Sadie Thompson

plot . a smoking , drinking , jazz listening , young prostitute named sadie thompson ( gloria swanson ) arrives at pago pago ( american samoa ) , on her way to a job with a shipping line on another island . at the same time , 'moralists ' arrive , including mr . and mrs . davidson ( lionel barrymore and blanche friderici ) . they all end up staying in the same hotel , where the davidsons plot to teach the natives about sin and sadie entertains a bunch of marines . sadie begins to fall in love with sergeant timothy o'hara ( raoul walsh ) , who is not fazed by her past . he tells her that he has a best friend who married a former prostitute , and the couple now lives happily in australia . davidson sets about trying to redeem sadie , much to her disgust . he tricks her into telling him about her past in san francisco and , once she refuses to repent , he declares that he will go to the governor and have her deported . sadie is terrified of the threat , but o'hara assures her that it will not happen . he tells her he wishes she would go to australia and wait for his term of service to finish , after which they can get married . she agrees . davidson gets his way , however , and sadie is livid . she and o'hara go to the governor , begging him to let her go to australia instead of back to san francisco . davidson has also managed to get o'hara punished for being immoral , but sadie will be able to go to australia instead if davidson approves . sadie pleads with him , but to no avail . she eventually confesses that , if she goes back to san francisco , there is '' a man there who wo n't let her go straight '' , which is what she wants to do . davidson figures out this mean that there is a warrant for her arrest back in san francisco . sadie claims that she was framed and is innocent , but will go to prison if she is sent back . davidson still refuses , saying she must atone for her past . sadie pleads and pleads and eventually offers to repent . davidson , however , says that the only way to fully repent is for her to go to prison . sadie runs to her room , crying out for davidson . davidson returns and sadie confesses she is afraid . davidson then tells her that , if she repents , there will be nothing to fear and he begins to pray with her . sadie converts to christianity . sadie prays for three whole days . she has put away her old things and has become a modest woman . o'hara returns and finds davidson is gone , apparently '' trying to stop the locals from dancing on the beach '' . o'hara tells sadie that he has a fishing boat waiting to take her and her things to a ship that will then take her to australia , where they can marry and be free . sadie is extremely afraid and refuses to go , saying that the '' old sadie is dead '' and she must go to san francisco and prison , to repent . o'hara does everything he can , including forcibly taking her from the room , but davidson is waiting outside . o'hara tries to attack him , but sadie asks him not to . o'hara , extremely upset , leaves and sadie pleads with davidson not to get him in trouble , for '' it was all her fault '' . later that night , sadie is asleep and everyone else is heading to bed . davidson can not sleep and goes out for a walk in the rain . ( it has rained almost continuously . ) his wife says he can not sleep for '' the unpleasant dreams he 's been having about miss thompson '' . a fellow boarder suspects they are not '' all that unpleasant '' . outside , davidson struggles with himself and realizes that he is sexually attracted to sadie and unable to handle it . he looks into her window and eventually returns to his room . sadie , frightened because she heard noises , is waiting in davidson 's room . davidson is shocked and sends her back to her room . the last reel is missing , but fishermen find davidson 's body . he has committed suicide . sadie and o'hara reconcile and head for australia . cast . gloria swanson as sadie thompson lionel barrymore as mr . alfred davidson blanche friderici as mrs . alfred davidson charles willis lane as dr . angus mcphail florence midgley as mrs . angus mcphail james a . marcus as joe horn sophia artega as ameena will stanton as quartermaster bates raoul walsh as sergeant timothy o'hara . production . in 1927 , swanson released her first independent film for united artists , the love of sunya which was filmed on her terms in new york city and was the opening night film of the roxy theatre . the production had been a disaster and swanson felt it would receive a mediocre reception at best . on the advice of joseph schenck she relented and returned to hollywood to prepare for a new picture . swanson 1981 p.294 feeling she would never have as much artistic freedom and independence as she had at that moment , swanson decided she , '' wanted to make my gold rush , '' referring to a recent film by charlie chaplin , which became perhaps his most celebrated work . schenck pleaded with her to do a commercially successful film like the last of mrs . cheyney . swanson felt it too formulaic and decided to call upon director raoul walsh , who was signed with fox film corporation at the time . walsh had been known for bringing controversial material to film . at their first meeting , swanson suggested a film based on the john colton and clemence randolph play rain ( 1923 ) , which in turn was based on the story by w . somerset maugham titled '' miss thompson '' ( 1921 ) . swanson had seen jeanne eagels perform the role on stage twice and enjoyed it . swanson 1981 p . 297 however , because of its content , the play was on the 'unofficial blacklist ' and had quietly been banned from being made into a film a year earlier . swanson 1981 p . 305 to try to avoid issues with the code , swanson and walsh decided to leave out profanity , rename 'reverend davidson ' to 'mr . davidson ' , and claim it was for the sake of morality to produce the picture , as irving thalberg had produced the scarlet letter ( 1926 ) at mgm . swanson 1981 pp . 297–302 swanson invited will hays for lunch and summarized the plot , naming the author and the sticking points . according to swanson , hays made a verbal promise that he would have no problem with the making of such a film . swanson set about getting the rights to the play by having schenck pretend to buy it in the name of united artists , never to be used . thus they were able to get the story rights for 60,000 instead of the original 100,000 . swanson 1981 pp . 302–304 when news broke as to just what was intended with the play , the three authors threatened to sue . swanson later contacted maugham requesting that he write an original story that served as a sequel . the sequel would involve following what became of sadie in australia . maugham agreed to write a new story ( for 100,000 ) but a sequel was never made . swanson and walsh set about writing the script , swanson 1981 p . 304 and discreetly placed an ad announcing the film , thinking no one noticed , as charles lindbergh had just made his historic flight . however , the press picked up on it and sensationalized the story . united artists received a threatening two-page telegram from the mpaa , signed by all its members including fox ( walsh 's studio ) and hays himself . in addition , the rest of the signers owned several thousand movies houses and if they refused to screen the film , it could be a financial disaster . swanson 1981 pp . 305–306 this was the first time swanson had heard the name of joseph p . kennedy , with whom she would later have an affair and who would finance her next few pictures , including queen kelly ( 1929 ) . swanson 1981 pp . 308–309 swanson was angered by the response , as she felt those very studios had produced '' questionable '' films themselves and were jealous at not having the chance to produce rain . swanson 1981 p.307 after another threatening telegram , she decided to first appeal to mpaa and then the newspapers . swanson 1981 p.309 she only heard back from marcus loew , who promised to appeal on her behalf , and since he had a chain of theatres , this eased some of her concerns . figuring the silence meant the matter had been dropped , swanson began filming on sadie thompson , which already had a quarter of a million dollars invested in it . swanson 1981 pp.311-312 before casting began , 17-year-old douglas fairbanks , jr . wanted to audition for the role of handsome o'hara . however , swanson felt he was too young and not right for the role . lionel barrymore had been first picked to play davidson , but was thought to be too ill at the time , though he did eventually win the role . barrymore wore the same outfit for an entire week , aggravating swanson . she asked some of the crew to tell him to change and wash ; which he did indeed do . swanson 1981 pp.320-321 despite this , swanson was happy with his performance . walsh had not acted in front of a camera in eight years and feared he would not be able to both direct and act at the same time . however , two days into filming , his fears were quelled . swanson 1981 pp.317-318 filming took place on santa catalina island , near long beach , california . swanson took ill shortly after and met a doctor who started her lifelong love of macrobiotic diets . swanson 1981 pp . 313–317 a week into shooting , sam goldwyn called cameraman george barnes away . swanson was furious , but the loan contract allowed goldwyn to call him away as he pleased . not wanting to let a hundred extras sit around for days , swanson and walsh tried to hire two other cameramen , but both were unsatisfactory . mary pickford offered the services of her favorite cameraman , charles rosher , who was called in , but despite doing a decent job , could not match barnes ' work . swanson 1981 pp . 319–320 through loew , mgm loaned oliver marsh , who completed the picture . swanson 1981 p . 321 the entire cameraman problem was extremely costly to the production , yet the picture went on . with the picture half-finished , it was already way over budget and schenck was wary , as swanson 's first picture had also been over budget and underperformed . swanson talked with her advisers and sold her farm at croton-on-hudson , and offered to sell her new york penthouse as well . despite reports that dirty words can be read on the characters ' lips , swanson claims the censors went over everything with a fine-tooth comb . swanson 1981 p.322 however , swanson admitted one line while she was shouting at davidson went , '' you 'd rip the wings off of a butterfly , you son of a bitch ! '' , when recounting a conversation with walsh later in life . swanson 1981 p . 499 if the word '' rain '' was used in a title card , the censors asked that it be removed . they also wanted to change davidson 's name to something else , but swanson and walsh refused . it was the first time raoul walsh had acted in 15 years , and it was his last appearance before the camera : he directed and was to star in his next project , in old arizona , while on location for that film a jackrabbit jumped through the windshield of his car and he lost his right eye in the resulting crash . he gave up acting and went on to an illustrious career behind the camera . . release and reception . right upon its release , sadie thompson was praised by critics as was swanson 's performance . welsch 2013 p.213 contemporary film critics have cited swanson 's performance as one of her best . the film was a financial and critical success and was the only silent , independent film of swanson 's to do well at the box office . in fact , it was one of her last financially successful films , along with the sound films the trespasser and sunset blvd . swanson 1981 p.407 it made 1 million in the united states and 7 million internationally . however , at kennedy 's advice , swanson had sold her distribution rights for the film to schenck because kennedy felt it would be a commercial failure . he also did not care for the image swanson portrayed in the film . by this point , queen kelly had been a disaster and swanson regretted it . swanson 1981 p.374 the film made the top 10 best pictures of the year list as well . . awards and honors . swanson was nominated for an academy award for best actress , and george barnes for best cinematography at the 1st academy awards for this film , the devil dancer and the magic flame . swanson did not attend the ceremony , and always felt it was like '' comparing apples to oranges . '' the film is recognized by american film institute in these lists : 2002 : afi 's 100 years.100 passions – nominated . restoration and home media release . the film was thought to have been lost for years . after swanson 's death in 1983 , the sole known surviving print of the film was discovered by her estate ; it had originally been stored in mary pickford 's personal archive . by that time , the final reel had become damaged . the film was bought by kino international , which hired dennis doros to reconstruct the final reel . doros used the original title sequences , still photos and footage from the 1932 adaptation ( which cinematographer oliver t . marsh also shot ) to substitute for the lost footage . a new score by joseph turrin was also composed for the film . moss 2011 p.451 kino 's version has been issued on dvd and online via netflix , as well as shown on turner classic movies . other film adaptations . 1932 - as rain , starring joan crawford , walter huston , guy kibbee and beulah bondi ; adapted by maxwell anderson , directed by lewis milestone . 1946 - as dirty gertie from harlem u.s.a . , starring francine everett and don wilson , adapted by true t . thompson , directed by spencer williams 1949 - a film noirish '' sadie thompson '' dance number from the marx brothers film love happy features vera-ellen dancing with a group of world war ii marines led by paul valentine . 1953 - as miss sadie thompson , starring rita hayworth , josé ferrer , aldo ray and charles bronson ; adapted by harry kleiner , directed by curtis bernhardt . it was nominated for the academy award for best original song ( for lester lee and ned washington 's '' sadie thompson 's song ( blue pacific blues ) '' ) . see also . sadie thompson building , setting of maugham 's story in pago pago , listed on the u.s . national register of historic places lionel barrymore filmography . references . external links . sadie thompson at virtual history sadie thompson at silents are golden southseascinema.org ua ( united artists ) lobby poster film available at the internet archive . entire film on youtube ( last reel reconstructed with stills in 1987 )