Radama I

early years . radama was the son of rambolamasoandro and king andrianampoinimerina of imerina , a growing kingdom in the central plateau of the island around antananarivo . as a child , radama was educated at court and learned to read the malagasy language in the sorabe arabico-malagasy script used by antemoro ombiasy ( court astrologers ) . as a young man he was described by a contemporary as about 5 ' 4 '' ( 1.6 meters ) and slim with broad shoulders and a narrow waist . radama was invited to join his father on a military expedition during his campaign to pacify the betsileo , who had forsaken an oath sworn to andrianampoinimerina . their initial attempt to capture king andriamanalina at the fortified city of fandanana west of antsirabe was unsuccessful . when they returned a year later , andrianampoinimerina split his army into two columns and put radama at the head of the second column , providing him with his first opportunity to command a military regiment . he was accompanied by a group of seasoned soldiers called the tantsaha , and andriandtsoanandria , one of his father 's more experienced military advisers , and successfully negotiated the submission of several towns in betsileo . andrianampoinimerina ultimately captured and executed andriamanalina , and together radama and his father also captured the strategic town of kiririoka . on andrianampoinimerina 's deathbed , he reportedly told his son , '' the sea is the border of my rice field '' . radama swore to his father that he would achieve this ambition . reign . in 1810 , at the age of 18 , radama succeeded his father as king of imerina . several of the principalities conquered by his father revolted upon news of andrianampoinimerina 's death , immediately obliging the young ruler to embark on military campaigns that successfully put down the rebellions and secured his position , which included completing the pacification of the betsileo kingdom . in 1816 radama was contacted by a mauritian trader sent by british governor robert townsend farquhar of mauritius ( ile de france ) , who was interested in increasing british influence in the region and preventing the re-establishment of french trading posts on madagascar ; as a result of this initial contact , two of radama 's brothers were sponsored to be educated in england . this was followed by a commercial treaty . on 23 october 1817 , radama signed a treaty negotiated by former military general james hastie that granted radama a formal alliance with the british crown and its recognition of radama as '' king of madagascar '' in exchange for horses , uniforms and a pledge to abandon the slave trade . the british were invited to establish a diplomatic mission on the island , and in 1820 hastie was appointed to the role of british resident . the import of slaves from the african mainland continued , however , and remained madagascar 's primary import throughout radama 's reign and into the 1850s . radama 's military campaign to toamasina in 1820 brought him into contact with welshmen david jones and david griffiths of the protestant london missionary society ( lms ) , who had established a school there enrolling three students . radama was inspired to introduce similar schools throughout imerina and within a year had established 23 schools enrolling 2300 students , of whom a third were girls . he tasked the lms missionaries to transcribe and teach the malagasy language using the latin alphabet . it was under radama 's rule that lms missionaries ( with notable contributions from scotland james cameron ) set up craft industries in carpentry , leather , tin plating and cotton , introduced the first printing press , translated and printed bibles in the malagasy language and oversaw radama 's plan to establish dozens of schools offering compulsory literacy courses and basic education for the andriana . radama 's european contacts describe him as openly skeptical of many of the religious rituals and traditions that formed the legitimacy of the merina monarchy over the past four centuries . in particular he was reportedly critical of the importance placed on the sampy , the 12 royal idols that figured prominently in merina court ritual . many of the cultural and technological innovations radama introduced during his reign were rejected by the broader population as a denial of the heritage of their ancestors and their traditions . during this time and with the help of the british support , radama 's military became the dominant force allowing him to unify the island by force . radama reportedly admired napoleon bonaparte and drew upon european structure and tactics to modernize his army , which included french , british and jamaican generals . in each newly conquered territory , administrative posts were built within fortified garrisons ( rova ) on the model of the original rova of antananarivo . these were staffed with merina colonists called voanjo ( '' peanuts '' ) . radama 's territorial expansion began in 1817 with a campaign to the eastern port town of toamasina , where he established a military post . this was followed by a series of westward campaigns into menabe in 1820 , 1821 and 1822 . the following year , radama sent military expeditions along the northeast coast , establishing military posts at maroantsetra , tintingue and mananjary . in 1824 further expeditions established posts at vohemar , diego suarez , and mahajanga . in 1825 military posts were established in the southeastern coastal towns of farafangana and fort dauphin . the antalaotra were defeated in 1826 in a combined land and sea attack . revolts by the antanosy and betsimisaraka prompted radama to launch a military campaign to subjugate them . the antesaka were conquered in radama 's final military campaign in 1827 , and the northern tanala became a vassalage . all together , radama united two thirds of the island under merina rule . the areas retaining independence included most of bara country , mahafaly and antandroy in the south , a stretch of southern tanala and the coastal area between antesaka and antanosy in the east , and northern menabe and ambongo in the west . death and succession . radama died prematurely on 27 july 1828 , at his residence ( the tranovola ) . historical sources provide conflicting accounts regarding his cause of death . many years of military campaigning certainly took their toll , and radama was prone to drinking heavily ; shortly before his death he displayed symptoms of advanced alcoholism as his health rapidly declined . his death was officially declared to be the consequence of heavy intoxication . radama was buried in a stone tomb on the grounds of the rova of antananarivo . in line with architecture of madagascar , his tomb was topped with a trano masina ( '' sacred house '' ) symbolic of royalty . like his father andrianampoinimerina and other merina sovereigns that would follow him , he was laid to rest in a silver coffin , and it is said the funerary goods buried with him were the most extensive and richest of any tomb in madagascar . these included a deep red silk lamba mena , imported paintings of european royalty , thousands of coins , eighty articles of clothing , swords , jewels , gold vases , containers of silver and so forth . alongside each interior wall of the trano masina were a mirror , bed , several chairs and a table upon which were placed two porcelain water vessels and one bottle each of water and rum that were replenished annually during the fandroana ( festival of the royal bath ) . most of these items were lost when a 1995 fire destroyed the rova of antananarivo where the tomb was located . radama died without naming a clear successor , but according to local custom , the rightful heir was rakotobe , the eldest son of radama 's eldest sister . radama died in the company of two trusted courtiers who were favorable to the succession of rakotobe . however , they hesitated to report the news of radama 's death for several days , fearing possible reprisals against them for having been involved in denouncing one of the king 's rivals , whose family had a stake in the succession after radama . during this time , another courtier , a high-ranking military officer named andriamamba , discovered the truth and collaborated with other powerful officers - andriamihaja , rainijohary and ravalontsalama - to support ramavo , radama 's highest ranking wife , as successor . she ultimately succeeded radama as queen ranavalona i . ancestry . references . bibliography . . external links .