Grand Prairie, Texas

education . primary and secondary schools . . public schools . most of grand prairie 's k-12 student population attends schools in the grand prairie independent school district , which serves areas of grand prairie in dallas county . the mansfield independent school district serves areas of grand prairie in tarrant county and operates six elementary schools within the grand prairie city limits . other portions of grand prairie reside within the arlington , cedar hill , irving , mansfield , and midlothian school districts . '' greetings from grand prairie . '' city of grand prairie . retrieved on december 27 , 2008 . in texas , school district boundaries do not follow city and county boundaries because all aspects of the school district government apparatus , including school district boundaries , are separated from the city and county government entirely , with the exception of the stafford municipal school district in the houston area . grand prairie independent school district . the high schools in the district are south grand prairie high school , grand prairie high school , crosswinds high school and dubiski career high school . middle schools include ymla at kennedy , jackson , reagan , truman , fannin , and adams . elementary schools include austin , bonham , bowie , bush , crockett , daniels , dickinson , eisenhower , florence hill , garcia , garner , johnson , lee , marshall , milam , monroe , moseley , powell , rayburn , seguin , travis , whitt , williams , and zavala . however , grand prairie collegiate institute and ywla at bill arnold offers both high school and middle school education . arlington independent school district . the arlington isd has the second highest portion of grand prairie 's k-12 student population . six arlington isd elementary schools are within the city limits of grand prairie . grand prairie residents in the arlington isd are located generally west of the dallas-tarrant county boundary and north of the intersection of camp wisdom and lake ridge in southwest grand prairie . one of the arlington high schools , james bowie high , has more grand prairie residents than arlington residents that are students at the school . grand prairie student/residents in the arlington isd attend bowie , sam houston , or lamar high school in the arlington isd and their feeder elementary schools and junior high schools . mansfield independent school district . the mansfield isd contains the third highest portion of the grand prairie 's k-12 student population . grand prairie residents in the mansfield isd are located generally south of the intersection of camp wisdom and lake ridge , and west of joe pool lake to the tarrant and ellis county line in southwest grand prairie . three mansfield isd schools , anna may daulton elementary ; louise cabaniss elementary ; and cora spencer elementary , are currently open within the city limits of grand prairie . the mansfield isd is the fastest growing isd in tarrant county , and the population growth in far southwest grand prairie is a major factor in the mansfield isd 's subsequent growth . grand prairie students/residents in the mansfield isd attend mansfield timberview high school , lake ridge high school or mansfield high school in the mansfield isd or their feeder elemetaries and middle schools . timberview high school is located on state highway 360 less than from the grand prairie city line . infrastructure . transportation . interstate highways 20 and 30 run east–west through the northern and southern parts of the city . texas state highways spur 303 ( named pioneer parkway ) and 180 ( main street ) also run east–west in the northern and central portions of the city . sh 360 runs for almost three miles in the northwestern portion of city ; most of the highway runs just west of the city limits in arlington . sh 161 , named the president george bush turnpike , runs north–south through western grand prairie . the main lanes were opened in late 2012 with frontage roads open since 2010 . portions of the highway located north of sh 180 are depressed while the portion south of sh 180 runs at-grade then becomes elevated . frontage roads remain at-grade throughout . the frontage road intersection at main street will open sometime in 2013 . belt line road is a major north–south thoroughfare in the city . the section of the road south of main street is dual-labelled as fm 1382 , which travels south , past i-20 and continues south to cedar hill . the section of the road north of main street keeps its name , continuing north into irving . there is presently no public transportation in grand prairie , as the city is not a member of dart . the city declined membership in 1984 . in the era of private operation of passenger trains prior to the onset of the amtrak era in 1971 , texas and pacific railway trains such as the texas eagle and the louisiana eagle made stops in grand prairie , on trips between fort worth and dallas . 1967 schedule of the texas eagle streamliner schedules , from the official guide of the railways 1952 schedule of the louisiana eagle , streamliner schedules , from the official guide of the railways amtrak 's texas eagle ( chicago-san antonio ) makes stops at dallas union station 12 miles to the east . attractions . in 1997 lone star park opened , where each memorial day the thoroughbred meeting is held , with seven stakes races worth just over 1 million . in 2000 gpx skate park was opened next to lone star park , which hosted the 2001 and 2002 x games trials . they closed in 2005 and were later re-opened in june 2006 by the grand prairie parks and recreation committee . the state-of-the-art the theatre at grand prairie , previously the verizon theatre at grand prairie , nextstage and nokia live , is in grand prairie . numerous concerts and other events are held here throughout the year . prairie lights is a seasonal display , featuring more than three million lights on more than 500 lighted displays . santa 's elves , snowmen , reindeer , angels , penguins , stars , lollipops and the world 's longest tunnel of lights are just a few of the displays showcased during the 40-day event . it also offers a unique out-of-car experience in holiday village midway through the drive with concessions , carousel rides , santa 's store for shopping , and photos with santa on friday , saturday and sunday . in 1973 , traders village was opened off of mayfield road , and state highway 360 . it describes itself as the largest flea market in texas , open on weekends from 7 a.m . until dusk . special events are held there on certain weekends , including a chili cookoff , auto swap-meet , etc . the grand prairie airhogs minor league baseball team and their stadium , the ballpark in grand prairie , were established in grand prairie in may 2007 and started play in may 2008 . the team ceased operations after the 2020 season . the historic uptown theatre in downtown grand prairie , reopened in 2008 after a year of renovations . it is now a playhouse and venue for concerts . the national recreation and parks association ( nrpa ) bestowed its highest national award , the gold medal award , to the grand prairie , texas parks and recreation department at the 2008 nrpa 's congress and exposition in baltimore . grand prairie , texas won the award in the population group of 100,000-250,000 . grand prairie is once again a finalist for the award in 2016 . grand prairie offers some of the best parks and recreation venues in the country . located near i-30 and beltline rd , turner park became grand prairie 's heritage ( 1st ever ) park back in the 1940s and today it features one of the top disc golf courses in north texas . grand central park is one of the largest indoor waterparks in texas , and is a first-of-its-kind , opened january 2018 along with a recreation center nearby that opened later that year . ripley 's believe it or not ! . notable people . larry d . alexander , artist and writer rodney anderson , republican member of the texas house of representatives from grand prairie ( 2011–2013 ) ; born in grand prairie wesley duke , professional football player selena gomez , singer , songwriter , and actress lauren waterman ( 2009–05 ) . selena gomez : spell bound teen vogue . retrieved may 11 , 2009 . ruthe jackson , council member nets katz , 2012 guggenheim fellow and professor of mathematics at caltech jud larson , auto racer billy miller , actor , daytime emmy winner ( the young and the restless ) martindale , david . '' arlington lamar grad billy miller makes a name for himself on y & r '' . fort worth star telegram . january 7 , 2011 . retrieved january 27 , 2011 . hayley orrantia , actress and singer , raised in grand prairie charley taylor , professional football player eric vale , voice actor affiliated with funimation kerry wood , major league baseball pitcher jeff okudah , national football league cornerback for the detroit lions jennifer mcfalls , olympic gold medalist and american softball coach . references . external links . city of grand prairie official website census map - grand prairie , texas