Harry Crosby

murder and suicide . on the evening of the play , december 10 , 1929 , caresse , crosby 's mother henrietta grew , and hart crane met for dinner before the play , but crosby was a no-show . it was unlike him to worry caresse needlessly . she called their friend stanley mortimer at his mother 's apartment , whose studio crosby was known to use for his trysts . he agreed to check his studio . mortimer had to enlist help to break open the locked door and found crosby and josephine 's bodies . crosby was in bed with a . 25 calibre bullet hole in his right temple next to josephine , who had a matching hole in her left temple , in what appeared to be a suicide pact . crosby was still clutching the belgian automatic pistol in one hand , josephine in the other . the steamship tickets he had bought that morning for the return to europe with caresse were in his pocket . the coroner also found in his pocket a cable from josephine addressed to crosby on the rms mauretania . the coroner reported that crosby 's toenails were painted red , and that he had a christian cross tattooed on the sole of one foot and a pagan icon representing the sun on the other . crosby 's wedding ring was found crushed on the floor , not on his finger , where he always promised caresse it would remain . caresse refused to witness the carnage and begged archibald macleish , who was in town from his farm , to take charge . while waiting for the doctors to finish their examination , macleish wondered if crosby 's literary aspirations had not contributed to his death . crosby 's suicide , along with hart crane 's suicide two and a half years later , were cited by later writers as emblematic of the lost generation . . scandal follows . the next day , the headlines revealed all : tragedy and disgrace . there was no suicide note , and newspapers ran sensational articles for many days about the murder or suicide pact—they could not decide which . the new york times front page blared , '' couple shot dead in artists ' hotel ; suicide compact is indicated between henry grew crosby and harvard man 's wife . but motive is unknown . he was socially prominent in boston—bodies found in friend 's suite . '' the new york newspapers decided it was a murder-suicide . gretchen powell had lunch with crosby the day of his death . her memory of the luncheon supported the notion that josephine was one of crosby 's many passing fancies . she related that crosby had told her , '' the rotch girl was pestering him ; he was exasperated ; she had threatened to kill herself in the lobby of the savoy-plaza if he did n't meet her at once . '' the deaths polarized the several prominent families affected . the rotch family considered josephine 's death to be murder . josephine 's erstwhile husband albert bigelow blamed crosby for '' seducing his wife and murdering her because he could n't have her . '' crosby 's poetry possibly gave the best clue to his motives . death was '' the hand that opens the door to our cage the home we instinctively fly to . '' his death mortified proper society . crosby 's biographer geoffrey wolff wrote , '' he had meant to do it ; it was no mistake ; it was not a joke . if anything of harry crosby commands respect , perhaps even awe , it was the unswerving character of his intention . '' crosby 's death , given the macabre circumstances under which it occurred , scandalized boston 's back bay society . . legacy . crosby as a poet was never more than a minor literary figure while he lived , and was remembered more for his scandalous suicide over his creative efforts . he has greater importance as a co-founder of the black sun press , which caresse continued to operate after his death . she also established , with jacques porel , a side venture , crosby continental editions , that published paperback books by ernest hemingway , william faulkner , and dorothy parker , among others . the paperback books did not sell well , and crosby continental closed in 1933 . the black sun press , however , continued publishing into the 1950s . the black sun press produced finely crafted books in small editions , including works by , among others , d . h . lawrence , archibald macleish , james joyce , kay boyle , and hart crane . crosby 's friend crane committed suicide less than two years later . malcolm cowley , whom crosby had published , wrote in his 1934 book exile 's return , that the death of '' harry crosby becomes a symbol '' of the rise and fall of the jazz age . he recited the excesses typified by crosby 's extravagant lifestyle as evidence of the shallowness of society during that era . when he edited and reissued the book in 1951 , he softened his opinion of crosby somewhat . '' i had written at length about the life of harry crosby , who i scarcely know , '' he wrote , '' in order to avoid discussing the more recent death of hart crane , whom i know so well that i could n't bear to write about him . '' in 1931 , caresse also published torchbearer , a collection of his poetry with an afterword by ezra pound , and aphrodite in flight , a 75-paragraph-long prose-poem and how-to manual for lovers that compared making love to a woman to flying planes . caresse published a boxed set of crosby 's work titled collected poems of harry crosby containing chariot of the sun with d . h . lawrence 's introduction , transit of venus with t . s . eliot 's introduction , sleeping together with stuart gilbert 's introduction , and torchbearer in 1931 . it was hand-set in dorique type ; only 50 copies were printed . during 1931 and 1932 , caresse collaborated with harry 's mother henrietta to publish letters he had written to his family while serving in france from the summer of 1917 until he returned home in 1919 . henrietta added a chronology and brief preface to the letters . the book war letters was published in a unnumbered edition of 125 copies . , a leather-bound edition of the book was priced from 2,000 to 3,500 . caresse crosby edited and published crosby 's diaries and papers . she wrote and published poems for harry crosby in 1931 . she also published and translated some of the works of hemingway , faulkner , and dorothy parker , among others . the black sun press enjoyed the greatest longevity among the several expatriate presses founded in paris during the 1920s . through 1936 , it published nearly three times as many titles as did edward titus through his black manikin press . books printed by the black sun press are valued by collectors . each book was hand-designed , beautifully printed , and illustrated with elegant typeface . a rare volume published by the black sun press of hart crane 's book-length poem the bridge , including photos by walker evans , was sold by christie 's in 2009 for us 21,250 . in 2009 , neil pearson , an antiquarian books expert , said , '' a black sun book is the literary equivalent of a braque or a picasso painting—except it 's a few thousand pounds , not 20 million . '' a new collection of harry crosby 's poetry , ladders to the sun : poems by harry crosby was published by soul bay press in april 2010 . in 2004 , fine line features optioned andrea berloff 's first screenplay harry and caresse . lasse hallström was initially attached to direct and leslie holleran was attached as a producer . . works . sonnets for caresse . ( 1925 ) paris , herbert clarke . sonnets for caresse . ( 1926 ) 2nd edition . paris , herbert clarke . sonnets for caresse . ( 1926 ) 3rd edition . paris , albert messein . sonnets for caresse . ( 1927 ) 4th edition . paris , editions narcisse . red skeletons . ( 1927 ) paris , editions narcisse . hindu love manual ( 1928 ) 20 copies chariot of the sun . ( 1928 ) paris , at the sign of the sundial . shadows of the sun . ( 1928 ) paris , black sun press . transit of venus . volume 1 . ( 1928 ) paris , black sun press . transit of venus . volume 2 . ( 1929 ) paris , black sun press . 1929 ( 500 copies printed ) mad queen . ( 1929 ) paris , black sun press . shadows of the sun-series two . ( 1929 ) paris , black sun press . the sun . ( 1929 ) paris , black sun press . sleeping together . ( 1929 ) paris , black sun press . ( 500 copies printed ) a sentimental journey through france and italy laurence sterne , ( 1929 ) paris , illus . by polia chentoff 400 copies shadows of the sun-series three . ( 1930 ) paris , black sun press . aphrodite in flight : being some observations on the aerodynamics of love . ( 1930 paris , black sun press . collected poems of harry crosby . ( 4 volumes ) . ( 1931–32 ) paris , black sun press . war letters . preface by henrietta crosby . ( 1932 ) paris , black sun press . 125 unnumbered copies . see also . list of ambulance drivers during world war i . references . sources . geoffrey wolff : black sun : the brief transit and violent eclipse of harry crosby ( random house , 1976 ) ; ( repr . new york review of books , 2003 ) minkoff , george robert . a bibliography of the black sun press . with an introduction by caresse crosby . ( great neck , n.y . : g . r . minkoff , 1970 ) . external links . harry crosby modern american poetry poems by harry crosby from the oldpoetry.com archives selected poems by harry crosby caresse crosby papers at southern illinois university carbondale special collections research center