Skin-tight garment

history and types . leotard . in 1886 , the name leotard was given to a one-piece skin-tight garment that covers the torso including the crotch , but not the legs or arms . the garment was named after french acrobatic performer jules léotard ( 1838–1870 ) , many years after his death , who wore the garment in his acrobatic act . in the early 20th century , use of leotards was mainly confined to circus and acrobatic shows , but were also worn by professional dancers , such as the showgirls of broadway . leotards on the stage were typically worn with stockings or tights . in the 1950s , traditionally-styled leotards continued to be worn mainly by stage performers and circus actors , but leotards began to be used as simple and functional exercise garments , often in institutional settings like schools and in fitness training . these were almost always black and worn together with thick tights . between 1950 and 1970 , leotards remained as such in appearance until a style change in the 1970s , when more colorful leotards appeared on the scene , most often in ballet and exercise . swimwear . the 1920s and 1930s saw leotards influencing swimsuit styles , with women 's one-piece swimsuits today still being similar in appearance to leotards . the most common type of one-piece swimsuit is the maillot or tank suit , which resembles a sleeveless leotard or bodysuit . in early years the one-piece swimsuit would have a narrow skirt slip or micro-shorts , for modesty considerations , but these were beginning to disappear in the 1940s . a recent innovation in one-piece swimsuits is the bodyskin , which superficially resembles a unitard or wetsuit . although these cover the entire torso , arms and legs , their function is not modesty , but reducing friction through the water for professional swimmers . bodystocking . a bodystocking is a one-piece skin-tight garment that covers the torso , legs and sometimes the arms of the wearer . it is a foundation garment or an article of lingerie usually made from a sheer fabric similar to that used for stockings or pantyhose , or from fishnet , lace or an opaque material , or a variation of these materials . a bodystocking differs from a unitard , which is worn as an outfit or article of clothing , and a leotard , which is used as a practice garment or performance costume by acrobats , gymnasts and other similar performers . designed to be revealed , but not to be too revealing , bodystockings may be worn as undergarments by performers such as belly dancers and exotic dancers . bodystockings were used on stage in at least 1860s . in 1861 , american actress adah isaacs menken controversially wore a flesh coloured bodystocking on stage , to preserve her modesty and stay within the obscenity laws , while giving the illusion of nudity . brooks , daphne a . “ lady menken ’ s secret : adah isaacs menken , actress biographies and the race for sensation . ” legacy , volume 15 . number 1 . ( 1998 ) : pages 68-77 . . unitard . the unitard is a variation of the leotard that also covers the legs and sometimes also has long sleeves , and which is considered to be a combination of a leotard and tights . it is similar to a bodystocking , but is designed as outerwear , for view by the general public . bodysuit . a bodysuit covers the torso , crotch , and sometimes the legs , hands , and feet . merriam-webster dictionary the style of a basic bodysuit is similar to a one-piece swimsuit and a leotard , though the materials may vary , and a bodysuit , unlike a swimsuit or leotard , has snaps , hooks or velcro at the crotch . a bodysuit may have sleeves and varying shoulder strap and collar styles . bodysuits can be made from a number of fabrics , including cotton , lace , nylon , etc . in general , textile bodysuits include expandable fiber such as spandex for a better fit to the shape of the body . a bodysuit is normally worn with trousers or a skirt , exposing at most the top of the garment above the waist . the top , torso part may act as a top for the smooth line it gives or because it can not become untucked from trousers or skirt . they may also be worn generally by women as underwear , activewear , or foundation garments . unlike a leotard , a bodysuit is not usually considered a form of athletic wear . the purpose of the opening at the crotch is to facilitate access during a visit to the toilet . stocking and pantyhose . modern stockings became popular in the 1920s with the rise in women 's hemlines . they were sheer , first made of silk or rayon ( then known as '' artificial silk '' ) , and after 1940 of nylon . nylon stockings were cheap , durable , and sheer compared to their cotton and silk counterparts . these stocking were very popular , and the demand for them has continued , though it has given ground to tights or pantyhose . during the 1960s , improved textile manufacturing processes made pantyhose cheaper , while spandex ( or elastane ) made them more comfortable and durable , and the miniskirt made the pantyhose a necessity to many women . the popularity of pantyhose grew into a wardrobe staple throughout the 1970s and 1980s . from 1995 there was a steady decline in sales of pantyhose , levelling off in 2006 with american sales less than half of what they had once been . sportswear . the development and use of stretch fabrics simplified the construction of clothing . first used in swimsuits and women 's bras , fashion designers began using them as early as the mid-1980s . they entered the mainstream market in the early 1990s , and are now widely used in sports clothing . in athletics and performance applications , skin-tight garments , or 'skin suits ' , provide protection from injury and scraping while dancing , gymnastics , swimming , cycling , skating , skiing , and running by enhancing muscle support and reducing muscle vibration , lessening wind and friction drag , and it also serves as protection from cuts , stings and abrasion , and as effective protection from uv rays of the sun . these also include other related athletic clothing . other uses . the united states military has also utilized skin-tight bodysuits for use in mission specific environments , for both the benefits listed above , but also because skin-tight garments are not as susceptible to snagging or catching on branches , wires , or other obstructions . skin-tight garments are fetishism by some people , perhaps on the basis that the garment forms a '' second skin '' that acts as a fetishistic surrogate for the wearer 's own skin . the most common forms of this are spandex fetishism and rubber fetishism , in which the skin-tight material is also shiny . skin-tight garments are often depicted as futuristic clothing in science fiction : see also sex in science fiction . see also . breeches briefs bodyskin bodysuit catsuit diveskin form-fitting garment leotard one-piece swimsuit gimp suit jammers jeans latex clothing , including liquid latex leggings polo neck space activity suit unitard wetsuit zentai