Battle of Killiecrankie

background . in february 1685 , the catholic james ii & vii came to power with widespread support ; the 1638 to 1651 wars of the three kingdoms meant many in both england and scotland feared the consequences of bypassing the 'natural heir ' . a desire for stability led to the rapid collapse of the monmouth rebellion and argyll 's rising in june 1685 , both led by protestant dissidents . by 1680 , over 95 % of scots belonged to the church of scotland , or kirk ; catholics numbered less than 2 % of the population and even other protestant sects were barred . the 1681 scottish test act required holders of public office to be members of the kirk ; james ' attempts to repeal it undermined his own supporters , while rewarding the extreme presbyterians who backed argyll in 1685 . in june 1688 , two events turned dissent into a crisis , the first being the birth of james francis edward on 10 june . this created the prospect of a catholic dynasty , rather than james being succeeded by his protestant daughter mary , and her husband william of orange . the second was the prosecution of the seven bishops , which seemed to extend official policy beyond mere tolerance for catholicism to an assault on the established church . their acquittal on 30 june destroyed james ' political authority in both scotland and england . in 1685 , many feared a return to civil war if james were bypassed ; by 1688 , anti-catholic riots made it seem only his removal could prevent one . william landed in brixham on 5 november with 14,000 men ; as he advanced , james ' army deserted , and he went into exile on 23 december . the parliament of england offered the english throne to william and mary in february 1689 . on 14 march , a convention met in edinburgh to agree a settlement for scotland . the convention was dominated by supporters of the new administration , with 'jacobites ' restricted to those linked to james by religion or personal ties . however , the number of activists on either side was tiny , the vast majority being unenthusiastic about either option . on 12 march , james landed in ireland , and the convention offered the scottish throne to william and mary on 11 april . the next day dundee raised the royal standard on dundee law . initial military actions . william 's military commander in scotland was general hugh mackay , head of the veteran dutch scots brigade . his force of 3,500 included the brigade regiments of mackay , balfour and ramsay , the english hastings regiment and two newly raised scots units . when ewen cameron of lochiel learned of william 's landing , he began recruiting men to fight for james but the short-term nature of clan warfare meant it needed to be used as soon as possible . in april , dundee joined him at glenroy and on 18 may , took his force of around 1,800 highlanders and attempted to bring mackay to battle . he failed to do so and returned in june , after which most of the clansmen went home , leaving him with less than 200 men . on 27 june , dundee wrote to the earl of melfort asking for reinforcements ; the loss of kintyre after the battle of loup hill made resupply from ireland extremely difficult and the letter details alternative landing spots . as time went on , his position weakened due to continued defections , the surrender of edinburgh castle on 14 june being especially discouraging . his requests for additional resources were denied , partly due to an internal dispute with the catholic 'non-compounders , ' who dominated james ' court in ireland and urged him to refuse any concessions to regain his throne . dundee and other scottish jacobites were mostly protestant 'compounders ' , for whom concessions were essential , and thus viewed with suspicion . the only reinforcements sent to scotland were 300 irish soldiers under the catholic alexander cannon , who landed near duart castle on 21 july . a 'jacobite ' garrison under patrick stewart of ballechin occupied blair castle , a strategic point controlling access to the lowlands and seat of the duke of atholl . this illustrates how many families balanced both sides ; claiming ill-health , atholl went to england , leaving his eldest son , john murray , to 'besiege ' his ancestral home . stewart himself was a trusted family retainer and one of atholl 's key lieutenants in the suppression of argyll 's rising in 1685 . in late july , jacobite reinforcements arrived at blair ; murray withdrew and mackay moved north to support him , with somewhere between 3,600 and 5,100 troops . seeing a chance to intercept , dundee set out with his available forces , ordering the clans to follow '' with all haste . '' lochiel 's sons were sent to raise additional levies ; he and 240 camerons plus cannon 's irish contingent reached blair on 26 july . battle . on the morning of 27 july , dundee learned mackay 's forces were entering the pass of killiecrankie , a track nearly long with the river garry on the left and steep hills on either side . sir alexander mclean and 400 men were sent to skirmish with the advance guard , while dundee assembled the rest of his troops on the lower slopes of creag eallich , north of the pass . as they advanced into the pass , the government army had the jacobites on the high ground above and the river behind , while the narrow track made advance or retreat equally hazardous . mackay halted , moved off the track and deployed his troops facing uphill in a long line only three men deep to maximise firepower . mackay 's force included balfour , ramsay and mackay 's regiments of the scots brigade , along with the newly raised regiments of kenmure and leven , part of hastings ' regiment , and 100 cavalry . as the most experienced , the scots brigade under balfour and lauder was placed on the left , which provided the best field of fire . the jacobites formed into columns and were in position by late afternoon but dundee waited until sunset , just after 8:00pm to begin his attack . balfour 's front line fired three volleys , killing nearly 600 highlanders but their fire was partly masked by a shallow terrace on the hillside , while the regiments to their right apparently fled without firing a shot . following their usual tactics , the highlanders fired a single volley at 50 metres , dropped their muskets , and using axes and swords crashed into mackay 's centre . killiecrankie is the first recorded use by british troops of the plug bayonet , which increased firepower by eliminating pikemen . it was 'plugged ' into the musket barrel , preventing further reloading or firing , so fixing them was delayed until the last possible moment . inexperience in their use and the speed of the highland charge left the government troops defenceless and many fled , abandoning balfour , who was killed along with james mackay , hugh 's younger brother . aftermath . mackay managed to reform hastings and leven 's regiments from the centre and right ; some 800 men made it back to stirling with relative ease , while others straggled in over the next few days . the highlanders halted their pursuit to loot the baggage train , and their own casualties were enormous , with between 600 and 800 wounded or killed , the vast majority on the government left . dundee was fatally wounded towards the end of the battle , and died shortly afterwards ; a letter sent under his name to james reporting the victory is generally thought to be a forgery , although it provides a useful summary of the action . based on muster rolls before and after the battle , government losses were around 2,000 killed , wounded or missing , although some of the '' missing '' may well have deserted . as colonels were paid for the number of men in their regiment , there was an obvious temptation to over-report pre-battle figures , but it is possible they suffered losses of up to 50 % . alexander cannon took over as leader , and while not as talented a commander as dundee , he faced the same problems ; without siege equipment , he could not capture a port , making resupply almost impossible , while lack of cavalry made them vulnerable in the open . in addition , his most reliable unit , the camrons , suffered particularly heavy casualties , while many other highlanders went home with their loot . these factors meant time was on mackay 's side , so long as he avoided another ambush . after an assault on dunkeld in august was repulsed with heavy losses , cannon ended the campaign . mackay spent the winter reducing jacobite strongholds and constructing a new base at fort william , while harsh weather conditions led to severe food shortages . when thomas buchan replaced cannon in february 1690 , he could only mobilise some 800 men ; he was taken by surprise at cromdale in may and his forces scattered . mackay pursued him into aberdeenshire and in november 1690 relinquished command to livingstone . in 2004 , a fragment of a hand grenade was found , providing evidence of their first use in britain 30 years earlier than that previously recorded at glen shiel in 1719 . a detailed survey carried out in 2015 confirmed the location and intensity of the close quarter fighting , along with the discovery of large numbers of pistol and musket balls . references . sources .