Duchy of Prussia

history . background . as protestantism spread among the laity of the teutonic monastic state of prussia , dissent began to develop against the roman catholic rule of the teutonic knights , whose grand master , albert , duke of prussia , a member of a cadet branch of the house of hohenzollern , lacked the military resources to assert the order 's authority . after losing a war against the kingdom of poland , and with his personal bishop , georg von polenz of pomesania and of samland , who had converted to lutheranism in 1523 , albertas juška , mažosios lietuvos bažnyčia xvi-xx amžiuje , klaipėda : 1997 , pp . 742–771 , hereafter the german translation die kirche in klein litauen ( section : 2 . reformatorische anfänge ; on : lietuvos evangelikų liuteronų bažnyčia , retrieved on 28 august 2011 . and a number of his commanders already supporting protestant ideas , albert began to consider a radical solution . at wittenberg in 1522 , and at nuremberg in 1524 , martin luther encouraged him to convert the order 's territory into a secular principality under his personal rule , as the teutonic knights would not be able to survive the reformation . eric christiansen . the northern crusades . penguin books . london , 1997 . . establishment . on april 10 , 1525 albert resigned his position , became a protestant , and in the prussian homage was granted the title '' duke of prussia '' by his uncle , king sigismund i of poland . in a deal partly brokered by luther , ducal prussia became the first protestant state , anticipating the dispensations of the peace of augsburg of 1555 . when albert returned to königsberg , he publicly declared his conversion and announced to a quorum of teutonic knights his new ducal status . the knights who disapproved of the decision were pressured into acceptance by albert 's supporters and the burghers of königsberg , and only eric of brunswick-wolfenbüttel , komtur of memel , opposed the new duke . on 10 december 1525 , at their session in königsberg , the prussian estates established the lutheran church in ducal prussia by deciding the church order . by the end of albert 's rule , the offices of grand commander and marshal of the order had deliberately been left vacant while the order was left with but 55 knights in prussia . some of the knights converted to lutheranism in order to retain their property and then married into the prussian nobility , while others returned to the holy roman empire , and remained catholic . desmond seward . the monks of war : the military religious orders . penguin books . london , 1995 . these remaining teutonic knights , led by the next grand master , walter von cronberg , continued to unsuccessfully claim prussia , but retained much of the estates in the teutonic bailiwicks outside of prussia . on 1 march 1526 , albert married princess dorothea , daughter of king frederick i of denmark , thereby establishing political ties between lutheranism and scandinavia . albert was greatly aided by his elder brother george , margrave of brandenburg-ansbach , who had earlier established the protestant religion in his territories of franconia and upper silesia . albert also found himself reliant on support from his uncle sigismund i of catholic poland , as the holy roman empire , and the roman catholic church , had banned him for his protestantism . the teutonic order had only superficially carried out its mission to christianize the native rural population and had erected few churches within the state 's territory . there was little longing for roman catholicism . baltic old prussians and prussian lithuanian peasants continued to practice pagan customs in some areas , for example , adhering to beliefs in perkūnas , symbolized by the goat , potrimpo , and peckols while '' consuming the roasted flesh of a goat '' . kirby , david . northern europe in the early modern period : the baltic world , 1492–1772 . longman . london , 1990 . bishop george of polentz had forbidden the widespread forms of pagan worship in 1524 , and repeated the ban in 1540 . on 18 january 1524 bishop george had ordered the use of native languages at baptisms , which improved the acceptance of batism by the peasants . there was little active resistance to the new protestant religion . the fact that the teutonic knights had brought catholicism and protestantism made the transition easier . h.w . koch a history of prussia . barnes & noble books . new york , 1978 . the church order of 1525 provided for visitations of the parishioners and pastors , first carried out by bishop george in 1538 . because ducal prussia was ostensibly a lutheran land , authorities traveled throughout the duchy ensuring that lutheran teachings were being followed and imposing penalties on pagans and dissidents . the rural population of native descent was only thoroughly christianised starting with the reformation in prussia . a peasant rebellion broke out in sambia in 1525 . the combination of taxation by the nobility , the contentions of the protestant reformation , and the abrupt secularization of the teutonic order 's remaining prussian lands exacerbated peasant unrest . the relatively well-to-do rebel leaders , including a miller from kaimen and an innkeeper from schaaken castle , were supported by sympathizers in königsberg . the rebels demanded the elimination of newer taxes by the nobility and a return to an older tax of two marks for every hide a measure of land of approximately forty acres . they claimed to be rebelling against the harsh nobility , not against duke albert , who was away in the holy roman empire , but they would only swear allegiance to him in person . upon albert 's return from the empire , he called for a meeting of the peasants in a field , whereupon he surrounded them with loyal troops and had them arrested without incident . the leaders of the rebellion were subsequently executed . there were no more large-scale rebellions . ducal prussia became known as a land of protestantism and sectarianism . in 1544 duke albert founded the albertina university in königsberg , which became the principal educational establishment for lutheran pastors and theologians of prussia . in 1560 , the university received a royal privilege from king sigismund ii augustus of poland . it was granted the same rights and autonomy those enjoyed by the kraków university , thus it became one of the leading universities in the polish–lithuanian commonwealth . the use of the native languages in church services made duke albert appoint exiled protestant lithuanian pastors as professors , e.g . stanislovas rapolionis and abraomas kulvietis , making the albertina also a centre of lithuanian language and literature . albertas juška , mažosios lietuvos bažnyčia xvi-xx amžiuje , klaipėda : 1997 , pp . 742–771 , here after the german translation die kirche in klein litauen ( section : 5 . die pfarrer und ihre ausbildung ; on : lietuvos evangelikų liuteronų bažnyčia , retrieved on 28 august 2011 . while the composition of the nobility changed little in the transition from the monastic state to the duchy , the control of the nobility over the dependent peasantry increased . prussia 's free peasants , called kölmer were holders of free estates according to culm law ) . these kölmer held with about a sixth of the arable land , a considerable share as compared with other nations in the feudal era . peter brandt in collaboration with thomas hofmann , preußen : zur sozialgeschichte eines staates ; eine darstellung in quellen , edited on behalf of berliner festspiele as a catalogue to the exhibition on prussia between 15 may and 15 november 1981 , reinbek bei hamburg : rowohlt , 1981 , ( preußen ; vol . 3 ) , pp . 24 and 35 . administratively , little changed in the transition from the teutonic knights to ducal rule . although he was formally a vassal of the crown of poland , albert retained self-government for prussia , his own army , the minting of his currency , a prussian estates , ( de , landtag ) , and had substantial autonomy in foreign affairs . william urban . the teutonic knights : a military history . greenhill books . london , 2003 . . lack of heirs . when albert died in 1568 , his teenage son ( exact age is unknown ) albert frederick inherited the duchy . the elector of brandenburg joachim ii , converted to lutheranism in 1539 . joachim wanted to merge his lands with the prussian dukedom , so his heirs would inherit both . joachim petitioned his brother-in-law , king sigismund ii of poland to grant this . sigismund ii was also albert frederick 's cousin . on 19 july 1569 , in lublin , poland , duke albert frederick rendered king sigismund ii homage and was in return installed as duke of prussia . the king simultaneously installed joachim ii and his descendants as co-heir . administration in the duchy declined as albert frederick became increasingly feeble-minded , leading margrave george frederick of brandenburg-ansbach to become regent of prussia in 1577 . following king sigismund iii 's prussian regency contract ( 1605 ) with joachim frederick of brandenburg and his treaty of warsaw , 1611 , with john sigismund of brandenburg , confirming the brandenburgian co-inheritance of prussia , these two regents guaranteed the free practice of catholic religion in prevailingly lutheran prussia . based on these contracts some lutheran churches were reconsecrated as catholic places of worship ( e.g . st . nicholas church , elbląg in 1612 ) . transition into brandenburg-prussia in 1618 . in 1618 , albert frederick died , with no surviving male heirs . as per the treaties , his son-in-law , elector john sigismund of the hohenzollern branch in brandenburg , became the duke 's legal successor , thereafter ruling brandenburg , and ducal prussia in personal union . in 1618 , the thirty years ' war broke out , and john sigismund himself died the following year . his son , george william , was successfully invested with the duchy in 1623 by king of poland sigismund iii vasa , thus the personal union brandenburg-prussia was confirmed . many of the prussian junkers were opposed to rule by the house of hohenzollern of berlin and appealed to sigismund iii vasa for redress , or even incorporation of ducal prussia into the polish kingdom , but without success . herbert eulenberg . the hohenzollerns . translated by m.m . bozman . the century co . new york , 1929 . brandenburg , being a fief of the holy roman empire , and ducal prussia , being a polish fief , made a cross-border real union legally impossible . de facto brandenburg and ducal prussia were more and more ruled as one , and colloquially referred to as brandenburg-prussia . due to the polish–swedish war , in 1635 the duchy was administered by polish statesman jerzy ossoliński , appointed by polish king władysław iv vasa . frederick william the '' great elector '' , duke of prussia and prince-elector of brandenburg , wished to acquire royal prussia in order to territorially connect his two fiefs . yet , during the second northern war , charles x gustav of sweden invaded ducal prussia and dictated the treaty of königsberg ( january 1656 ) , which made the duchy a swedish fief . in the subsequent treaty of marienburg ( june 1656 ) , charles x gustav promised to cede to frederick william the polish chełmno voivodeship , malbork , pomerania , and the prince-bishopric of warmia , if frederick william would support charles gustav 's effort . the proposition was somewhat risky , since frederick william would definitely have to provide military support , while the reward could only be provided conditional on victory . when the tide of the war turned against charles x gustav , he concluded the treaty of labiau ( november 1656 ) , making frederick william i the full sovereign in ducal prussia and warmia , which , however , was part of poland . in response to the swedish-prussian alliance , king john ii casimir of poland submitted a counter-offer which frederick william accepted . they signed the treaty of bromberg on 6 september 1657 and the treaty of wehlau on 29 july 1657 . in return for frederick william 's renunciation of the swedish-prussian alliance , john casimir recognised frederick william 's full sovereignty over the duchy of prussia . after almost 200 years of polish suzerainty over the teutonic monastic state of prussia and its successor ducal prussia , the territory passed under the full sovereignty of brandenburg . therefore , duchy of prussia then became the more adequate appellation for the state . full sovereignty was a necessary prerequisite to upgrade ducal prussia to the sovereign kingdom of prussia , in 1701 . ( not to be confused with polish royal prussia . ) however , the end of polish suzerainty was met with resistance of the population , regardless of ethnicity , as it was afraid of brandenburg absolutism and wished to remain part of the crown of the kingdom of poland . the burghers of the capital city of königsberg , led by hieronymus roth , rejected the treaties of wehlau and oliva and viewed prussia as '' indisputably contained within the territory of the polish crown '' . janusz jasiński , polska a królewiec , komunikaty mazursko-warmińskie nr 2 , 2005 , p . 126 ( in polish ) it was noted that the incorporation into the polish crown under the treaty of kraków was approved by the city of königsberg , while the separation from poland took place without the city 's consent . polish king john ii casimir vasa was asked for help , masses were held in protestant churches for the polish king and the polish kingdom . in 1662 , elector frederick william entered the city with his troops and forced the city to swear allegiance to him . however , in the following decades attempts to return to polish suzerainty were still made . in 1675 , the polish-french treaty of jaworów was even signed , according to which france was to support polish efforts to regain control of the region , while poland was to join the ongoing franco-brandenburgian war on the french side , however , it was not implemented . kingdom in 1701 . ducal prussia 's full sovereignty allowed elector frederick i of prussia to become '' king in prussia '' in 1701 without offending emperor leopold i . the government of de facto collectively ruled brandenburg-prussia , seated in brandenburg 's capital berlin , mostly appeared under the higher ranking titles of the prussian government . after the kingdom of prussia 's annexation of the bulk of the province of royal prussia in the first partition of poland in 1772 , former ducal prussia — including previously polish-controlled warmia within royal prussia — was reorganized into the province of east prussia , while most of former royal prussia became the province of west prussia . the kingdom of prussia , then consisting of east and west prussia , being a sovereign state , and brandenburg , being a fief within the holy roman empire , were amalgamated de jure only after the latter 's dissolution in 1806 . see also . references .