The Nation (Irish newspaper)

background . the founders of the nation were three young men – two catholics and one protestant – who , according to the historian of the newspaper t . f . o'sullivan , were all '' free from the slightest taint of bigotry , and were anxious to unite all creeds and classes for the country 's welfare . '' . young ireland , t . f . o'sullivan , the kerryman ltd . 1945 pg 6 they were charles gavan duffy , its first editor ; thomas davis , and john blake dillon . all three were members of daniel o'connell 's repeal association , which sought repeal of the 1800 act of union between ireland and britain ; this association would later be known as young ireland.the name suggested by duffy for the paper was the national , but davis disagreed , suggesting '' that the use of an adjective for such a purpose was contrary to the analogies of the english language '' . he suggested the nation , which was assented to by all three . young ireland , t . f . o'sullivan , the kerryman ltd . 1945 pg 42 '' we desired to make ireland a nation '' , duffy wrote , '' and the name would be a fitting prelude to the attempt . '' . in due course and after many other consultations between the founders , the following announcement was made as to the date of publication , the name of the journal , and the contributors : . young ireland , t . f . o'sullivan , the kerryman ltd . 1945 pg 43 on the first saturday in october will be published the first number of a ; dublin weekly journal to be called the nation , for which the services of the most eminent political writers in the country have been secured . it will be edited by charles gavan duffy , editor of the vindicator ( ulster newspaper ) , aided by the , following distinguished contributors : — john o'connell , esq . , m.p . ; thomas osborne davis , esq . , barrister-at-law ; w . j . o'neill daunt , esq . , author of the green book , john b . dillon , esq . , barrister-at-law clarence mangan , esq . , author of anthologia germanica and litterae orientales ; the late editor of the london magazine and charivari , j . c . fitzgerald , editor of the true sun , and others whose names we are not at liberty to publish . the paper was first published on saturday 15 october 1842 . the prospectus of the nation . in the prospectus , which was written by davis with the exception of one sentence , it was stated , life of john mitchel , p . a . sillard , james duffy and co . , ltd 1908.pg 3 the projectors of the nation have been told that there is no room in ireland for another liberal journal ; but they think differently . they believe that since the success of the long and gallant struggle which our fathers maintained against sectarian ascendancy , a new mind has grown up amongst us , which longs to redress other wrongs and achieve other victories ; and that this mind has found no adequate expression in the press . the liberal journals of ireland were perhaps never more ably conducted than at this moment ; but their tone and spirit are not of the present but the past ; —their energies are shackled by old habits , old prejudices , and old divisions ; and they do not and can not keep in the van of the advancing people . the necessities of the country seem to demand a journal able to aid and organise the new movements going on amongst us—to make their growth deeper , and their fruit 'more racy of the soil'— and , above all , to direct the popular mind and the sympathies of educated men of all parties to the great end of nationality . such a journal should be free from the quarrels , the interests , the wrongs , and even the gratitude of the past . it should be free to apply its strength where it deems best— free to praise—free to censure ; unshackled by sect or party ; able , irish , and independent . holding these views , the projectors of the nation can not think that a journal , prepared to undertake this work , will be deemed superfluous ; and as they labour , not for themselves but for their country , they are prepared , if they do not find a way open , to try if they can not make one . nationality is their first object—a nationality which will not only raise our people from their poverty , by securing to them the blessings of a domestic legislature , but inflame and purify them with a lofty and heroic love of country—a nationality of the spirit as well as the letter—a nationality which may come to be stamped upon our manners , our literature , and our deeds—a nationality which may embrace protestant , catholic , and dissenter , milesian and cromwellian , the irishman of a hundred generations , and the stranger who is within our gates ; not a nationality which would preclude civil war , but which would establish internal union and external independence—a nationality which would be recognised by the world , and sanctified by wisdom , virtue , and time . as could be seen from the prospectus , as political objectives went , the programme was certain to be of immense assistance to daniel o'connell in his efforts to revive the agitation for repeal , young ireland and 1848 , dennis gwynn , cork university press 1949 , pg 8 but o'connell also knew and felt that he was receiving , for the present , a powerful support from them ; but he knew also , that they were outside of his influence , and did not implicitly believe that repeal would be yielded to '' agitator '' ; that they were continually seeking , by their writings , to arouse a military spirit among the people ; showing plainly , that while they helped the repeal association , they fully expected that the liberties of the country must be fought for in the end : it was in appearance only that they worked in harmony . life of john mitchel , p . a . sillard , james duffy and co . , ltd 1908 , pg 11 john mitchel joined the staff of the nation in the autumn of 1845 . young ireland , t . f . o'sullivan , the kerryman ltd , 1945 . on mitchel 's frequent trips from banbridge , co down to dublin , he had come in contact with the repeal members who gathered about the nation office and in the spring of 1843 he became a member of the repeal association . william dillon , the life of john mitchel ( london , 1888 ) 2 vols . ch iv for the next two years mitchel wrote political and historical articles and reviews for the nation . he covered a wide range of subjects , including the great famine , on which he contributed some influential articles which attracted significant attention . mitchel resigned his position as leader writer on the nation , he himself wrote years afterwards , because he came to regard as '' absolutely necessary a more vigorous policy against the english government than that which william smith o'brien , charles gavan duffy and other young ireland leaders were willing to pursue '' . in 1847 , when he severed his connection with the nation , he wrote , '' i had watched the progress of the famine policy of the government , and could see nothing in it but a machinery , deliberately devised , and skillfully worked , for the entire subjugation of the island—the slaughter of portion of the people , and the pauperization of the rest '' , and he had therefore '' come to the conclusion that the whole system ought to be met with resistance at every point , and the means for this would be extremely simple , namely , a combination among the people to obstruct and render impossible the transport and shipment of irish provisions ; to refuse all aid to its removal ; to destroy the highways ; to prevent everyone , by intimidation , from daring to bid for grain and cattle if brought to auction under 'distress ' ( a method of obstruction which put an end to church tithes before ) ; in short , to offer a passive resistance universally ; but occasionally , when opportunity served , to try the steel . '' to recommend such a course would be extremely hazardous , and was besides in advance of the revolutionary progress made up to that time by mr . duffy , the proprietor of the nation , mitchel therefore resigned from the journal , and started his own paper , the united irishman . women wrote for the paper , and published under pseudonyms such as mary ( ellen mary patrick downing ) ; speranza ( jane elgee , lady wilde , oscar wilde 's mother ) , known universally as '' speranza '' of the nation ; and eva ( mary eva kelly , who would marry kevin izod o'doherty ) . these three were known as the '' three graces '' of the nation . eithne ( marie thompson ) , finola ( elizabeth willoughby varian ) , , ruby ( rose kavanagh ) and thomasine ( olivia knight ) were others . in july 1848 jane wilde and margaret callan assumed editorial control of the nation during gavan duffy 's imprisonment in newgate . the role played by some of its key figures in the paper in the ill-fated young irelander rebellion of 1848 cemented the paper 's reputation as the voice of irish radicalism . dillon was a central figure in the revolt and was sentenced to death , the sentence later commuted . he fled ireland , escaping first to france and , eventually , to the united states , where he served the new york bar . w . j . mccormack , patrick gillan . '' the blackwell companion to modern irish culture '' , page 167 . new york : wiley-blackwell , 2001 its triumvirate of founders followed differing paths . davis died , aged 30 , in 1845 . both dillon and duffy became mps in the british house of commons . duffy emigrated to australia where he became premier of the state of victoria , later being knighted as a order of st michael and st george ( kcmg ) . dillon died in 1866 . his son , john dillon became leader of the irish parliamentary party and his grandson , james dillon , leader of fine gael . the nation continued to be published until 1900 , when it merged with the irish weekly independent . later political figures associated with the paper included td sullivan and jj clancy . contributors . denis florence maccarthy c . p . meehan william carleton john keegan casey john mitchel john kenyon michael doheny thomas d'arcy mcgee richard robert madden john kells ingram ( author of '' the memory of the dead '' ) edward walsh james fintan lalor thomas devin reilly john edward pigot charles kickham jane wilde richard d'alton williams thomas macnevin john cashel hoey , editor 1849–57 . michael hogan – '' the bard of thomond '' hugh heinrick . notes and references . further reading . the politics of irish literature : from thomas davis to w.b . yeats , malcolm brown , allen & unwin , 1973 . john mitchel , a cause too many , aidan hegarty , camlane press . thomas davis , the thinker and teacher , arthur griffith , m.h . gill & son 1922 . brigadier-general thomas francis meagher his political and military career , capt . w . f . lyons , burns oates & washbourne limited 1869 young ireland and 1848 , dennis gwynn , cork university press 1949 . daniel o'connell the irish liberator , dennis gwynn , hutchinson & co , ltd . o'connell davis and the colleges bill , dennis gwynn , cork university press 1948 . smith o'brien and the '' secession '' , dennis gwynn , cork university press meagher of the sword , edited by arthur griffith , m . h . gill & son , ltd . 1916 . young irelander abroad the diary of charles hart , edited by brendan o'cathaoir , university press . john mitchel first felon for ireland , edited by brian o'higgins , brian o'higgins 1947 . rossa 's recollections 1838 to 1898 , intro by sean o'luing , the lyons press 2004 . labour in ireland , james connolly , fleet street 1910 . the re-conquest of ireland , james connolly , fleet street 1915 . john mitchel noted irish lives , louis j . walsh , the talbot press ltd 1934 . thomas davis : essays and poems , centenary memoir , m . h gill , m.h . gill & son , ltd mcmxlv . life of john martin , p . a . sillard , james duffy & co . , ltd 1901 . life of john mitchel , p . a . sillard , james duffy and co . , ltd 1908 . john mitchel , p . s . o'hegarty , maunsel & company , ltd 1917 . the fenians in context irish politics & society 1848–82 , r . v . comerford , wolfhound press 1998 william smith o'brien and the young ireland rebellion of 1848 , robert sloan , four courts press 2000 irish mitchel , seamus maccall , thomas nelson and sons ltd 1938 . ireland her own , t . a . jackson , lawrence & wishart ltd 1976 . life and times of daniel o'connell , t . c . luby , cameron & ferguson . young ireland , t . f . o'sullivan , the kerryman ltd . 1945 . irish rebel john devoy and america 's fight for irish freedom , terry golway , st . martin 's griffin 1998 . paddy 's lament ireland 1846–1847 prelude to hatred , thomas gallagher , poolbeg 1994 . the great shame , thomas keneally , anchor books 1999 . james fintan lalor , thomas , p . o'neill , golden publications 2003 . charles gavan duffy : conversations with carlyle ( 1892 ) , with introduction , stray thoughts on young ireland , by brendan clifford , athol books , belfast , . ( pg . 32 titled , foster 's account of young ireland . ) envoi , taking leave of roy foster , by brendan clifford and julianne herlihy , aubane historical society , cork . the falcon family , or , young ireland , by m . w . savage , london , 1845 . ( an gorta mor ) quinnipiac university . external links . irish news archive- the full archives of the nation