Banks Peninsula

geology . thumb thumb banks peninsula forms the most prominent volcanic feature of the south island , similar to — but more than twice as large as — the older dunedin volcano ( otago peninsula and harbour ) to the southwest . geologically , the peninsula comprises the eroded remnants of two large ( lyttelton formed first , then akaroa ) , and the smaller mt herbert volcanic group . these formed due to intraplate volcanism between approximately eleven and eight million years ago ( miocene ) on a continental crust . the peninsula formed as offshore islands , with the volcanoes reaching to about 1,500 & nbsp ; m above sea level . two dominant craters formed lyttelton and akaroa harbours . the canterbury plains formed from the erosion of the southern alps / kā tiritiri o te moana ( an extensive and high mountain range caused by the meeting of the indo-australian and pacific plates ) and from the alluvial fans created by large braided rivers . these plains reach their widest point where they meet the hilly sub-region of banks peninsula . a layer of loess , a rather unstable fine silt deposited by the foehn winds which bluster across the plains , covers the northern and western flanks of the peninsula . the portion of crater rim lying between lyttelton harbour and christchurch city forms the port hills . prehistory . according to tradition the first māori settlers of the area now known as banks peninsula were the waitaha led by their founding ancestor rākaihautū . the māori name for the peninsula is te pataka o rākaihautū ( the storehouse of rākaihautū ) in recognition of his deeds and the abundance of mahinga kai ( foods of the forests , sea , rivers and skies ) . they were followed by kāti māmoe , and then the ngāi tahu hapu ngāi tūhaitara , who arrived in the 1730s . . history . the first european sighting of the peninsula was on 17 february 1770 by captain james cook and crew during cook 's first circumnavigation of new zealand . cook described the land as '' of a circular figure . of a very broken uneven surface and having more the appearance of barrenness than fertility . '' deceived by the outline of higher land behind the peninsula , cook mistook it for an island and named it '' banks island '' in honour of s botanist , joseph banks . distracted by a phantom sighting of land to the southeast , cook then ordered endeavour away to the south without exploring more closely . in 1809 captain samuel chase , in the sealer pegasus , corrected cook 's charts by determining that '' banks island '' was in fact a peninsula . his first officer , william stewart , charted this area of the coast . pegasus bay is named after their vessel . in 1830 the māori settlement at takapūneke was sacked , and the local ngāi tahu chief , tama-i-hara-nui captured , by ngāti toa chief , te rauparaha , with the assistance of the captain of the british brig elizabeth , john stewart . it was partly as a result of this massacre that the british authorities sent james busby , as official british resident , to new zealand in 1832 . during the 1830s several european whaling bases were established on banks peninsula . in 1838 captain langlois , a french whaler , decided that akaroa would make a good settlement to service whaling ships and '' purchased '' the peninsula in a dubious land deal with the local māori . he returned to france , floated the nanto-bordelaise company , and set sail for new zealand with a group of french and german families aboard the ship , with the intention of forming a french colony on a french south island of new zealand . by the time langlois and his colonists arrived at banks peninsula in august 1840 , many māori had already signed the treaty of waitangi ( the signatories including two chiefs at akaroa in may ) and new zealand 's first british governor , william hobson , had declared british sovereignty over the whole of new zealand . on hearing of the french plan for colonisation , hobson quickly dispatched hms britomart from the bay of islands to akaroa with police magistrates on board . while langlois and his colonists sheltered from unfavourable winds at pigeon bay on the other side of the peninsula , the british raised their flag at greens point between akaroa and takapūneke and courts of law convened to assert british sovereignty over the south island . during the 1840s , the peninsula and the canterbury plains beyond were considered for colonisation , but it took until 1848 for the canterbury association chief surveyor , captain joseph thomas to survey the surrounding plains and prepare for the arrival of the first four ships in december 1850 . from the 1850s , lyttelton and then christchurch outgrew akaroa , which is now a holiday resort and cruise ship destination and has retained many french influences as well as many of its nineteenth-century buildings . historic harbour defence works dating from 1874 onwards survive at ripapa island in lyttelton harbour , and at godley head . in 2011 , the christchurch earthquakes of feb and june had their epicentres in the port hills , significantly affecting communities . economy . fisheries . several sites off the coast of the peninsula serve for mariculture cultivation of mussels . farming . farming has been a traditional industry on banks peninsula . tourism . following the major earthquakes of 2010 and 2011 , which affected christchurch and lyttelton ( the harbour serving christchurch ) , cruise ships were diverted to akaroa harbour . summit road . the summit road forms a notable feature on the peninsula . built in the 1930s , the road is in two sections ( both of which have views of the area , as well as parks , walkways , and other recreational features ) : one section runs along the crest of the port hills from godley head ( the northern head of lyttelton harbour ) to gebbies pass at the head of the harbour the other section runs around the crater rim of akaroa harbour from 'hill top ' – the junction with the main christchurch-akaroa highway – to a point above akaroa . conservation . estimates suggest that native forest once covered 98 % of the peninsula . however , māori and european settlers successively denuded the forest cover and less than 2 % remains today , although some reforestation has started . european settlers have planted many english trees , notably walnut . hinewai reserve . hinewai reserve , a private nature reserve , has been established on the peninsula to allow for native forest to regenerate on land that was once farmed . it was established in 1987 and now spans 1250 hectares of native bush . it has 40 & nbsp ; km of walking tracks through the native bush . other protected areas on the peninsula include ellangowan scenic reserve ( 3.14 & nbsp ; km² ) , designated in 1973 , mount herbert scenic reserve ( 2.42 & nbsp ; km² ) , designated in 1980 , wairewa stewardship area ( 6.51 & nbsp ; km² ) , designated in 1987 , and palm gully scenic reserve ( 1.11 & nbsp ; km² ) , designated in 1989 . unep-wcmc ( 2020 ) . protected area profile for new zealand from the world database of protected areas , october 2020 . available at : www.protectedplanet.net . marine reserves . a large marine mammal sanctuary , mainly restricting set net fishing , surrounds much of the peninsula . this has the principal aim of the conservation of hector 's dolphin , the smallest of all dolphin species . eco-tourism based around the playful dolphins has now become a significant industry in akaroa . the relatively small pohatu marine reserve centres on flea bay on the south-east side of the peninsula and the larger akaroa marine reserve lies at the entrance to the akaroa harbour . rod donald banks peninsula trust . the rod donald banks peninsula trust aims to improve public walking and biking access and enhance biodiversity on banks peninsula . they ( in 2020 ) are raising money to purchase 500ha of land including the summits of mt herbert/ te ahu patiki and mt bradley with the intention to set up a conservation park protecting and restoring native biodiversity . the land is currently farmland but over time the trust intends to return it to native bush.they are also involved in developing te ara pātaka , also known as the summit walkway . they have also been involved in providing tramping huts ( rod donald hut and otamahua hut on quail island ) for the public to access . . banks peninsula conservation trust . the banks peninsula conservation trust was formed in 2001 . it works to conserve and enhance the biodiversity and encourage sustainable land management on banks peninsula . work being undertaken in 2020 included work to protect moreporks and tuis . they also work with landowners to legally protect important biodiversity and landscape values in perpetuity through covenants . . towns . akaroa . akaroa is a small town on the edge of the akaroa harbour . little river . little river is a small town which sits at the end of the little river rail trail . there are several art galleries , a camp ground , rugby club and primary school there . wairewa . wainui . wainui is a settlement of mostly holiday houses on the akaroa harbour . duvauchelle . duvauchelle is a small town which sits at the head of the akaroa harbour . bays . the inland valleys of the port hills known as mccormacks bay and moncks bay are bays of the avon heathcote estuary , rather that coastal bays of banks peninsula . working around the coast from north to south one encounters : . sumner bay . sumner bay marks the coastal transition from the long sandy beach of pegasus bay and the lowlands of the canterbury plains to the rocky cliffs of banks peninsula . while sumner is politically and socially considered a suburb of christchurch , the high clifton cliffs and the post of volcanic rock on the beach , known locally as rapanui , or shag rock , mark the place where the coastal plains meet the peninsula . taylors mistake . taylors mistake is a christchurch swimming beach with a number of holiday houses lining the bay . lyttelton harbour . lyttelton harbour is a harbour within banks peninsula . within the harbour lies quail island . port levy . port levy is the most north facing of the bays on banks peninsula . it has been visited by europeans since the 1820s and known as koukourarata in maori . . pigeon bay . pigeon bay has a walking track which follows the eastern side of pigeon bay out to the head of the bay . it takes about 4 or 5 hours to walk there and back . it has spectacular coastal views . there are a number of holiday homes in pigeon bay as well as a yacht club . little akaloa . little akaloa is named '' little '' to distinguish it from akaroa . it was spelt hakaroa until 1864 . . akaroa harbour . akaroa harbour is one of the two large harbours on banks peninsula . the other being lyttelton harbour . tumbledown bay . tumbledown bay is considered one of the best beaches near christchurch . most people are put off by the drive to get there , hence it is usually very quiet . . te oka bay . . magnet bay . magnet bay is known as a spot to go surfing . it has an exposed reef and point break . these provide reasonably consistent surf all year around . . walking tracks . banks peninsula track . an attraction for trampers and bushwalkers is the banks peninsula track . there are opportunities to see penguins , falcons , geckos , and sooty shearwater while walking the track . the track can be completed over two to three days . the 31 & nbsp ; km circular route starts in akaroa and visits flea bay , stony bay and hinewai reserve . . te ara pataki ( summit walkway ) . the te ara pataki ( summit walkway ) is a three day tramp that can start at multiple places . the longest routes start either at gebbies pass or kaituna valley and go to sign of the packhorse hut on the first day . on the second day , trampers follow a track crossing just below mount bradley ( 855m ) and then ascend mount herbert ( 919m ) before descending to the port levy saddle . from here it is a short walk to the second overnight stay at rod donald hut . the third day takes in mount fitzgerald ( 826m ) and mount sinclair ( 841m ) . the track then descends past a 2000 year old giant tōtara in montgomery park scenic reserve before finishing near the hilltop tavern on state highway 75 . . le race . the annual 100 & nbsp ; km road cycling race from cathedral square in christchurch to akaroa traverses the banks peninsula . the course climbs up dyers pass road , follows the summit road along the port hills before descending gebbies pass to state highway 75 . it then ascends to hilltop before turning off and following the summit road , climbing duvauchelle peak and descending long bays road into akaroa . it has been won by three times by mark bailey , twice by michael vink , jeremy yates and daniel whitehouse . hayden roulston ( 2016 ) and brian fowler ( 2005 ) have also won it . in the women 's competition jo buick , reta trotman and sharlotte lucas have all won it three times . . statistics . highest point : mount herbert / te ahu pātiki permanent population : 7600