Art Alexakis

early life . alexakis was born in los angeles , the youngest of five children . soon after his father left the family ( when art was five years old ) , financial difficulties forced his mother to relocate the family to the mar vista gardens housing project in california , located on the west side of los angeles in del rey . alexakis was physically and sexually abused by older kids in his neighborhood . carlson , daniel . '' sxsw film festival : the other f-word '' his brother george died of a heroin overdose when alexakis was 12 . that same year , alexakis 's 15-year-old girlfriend committed suicide . everclear ’ s art alexakis : ” sparkle and fade ’ was my escape route ’ not long after her death , alexakis attempted suicide by filling his pockets with sand and lead weights and jumping off the santa monica pier . later , he said that the vision and voice of his brother george compelled him to survive . edwards , gavin . '' clear unpleasant danger '' . details . may 1996 . alexakis started shooting up when he was 13 , mostly taking crystal methamphetamine . he became addicted to heroin and cocaine , and he survived a cocaine overdose when he was 22 . he quit drugs cold turkey in june , 1984 . . music career . early bands . while living in los angeles in the '80s , alexakis was in a band called shakin ' brave . shakin ' brave featured a rather rough rock sound , but never really rose above the sea of music in southern california . alexakis and his first wife anita relocated to san francisco . while living in san francisco , alexakis stumbled upon a genre of music known as '' cowpunk '' , a style merging two prevalent forms of music with which he grew up — the tunefulness of country and the distorted guitars/fast tempo of rock and roll . inspired , alexakis established shindig records . the easy hoes formed in the late '80s and released one album , tragic songs of life , in 1989 . alexakis 's next project began as a solo album but grew into a group project under the name colorfinger . this band released the album , deep in the heart of the beast in the sun as well as an ep , demonstration . only the full-length album was made available for sale . both were released on alexakis 's shindig records . a few songs originally performed by colorfinger were made into everclear songs , such as '' why i do n't believe in god '' , '' invisible , '' '' the twistinside '' , '' heartspark dollarsign '' , and '' hateful '' . everclear . following a move to portland , alexakis placed an ad in the rocket seeking a bass player and a drummer to form a new band . alexakis had two respondents , craig montoya and scott cuthbert . the trio became the first incarnation of everclear . after cuthbert was replaced by greg eklund , the band spent the better part of a decade as a dominant act on alternative rock radio . the band scored three platinum albums in sparkle & fade , so much for the afterglow , and songs from an american movie vol . one : learning how to smile . the instability and personal turmoil alexakis experienced throughout his life would directly inspire his lyrics . '' father of mine '' and '' why i do n't believe in god '' described his difficult youth , while '' heroin girl '' , '' strawberry '' , and '' color pit '' touched upon his drug addictions . everclear 's breakthrough album , sparkle & fade , deals with the themes of escape and redemption that pervaded his life upon leaving san francisco . songwriting and industry roles . while finding success as a musical act and songwriter , alexakis took on other projects within the music industry . for several years , he served as an a & r representative for capitol records . in 1996 , he produced frogpond 's 1996 album count to ten . in the early 2000s , alexakis established his own label , popularity recordings , as a subsidiary of artemis records . alexakis produced the label 's first release , the 2002 album volume by flipp . the label closed in 2003 . alexakis has also dabbled in songwriting with other artists , including co-writing and dueting the song '' at the end of the day '' released on marion raven 's 2005 and 2007 albums , here i am and set me free , respectively . in october 2008 , alexakis entered the studio with the minneapolis-based band apparently nothing ( previously a madison band and later renamed to the usual things ) to produce their debut album , tentatively titled the middle coast . . radio . from march 2017 through february 2019 , alexakis hosted a weekly radio show on sirius xm 's 1990s alternative and grunge music channel , lithium ( channel 34 ) . . film and television . alexakis took film classes at los angeles community college . in 2000 , alexakis made brief appearances in the heather graham comedy committed . he played the lead role in the 2006 short film room to breathe and had parts in rid of me ( 2011 ) and rogue river ( 2012 ) . in 2014 , he had a role as a tattoo artist in the biographical drama film wild starring reese witherspoon . alexakis was interviewed on space ghost coast to coast ; the interview never aired , although it is briefly glimpsed on episode 60 , '' lawsuit . '' in 2002 , alexakis appeared in two episodes of the chris isaak show . in 2006 , alexakis appeared on an episode of ned 's declassified school survival guide on nickelodeon as a music teacher named mr . gibson ( a reference to gibson guitars ) . in august 2006 , alexakis appeared on the o'reilly factor discussing the music video for '' hater '' , the first single from everclear 's welcome to the drama club . political activism . in 2000 , alexakis testified before congress in support of hr 1488 , the compassion for children and child support enforcement act . through aces , the association of children for the enforcement of support , president geraldine jenson and nancy pelosi sponsored this bill . the law passed . alexakis was a delegate for the 2004 democratic national convention representing oregon 's 3rd congressional district after campaigning for john edwards during the u.s . presidential election , 2004 . he and everclear recorded the woody guthrie standard '' this land is your land '' , which he performed at several political events . alexakis is also a gay rights activist . in 2010 , he expressed his support for gay marriage and opposition to proposition 8 , '' i do n't think prop 8 , gay marriage or the things your community lobbies for are political issues . we are americans ; that 's where it ends . if lady justice is supposed to be blind , then why not towards your community ? it is going to happen ; it 's happening , and i think it is a great thing . '' in the same interview , he reflected on the gay rights movement in the 1970s by saying , '' i went to san francisco to see the sex pistols in 1978 . i was barely 16 and i went with this neighbor of mine , who my mom did n't know was gay , but i knew was gay . i went to castro with a whole group of gay guys and saw a side of the culture that i had never seen before . i was aware of harvey milk before most people were . it was a great experience . '' alexakis has also been involved in drug awareness programs , including the taping of public service announcements for the office of national drug control policy . along with everclear , he has performed for u.s . soldiers in guantanamo bay , cuba , hawaii , and abu dhabi . he has also performed for snowball express , which organizes events for military families who lost loved ones in the war . personal life . during his younger years , alexakis was an atheism . in an august 2000 interview with spin , alexakis stated he had since become christian . speaking about his then-fiancée stephanie greig , he said , '' she 's a christian , and i 'm a christian—my ex isn't—and so i was like , it 's okay to be a christian . i 'm not like a born-again . well , i guess i am born-again , in a way . but i do n't knock people over the head with it . i just kind of use my spirituality to make my life better . '' on march 26 , 2019 , alexakis announced that he had been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in a letter to fans posted on the band 's website . alexakis says he was diagnosed with relapsing-remitting ms following a car accident three years prior . . partial discography . with the easy hoes : 1989 & nbsp ; – tragic songs of life with colorfinger : 1990 & nbsp ; – deep in the heart of the beast in the sun 1990 & nbsp ; – demonstration with everclear : 1993 & nbsp ; – world of noise 1995 & nbsp ; – sparkle and fade 1997 & nbsp ; – so much for the afterglow 2000 & nbsp ; – songs from an american movie vol . one : learning how to smile 2000 & nbsp ; – songs from an american movie vol . two : good time for a bad attitude 2003 & nbsp ; – slow motion daydream 2004 & nbsp ; – ten years gone : the best of everclear 1994-2004 2006 & nbsp ; – welcome to the drama club 2008 & nbsp ; – the vegas years 2009 & nbsp ; – in a different light 2012 & nbsp ; – invisible stars 2015 & nbsp ; – black is the new black solo : 2019 & nbsp ; – sun songs . references . external links .