Sol Plaatje

early life . plaatje was born in doornfontein near boshof , orange free state ( now free state province , south africa ) , the sixth of eight sons . his grandfather 's name was selogilwe mogodi ( 1836-1881 ) but his employer , the boer farmer groenewald , nicknamed him plaatje ( 'picture ' ) in 1856 and the family started using this as a surname . his parents johannes and martha were members of the tswana nation . they were christians and worked for missionaries at mission stations in south africa . when solomon was four , the family moved to pniel near kimberley in the cape colony to work for a german missionary , ernst westphal , and his wife wilhelmine . there he received a mission-education . when he outpaced fellow learners he was given additional private tuition by mrs . westphal , who also taught him to play the piano and violin and gave him singing lessons . in february 1892 , aged 15 , he became a pupil-teacher , a post he held for two years . after leaving school , he moved to kimberley in 1894 where he became a telegraph messenger for the post office . he subsequently passed the clerical examination ( the highest in the colony ) with higher marks than any other candidate in dutch and typing ( reported by neil parsons in his foreword to native life in south africa , before and since the european war and the boer rebellion ) . at that time , the cape colony had qualified suffrage for all men 21 or over , the qualification being that they be able to read and write english or dutch and earn over 50 pounds a year . thus , when he turned 21 in 1897 , he was able to vote , a right he would later lose when british rule ended . shortly thereafter , he became a court interpreter for the british authorities during the siege of mafeking and kept a diary of his experiences which were published posthumously . after the war , he was optimistic that the british would continue to grant qualified franchise to all males , but they gave political rights to whites only in the 1910 union of south africa . plaatje criticised the british in an unpublished 1909 manuscript entitled '' sekgoma – the black dreyfus . '' . career . as an activist and politician , he spent much of his life in the struggle for the enfranchisement and liberation of african people . he was a founder member and first general secretary of the south african native national congress ( sannc ) , which would become the african national congress ( anc ) ten years later . as a member of an sannc deputation , he traveled to england to protest against the natives land act , 1913 , and later to canada and the united states where he met marcus garvey and w . e . b . du bois . while he grew up speaking the tswana language , plaatje would become a polyglot . fluent in at least seven languages , he worked as a court interpreter during the siege of mafeking , and translated works of william shakespeare into tswana . his talent for language would lead to a career in journalism and writing . he was editor and part-owner of kuranta ya becoana ( bechuana gazette ) in mahikeng , and in kimberley tsala ya becoana ( bechuana friend ) and tsala ya batho ( the friend of the people ) . plaatje was the first black south african to write a novel in english – mhudi . he wrote the novel in 1919 , but it was only published in 1930 ( in 1928 the zulu writer r . r . r . dhlomo published an english-language novel , entitled an african tragedy , at the missionary lovedale press , in alice ; this makes dhlomo 's novel the first published black south african novel in english , even though plaatje 's mhudi had been written first ) . he also wrote native life in south africa , which neil parsons describes as '' one of the most remarkable books on africa by one of the continent 's most remarkable writers '' , and boer war diary that was first published 40 years after his death . performing . plaatje made three visits to britain . there he met many people of similar views . one was the cinema and theatrical impresario george lattimore who in 1923 was promoting with pathé , cradle of the world , the '' most marvellous and thrilling travel film ever screened '' . in a letter to the pan-africanist w . e . b . du bois , lattimore reported that he was having a '' successful run '' at the philharmonic hall in london . letter from george w . lattimore to w . e . b . du bois , 21 august 1923 . w . e . b . du bois papers , credo . retrieved 13 october 2014 . the show , which had the character of a revue , included live music and singing . plaatje was recruited by lattimore to take the role of an african tribesman . topp fargion , janet . '' sol t plaatje : the hidden recording '' , in playback , bulletin of the british library national sound archive , no . 12 , autumn 1995 , pp . 2-4 . . personal life . plaatje was a committed christian , solomon tshekisho plaatje ( sol plaatje ) mafikeng capital city – north west province south africa at www.tourismnorthwest.co.za and organised a fellowship group called the christian brotherhood at kimberley . he was married to elizabeth lilith m'belle , a union that would produce six children – frederick york st leger , halley , richard , violet , olive and johannes gutenberg . he died of pneumonia at pimville , johannesburg on 19 june 1932 aged 56 , and was buried in kimberley . over a thousand people attended the funeral . recognition and legacy . 1935 : three years after his death , a tombstone was erected over plaatje 's grave with the inscription : '' i khutse morolong : modiredi wa afrika – rest in peace morolong , you servant of africa '' . decades passed before plaatje began to receive the recognition he deserved . '' much of what he strove for came to nought , '' writes his biographer brian willan , '' his political career was gradually forgotten , his manuscripts were lost or destroyed , his published books largely unread . his novel mhudi formed part of no literary tradition , and was long regarded as little more than a curiosity . '' 1970s : interest was stirred in plaatje 's journalistic and literary legacy through the work of john comaroff ( who edited for publication the boer war diary of sol t . plaatje , and by tim couzens and stephen gray ( who focused attention on sol plaatje 's novel , mhudi 1978 : mhudi was re-published under the editorial guidance of stephen gray plaatje , sol t . 1978 ( 1930 ) . mhudi . ed . stephen gray . oxford : heinemann educational books . 1982 : plaatje 's native life in south africa : before and since the european war and the boer rebellion ( 1916 ) was re-published by ravan press . plaatje , sol t . native life in south africa : before and since the european war and the boer rebellion . johannesburg : ravan . 1982 : the african writers association instituted a sol plaatje prose award ( alongside the h . i . e . and r . r . r . dhlomo drama award and the s . e . k . mqhayi poetry award ) . the literature police : chronology 1984 : brian willan published his biography , sol plaatje : south african nationalist , 1876–1932 . 1991 : the sol plaatje museum , housed in plaatje 's kimberley home at 32 angel street , was opened , actively furthering his written legacy . department of basic education : sol plaatje house : explanation written by dr karen haire for the sol plaatje educational trust , 32 angel street , kimberley , 8301 , retrieved 26 july 2013 . 1992 : the house at 32 angel street in kimberley , where plaatje spent his last years , was declared a national monument ( now a provincial heritage site ) . government gazette of south africa , no . 14048 , pretoria : 19 june 1992 . it continues as the sol plaatje museum , run by the sol plaatje educational trust , with donor funding . in the 2000s the sol plaatje educational trust has published plaatje biographies by maureen rall and sabata-mpho mokae . circa 1995 : the sol plaatje municipality ( kimberley ) in south africa 's northern cape province was named in plaatje 's honour . 1998 : an honorary doctorate was posthumously conferred on plaatje by the university of the north-west , with several of his descendants present . 1998 : plaatje 's grave in west end cemetery , kimberley , was declared a national monument ( now a provincial heritage site ) . government gazette of south africa , no . 18694 , pretoria : 27 february 1998 . it was only the second grave in south african history to be awarded national monument status . diamond fields advertiser , wednesday , 17 october 2001 , '' tsala ea batho '' , kimberley , p . 10 . 2000 : the diamond fields advertiser launches the sol t plaatje memorial award to honour the top setswana and top english matriculant each year in the northern cape . the first recipients are claire reddie ( english ) and neo molefi ( setswana ) . diamond fields advertiser . wednesday 17 october 2001 , '' tsala ea batho '' , kimberley , p . 12 . 2000 : the department of education building in pretoria was renamed sol plaatje house , on 15 june 2000 , '' in honour of this political giant and consummate educator . '' 2000 : the south african post office issued a series of stamps featuring writers of the boer war , with plaatje appearing on the 1.30 rand stamp . the series also includes sir arthur conan doyle , winston churchill , johanna brandt and the anglo-boer war medal . anglo-boer war writers – stamps , trussel.com . 2000 : the african national congress initiated the sol plaatje award , one of a number of annual achievement awards . the sol plaatje award recognises the best performing anc branch . anc annual achievement awards . 2002 : the sol plaatje media leadership institute was established within rhodes university 's department of journalism and media studies . sol plaatje institute retrieved 10 august 2013 . 2005 : the saulspoort dam was renamed sol plaatje dam , although not in honour of sol plaatje the man but in remembrance of 41 sol plaatje municipal workers drowned in a bus disaster there on 1 may 2003 . government gazette , republic of south africa , vol . 478 , pretoria , 1 april 2005 , no . 27408 ; retrieved 16 august 2013 . drama at bus tragedy service news24.com , 5 may 2003 ; retrieved 16 august 2013 . 2007 : the sol plaatje prize for translation was instituted by the english academy of south africa , awarded bi-annually for translation of prose or poetry into english from any of the other south african official languages . 2009 : the sol plaatje power station at the sol plaatje dam was commissioned – the first commercial small hydro power station constructed in south africa in 22 years . 2009 : sol plaatje was honoured in the posthumous literary award given by the south african literary awards . 2010 : the first plaatje festival , held in mahikeng , hosted by the north west province departments of sport , arts and culture and of education , on 5 and 6 november 2010 . it brought together plaatje and molema descendants , poets , journalists , scholars , language practitioners , educators , and learners , who '' paid tribute to this brilliant setswana man of letters . '' 2010 : a statue of sol plaatje , seated and writing at a desk , was unveiled in kimberley by south african president jacob zuma on 9 january 2010 , the 98th anniversary of the founding of the african national congress . by sculptor johan moolman , it was erected at kimberley 's civic centre , formerly the malay camp , and situated approximately where plaatje had his printing press in 1910 – 13 . plaatje statue unveiled , diamond fields advertiser , 11 january 2010 , p . 6 . ( contrary to sunday argus and independent on line reports 10 january 2010 , at 12:42pm suggesting that this took place in cape town . ) 2011 : the european union sol plaatje poetry competition was inaugurated , honouring '' the spirit of the legendary intellectual giant , sol plaatje , the activist , linguist and translator , novelist , journalist and leader . '' winners ' work has been published in an annual anthology since the competition 's inauguration . sol plaatje european union poetry anthology . 2012 : seetsele modiri molema 's lover of his people : a biography of sol plaatje was published . translated and edited by d . s . matjila and karen haire , the manuscript , sol t . plaatje : morata wabo , dating from the 1960s , was the first plaatje biography written in his mother tongue , setswana , and the only book-length biography written by someone who actually knew plaatje . 2013 : the naming of the sol plaatje university in kimberley , which opened in 2014 , was announced by president jacob zuma on 25 july 2013 . '' new universities ' names revealed '' , news24 , 25 july 2013 . 2013 : the renaming of unisa 's florida campus library as the sol plaatje library , unveiled on 30 july 2013 . all in the name of science : campus buildings renamed ; retrieved 16 august 2013 . schools in kimberley and mahikeng are named after sol plaatje . original writing . with john comaroff the essential interpreter ( circa 1909 ) an essay bantu folk-tales and poems . translations of shakespeare . dikhontsho tsa bo-juliuse kesara – julius caesar diphosho-phosho – the comedy of errors both of these were called '' remarkably good '' translations in a 1949 study .