William F. Friedman

early life . friedman was born wolf friedman , , in chişinău , bessarabia , the son of frederick friedman , a jew from bucharest who worked as a translator and linguist for the russian postal service , and the daughter of a well-to-do wine merchant . friedman 's family fled russia in 1892 to escape the virulent anti-semitism there , ending up in pittsburgh , pennsylvania . '' william w . friedman : principal cryptologist '' three years later , his first name was changed to william . as a child , friedman was introduced to cryptography in the short story '' the gold-bug '' by edgar allan poe . he studied at the michigan agricultural college ( known today as michigan state university ) in east lansing and received a scholarship to work on genetics at cornell university . meanwhile , george fabyan , who ran a private research laboratory to study any personally interesting project , decided to set up his own genetics project and was referred to friedman . friedman joined fabyan 's riverbank laboratories outside chicago in september 1915 . as head of the department of genetics , one of the projects he ran studied the effects of moonlight on crop growth , and so he experimented with the planting of wheat during various phases of the moon . initial work in cryptology . another of fabyan 's pet projects was research into secret messages which sir francis bacon had allegedly hidden in various texts during the reigns of elizabeth i and james i . the research was carried out by elizabeth wells gallup . she believed that she had discovered many such messages in the works of william shakespeare , and convinced herself that bacon had written many , if not all , of shakespeare 's works . friedman had become something of an expert photographer while working on his other projects , and was asked to travel to england on several occasions to help gallup photograph historical manuscripts during her research . he became fascinated with the work as he courted elizebeth smith , gallup 's assistant and an accomplished cryptographer . they married , and he soon became director of riverbank 's department of codes and ciphers as well as its department of genetics . during this time , friedman wrote a series of 8 papers on cryptography , collectively known as the '' riverbank publications '' , including the first description of the index of coincidence , an important mathematical tool in cryptanalysis . with the entry of the united states into world war i , fabyan offered the services of his department of codes and ciphers to the government . no federal department existed for this kind of work ( although both the army and navy had had embryonic departments at various times ) , and soon riverbank became the unofficial cryptographic center for the us government . during this period , the friedmans broke a code used by german-funded indian radicals in the us who planned to ship arms to india to gain independence from britain . analyzing the format of the messages , riverbank realized that the code was based on a dictionary of some sort , a cryptographic technique common at the time . the friedmans soon managed to decrypt most of the messages , but only long after the case had come to trial did the book itself come to light : a german-english dictionary published in 1880 . signals intelligence service . the united states government decided to set up its own cryptological service , and sent army officers to riverbank to train under friedman . to support the program , friedman wrote a series of technical monographs , completing seven by early 1918 . he then enlisted in the army and went to france to serve as the personal cryptographer for general john j . pershing . he returned to the us in 1920 and published an eighth monograph , '' the index of coincidence and its applications in cryptography '' , considered by some to be the most important publication in modern cryptography to that time . his texts for army cryptographic training were well thought of and remained classified for several decades . in 1921 he became chief cryptanalyst for the war department and later led the signals intelligence service ( sis ) —a position he kept for a quarter century . in 1929 , after the american black chamber in new york city was disbanded , its files were entrusted to sis , and the cryptographic and intelligence services was reorganized to suit its new position at the war department . friedman coined several terms , including '' cryptanalysis '' , and wrote many monographs on cryptography . one of these ( written mostly in his spare time ) was the first draft of his elements of cryptanalysis , which later was expanded to four volumes and became the u.s . army 's cryptographic main textbook and reference . realizing that mathematical and language skills were essential to sis ' work , friedman managed to get authority to hire three men with both mathematical training and language knowledge . they were solomon kullback , frank rowlett and abraham sinkov , each of whom went on to distinguished service for decades . in addition he also was finally able to hire a man fluent in japanese , john hurt . during this period elizebeth friedman continued her own work in cryptology , and became famous in a number of trials involving rum-runners and the coast guard and fbi during prohibition . solution of cipher machines . left during the 1920s , several new cipher machines were developed generally based on using typewriter mechanics and basic electrical circuitry . an early example was the hebern rotor machine , designed in the us in 1915 by edward hebern . this system offered such security and simplicity of use that hebern heavily promoted it to investors . friedman realized that the new rotor machines would be important , and devoted some time to analyzing hebern 's design . over a period of years , he developed principles of analysis and discovered several problems common to most rotor-machine designs . examples of some dangerous features which allowed cracking of the generated code included having rotors step one position with each keypress , and putting the fastest rotor ( the one that turns with every keypress ) at either end of the rotor series . in this case , by collecting enough ciphertext and applying a standard statistical method known as the kappa test , he showed that he could , albeit with great difficulty , crack any cipher generated by such a machine . friedman used his understanding of rotor machines to develop several that were immune to his own attacks . the best of the lot was the sigaba—which was destined to become the us 's highest-security cipher machine in world war ii after improvements by frank rowlett and laurance safford . just over 10,000 were built . a patent on sigaba was filed at the end of 1944 , but kept secret until 2001 , after friedman had died , when it was finally issued as . in 1939 , the japanese introduced a new cipher machine for their most sensitive diplomatic traffic , replacing an earlier system that sis referred to as '' red . '' the new cipher , which sis called '' purple '' , was different and much more difficult . the navy 's cryptological unit ( op-20-g ) and the sis thought it might be related to earlier japanese cipher machines , and agreed that sis would handle the attack on the system . after several months trying to discover underlying patterns in purple ciphertexts , an sis team led by friedman and rowlett , in an extraordinary achievement , figured it out . purple , unlike the german enigma or the hebern design , did not use rotors but stepping switch like those in automated telephone exchanges . leo rosen of sis built a machine using — as was later discovered — the identical model of switch that the japanese designer had chosen . thus , by the end of 1940 , sis had constructed an exact analog of the purple machine without ever having seen one . with the duplicate machines and an understanding of purple , sis could decrypt increasing amounts of japanese traffic . one such intercept was the message to the japanese embassy in washington , d.c . , ordering an end ( on december 7 , 1941 ) to negotiations with the us . the message gave a clear indication of impending war , and was to have been delivered to the us state department only hours prior to the attack on pearl harbor . the controversy over whether the us had pearl harbor advance-knowledge debate has roiled well into the 21st century . in 1941 , friedman was hospitalized with a '' nervous breakdown '' , widely attributed to the mental strain of his work on purple . while he remained in hospital , a four-man team — abraham sinkov and leo rosen from sis , and lt . prescott currier and lt . robert weeks from the u.s . navy 's op-20-g — visited the british establishment at the '' government code and cypher school '' at bletchley park . they gave the british a purple machine , in exchange for details on the design of the enigma machine and on how the british cryptanalysis of the enigma . however friedman visited bletchley park in april 1943 and played a key role in drawing up the 1943 brusa agreement . . national security agency . image : friedman-bust.jpg right thumb upright bust of friedman on display at the national cryptologic museum , where he is identified as the '' dean of american cryptology '' . following world war ii , friedman remained in government signals intelligence . in 1949 he became head of the cryptographic division of the newly formed armed forces security agency ( afsa ) and in 1952 became chief cryptologist for the national security agency ( nsa ) when it was formed to take over from afsa . friedman produced a classic series of textbooks , '' military cryptanalysis '' , which was used to train nsa students . ( these were revised and extended , under the title '' military cryptanalytics '' , by friedman 's assistant and successor lambros d . callimahos , and used to train many additional cryptanalysts . ) during his early years at nsa , he encouraged it to develop what were probably the first super-computers , although he was never convinced a machine could have the '' insight '' of a human mind . friedman spent much of his free time trying to decipher the famous voynich manuscript , said to be written sometime between 1403–1437 . however , after four decades of study he finally had to admit defeat , contributing no more than an educated guess as to its origins and meaning . in 1955 , friedman initiated , on behalf of the nsa , a secret agreement with crypto ag , a swiss manufacturer of encryption machines . the agreement resulted in many of the company 's machines being compromised , so that the messages produced by them became crackable by the nsa . friedman retired in 1956 and , with his wife , turned his attention to the problem that had originally brought them together : examining bacon 's supposed codes . together they wrote a book entitled the cryptologist looks at shakespeare , which won a prize from the folger library and was published under the title the shakespearean ciphers examined . the book demonstrated flaws in gallup 's work and in that of others who sought hidden ciphers in shakespeare 's work . at nsa 's request friedman prepared six lectures concerning cryptography and cryptanalysis , which he delivered at nsa . but later the agency , concerned about security , confiscated the reference materials from friedman 's home . death and legacy . friedman 's health began to fail in the late 1960s , and he died in 1969 . & nbsp ; friedman and his wife elizebeth are buried in arlington national cemetery . friedman and his wife donated their archives to the library of the george c . marshall foundation , which also has had material reclassified and removed by the nsa . friedman has been inducted into the military intelligence hall of fame and there is a building named after william and elizebeth at the nsa complex at fort george g . meade in maryland . he was also presented the medal for merit by president harry truman , and the national security medal by dwight eisenhower . friedman has the distinction of having one of the longest known suppressed patent applications , for , a patent for a '' cryptographic system '' . it was filed on july 25 , 1933 , issued on august 1 , 2000 . children . friedman had two children with his wife , elizebeth . barbara friedman ( later atchison ) ( born 1923 ) , and john ramsay friedman ( 1926–2010 ) . . in popular culture . commander schoen , a character appearing in neal stephenson 's novel cryptonomicon , is to a large extent inspired by friedman . schoen shares a significant background and personality traits with friedman , including being one of the top cryptanalysts of the u.s . army , breaking japanese codes prior to japan 's involvement in world war ii , and the psychological problems that he suffered from as a result . in his acknowledgements , stephenson writes '' among all these great wartime hackers , some kind of special recognition must go to william friedman , who sacrificed his health to break the japanese machine cipher called purple before the war even began . '' . awards and honors . 1944 : commendation for exceptional civilian service 1946 : medal for merit 1955 : national security medal .