Book of Tobit

canonical status . in christianity . the book of tobit is listed as a canonical book by the council of rome ( a.d . 382 ) , the council of hippo ( a.d . 393 ) , the council of carthage ( 397 ) b . f . westcott , a general survey of the history of the canon of the new testament ( 5th ed . edinburgh , 1881 ) , pp . 440 , 541-2 . and ( a.d . 419 ) , council of carthage ( a.d . 419 ) canon 24 the council of florence ( 1442 ) and finally the council of trent ( 1546 ) , session iv celebrated on the eighth day of april , 1546 under pope paul iii and is part of the canon of both the catholic church and eastern orthodox churches . catholics refer to it as deuterocanonical . augustine ( c . a.d . 397 ) and pope innocent i ( a.d . 405 ) affirmed tobit as part of the old testament canon . athanasius ( a.d . 367 ) mentioned that certain other books , including the book of tobit , while not being part of the canon , '' were appointed by the fathers to be read '' . according to rufinus of aquileia ( c . a.d . 400 ) the book of tobit and other deuterocanonical books were not called canonical but ecclesiastical books . article vi of the thirty-nine articles of the church of england lists it as a book of the '' apocrypha '' . historically evangelical anglicans viewed it as worthy to be read and it is still read in churches . many high church anglicans view it as part of the canon of scripture . in judaism . before the 1952 discovery of aramaic and hebrew fragments of tobit among the dead sea scrolls in a cave at qumran , scholars believed tobit was not included in the jewish canon because of late authorship , estimated to a.d . 100 . fitzmyer , at p . 50 , 55–57 qumran fragments of the text , which were copied between 100 b.c . to a.d . 25 , evidence a much earlier origin than previously thought . these fragments evidence authorship no later than the 2nd century bc and , likely , contemporary with the date ascribed , by modern scholars , to the final compilation of the book of daniel , which did attain canonical status . r . glenn wooden , '' changing perceptions of daniel : reading chapters 4 and 5 of daniel '' , in from biblical criticism to biblical faith , brackney & evans eds . , p . 10 ( mercer univ.press 2007 ) . other scholars have postulated that tobit was excluded from the jewish scriptures for a halakha reason because raguel , the bride 's father , wrote the marriage document discussed in , instead of the bridegroom , as required by jewish rabbinical law . however , some ancient jewish rabbinic scholars possibly considered tobit to be canonical . bereishit rabbah , an aggadic commentary on the book of genesis compiled circa a.d . 400–600 , includes a truncated aramaic version of tobit . tobit was also part of the septuagint , the first greek translation of the bible . in more contemporary times , a number of jews in israel have sought to reclaim tobit as part of the canon . mark bredin , studies in the book of tobit : a multidisciplinary approach , p . 3 ( t & t clark 2006 ) , . . summary . this book tells the story of tobit , a righteous israelite of the tribe of naphtali , living in nineveh after sargon ii had deported the northern tribes of israel to assyria in 721 b.c . in the two greek versions , the first two and a half chapters are written in the first person ; in the vulgate version , they are written in the third person . septuaginta : editio altera/revised edition , 2006 : deutsche bibelgesellschaft , stuttgart , pp . 1002-1039 ; biblia sacra vulgata , vierte , verbesserte auflage 1994 : deutsche bibelgesellschaft , stuttgart , pp . 676-690 . tobit , raised by his paternal grandmother , deborah , remains loyal to the worship of god at the temple in jerusalem , refusing the cult of the golden calf that jeroboam , king of the northern kingdom of israel , set up at dan . he is particularly noted for his diligence in attempting to provide proper burials for fallen israelites whom sargon 's successor , sennacherib , has slain . for this behavior the king seizes his property and exiles him . after sennacherib 's death , tobit is allowed to return to nineveh , where he buries a man who has been murdered on the street . that night , he sleeps in the open and is blinded by bird droppings which fall into his eyes . his blindness subsequently leads him to falsely accuse his wife , anna , of stealing a baby goat she had received as partial payment for work she had done . '' tobit , book of '' , cyclopædia of biblical , theological , and ecclesiastical literature , volume 10 this strains his marriage and , ultimately , he prays for death . '' tobit , book of '' , jewish encyclopedia meanwhile , in faraway medes , a young woman named sarah has prayed for death in despair . the demon of lust , asmodeus ( '' the worst of demons '' ) , abducts and kills every man sarah marries on their wedding night before the marriage can be consummated . god sends the angel raphael , disguised as a human , to heal tobit and free sarah from the demon . the main narrative is dedicated to tobit 's son , tobiah or tobiyah ( greek : tobias ) , who is sent by his father to collect money that the elder has deposited in distant media . raphael presents himself as tobit 's kinsman , azariah , and offers to aid and protect tobias . under raphael 's guidance , tobias journeys to media with his dog . along the way , while washing his feet in the river tigris , a fish tries to swallow his foot . by the angel 's order , he captures it and removes its heart , liver and gall bladder . upon arriving in media , raphael tells tobias of the beautiful sarah , whom tobias has the right to marry because he is her cousin and closest relative . the angel instructs the young man to burn the fish 's liver and heart to drive away the demon when he attacks on the wedding night . the two marry , and the fumes of the burning organs drive the demon to upper egypt , where raphael follows and binds him . sarah 's father had been digging a grave to secretly bury tobias under the assumption that he would be killed . surprised to find his son-in-law alive and well , he orders a double-length wedding feast and has the grave secretly filled . since the feast prevents him from leaving , tobias sends raphael to recover his father 's money . after the feast , tobias and sarah return to nineveh . there , raphael tells the youth to use the fish 's gall to cure his father 's blindness . raphael then reveals his identity and returns to heaven , and tobit sings a hymn of praise . tobit tells his son to leave nineveh before god destroys it according to prophecy ( compare the book of nahum ) . after the prayer , tobit dies at an advanced age . tobit 's age at death is variously given as 127 years in greek i , 117 years in greek ii and the vetus latina , and 102 years in most manuscripts of the vulgate , 112 years in others , ( 158 ) '' an hundred and eight and fifty years old '' in tobit 14:11 kjv ( wikisource ) ( 102 ) '' a hundred and two years '' douay-rheims ( biblegateway ) after burying his father and mother , tobias returns to media with his family . liturgical and religious significance . readings from the book are used in the latin rite . because of the book 's praise for the purity of marriage , it is often read during weddings in many rites . doctrinally , the book is cited for its teaching on the intercession of angels , filial piety , tithing and almsgiving , and reverence for the dead . '' introduction '' , tobit , nab , libreria editrice vaticana tobit is also made reference to in chapter 5 of 1 meqabyan , a book considered canonical in the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church . the story is unusual in its having the only positive reference to a dog in biblical literature . . composition . dating . the story in the book of tobit is set in the 8th century bc , but some scholars claim there are historical errors which rule this out , miller , at p . 10-11 . and now date the book to between 225 and 175 bc . fitzmyer , at p . 51 . to achieve this , they assert that a direct quote in tobit 2:6 from the book of amos ( '' your feasts shall be turned into mourning , and all your mirth into lamentation '' ) indicates that the prophetic books had become not only fixed but authoritative , signalling a post-exilic date , and reference to the '' book of moses '' ( 6:13 , 7:11–13 ) and the '' law of moses '' ( 7:13 ) echo identical phrasing in the book of chronicles , which in their assertion was composed after the 4th century bc , a date which itself is widely contested . fitzmyer , at p . 51 ; miller , at p . 11 . dating tobit 's authorship to after 175 bc is problematic , as the author expresses no awareness of seleucid attempts to hellenize judea ( from 175 bc ) or of the maccabean revolt against the seleucids ( 165 bc ) , nor does it espouse apocalyptic or messianic expectations upon which later writings focused , fitzmyer , at pp . 51–52 ; miller at pp . 11–12 . but some scholars espouse a later date of composition of at least portions of tobit . fitzmyer , at p . 52 . . location and language . no scholarly consensus exists on the place of composition , and '' almost every region of the ancient world seems to be a candidate . '' miller , at pp . 12–13 . a mesopotamian origin seems logical given that the story takes place in assyria and persia , as does the invocation of the persian demon '' aeshma daeva '' , rendered '' asmodeus '' by tobit . but significant errors in geographical detail ( such as the distance from ecbatana to rhages and their topography ) render this origin questionable . miller , at p . 13 . arguments against and in favor of judean or egyptian composition also exist . miller , at pp . 12–15 . the original language of composition remains unclear . tobit may have been originally composed either in aramaic or hebrew , since fragments of tobit in both languages have been discovered at qumran . genre . the book is closely related to jewish wisdom literature . this is especially clear in tobit 's instructions to tobias before his departure for media in chapter 4 , which particularly praise the value of prayer , fasting , and almsgiving . manuscripts . as stated , fragments of tobit in both aramaic and hebrew have been discovered at qumran . four aramaic fragmentary texts of tobit ( 4qtob a–d ar 4q196-199 ) and one hebrew text ( 4qtob e 4q200 ) were found at qumran in cave iv . a.a . di lella , new english translation of the septuagint , '' tobit '' ( pdf ) , 2007 jerome described his version for the vulgate as being made from an aramaic text available to him . surviving greek translations are found in two versions . the shorter , which robert hanhart called greek i in his edition of the septuagint , is found in codex vaticanus , alexandrinus , venetus , and most cursive manuscripts . the greek ii version , 1700 words longer , is found in codex sinaiticus and closely aligns with the hebrew and aramaic fragments found at qumran . apparently the old latin ( la ) manuscripts are also translated from the longer greek ii version . most english translations since 1966 have relied on the greek ii version . . see also . mary untier of knots ( painting with tobias and the angel ) tobias and the angel ( verrocchio ) philosopher in meditation ( '' tobit and anna in an interior '' by rembrandt ) . notes . references . bibliography . fitzmyer , joseph a . , '' tobit '' , ( de gruyter , 2003 ) , commentaries on early jewish literature , miller , geoffrey david , marriage in the book of tobit , pp . & nbsp ; 10–15 ( walter de gruyter 2011 ) , . external links . wikisource book of tobit ( kjv apocrypha ) the book of tobit full text from st-takla.org ( also available in arabic ) world wide study bible : tobit 2012 critical translation with dramatized audio version ( tobi ) various versions