Black Francis

influences . thompson has drawn influence from a number of music genre . as a teenager , he mostly listened to 1960s folk and religious music , including the christian singer-songwriter larry norman . for playing on his junior high baseball team , he was given leon russell 's 1970 debut album , which he says influenced some of his vocalizing . later in high school and in college , he discovered punk rock ( black flag ) , along with bands from other genres , such as the new wave band the cars and the obscure angst . while in boston in 1984 , before starting the pixies , he listened to hüsker dü 's zen arcade , the spotlight kid by captain beefheart , and i 'm sick of you , an iggy pop bootleg . thompson was also greatly influenced by the the beatles ( album ) with regards to the experimental nature of his compositions . thompson 's lyrics have also featured references to the bible , especially in his career with the pixies ; most notably in the incestuous tale of nimrod in '' nimrod 's son '' , the stories of uriah and bathsheba in '' dead '' , samson in '' gouge away '' and references to the tower of babel in songs such as '' build high '' and '' old black dawning '' . he cited surrealism films eraserhead and un chien andalou ( as mentioned in '' in heaven '' and '' debaser '' respectively ) as major influences on his work with the pixies ; however , surrealism was less of an influence in his solo career . he commented on these influences ( which he paid tribute to most in the pixies ' doolittle ) , saying he '' did n't have the patience to sit around reading surrealist novels '' , but found it easier to watch 20-minute films . sisario , 2006 . p . 29 . songwriting and lyrics . during his stay in puerto rico , thompson acquired a fairly fluent , although informal and at times incorrect , use of spanish , which he has continued throughout his career . several early pixies songs , including '' isla de encanta '' and '' vamos '' , reference his experiences in san juan , and the lyrics are often heavily seasoned with the island 's slang . the island 's influence in his work is most notable in the song '' isla de encanta '' , named after the island 's motto , '' isla del encanto '' . other pixies songs drawn from his experiences there include '' vamos '' ( come on pilgrim ) , '' oh my golly ! '' , '' where is my mind ? '' ( surfer rosa ) , '' crackity jones '' ( doolittle ) and the b-side '' bailey 's walk '' . several of his songs contain spanish lyrics , most notably in the pixies ' first album , come on pilgrim , and a spanish translation of '' evil hearted you '' by the yardbirds . francis , black . lyrics . '' evil hearted you ( corazon de diablo ) '' . from his later works with the pixies onwards , his use of spanish drifted westward , reflecting places and aspects of the state of california and its culture . thompson 's lyrics are noted for their obscure references to off-beat topics such as outer space , ufos , and the three stooges—the last of these being the subject of '' two reelers '' , a song from teenager of the year . lyrics with a focus on science fiction were particularly prominent on the later pixies records , as well as his early solo albums . with the catholics , his lyrics have tended towards historical topics ; for example , the song '' st . francis dam disaster '' ( from dog in the sand ) details the catastrophic collapse of the st . francis dam near los angeles in march 1928 , and the all my ghosts ep featured an account of the 1860 wiyot massacre of wiyot indians in 1860 near eureka , california . . television appearances and videos . thompson has appeared on a range of television shows solo and as part of the pixies , ranging from 120 minutes and the late show in the united states , to the word in the uk . as part of the pixies , he was reluctant to film music videos for singles . elektra records ' peter lubin commented that '' to get videos out of them was a major & nbsp ; . undertaking and it only got worse over time '' , citing the fact that thompson refused to lip-sync ; frank , ganz , 2005 . p . 140 the video for '' here comes your man '' features thompson and deal opening their mouths as the vocals are being heard , mocking the practice . in his early solo career as frank black , his videos were more professional ; he became more willing to take part in them . '' los angeles '' is an example ; the video features thompson riding across a desert on a hovercraft . they might be giants ' john flansburgh , who directed the '' los angeles '' video , later commented on the change in black 's attitude to music videos : thompson has released few music videos since leaving 4ad , one being a low-budget video in germany for dog in the sand ' s '' robert onion '' . the last widely released video produced for his solo material was for '' men in black '' , from cult of ray . in 2013 , thompson appeared in a video promoting mcsweeney 's children 's book lost sloth . discography . studio albums . frank black ( 1993 ) teenager of the year ( 1994 ) the cult of ray ( 1996 ) frank black and the catholics ( 1998 ) pistolero ( 1999 ) sunday sunny mill valley groove day ( 2000 , unreleased ) dog in the sand ( 2001 ) black letter days ( 2002 ) devil 's workshop ( 2002 ) show me your tears ( 2003 ) frank black francis ( 2004 ) honeycomb ( 2005 ) fast man raider man ( 2006 ) christmass ( 2006 ) bluefinger ( 2007 ) svn fngrs ( ep ) ( 2008 ) the golem ( 2010 ) nonstoperotik ( 2010 ) paley & francis ( 2011 ) ( with reid paley ) . pixies . come on pilgrim ( 1987 ) surfer rosa ( 1988 ) doolittle ( 1989 ) bossanova ( 1990 ) trompe le monde ( 1991 ) ep1 ( 2013 ) ep2 ( 2014 ) ep3 ( 2014 ) indie cindy ( 2014 ) head carrier ( 2016 ) beneath the eyrie ( 2019 ) . references . bibliography . frank , josh ; ganz , caryn . ( 2005 ) . fool the world : the oral history of a band called pixies . virgin books . sisario , ben . ( 2006 ) . doolittle . continuum , 33⅓ series . external links .