Old Sarum

name . the present name seems to be a corruption of the medieval latin and norman forms of the name salisbury , such as the sarisburie that appeared in the domesday book . english heritage . old sarum , p . & nbsp ; 24 . ( london ) , 2003 . ( these were adaptions of the earlier names searoburh , wiltshire government . '' wiltshire community history : salisbury : thumbnail history '' . searobyrig , and searesbyrig , samuel , lewis . lewis 's topographical dictionary of england , vol . & nbsp ; iv . 1835 . cameron , kenneth . english place-names , p . & nbsp ; 35 . ( batsford ) , 1988 . blake , norman francis & & nbsp ; al . '' english historical linguistics : studies in development '' in cectal conference papers series , no . & nbsp ; 3 . centre for english cultural tradition and language ( sheffield ) , 1984 . calques of the indigenous brittonic name with the old english suffixes and , denoting fortresses or their adjacent settlements . ) the longer name was first abbreviated as sar̅ , but , as such a mark was scribal abbreviations ( common in placenames ) , the name was confused and became sarum sometime around the 13th century . the earliest known use was on the seal of the hospital at salisbury , which was in use in 1239 . the 14th-century robert wyvil was the first to describe himself as episcopus sarum . the victoria history of the county of wiltshire , , . the addition of 'old ' to the name distinguished it from new sarum , the formal name of the present-day city of salisbury until 2009 . history . prehistory . the hilltop at old sarum shows evidence of neolithic settlement english heritage . old sarum , . ( london ) , 2003 . as early as 3000 & nbsp ; bc . english heritage . old sarum , p . & nbsp ; 22 . london , 2003 . there is evidence that early hunters and , later , farming communities occupied the site . a protective hill fort was constructed by the local inhabitants around 400 & nbsp ; bc during the british iron age by creating enormous banks and ditches surrounding the hill . the hillfort is broadly oval shaped , measuring in length and in width . it consists of a double bank and intermediate ditch with an entrance on the eastern side . numerous other hillforts of the same period can be found locally , including figsbury ring to the east and vespasian 's camp to the north . the archaeologist sir r.c . hoare described it as '' a city of high note in the remotest periods by the several tumulus near it , and its proximity to the two largest stone circles in england , namely , stonehenge and avebury . '' '' ancient wilts , '' — sir r.c . hoare , speaking of stonehenge , expresses his opinion that '' our earliest inhabitants were celts , who naturally introduced with them their own buildings customs , rites , and religions ceremonies , and to them i attribute the erection of stonehenge , and the greater part of the sepulchral memorials that still continue to render its environs so truly interesting to the antiquary and historian . '' abury , or avebury , is a village amidst the remains of an immense temple , which for magnificence and extent is supposed to have exceeded the more celebrated fabric of stonehenge ; some enthusiastic inquirers have however , carried their supposition beyond probability , and in their zeal have even supposed them to be antediluvian labours ! many of the barrows in the vicinity of sarum have been opened , and in them several antiquarian relics have been discovered . in short , the whole county is one of high antiquarian interest , and its history has been illustrated with due fidelity and research . this has led more recent scholars to doubt the original inhabitants were actually celts . it is now believed they may have been the much earlier '' beaker people '' , so named for the beaker-shaped pots they made . . roman period . at the time of the roman conquest of britain in the 1st century , the area of old sarum seems to have formed part of the territory of the atrebates , '' roman sorbiodunum '' at stratford sub castle ( salisbury ) , 2014 . accessed 2 jan 2015 . a british tribe apparently ruled by gauls exiles . although the dynasty 's founder commius had become a foe of caesar 's , his sons submitted to augustus as client kings . their realm became known as the regnenses and the overthrow of one of them , verica , was the casus belli used to justify the emperor claudius 's invasion . the settlement appeared in the welsh brut y brenhinedd as roberts ( 1811 ) , p . & nbsp ; 135 . or gradawc welsh prose 1300–1425 . '' oxford jesus college ms . & nbsp ; 111 ( the red book of hergest ) & nbsp ; – page 147r : trioedd ynys prydain , cas bethau , enwau ac anrhyfeddodau ynys prydain '' , col . & nbsp ; 600 . university of cardiff ( cardiff ) , 2014 . ) and as caer-wallawg . roberts , peter . the chronicle of the kings of britain ; translated from the welsh copy attributed to tysilio ; collated with several other copies , and illustrated with copious notes ; to which are added , original dissertations , pp . & nbsp ; 150–151 . e . & nbsp ; williams ( london ) , 1811 . bishop ussher argued for its identification with the nennius . theodor mommsen . historia brittonum , vi . composed after ad & nbsp ; 830 . hosted at s : la : main page . listed among the 28 cities of britain by the historia brittonum traditionally ascribed to nennius . newman , john henry & & nbsp ; al . lives of the english saints : st . german , bishop of auxerre , ch . & nbsp ; x : '' britain in 429 , a . & nbsp ; d . '' , p . & nbsp ; 92 . james toovey ( london ) , 1844 . . saxon period . cynric , king of wessex , captured the hill in 552 . it remained part of wessex thereafter but , preferring settlements in bottomland like nearby wilton , the saxons largely ignored old sarum until the viking invasions led to restore its fortifications . in the early part of the 9th century , it was a frequent residence of egbert of wessex and , in 960 , assembled a national council there to plan a defence against the danelaw . brompton twysd . 866 . along with wilton , it was abandoned by its residents to be sacked and burned by the dano-norwegian king sweyn forkbeard in 1003 . hunt , william . '' sweyn ( d . & nbsp ; 1014 ) '' in the dictionary of national biography , vol . & nbsp ; lv . smith , elder , & & nbsp ; co . ( london ) , 1898 . hosted at wikisource . accessed 3 jan 2014 . it subsequently became the site of wilton 's mint . . norman period . a motte-and-bailey castle was built by 1069 , three years after the norman conquest . the castle was held directly by the norman kings ; its castellan was generally also the sheriff of wiltshire . in 1075 , the council of london established herman as the first bishop of salisbury , british history online . fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 , vol . & nbsp ; iv , '' salisbury : bishops '' . institute of historical research ( london ) , 1991 . uniting his former sees of sherborne and ramsbury into a single diocese which covered the counties of dorset , wiltshire , and berkshire . he and saint osmund began the construction of the old sarum cathedral but neither lived to see its completion in 1092 . osmund was a cousin of william the conqueror sarum charters , 373 . and lord chancellor of england ; he was responsible for the codification of the sarum rite , bergh , frederick & nbsp ; t . '' sarum rite '' in the catholic encyclopedia , vol . & nbsp ; xiii . robert appleton co . ( new york ) , 1912 . hosted at new advent . accessed 28 dec 2014 . the compilation of the domesday book , and—after centuries of advocacy from salisbury 's bishops—was finally canonized by pope in 1457 . swanson , r.n . religion and devotion in europe , – , pp . & nbsp ; 148 & 315 . cambridge university press ( cambridge ) , 1995 . the domesday book was probably presented to william i at old sarum in 1086 , the same year he convened the prelates , nobles , sheriffs , and knights of his dominions there to pay him homage roger of hoveden by the oath of salisbury . two other national councils were held there : one by william rufus in 1096 a description . ( 1774 ) , p . & nbsp ; 2 . the cathedral was consecrated on 5 & nbsp ; april 1092 but suffered extensive damage in a storm , traditionally said to have occurred only five days later . the ecclesiologist , p . & nbsp ; 60 . '' old sarum '' at sacred destinations . accessed 10 sept 2010 . bishop roger was a close ally of who served as his viceroy during the king 's absence to normandy and directed the chancellor and exchequer along with his extended family . davis , r.h.c . king stephen , . longman ( london ) , 1977 . he refurbished and expanded old sarum 's cathedral in the 1110s . this work ultimately doubled the cathedral 's length and involved the large-scale leveling of the ecclesiastical district in the northwest quadrant of the town . he began work on a royal palace during the 1130s , prior to his arrest by henry 's successor stephen . this palace was long thought to have been the small structure whose ruins are located in the small central bailey ; it may , however , have been the large palace modern in the southeast quadrant of the outer bailey . this palace was , surrounded a large central courtyard , and had walls up to thick . a room was probably a great hall and there seems to have been a large tower . at the time of roger 's arrest by , the bishop administered the castle on the king 's behalf ; it was thereafter allowed to fall into disrepair but the sheriff and castellan continued to administer the area under the king 's authority . storer , james . history and antiquities of the cathedral churches of great britain , vol . & nbsp ; iv , p . & nbsp ; 73 . rivingtons ( london ) , 1819 . . angevin period . medieval sarum also seems to have had industrial facilities such as kilns and furnaces . residential areas were principally located in the two southern quadrants , built up beside the ditch protecting the inner bailey and norman castle . henry ii held his wife , eleanor of aquitaine , prisoner at old sarum . in the 1190s , the plain between old sarum and wilton was one of five specially designated by for the holding of english tournaments . ditchfield , p.h . english villages , ch . & nbsp ; xi . methuen & & nbsp ; co . ( london ) , 1901 . an early 12th-century observer , william of malmesbury , called sarum a town '' more like a castle than city , being environed with a high wall '' , and noted that '' notwithstanding that it was very well accommodated with all other conveniences , yet such was the want for water that it sold at a great rate '' . a description of that admirable structure , the cathedral church of salisbury . with the chapels , monuments , grave-stones , and their inscriptions . to which is prefixed , an account of old sarum , p . & nbsp ; 1 . r . & nbsp ; baldwin ( london ) , 1774 . hosted at archive.org . accessed 3 jan 2015 . holinshed denied this and noted that the hill was '' very plentifully served with springs and wells of very sweet water '' ; excavation has discovered numerous wells ( including one within the norman keep ) but suggests that they were so deep as to make their use more cumbersome than carting water uphill from the rivers . the issue was presented to kings richard and john as the prime reason to relocate the cathedral but seems to have only been part of the issue . the late 12th-century canon peter of blois robinson , j . armitage . : s : somerset historical essays/peter of blois 128 oxford university press ( london ) , 1921 . described his prebendary as '' barren , dry , and solitary , exposed to the rage of the wind '' and the cathedral '' as a captive on the hill where it was built , like the ark of god shut up in the profane house of baal . '' peter of blois , epistle no . & nbsp ; 105 . holinshed records that the clerics brawled openly with the garrison troops . herbert poore received permission for the move from richard i , who was agreeably disposed towards the diocese after discovering it held in coin in trust for his father , in addition to jewels , vestments , and plate , a description . ( 1774 ) , p . & nbsp ; 3 . but was forced to delay the change after john 's succession . by papal order , herbert 's brother richard poore was translated from chichester to succeed him in 1217 ; the next year , sarum 's dean and chapter presented arguments to rome for the cathedral 's relocation . the investigation of these claims by the papal legate cardinal gualo verified the chapter 's claims that the site 's water was both expensive and sometimes restricted by the castellans ; that housing within the walls was insufficient for the clerics , who were required to rent from the laity ; that the wind was sometimes so strong that divine offices could not be heard and the roof was repeatedly damaged ; and that the soldiers of the royal fortress restricted access to the cathedral precinct to the common folk during ash wednesday and on other occasions for providing the eucharist and the clerics felt imperiled by their circumstances . thereupon issued an indulgence to relocate the cathedral on 29 march 1217 or 1218 . a description . ( 1774 ) , p . & nbsp ; 4 . the chapter voted unanimously for the move and agreed to pay for it by withholding various portions of their prebends over the next seven years . on easter monday , 1219 , a wooden chapel dedicated to the virgin mary was begun near the banks of the hampshire avon ; on trinity sunday , bishop poore celebrated mass there and consecrated a cemetery . on day , april 28 , 1220 , the foundation of the future stone cathedral was begun . a description . ( 1774 ) , p . & nbsp ; 5 . the settlement that grew up around it was called new salisbury , then ( at least formally ) new sarum , then finally salisbury . the former cathedral was formally dissolved in 1226 . the inhabitants of the new city gradually razed the old , constructing salisbury cathedral and other buildings from the materials at old sarum . evidence of quarrying into the 14th century shows some continued habitation , but the settlement was largely abandoned and ordered the castle 's demolition in 1322 . . modern period . the castle grounds were sold by in 1514 . from the reign of edward ii in the 14th century , the borough of old sarum elected two members to the house of commons despite the fact that , from at least the 17th century , it had no resident voters at all . one of the members in the 18th century was william pitt the elder . in 1831 , old sarum had eleven voters , all of whom were landowners who lived elsewhere . that made old sarum the most notorious of the rotten boroughs . the reform act 1832 subsumed the old sarum area into an enlarged borough of wilton . old sarum was an extra-parochial area and became a civil parish in 1858 , but the civil parish was abolished in 1894 . the site of the castle and cathedral is considered a highly important british monument : it was among the 26 england locations scheduled by the 1882 ancient monuments protection act , ancient monuments protection act , 1882 45 & 46 vict . ch . 73 , reprinted in robert hunter 's : s : the preservation of places of interest or beauty/appendix a 37 . university press ( manchester ) , 1907 . hosted at wikisource . accessed 3 jan 2014 . the first such british legislation . that protection has subsequently continued , expanding to include some suburban areas west and south-east of the outer bailey . no . & nbsp ; 1015675 : '' old sarum '' . english heritage ( london ) , 2014 . accessed 3 jan 2015 . it was also listed as a grade i site in 1972 . no . & nbsp ; 1248682 : '' remains of old sarum castle and cathedral '' . english heritage ( london ) , 2014 . accessed 3 jan 2015 . old sarum is now administered by english heritage . its paved carpark and grass overflow carpark are located in the eastern area of the outer bailey . between 1909 and 1915 , william st john hope , w . hawley and d.h . montgomerie excavated the site for the society of antiquaries of london . in 1917 , during world war i , a site just north-east of old sarum , along the portway , was developed as the 'ford farm ' aerodrome . that became old sarum airfield , which remains in operation with a single grass runway . a second excavation occurred in the 1950s under john w . g . musty and philip rahtz . in 2014 , an on-site geophysical survey of the inner and outer bailey by the university of southampton revealed its royal palace , keys , david . '' archaeologists find vast medieval palace buried under prehistoric fortress at old sarum '' in the independent , 3 dec 2014 . accessed 1 jan 2015 . as well as the street plan of the medieval city . '' old sarum archaeologists reveal plan of medieval city '' at the bbc . 3 dec 2014 . accessed 2 jan 2015 . strutt , kristian . '' archaeologists reveal layout of medieval city at old sarum '' . university of southampton ( southampton ) , 3 dec 2014 . accessed 2 jan 2015 . the survey made use of soil resistivity to electric current , electrical resistivity tomography , magnetometry , and ground-penetrating radar . the team planned to return in 2015 to complete a similar survey of the romano-british site located south of the hillfort .