Mustang Ranch

operation . the courtesans lived on the ranch during their entire shift , which lasted from several days to several weeks . in the early 1970s , the women were lingerie clad . conforte claimed in 1971 , the age range of the working girls was 18 to 35 . conforte could provide women of any age , race or size on request of the high rollers . the shifts lasted 12 hours per day . clothing and salon services were provided by vendors who traveled from as far away as san francisco and by non-courtesan employees who lived in sparks , nevada . doctors came to the ranch to do pelvic exams and check for sexually transmitted diseases . although many of the women working were from reno or sparks , many commuted from sacramento and san francisco . others came from all parts of the country . women not working on the ranch were not allowed in . owner joe conforte allowed '' out parties '' for high rollers to take the women to hotels in reno . las vegas reporter colin mckinlay visited the mustang ranch to do one of the first reports ever allowed by mustang management . he wrote , '' the women were the most beautiful of any fantasy of man . as in other nevada brothels , customers were buzzed in through the parlor door . once in , they chose a woman from a lineup in a lobby , and negotiated prices and services . she checked the penis for any open sores or signs of venereal disease and tested the pre-ejaculatory fluid . a short negotiation was made as to the type of '' party '' the customer wanted . the house received half of anything the women made . after the negotiations were over , the courtesan collected the money and deposited it with a cashier . joe conforte in 1986 wrote his autobiography and history of the mustang ranch , with nevada writer , david w . toll . david w . toll : breaks , brains and balls , the story of joe conforte and nevada 's fabulous mustang ranch , gold hill publishing company , 2011 . toll is a prize-winning nevada journalist , author and publisher . . history . the brothel started out as a set of four double-wide trailers , run by richard bennett and initially called mustang bridge ranch . joe conforte ( 1925-2019 ) , ( look gave his age as 48 in 1971 ) who had owned several brothels in nevada together with his wife , sally burgess conforte aka jesse e . conforte ( 1917–1992 ) since october 1955 , took over the mustang bridge ranch in 1967 . at this time , brothels were not explicitly illegal in nevada , but some had been closed as public nuisances . conforte gained political influence in storey county ( by renting out cheap trailers and telling the renters how to vote ) and persuaded county officials to pass a brothel-licensing ordinance , which came into effect in 1971 . joe conforte was featured in look , june 29 , 1971 , the article titled '' legal prostitution spreads in nevada ' '' by gerald astor , look senior editor . joe was on the cover of rolling stone magazine november 23 , 1972 . the nevada supreme court upheld the right of a county to legalize prostitution , and several counties followed suit . conforte converted the trailers into a permanent structure with 54 bedrooms . mustang i had a spa room with jacuzzi . the swimming pool was for adult play . in 1976 , the world class boxer oscar bonavena ( 1942–1976 ) , who was a former friend of conforte 's and probably had an affair with his wife sally , was shot dead at the ranch by conforte 's bodyguard . in 1982 , mustang ii with 48 bedrooms was built a hundred meters away from mustang i . a bit smaller and not as luxurious as mustang i , mostly new women and women demoted from mustang i for some infraction worked there . mustang 1 was subsequently rebranded as the '' world famous mustang ranch '' . . forfeiture and sale following tax fraud . after losing a tax fraud case in 1990 , the brothel was closed for three months and auctioned off . conforte fled the united states to brazil . the brothel was bought by a holding company and stayed open . after that company and the brothel 's manager ( a former county commissioner ) lost a federal fraud , racketeering and conspiracy case in 1999 , the mustang ranch was closed and forfeited to the federal government . that same year , the brazil supreme court ruled conforte could not be extradited . in 2002 , the brothel 's furniture , paintings and accessories were auctioned off . the bureau of land management sold the ranch 's pink stucco structures on ebay in 2003 . bordello owner lance gilman purchased the buildings for 145,100 and moved them to his wild horse adult resort & spa five miles ( 8 km ) to the east , where the relocated and extensively renovated buildings eventually became the second brothel located at that complex . however , the rights to the name mustang ranch , which gilman had hoped to use for this new brothel , were tied up in a court battle with david burgess , the owner of the old bridge ranch , nephew of joe conforte , and manager of the mustang ranch from 1979 until 1989 . in december 2006 , a federal judge ruled that gilman was the '' exclusive owner of the mustang ranch trademark '' giving him the rights to use the name and branding . in late march 2007 , the final remaining building , the annex ii which had been bought for 8,600 by dennis hof , was burned down in a fire department training exercise . a reno gazette-journal report river returning to nature , an october 2005 reno gazette-journal article mentioning the fate of the mustang ranch cited plans for the restoration of natural conditions to the section of the truckee river flowing through the land , following the completion of a similar restoration restoration of mccarran ranch land from the nature conservancy website five miles downstream on mccarran ranch land owned by the nature conservancy . contrary to a popular urban legend circulated by email , the mustang ranch was never operated by the u.s . government . it was operated by the bankruptcy trustee appointed by the united states bankruptcy court on behalf of the united states government . hoping to save the wild mustang -- ranch , that is false : u.s . gov't tried ( and failed ) to run mustang ranch . in media . the 1973 motion picture charley varrick contained a scene filmed at mustang ranch , with a cameo by joe conforte . nevada writer gabriel r . vogliotti ( 1908–1983 ) did research living at the mustang ranch . in 1975 , he authored the girls of nevada , with a subtitle on the dust jacket , featuring joe conforte , overseer of the mustang ranch . in 1978 , robert goralnick wrote and directed mustang : the house that joe built . the 2010 film love ranch starring helen mirren is loosely based on the events at the mustang ranch . after a visit to the new mustang ranch in 2008 , mirren announced she was a '' complete believer in legal brothels . '' dame helen mirren calls for the legalization of brothels , the sunday mail , 7 september 2008