Hammer Film Productions

television series . journey to the unknown . this was a fantasy , science fiction and supernatural anthology series which dealt with normal people in everyday situations that found themselves having to experience something out of the ordinary . 17 episodes of approximately 50 minutes each were produced by hammer film productions and 20th century fox television . in america , eight episodes from the series were broadcast as four television film consisting of twinned episodes along with new segment introduction footage provided by actors patrick mcgoohan , sebastian cabot and joan crawford serving as hosts . the series was first aired on abc from september 26 , 1968 to january 30 , 1969 , prior to broadcast in the uk on itv during 1969 . hammer house of horror . in 1980 , hammer films created an anthology series for british television , hammer house of horror . shown on itv , it ran for 13 episodes with a running length of approximately 51 minutes each . in a break from their cinema format , these self-contained episodes featured plot twists which usually saw the protagonists fall into the hands of that episode 's horror at the end . the series featured a different kind of horror each week , including witches , werewolves , ghosts , devil worship and voodoo , but also included non-supernatural horror themes such as cannibalism , confinement and serial killers . all the stories were set in contemporary england . hammer house of mystery and suspense . a second television anthology series , hammer house of mystery and suspense , was produced in 1984 and ran for 13 episodes . the stories were originally to have been the same 51 min . length as their previous series , but it was decided to expand them to feature-length to market them as 'movies of the week ' in the us . the running time varied from 69 to 73 minutes . the series was made in association with 20th century fox ( who broadcast films as fox mystery theater ) and as such , the sex and violence seen in the earlier series was toned down considerably for us television . each episode featured a star , often american , known to us viewers . this series was hammer 's final production of the 20th century , and the studio went into semi-permanent hiatus . tributes and parodies . the initial success of the hammer horror series led to tributes and parodies : carry on screaming ! ( 1966 ) is a broad parody of horror film tropes in general , but is often labelled a '' hammer horror spoof '' due the fact that it was produced in britain at the height of hammer 's boom period . the rocky horror picture show ( 1975 ) has many locations , sets , and props that were used in hammer films . the '' pretty '' monster featured is , perhaps , a reference to hammer 's the revenge of frankenstein . seasons of the bbc science fiction series doctor who beginning in autumn 1975 and running to spring 1977 are widely acknowledged to owe a debt to the look , tone and feel of hammer 's horror films . this is shown particularly in the serials pyramids of mars , the brain of morbius , the masque of mandragora and the talons of weng-chiang , though many others have obvious roots and influences from the films . bloodbath at the house of death uses hammer 's films as the inspiration for its setting . the british tv series dr . terrible 's house of horrible ( 2001 ) featured spoofs of hammer films . noteworthy in this regard was the episode entitled '' lesbian vampire lovers of lust '' . singer kate bush immortalised the range of films in her song , '' hammer horror '' , referencing the hunchback of notre dame ( which was never adapted by hammer film productions ) , dracula and frankenstein . british rock band maxïmo park paid tribute to the series with their song '' hammer horror '' , from their b-sides collection missing songs . in the dvd commentary of sleepy hollow , director tim burton credits hammer horror films as a primary influence for the film . sleepy hollow featured hammer veterans , including michael gough and christopher lee . the faux trailer for do n't featured in grindhouse was intended to be a spoof of hammer horror . tom mcloughlin claims that friday the 13th part vi : jason lives was heavily influenced by the hammer films . tale of the mummy , a 1998 low-budget mummy film by russel mulcahy , is a tribute to hammer 's pictures , and features a cameo role by christopher lee and a scene which references the poster art of hammer 's 1959 the mummy adaptation . the parody serial '' the phantom raspberry blower of old london town '' in the british comedy sketch series the two ronnies , was highly evocative of the hammer 's style of horror , particularly the dracula films , though it was primarily a spoof on the jack the ripper theme . much of the dark humour of the bbc comedy series the league of gentlemen written by and starring reece shearsmith , steve pemberton and mark gatiss can be seen to have been influenced by the british horror films by hammer and other production companies , of which they and co-writer jeremy dyson are great fans . in 2010 , mark gatiss devoted a large part of the second episode of his bbc documentary series a history of horror to hammer films , including interviews with key hammer figures . the british black/death metal group akercocke have drawn influence from the hammer house of horror , adopting in their works the tropes of devil worship and sexuality present in the 1980s series and based an album ( choronzon ) on the episode 'guardian of the abyss ' . the british radio dramatist marty ross acknowledged a debt to hammer with regard to his two serials for bbc radio 7 ; ghost zone , influenced by hammer science fiction such as the damned and the quatermass films , and catch my breath , influenced by the kiss of the vampire and the brides of dracula . the midsomer murders episode '' death and the divas '' ( series 15 , episode 4 , first broadcast 2 january 2013 ) is an homage to hammer horror films , featuring mock-clips from a variety of 1960s horror movies ; the plot concerns an actress famous for her roles in british horror films . dario argento 's 2013 adaptation of dracula is heavily influenced by the previous hammer films starring christopher lee . in an interview for the new blu-ray release of lifeforce , director tobe hooper said that he '' had made a 70mm hammer film . '' wallace & gromit : the curse of the were-rabbit is a supernatural comedy clay-animated parody of classic horror movies and hammer horror flicks by aardman animations . it was released on october 7 , 2005 , and the title possibly parodies a hammer horror film called the curse of the werewolf . see also . hammer filmography house of hammer cinema of the united kingdom . references . bibliography . frankenstein , dracula et les autres sous les feux de la hammer , daniel bastié , editions grand angle , 2015 , 227 p . . external links . official hammer web site hammer horror bfi screenonline article hammer horror films list