Singing

effect on the brain . john daniel scott , among others , have cited that '' people who sing are more likely to be happy '' . this is because '' singing elevates the levels of neurotransmitters which are associated with pleasure and well being '' . humans have a long prehistory of music , especially singing ; before written language , stories were passed down through song , because song is often more memorable . there is also evidence that music or singing may have evolved in humans before language . levitin , in his this is your brain on music , argues that '' music may be the activity that prepared our pre-human ancestors for speech communication '' and that '' singing . might have helped our species to refine motor skills , paving the way for the development of the exquisitely fine muscle control required for vocal . speech '' ( 260 ) . on the other hand , he cites pinker , who '' argued that language is an adaptation and music is its spandrel . an evolutionary accident piggybacking on language '' ( 248 ) . studies have found evidence suggesting the mental , as well as physical , benefits of singing . when conducting a study with 21 members of a choir at three different points over one year , three themes suggested three areas of benefits ; the social impact ( connectedness with others ) , personal impact ( positive emotions , self-perception , etc . ) , and functional outcomes ( health benefits of being in the choir ) . findings showed that a sense of well-being is associated with singing , by uplifting the mood of the participants and releasing endorphins in the brain . many singers also reported that singing helped them regulate stress and relax , allowing them to deal better with their daily lives . from a social perspective , approval from the audience , and interaction with other choir members in a positive manner is also beneficial . singing is beneficial for pregnant mothers . by giving them another medium of communication with their newborns , mothers in one study reported feelings of love and affection when singing to their unborn children . they also reported feeling more relaxed than ever before during their stressful pregnancy . a song can have nostalgic significance by reminding a singer of the past , and momentarily transport them , allowing them to focus on singing and embrace the activity as an escape from their daily lives and problems . . effect on body . a recent study by tenovus cancer care found that singing in a choir for just one hour boosts levels of immune proteins in cancer patients and has a positive overall effect on the health of patients . the study explores the possibility that singing could help put patients in the best mental and physical shape to receive the treatment they need , by reducing stress hormones , and increasing quantities of cytokines- proteins of the immune system that can increase the body 's ability to fight disease . '' singing gives you physical benefits like breath control and muscle movement and enunciation , as well as the learning benefits of processing information '' says a musical director and accompanist in the study . the enunciation and speech benefits tie into the language benefits detailed below . some have advocated , as in a 2011 article in the toronto star , that everyone sing , even if they are not musically talented , because of its health benefits . singing lowers blood pressure by releasing pent up emotions , boosting relaxation , and reminding them of happy times . it also allows singers to breathe more easily . patients with lung disease and chronic pulmonary disease experience relief from their symptoms from singing just two times a week . in addition to breathing related illness , singing also has numerous benefits for stroke victims when it comes to relearning the ability to speak and communicate by singing their thoughts . singing activates the right side of the brain when the left side can not function ( the left side is the area of the brain responsible for speech ) , so it is easy to see how singing can be an excellent alternative to speech while the victim heals . . singing and language . every spoken language , natural or non-natural language has its own intrinsic musicality which affects singing by means of pitch , phrasing , and accent . neurological aspects . much research has been done recently on the link between music and language , especially singing . it is becoming increasingly clear that these two processes are very much alike , and yet also different . levitin describes how , beginning with the eardrum , sound waves are translated into pitch , or a tonotopy , and then shortly thereafter '' speech and music probably diverge into separate processing circuits '' ( 130 ) . there is evidence that neural circuits used for music and language may start out in infants undifferentiated . there are several areas of the brain that are used for both language and music . for example , brodmann area 47 , which has been implicated in the processing of syntax in oral and sign languages , as well as musical syntax and semantic aspects of language . levitin recounts how in certain studies , '' listening to music and attending its syntactic features , '' similar to the syntactic processes in language , activated this part of the brain . in addition , '' musical syntax . has been localized to . areas adjacent to and overlapping with those regions that process speech syntax , such as broca 's area '' and '' the regions involved in musical semantics . appear to be localized near wernicke 's area . '' both broca 's area and wernicke 's area are important steps in language processing and production . singing has been shown to help stroke victims recover speech . according to neurologist gottfried schlaug , there is a corresponding area to that of speech , which resides in the left hemisphere , on the right side of the brain . this is casually known as the '' singing center . '' by teaching stroke victims to sing their words , this can help train this area of the brain for speech . in support of this theory , levitin asserts that '' regional specificity , '' such as that for speech , '' may be temporary , as the processing centers for important mental functions actually move to other regions after trauma or brain damage . '' thus in the right hemisphere of the brain , the '' singing center '' may be retrained to help produce speech . . accents and singing . the speaking dialect or accent of a person may differ greatly from the general singing accent that a person uses while singing . when people sing , they generally use the accent or neutral accent that is used in the style of music they are singing in , rather than a regional accent or dialect ; the style of music and the popular center/region of the style has more influence on the singing accent of a person than where they come from . for example , in the english language , british singers of rock or popular music often sing in an american accent or neutral accent instead of an english accent . . singing animals . scholars agree that singing is strongly present in many different species . wallin , nils , bjorn merker , steven brown . ( editors ) ( 2000 ) . the origins of music . cambridge , massachusetts : mit wide dispersal of singing behavior among very different animal species , like birds , gibbons , whales , and many others strongly suggests that singing appeared independently in different species . currently , there are about 5400 species of animals that are known to sing . at least some singing species demonstrate the ability to learn their songs , to improvise and even to compose new melodies . payne , katherine ( 2000 ) . '' the progressively changing songs of humpback whales : a window on the creative process in a wild animal . '' in the origins of music . edited by n . l . wallin , b . merker and s . brown , pp . 135–150 . cambridge , massachusetts : mit in some animal species singing is a group activity ( see , for example , singing in gibbon families . geissmann , thomas . 2000 . '' gibbon songs and human music from an evolutionary perspective . '' ( archived 3 january 2011 ) in the origins of music . edited by n . wallin , b . merker and s . brown , pp . 103–124 . cambridge , massachusetts : mit ) . singing to animals . herders in scandinavia use songs known as kulning to call livestock . mongolian herders use species-specific songs to encourage bonding between animals and their newborn offspring . . see also . list of multilingual bands and artists sign singing . art music . a cappella aria bel canto chanson chiaroscuro ( music ) child singer choral music fach group singing opera overtone singing recitative singer-songwriter sprechgesang throat singing voice pedagogy voice projection voice type yodeling winsingad . other music . beat boxing belt ( music ) death growl humming isicathamiya kulning lead vocalist mbube rapping screaming ( music ) vocoder . physiology . n-acylethanolamine ( nae ) . references . further reading . blackwood , alan . the performing world of the singer . london : hamish hamilton , 1981 . 113 p . , amply ill . ( mostly with photos . ) . reid , cornelius . a dictionary of vocal terminology : an analysis . new york : j . patelson music house , 1983 . external links . a brief history of singing singing and health : a systematic mapping and review of non-clinical research