Ultimate Play the Game

history . early history and rise . ultimate play the game was founded in the leicestershire town of ashby-de-la-zouch in 1982 by tim and chris stamper , their friend john lathbury , and tim 's girlfriend ( later wife ) carole ward . other members of the stamper family were also involved in the early running and support of the company , which was initially located in a house next to the family-run newsagent . jones , darran and king , ryan . x360 magazine supplemental : rare – the ultimate story , page 9 . imagine publishing , 2005 . both tim and chris had worked in arcade game development including , according to one report , konami 's gyruss , and claimed to be '' the most experienced arcade video game design team in britain '' until tiring of working for others and leaving to start ashby computers and graphics . this led to acg 's initial trade being in creating arcade conversion kits , before moving into the home computer software market developing games under the ultimate play the game name . ashby released four arcade games : blue print for midway games , and grasspin , dingo and saturn for jaleco . ultimate 's first release was jetpac in may 1983 for the 16k spectrum , followed by bbc micro and commodore vic-20 versions . it was a huge commercial success ; the spectrum version alone sold more than 300,000 copies to a market of only one million spectrum owners at the time , rollings , andrew . the zx spectrum book – 1982-199x . hiive publishing , 2007 . jones and king quote the jetman sales figure as being 330,000 . and providing the fledgling company with a turnover in excess of £1 & nbsp ; million . this was followed by three further 16k releases , pssst in june , tranz am , and cookie , before ultimate stepped up to the 48k spectrum . jetpac , pssst , tranz am and cookie were four of only ten games ever to be released on the 16k rom format for use with the zx interface 2 . they were also republished on cassette , with distinctive silver inlay cards , by sinclair research for inclusion in zx spectrum bundles . ultimate 's first 48k releases were lunar jetman – a sequel to jetpac – and atic atac , both of which were released in late 1983 . both games were very well received by the gaming press , crash magazine in particular praising what ultimate had managed to do with the extra memory lunar jetman used . in 1984 came sabre wulf , the first in the sabreman series , and the first release at a suggested retail price of £9.95 . the price of ultimate titles had previously been just £5.50 , which was typical for spectrum arcade-style games at the time . this increase was to discourage piracy , with the idea being that if customers paid more for a game they would be less inclined to give away copies . jones , darran and king , ryan . x360 supplemental : rare – the ultimate story , page 13 . imagine publishing , 2005 . this coincided with the introduction of the distinctive ultimate '' big box '' packaging ( used with all further spectrum releases until gunfright , and with various releases on other platforms ) , which the company felt might also help justify the price increase and encourage gamers to buy the game rather than copy it . the strategy paid off as sabre wulf went on to sell over 350,000 copies on the spectrum alone . sabre wulf at eurogamer.net . retrieved 30 october 2007 . this was followed by the simultaneous release at the end of 1984 of the next two instalments in the sabreman series , underwurlde and knight lore . knight lore was something of a revolution in the home computer game market , using a forced-perspective isometric viewpoint branded filmation , the style of which would be extensively copied in other games , notable examples being batman and head over heels from ocean software . knight lore , and some of its filmation follow-up alien 8 , was actually completed before sabre wulf but ultimate decided that it could have a potentially negative effect on sales of the comparatively primitive sabre wulf , so it was postponed until late 1984 for a simultaneous release with underwurlde . ultimate won the golden joystick award for best software house in both 1983 and 1984 . ultimate was criticised somewhat in the gaming media for their repeated use of the filmation technique in subsequent games alien 8 , nightshade , gunfright and pentagram , though nightshade and gunfright used filmation ii , a variation on the engine , resulting in a similar visual style , but significantly different gameplay , with scrolling around a large world and arcade-like play , rather than the room-based puzzles of the earlier filmation titles . decline and fall . with the consistent success of ultimate 's releases there were rumours of a buyout by ocean , until it was announced in 1985 that the stamper brothers had sold the ultimate catalogue and name to us gold , who would continue to release games under the ultimate label . later titles such as martianoids and bubbler were not seen by the gaming press as being up to ultimate 's previously high standards and sales fell . us gold released no new ultimate games after bubbler in 1987 . a final sabreman game , mire mare , was trailed in earlier sabreman games and was mentioned by sinclair user as being next up for release , but was quietly dropped during development . in late 1988 , rare bought back all the rights sold to us gold and were reported to be developing games again . future releases were to have included solar jetman , which would eventually appear only on the nintendo entertainment system , although home computer conversions for the commodore 64 , commodore amiga , and atari st were completed by storm software , but not released . . rare limited . shortly before the us gold buyout , the name of another company '' rare limited '' began appearing on the credits of ultimate releases . this was in fact another company set up by the stampers to develop for ultimate , but not be subject to any ultimate takeover . rare ( initially under the banner rare : designs on the future ) would evolve after ultimate 's demise into a prolific developer for the nintendo entertainment system . this led nintendo to purchase a stake in the company , whose success was furthered with such classic snes and nintendo 64 releases as donkey kong country and goldeneye 007 . in 2002 rare was purchased outright by microsoft for us 377 & nbsp ; million , a record fee for a video game developer , and currently develops games for the xbox one console . at the end of 2006 tim and chris stamper left rare to '' pursue other opportunities '' , ending a 24-year involvement in developing home video games . the ultimate name in subsequent years . in 2004 , rare revived ultimate 's sabreman franchise with the release of sabre wulf for the game boy advance . a new version of sabre wulf for the xbox was also rumoured , sabre wulf on xbox ? at computerandvideogames.com . though it was never released or even officially announced . a racing game based on the ultimate/rare universe titled sabreman stampede was also in development , but was canceled . secret rare racer revealed ! at computerandvideogames.com . in 2007 rare released the fourth game of the jetman series jetpac refuelled for xbox live arcade . on 8 december 2006 and 16 january 2007 respectively , rare 's owners microsoft corporation filed us and eu trademark claims on the ultimate play the game name and logo . the registered purpose is '' entertainment services , namely , providing an on-line computer game '' . due to the nature of this us government site , the relevant page can not be directly linked to , so a search must be manually performed . the eu trademark may be found here : emulated versions of seven ultimate titles were later included as part of the 2015 game compilation rare replay for xbox one . relationship with the press and fans . press . ultimate had a reputation for secrecy that has continued to a lesser extent with successor rare . due to the small number of staff employed at ultimate in the early days , the company had no time to speak to the press or attend trade events . the british computer gaming press even complained over how difficult it was to get hold of them . as tim stamper later said : this press blackout soon worked to the company 's advantage . due to their reputation for producing high quality products , along with speculation in the press and amongst gamers , anticipation for each release was high . this was helped along by the full-page advertisements placed in magazines showing the cover art of the game in question , but no shots or description of the game itself . these ads would be run prior to and for several months after the release date . the magazines were not able to preview the games ; the review copies , usually sent out just before general release , would be the first opportunity for anyone to see them . not talking to the press worked for ultimate and it soon became policy . when a journalist reviewing nightshade for crash magazine asked ultimate what the object of the game was , and how large the play area was , they responded with , respectively , '' oh , we ca n't tell you that '' and '' it 's pretty large '' . . lunar jetman 's trailer . image : lunar jetman trailer.gif right thumb 256px the lunar jetman '' trailer '' screenshot as published in crash magazine , february 1986 . this air of mystery was increased when crash magazine published a reader 's photograph of lunar jetman featuring jetman 's moon rover pulling a trailer . the possible existence of a trailer ( as depicted on the game 's cover art and loading screen ) had been speculated on since the game 's release , and many fans had searched fruitlessly for it . the stampers shrugged off questions about whether this screen shot was genuine , but stopped short of actually denying it . there have even been suggestions that ultimate themselves may have created the screen shot to generate more interest in the game . it has since been proven that lunar jetman 's code does not contain graphics for a trailer . ultimate play the game – company lookback , retro micro games action – the best of gamestm retro volume 1 , pages 24–26 . imagine publishing , 2006 . fans . ultimate were one of the first developers to have their own fanbase focused on the company and brand as much as the games themselves . they received so much fan mail at their peak that a full-time employee had to be taken on to deal with up to 60 letters per day . they were known for their positive attitude to fans , always replying to letters and responding to requests for merchandise by sending posters , sweatshirts and caps free of charge . the stampers later stated that they were more interested in creating the games than making money from merchandising . retro gamer has suggested that besides the quality of the games , ultimate 's popularity arose from a combination of '' superb presentation '' as well as the company 's '' air of mystique '' giving it a '' secretive yet cool vibe '' . ultimate collectables , retro gamer anthology , pages 61–63 , live publishing , 2004 . releases on other platforms . the main series of games produced by ultimate were all released on the sinclair zx spectrum , with most from sabre wulf onward also on the amstrad cpc and msx , and most early games up to and including nightshade also on the bbc micro . only three of these ( sabre wulf , underwurlde and nightshade ) were released on the other major platform of the time , the commodore 64 , however a series of c64-exclusive titles were published by ultimate : : the staff of karnath ( 1984 ) : entombed ( 1984 ) : imhotep ( 1985 ) : blackwyche ( 1985 ) : outlaws ( 1985 ) : dragon skulle ( 1985 ) the staff of karnath , entombed , blackwyche and dragon skulle all concern the adventures of sir arthur pendragon . authorship . the company 's secretive tendencies also extended to the question of who wrote the games . whereas most games of the time would list those responsible on the cassette inlay cards or even on the front of the box ( one notable example , football manager , even going as far as to feature a picture of author kevin toms on the front of the box ) , no ultimate title ever mentioned any names at all , and the authorship of some of them remains unclear . the ultimate titles up to gunfright were produced primarily by tim and chris stamper , tim provided the graphics and chris the programming , along with fellow founders john lathbury ( coding ) and carol ward ( graphic design ) . tim also created the cover art for the games , including the famous ultimate play the game logo . the stampers retained the major creative roles until the purchase by us gold , who brought in their own programming teams to create martianoids and bubbler . the exact authorship of pentagram and cyberun is known only to those involved ; often considered us gold games , they are both possibly stamper games . this remains a possibility as although chris stamper has said in an interview , '' what was the last one we developed as a team ? it was gunfright , i think '' , ultimate had already admitted to developing games in an order different from that of their release , as with knight lore and sabre wulf . the authorship of the commodore 64 titles was at the time even more uncertain . the conversions of existing spectrum games sabre wulf , underwurlde and nightshade were handled by firebird , who hired mr micro , softstone , and psi , respectively , to develop the titles . imhotep was submitted to ultimate in a virtually complete form by author manuel caballero , who had previously written batty builders and firefleet . ultimate did not make any announcements regarding the authorship of the other commodore games , but an article by martyn carroll revealed how frank gasking of '' games that were n't 64 '' managed to identify the creators as dave and robert ( bob ) thomas based on a message that appears on the final screen of dragonskulle . these two brothers were also the creators of the previous three games of the series the staff of karnath , entombed and blackwyche . in an interview with the brothers in retro gamer magazine , they revealed they also authored outlaws , in just six weeks , so ultimate would have something for the commodore 64 for christmas . . references . further reading . . external links . ultimate wurlde by rob uttley ultimate play the game profile from mobygames ( as rare , limited ) ultimate play the game special collection at c64sets.com