BoPET

history . bopet film was developed in the mid-1950s , izard , emmette farr , '' production of polyethylene terephthalate '' , u.s . patent no . 2,534,028 ( filed : 1948 may 13 ; issued : 1950 december 12 ) . adams , john francis edward ; gerber , kenneth george ; holmes-walker , william anthony , '' process for the production of biaxially oriented polyethylene terephthalate film '' , u.s . patent no . 3,177,277 ( filed : 1957 may 10 ; issued : 1965 april 6 ) . originally by dupont , imperial chemical industries ( ici ) , and hoechst . in 1955 eastman kodak used mylar as a support for photographic film and called it '' estar base '' . the very thin and tough film allowed reels to be exposed on long-range u-2 reconnaissance flights . eyes in the sky , dino a . brugioni 2010 , naval institute press , , pp . 102 , 115 . in 1964 , nasa launched echo ii , a diameter balloon constructed from a thick mylar film sandwiched between two layers of thick aluminium foil bonded together . staugaitis , c . & kobren , l . ( 1966 ) '' mechanical and physical properties of the echo ii metal-polymer laminate ( nasa tn d-3409 ) '' , nasa goddard space flight center . . manufacture and properties . thumb the manufacturing process begins with a film of molten polyethylene terephthalate ( pet ) being extruded onto a chill roll , which quenches it into the amorphous state . it is then biaxially oriented by drawing . the most common way of doing this is the sequential process , in which the film is first drawn in the machine direction using heated rollers and subsequently drawn in the transverse direction , i.e . orthogonally to the direction of travel , in a heated oven . it is also possible to draw the film in both directions simultaneously , although the equipment required for this is somewhat more elaborate . draw ratios are typically around 3 to 4 in each direction . once the drawing is completed , the film is '' heat set '' or crystallized under tension in the oven at temperatures typically above . the heat setting step prevents the film from shrinking back to its original unstretched shape and locks in the molecular orientation in the film plane . the orientation of the polymer chains is responsible for the high strength and stiffness of biaxially oriented pet film , which has a typical young 's modulus of about . another important consequence of the molecular orientation is that it induces the formation of many crystal nuclei . the crystallites that grow rapidly reach the boundary of the neighboring crystallite and remain smaller than the wavelength of visible light . as a result , biaxially oriented pet film has excellent clarity , despite its semicrystalline structure . if it were produced without any additives , the surface of the film would be so smooth that layers would adhere strongly to one another when the film is wound up , similar to the sticking of clean glass plates when stacked . to make handling possible , microscopic inert inorganic particles are usually embedded in the pet to roughen the surface of the film such as silicon dioxide . biaxially oriented pet film can be metallized by vapor deposition of a thin film of evaporated aluminium , gold , or other metal onto it . the result is much less permeable to gases ( important in food packaging ) and reflects up to 99 % of light , including much of the infrared spectrum . for some applications like food packaging , the aluminized bopet film can be laminated with a layer of polyethylene , which provides sealability and improves puncture resistance . the polyethylene side of such a laminate appears dull and the bopet side shiny . other coatings , such as conductive indium tin oxide ( ito ) , can be applied to bopet film by sputter deposition . applications . uses for bopet polyester films include , but are not limited to : . flexible packaging and food contact . laminates containing metallized bopet foil ( in technical language called printin or laminate web substrate ) protect food against oxidation and aroma loss , achieving long shelf life . examples are coffee '' foil '' packaging and pouches for convenience foods . white bopet web substrate is used as lidding for dairy goods such as yogurt . clear bopet web substrate is used as lidding for fresh or frozen ready meals . due to its excellent heat resistance , it can remain on the package during microwave or oven heating . roasting bags metallised films laminated sheet metal ( aluminium or steel ) used in the manufacture of cans ( bisphenol a-free alternative to lacquers ) . covering over paper . a clear overlay on a map , on which notations , additional data , or copied data , can be drawn without damaging the map metallized bopet is used as a mirror-like decorative surface on some book covers , t-shirts , and other flexible cloths . protective covering over buttons/pins/badges the glossy top layer of a polaroid sx-70 photographic print as a backing for very fine sandpaper bopet film is used in bagging comic books , in order to best protect them during storage from environmental conditions ( moisture , heat , and cold ) that would otherwise cause paper to slowly deteriorate over time . this material is used for archival science storage of documents by the library of congress ( mylar® type d , ici melinex 516 or equivalent ) and several major library comic book research collections , including the comic art collection at michigan state university . while bopet is widely ( and effectively ) used in this archival sense , it is not immune to the effects of fire and heat and could potentially melt , depending on the intensity of the heat source , causing further damage to the encased item . similarly , trading card decks ( such as pokémon , magic : the gathering , and yu-gi-oh ! ) are packaged in pouches or sleeves made of metallized bopet . it can also be used to make the holographic artwork featured on some cards , typically known as '' holos '' , '' foils '' , '' shinies '' , or '' holofoils '' . for protecting the spine of important documents , such as medical records . insulating material . an electrical insulation material insulation for houses and tents , reflecting thermal radiation five layers of metallized bopet film in nasa 's spacesuits make them radiation resistant and help regulate temperature . metallized bopet film space blanket conserve a shock victim 's body heat . as a thin strip to form an airtight seal between the control surfaces and adjacent structure of aircraft , especially gliders . light insulation for indoor gardening . fire shelters , used by wildland firefighters . fire proximity suit used by fire fighters for protection from the high amount of heat release from fuel fires . used in sock and glove liners to lock in warmth . solar , marine and aviation . metallized bopet is intended to be used for solar sails as an alternative means of propulsion for spacecraft such as cosmos 1 translucent mylar film , as wide as 48 '' and in up to 12 ' in length , found widespread use as a non-dimensional engineering drawing media in the aerospace industry due to its dimensional stability ( also see printing media section below ) . this allows production and engineering staff to lay manufactured parts directly over or under the drawing film in order to verify the fidelity of part profiles , hole locations and other part features . metallized bopet sun curtains reflect sunlight and heat away from windows . aluminized , as an inexpensive solar eclipse viewer , although care must be taken , because invisible fissures can form in the metal film , reducing its effectiveness . high performance sails for sailboats , hang gliding , paragliding and kites use bopet films as the back face of the pv modules in solar panels metallized bopet as a reflector material for solar cooking stoves to bridge control surface gaps on sailplanes ( gliders ) , reducing profile drag . science . amateur and professional visual and telescopic solar filters . bopet films are often annealed to a glass element to improve thermal conductivity , and guarantee the necessary flat surface needed for even telescopic solar observation . manufacturers will typically use films with thicknesses of , in order to give the films better resilience . thickness films with a heavy aluminium coating are generally preferred for naked-eye solar observation during eclipses . films in annular ring mounts on gas-tight cells , will readily deform into spherical mirrors . photomultiplier cosmic-ray observatories often make use of these mirrors for inexpensive large ( 1.0 m and above ) , lightweight mirror surfaces for sky-sector low and medium energy cosmic ray research . as a light diaphragm material separating gases in hypersonic shock and expansion tube facilities . as a beamsplitter in fourier transform infrared spectroscopy , typically with laser applications . film thicknesses are often in the 500 micrometre range . coating around hematocrit . insulating material for a cryocooler radiation shield . as a window material to confine gas in detectors and targets in nuclear physics . in ct scanners it acts as a physical barrier between the xray-tube , detector ring and the patient allowing negligible attenuation of the xray beam when active . spacecraft are insulated with a metallized bopet film . the descent stage of the apollo 's lunar module is covered in bopet because it 's lightweight and made sure the inside temperature of the inside of the desecent stage ( where a significant amount of apperature was stored ) was normal . electronic and acoustic . carrier for flexible printed circuits . bopet film is often used as the diaphragm material in headphones , electrostatic loudspeakers and microphones . bopet film has been used in the production of banjo & drumheads since 1958 due to its durability and acoustical properties when stretched over the bearing edge of the drum . they are made in single- and double-ply versions , with each ply being in thickness , with a transparent or opaque surface , originally used by the company evans . bopet film is used as the substrate in practically all magnetic tapes and floppy disks . metallized bopet film , along with other plastic films , is used as a dielectric in foil capacitors . clear bopet bags are used as packaging for audio media such as compact discs and vinyl records . clear and white bopet films are used as core layers and overlays in smart cards . printing media . before the widespread adoption of cad , engineering drawings or architectural drawings were plotted onto sheets of bopet film , known as drafting film . the bopet sheets become legal documents from which copies or blueprints are made . bopet sheets are more durable and can withstand more handling than bond paper . although '' blueprint '' duplication has fallen out of use , mylar is still used for its archival properties , typically as a record set of plans for building departments to keep on file . transparency ( projection ) for photocopiers or laser printers ( bopet film withstands the high heat ) . modern lithography printing plates aka '' pronto plates '' ( bopet resists oil ) . other . balloons , metallic balloons . route information signs , called rollsigns or destination blinds , displayed by public transport vehicles for materials in kites covering glass to decrease probability of shattering in theatre effects such as confetti . as the adhesive strip to attach the string to a teabag one of the many materials used as windsavers or valves for valved harmonicas on farmland and domestic gardens , highly reflective aluminized pet film ribbons are used to keep birds away from plants . measuring tape protecting pinball machine playfields from wear used in dentistry when restoring teeth with composite . in nail polish , as a coloured and finely shredded additive to create a glitter effect . numismatics storing coins for long periods of time . pvc was previously used for this , but over long periods of time pvc can release chlorine , which reacts with the silver and copper in coins . bopet does not have this problem . references . external links . history of polymers & plastics for teachers . by the american chemistry council ( html format ) or ( pdf format ) - 1.9mb , which includes the '' chasing arrow '' recycling symbols ( pet is 1 ) and a description of plastics . an interesting toy has been developed using bopet and a stick-shaped van de graaff generator .