Manchu people

folk art . . octagonal drum . octagonal drum is a type of manchu folk art that was very popular among bannermen , especially in beijing . it is said that octagonal drum originated with the snare drum of the eight-banner military and the melody was made by the banner soldiers who were on the way back home from victory in the battle of jinchuan . the drum is composed of wood surrounded by bells . the drumhead is made by wyrmhide with tassels at the bottom . the colors of the tassels are yellow , white , red , and blue , which represent the four colors of the eight banners . when artists perform , they use their fingers to hit the drumhead and shake the drum to ring the bells . traditionally , octagonal drum is performed by three people . one is the harpist ; one is the clown who is responsible for harlequinade ; and the third is the singer . '' zidishu '' is the main libretto of octagonal drum and can be traced back to a type of traditional folk music called the '' manchu rhythm '' . although zidishu was not created by han chinese , it still contains many themes from chinese stories , such as romance of the three kingdoms , dream of the red chamber , romance of the western chamber , legend of the white snake and strange stories from a chinese studio . additionally , there are many works that depict the lives of bannermen . aisin gioro yigeng , who was pen named '' helü '' and wrote the sigh of old imperial bodyguard , as the representative author . zidishu involves two acts of singing , which are called dongcheng and xicheng . after the fall of the qing dynasty , the influence of the octagonal drum gradually reduced . however , the and crosstalk which derived from octagonal are still popular in chinese society and the new generations . many famous chinese monochord performers and crosstalkers were the artists of octagonal drum , such as de shoushan and zhang sanlu . ulabun . ulabun is a form of manchu storytelling entertainment which is performed in the manchu language . different from octagonal drum , ulabun is popular among the manchu people living in manchuria . it has two main categories ; one is popular folk literature such as the tale of the nisan shaman , the other is from folk music with an informative and independent plot , and complete structure . aka . akšan/akxan is a famous artist in performing ulabun . . religion . originally , manchus , and their predecessors , were principally buddhists with shamanist influences . every manchu king started his royal title with buddha . after the conquest of china in the 17th century , manchus came into contact with chinese culture . they adopted confucianism along with buddhism and discouraged shamanism . manchu shamanism . shamanism has a shamanism in the qing dynasty and influenced them tremendously over thousands of years . john keay states in a history of china , shaman is the single loan-word from manchurian into the english language . after the conquest of china in the 17th century , although manchus officially adopted buddhism and widely adopted chinese folk religion , shamanic traditions can still be found in the aspects of soul worship , totem worship , belief in nightmares and apotheosis of philanthropists . apart from the shamanic shrines in the qing palace , no temples erected for worship of manchu gods could be found in beijing . thus , the story of competition between shamanists and lamaists was oft heard in manchuria but the manchu emperors helped lamaists or tibetan buddhists officially . buddhism . jurchens , the predecessors of the manchus adopted the buddhism of balhae , goryeo , liao and song in the 10–13th centuries , the relation of manchu emperors and buddhism ( simplified chinese ) so it was not something new to the rising manchus in the 16–17th centuries . qing emperors were always entitled '' buddha '' . they were regarded as mañjuśrī in tibetan buddhism and had high attainments . hong taiji who was of mongolian descent started leaning towards chan buddhism , which became zen buddhism . still , huangtaiji patronized tibetan buddhism extensively and publicly . huangtaiji patronized buddhism but sometimes felt tibetan buddhism to be inferior to chan buddhism . the qianlong emperor 's faith in tibetan buddhism has been questioned in recent times because the emperor indicated that he supported the yellow church ( the tibetan buddhist gelukpa sect ) this explanation of only supporting the '' yellow hats '' tibetan buddhists for practical reasons was used to deflect han criticism of this policy by the qianlong emperor , who had the '' lama shuo '' stele engraved in tibetan , mongol , manchu and chinese , which said : '' by patronizing the yellow church we maintain peace among the mongols . '' it seems he was wary of the rising power of the tibetan kingdom and its influence over the mongolians and manchu public , princes and generals . chinese folk religion . manchus were affected by chinese folk religions for most of the qing dynasty . save for ancestor worship , the gods they consecrated were virtually identical to those of the han chinese . guan yu worship is a typical example . he was considered as the god protector of the nation and was sincerely worshipped by manchus . they called him '' lord guan '' . uttering his name was taboo . in addition , manchus worshipped cai shen and the kitchen god just as the han chinese did . the worship of mongolian and tibetan gods has also been reported . roman catholic . influenced by the society of jesus in china , there were also a considerable number of manchu catholics during the qing dynasty . the earliest manchu catholics appeared in the 1650s . in the yongzheng eras , depei , the hošo jiyan prince , was a catholic whose baptismal name was '' joseph '' . his wife was also baptised and named '' maria '' . at the same time , the sons of beile sunu were devout catholics , too . in the jiaqing period , tong hengšan and tong lan were catholic manchu bannermen . these manchu catholics were proselytized and persecuted by qing emperors but they steadfastly refused to renounce their faith . there were manchu catholics in modern times , too , such as ying lianzhi , the founder of fu jen catholic university . traditional holidays . manchus have many traditional holidays . some are derived from chinese culture , such as the '' spring festival '' and duanwu festival . some are of manchu origin . for instance , banjin inenggi , on the 13th day of the tenth month of the lunar calendar , is the anniversary of the name creation of manchu . this day in 1635 , hong taiji changed the ethnic name from jurchen to manchu . food extermination day , on every 26th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar , is another example which was inspired by a story that once nurhaci and his troops were in a battle with enemies and almost running out of food . the villagers who lived near the battlefield heard the emergency and came to help . there was no tableware on the battlefield . they had to use perilla leaves to wrap the rice . afterwards , they won the battle . so later generations could remember this hardship , nurhaci made this day the '' food extermination day '' . traditionally on this day , manchu people eat perilla or cabbage wraps with rice , scrambled eggs , beef or pork .