Transcription (linguistics)

phonetic vs . orthographic transcription . broadly speaking , there are two possible approaches to linguistic transcription . phonetic transcription focuses on phonetic and phonological properties of spoken language . systems for phonetic transcription thus furnish rules for mapping individual sounds or phones to written symbols . systems for orthographic transcription , by contrast , consist of rules for mapping spoken words onto written forms as prescribed by the orthography of a given language . phonetic transcription operates with specially defined character sets , usually the international phonetic alphabet . which type of transcription is chosen depends mostly on the research interests pursued . since phonetic transcription strictly foregrounds the phonetic nature of language , it is most useful for phonetic or phonological analyses . orthographic transcription , on the other hand , has a morphological and a lexical component alongside the phonetic component ( which aspect is represented to which degree depends on the language and orthography in question ) . it is thus more convenient wherever meaning-related aspects of spoken language are investigated . phonetic transcription is doubtlessly more systematic in a scientific sense , but it is also harder to learn , more time-consuming to carry out and less widely applicable than orthographic transcription . as theory . mapping spoken language onto written symbols is not as straightforward a process as may seem at first glance . written language is an idealization , made up of a limited set of clearly distinct and discrete symbols . spoken language , on the other hand , is a continuous ( as opposed to discrete ) phenomenon , made up of a potentially unlimited number of components . there is no predetermined system for distinguishing and classifying these components and , consequently , no preset way of mapping these components onto written symbols . literature is relatively consistent in pointing out the nonneutrality of transcription practices . there is not and can not be a neutral transcription system . knowledge of social culture enters directly into the making of a transcript . they are captured in the texture of the transcript ( baker , 2005 ) . transcription systems . transcription systems are sets of rules which define how spoken language is to be represented in written symbols . most phonetic transcription systems are based on the international phonetic alphabet or , especially in speech technology , on its derivative sampa . examples for orthographic transcription systems ( all from the field of conversation analysis or related fields ) are : . ca ( conversation analysis ) . arguably the first system of its kind , originally sketched in ( sacks et al . 1978 ) , later adapted for the use in computer readable corpora as ca-chat by ( macwhinney 2000 ) . the field of conversation analysis itself includes a number of distinct approaches to transcription and sets of transcription conventions . these include , among others , jefferson notation . to analyze conversation , recorded data is typically transcribed into a written form that is agreeable to analysts . there are two common approaches . the first , called narrow transcription , captures the details of conversational interaction such as which particular words are stressed , which words are spoken with increased loudness , points at which the turns-at-talk overlap , how particular words are articulated , and so on . if such detail is less important , perhaps because the analyst is more concerned with the overall gross structure of the conversation or the relative distribution of turns-at-talk amongst the participants , then a second type of transcription known as broad transcription may be sufficient ( williamson , 2009 ) . jefferson transcription system . the jefferson transcription system is a set of symbols , developed by gail jefferson , which is used for transcribing talk . having had some previous experience in transcribing when she was hired in 1963 as a clerk typist at the ucla department of public health to transcribe sensitivity-training sessions for prison guards , jefferson began transcribing some of the recordings that served as the materials out of which harvey sacks ' earliest lectures were developed . over four decades , for the majority of which she held no university position and was unsalaried , jefferson 's research into talk-in-interaction has set the standard for what became known as conversation analysis ( ca ) . her work has greatly influenced the sociological study of interaction , but also disciplines beyond , especially linguistics , communication , and anthropology . this system is employed universally by those working from the ca perspective and is regarded as having become a near-globalized set of instructions for transcription . davidson , c . ( 2007 ) . independent writing in current approaches to writing instruction : what have we overlooked ? english teaching : practice and critique . volume 6 , number 1 . . dt ( discourse transcription ) . a system described in ( dubois et al . 1992 ) , used for transcription of the santa barbara corpus of spoken american english ( sbcsae ) , later developed further into dt2 . gat ( gesprächsanalytisches transkriptionssystem – conversation analytic transcription system ) . a system described in ( selting et al . 1998 ) , later developed further into gat2 ( selting et al . 2009 ) , widely used in german speaking countries for prosodically oriented conversation analysis and interactional linguistics . selting , margret / auer , peter / barden , birgit / bergmann , jörg / couper-kuhlen , elizabeth / günthner , susanne / meier , christoph / quasthoff , uta / schlobinski , peter / uhmann , susanne ( 1998 ) : gesprächsanalytisches transkriptionssystem ( gat ) . in : linguistische berichte 173 , 91-122 . selting , m . , auer , p . , barth-weingarten , d . , bergmann , j . , bergmann , p . , birkner , k . , couper-kuhlen , e . , deppermann , a . , gilles , p . , günthner , s . , hartung , m . , kern , f . , mertzlufft , c . , meyer , c . , morek , m . , oberzaucher , f . , peters , j . , quasthoff , u . , schütte , w . , stukenbrock , a . , uhmann , s . ( 2009 ) : gesprächsanalytisches transkriptionssystem 2 ( gat 2 ) . in : gesprächsforschung ( 10 ) , 353-402 . . hiat ( halbinterpretative arbeitstranskriptionen – semiinterpretative working transcriptions ) . arguably the first system of its kind , originally described in ( ehlich and rehbein 1976 ) – see ( ehlich 1992 ) for an english reference - adapted for the use in computer readable corpora as ( rehbein et al . 2004 ) , and widely used in functional pragmatics . ehlich , k . ( 1992 ) . hiat - a transcription system for discourse data . in : edwards , jane / lampert , martin ( eds . ) : talking data – transcription and coding in discourse research . hillsdale : erlbaum , 123-148 . ehlich , k . & rehbein , j . ( 1976 ) halbinterpretative arbeitstranskriptionen ( hiat ) . in : linguistische berichte ( 45 ) , 21-41 . rehbein , j . ; schmidt , t . ; meyer , b . ; watzke , f . & herkenrath , a . ( 2004 ) handbuch für das computergestützte transkribieren nach hiat . in : arbeiten zur mehrsprachigkeit , folge b ( 56 ) . . software . transcription was originally a process carried out manually , i.e . with pencil and paper , using an analogue sound recording stored on , e.g . , a compact cassette . nowadays , most transcription is done on computers . recordings are usually digital audio files or video files , and transcriptions are electronic documents . specialized computer software exists to assist the transcriber in efficiently creating a digital transcription from a digital recording . two types of transcription software can be used to assist the process of transcription : one that facilitates manual transcription and the other automated transcription . for the former , the work is still very much done by a human transcriber who listens to a recording and types up what is heard in a computer , and this type of software is often a multimedia player with functionality such as playback or changing speed . for the latter , automated transcription is achieved by a speech recognition which converts audio or video files into electronic text . some of the software would also include the function of annotation . . see also . interlinear gloss phonetic transcription speech recognition subtitle ( captioning ) textual scholarship transcription ( service ) transcription software . references . further reading . hepburn , a . , & bolden , g . b . ( 2013 ) . the conversation analytic approach to transcription . in j . sidnell & t . stivers ( eds . ) , the handbook of conversation analysis ( pp . & nbsp ; 57–76 ) . oxford : blackwell . pdf dubois , john / schuetze-coburn , stephan / cumming , susanne / paolino , danae ( 1992 ) : outline of discourse transcription . in : edwards/lampert ( 1992 ) , 45-89 . haberland , h . & mortensen , j . ( 2016 ) transcription as second order entextualisation : the challenge of heteroglossia . in : capone , a . & mey , j . l . ( eds . ) : interdisciplinary studies in pragmatics , culture and society , 581-600 . cham : springer . jenks , c.j . ( 2011 ) transcribing talk and interaction : issues in the representation of communication data . amsterdam : john benjamins . macwhinney , brian ( 2000 ) : the childes project : tools for analyzing talk . mahwah , nj : lawrence erlbaum . ochs , e . ( 1979 ) transcription as theory . in : ochs , e . & schieffelin , b . b . ( ed . ) : developmental pragmatics , 43-72 . new york : academic press . sacks , h . ; schegloff , e . & jefferson , g . ( 1978 ) a simplest systematics for the organization of turn taking for conversation . in : schenkein , j . ( ed . ) : studies in the organization of conversational interaction , 7-56 . new york : academic press . external links . transcription in action - website from uc santa barbara documentation and examples for the hiat transcription system transcription - a website with resources for transcription in conversation analysis