Deutsche Bahn

company profile . the deutsche bahn group is divided into various organizational units that perform their tasks with subsidiaries . personenverkehr . db personenverkehr is the group that manages passenger travel within germany . originally called ( english : travel and tourism ) , this group is responsible for the managing , servicing and running of german passenger services . this group is divided into three business areas : , and arriva . arriva . arriva runs bus and rail companies in 12 european countries . the merger was approved by the european commission in august 2010 , subject to db divesting arriva services in germany ( these are now run as . the merger became effective on 27 august 2010 . services in the uk formerly run as are now operated by a new subdivision of the company , arriva uk trains . it operates the chiltern railways , and crosscountry franchises as well as open-access operator grand central . it also operates the london overground concession as arriva rail london . the former tyne & wear metro operations , already started by db regio uk , ended in 2017 , while arriva trains wales services passed to transport for wales in 2018 . db fernverkehr . operates all intercityexpress and intercity trains in germany as well as in some neighboring countries and several eurocity and eurocityexpress trains throughout europe . unlike its sister companies and , still holds a monopoly in its segment of the market as it operates hundreds of trains per day , while all competitors ' long-distance services combined amount to no more than 10–15 trains per day . additionally operates a few long-distance coach services throughout germany , called . db regio . ag is the subsidiary of that operates passenger trains on short and medium distances in germany . unlike its long-distance counterpart , , it does not operate trains on its own account . traffic is ordered and paid for by the ( states ) or their respective ( regional train operation supervisors ) . some states have awarded long-term contracts to ( usually 10 to 15 years ) , in others , db regio 's operations are decreasing , in north rhine-westphalia , their market share is expected to be lower than 50 % . rail services are divided into several regional companies : for schleswig-holstein , hamburg , lower saxony , bremen for berlin , brandenburg , mecklenburg-vorpommern for north rhine-westphalia for saxony , saxony-anhalt , thuringia for hesse for rhineland-palatinate , saarland , parts of baden-württemberg and hesse for the rest of baden-württemberg for bavaria ( small , independent networks , like erzgebirgsbahn , gäubodenbahn , kurhessenbahn , oberweißbacher bergbahn , südostbayernbahn , westfrankenbahn for easier organisation ) the bus services consist of 25 bus companies , which have subsidiary companies themselves . infrastructure . . db netze . the infrastructure division is divided into the db netz ( rail infrastructure ) , db station & service ( stations and services ) and db energie ( energy ) business units . db engineering & consulting . db engineering & consulting , which is responsible for construction supervision , construction planning and maintenance , is also assigned to this department without being part of a business area . via its subsidiary db engineering & consulting , db signed a memorandum of understanding with iranian rail operator bonyad eastern railways ( bonrail ) in may 2017 and shortly after a consulting contract with islamic republic of iran railways ; both projects were abandoned after the united states imposed new sanctions against iran and said firms doing business with iran would be barred from doing business with the united states . gernot heller and douglas busvine ( august 16 , 2018 ) , german rail operator , deutsche telekom end iran projects reuters . the california high-speed rail authority 's ( chsra ) board approved on november 15 , 2017 an early train operator contract with db engineering & consulting usa . the firm is the u.s . arm of deutsche bahn ag . as early train operator , db engineering & consulting will assist chsra with planning , designing and implementing the state 's high-speed rail program . in germany , db e & c acts as a planning office and in construction supervision for deutsche bahn construction sites . logistics . the transport and logistics division acted in the market with the business units db schenker and db schenker rail , which were combined under the umbrella of db schenker , and the intermodal division , which operates in combined transport . in 2016 , rail freight transport was separated from logistics and db schenker rail was renamed db cargo . foreign firms . . it is possible to obtain train times for any journey in europe from 's website . tickets - timetable trans-eurasia logistics is a joint venture with russian railways ( ržd ) that operates container freight trains between germany and china via russia . key persons . . board of directors . richard lutz , ceo since 2017 levin holle , cfo and chief executive for logistics sigrid nikutta , chief executive of db cargo and rail freight berthold huber , chief executive for passenger services sabina jeschke , cto martin seiler , chro ronald pofalla , chief executive for infrastructure . history . while the rail transport in germany dates back to 1835 when the first tracks were laid on a route between nuremberg and , has been a relatively recent development in german railway history . on january 1 , 1994 , and were merged to form one company , and so , they became . at the same time , adopted its current logo and db abbreviation . modernised the logo and typographer designed a new corporate font known as db & nbsp ; type . when deutsche bahn was formed in january 1994 , it became a joint stock-company , and were designed to operate the railways of both the former east and west germany after unification in october 1990 as a single , uniform , and private company . '' the foundation of deutsche bahn ag '' company website there are three main periods of development in this unified german railway : its formation , its early years ( 1994–1999 ) , and the period from 1999 to the present . originally , dbag had its headquarters in but moved to in central berlin in 1996 , where it occupies a 26-storey office tower designed by at the eastern end of the sony center and named . as the lease was to expire in 2010 , db had announced plans to relocate to , and in 2007 a proposal for a new headquarters by 3xn won an architectural competition which also included foster + partners , and . however , these plans were put on hold due to the financial crisis of 2008 , and the lease was extended . construction of the new headquarters building was started in 2017 under the title '' cube berlin '' according to the designs by 3xn . finished in february 2020 , the cube will house the legal offices of deutsche bahn , but not become the main headquarters . . 1999 to present . the second step of the ( railway reform ) was carried out in 1999 . all rolling stock , track , personnel , and real assets were divided between the subsidiaries of dbag : ( long-distance passenger service , later renamed ( operating the stations ) . this new organisational scheme was introduced not least to implement eu directive 91/440 that demands access to railway systems free of discrimination . in december 2007 , db reorganised again , bringing all passenger services into its arm , logistics under and infrastructure and operations under . the db is owned by the federal republic . by the constitution , the federal republic is required to retain ( directly or indirectly ) a majority of the infrastructure ( the present stocks . in 2008 , it was agreed to '' float '' a portion of the business , meaning an end to the 100 % share the german federal republic had in it , with a plan that 25 % of the overall share would be sold to the private sector . '' partial sale of db agreed '' railway gazette international may 2008 page 289 however the onset of the financial crisis of 2007–08 saw this cancelled . '' db flotation on hold '' railway gazette international november 2008 page 843 in 2014 , the jewish community of thessaloniki demanded that the , which is the successor of the , should reimburse the heirs of greek holocaust victims of thessaloniki for train fares that they were forced to pay for their deportation from thessaloniki to and treblinka between march and august 1943 . one way tickets thessaloniki – auschwitz , june 2015 zug der erinnerung/thessaloniki zug der erinnerung ( non-government organisation “ train of commemoration ” ) . in june 2018 controversy grew in the united kingdom over widespread cancellations of railway services and numerous delayed services operated by deutsche bahn in britain , under its northern brand . this resulted in britain 's minister of transport , chris grayling , setting up an enquiry into whether the deutsche bahn subsidiary had breached its contractual agreement to provide railway services in the north of england . he warned that if the company was found to be in breach of its contractual agreements it could be banned from running railway services in the united kingdom . gwyn topham , helen pidd and pippa crerar , 'northern and gtr could be barred from rail franchises ' in the guardian ( uk newspaper ) , 4 june 2018 . logo history . file : deutsche reichsbahn gesellschaft logo.svg deutsche bahn 's second and former logo as deutsche reichsbahn used from april 1 , 1920 to april 26 , 1945 . file : deutsche reichsbahn ddr.svg deutsche bahn 's third and previous logo as deutsche reichsbahn used from august 30 , 1924 to december 31 , 1993 . this logo were used in tandem with the 1920 logo until april 27 , 1945 . file : deutsche bundesbahn.svg deutsche bahn 's previous secondary logo as deutsche bundesbahn used from october 10 , 1946 to december 31 , 1993 . file : deutsche bahn ag-logo.svg deutsche bahn 's fourth and current logo since january 1 , 1994 . . structure and subsidiaries . db cargo . train categories . trains in germany are classified by their stopping pattern : '' produktübersicht '' on db ag website ( long-distance trains ) , also fernzug ice ( intercity-express ) for high-speed long-distance train services between major cities and regions . does also cross european borders to the netherlands , belgium , france , switzerland and austria . ec ( eurocity ) for ic trains that cross borders , and connects germany with other countries . can also be operated by foreign state railways . can have carriages from various european countries . ic ( intercity ) for long-distance semi-high-speed services , that connects regions and cities . serves as a '' mini ice '' with trains reaching high speed ( average around 160 – 220 & nbsp ; km/h ) , but stops more frequently , and in smaller cities than ice services . on some ic lines the trains go on older railways instead of the high speed lines the ice takes . international ic services are usually operated as euro-city . as like ice , ec and ( few ) ic do cross european borders , train categories of other operators do so into germany and are operated in cooperation with deutsche bahn : ece ( eurocity express ) for international high-speed rail services . currently only one route from frankfurt to milan tgv from france to frankfurt and munich via stuttgart rj ( railjet ) from austria to munich and frankfurt as well as to berlin ( local trains ) ire longer distance re trains , that connects regions and cities . serves as slower ic trains . ire trains only exist in baden-württemberg and on the hamburg–berlin route re serves regions and connects cities , and does not stop at every station on the route . rb stops at all stations on the route ( except where s-bahn is available ) and is the most basic train service s is rapid transit and most services stop at all stations . operate high-frequency services and are comparable with , for example , the london overground train categories no longer used include : met ( metropolitan ) was a luxury train service between hamburg and cologne . the two special met train sets are now used for ic and ice services , and does still have a comfort level above the regular ic and ice coaches ir , set between re and ic was meant to connect cities and regions at a lower price , but also be used for local traffic . replaced partly by ic , re and ire se operated as a mixture of re and rb : trains skipped many stations in urban areas but made all stops in the countryside . rebranded as re and rb . in some regions , such as rhine-main ( frankfurt , , the local transit authority advertised trains as se . internally , db classified them as either re or rb , but even db trains display '' se '' on their destination boards . this ceased in december 2016 . in the early days of dbag , the most basic train categories , which were in use since the early days of rail travel in germany , were also used : d or , abbreviated from was the express train category and used to be the highest train category . it was replaced by ic and the even faster ice . the trains of the car shuttle service connecting the island of sylt with the mainland are still officially referred to as d trains e was the express train offering faster journeys than normal passenger trains but not at such long distances and speed as d trains , though there were some quite long running e trains . no direct successor , would be located between re and ic n , the most basic form of train service stopping at all stations . when all local train services were , i.e . operating at a fixed interval ( mostly one train per hour ) , they were rebranded as rb there are several other operators in germany which sometimes offer other categories , also , a local transport authority or tariff associations might brand the trains in a different way than db does . for example , in the nuremberg region , re and rb trains are not differentiated , but called r instead . in some regions , such as , private operators do use the re and rb labels , in others , such as saxony , they do not . in online and print information systems of db , private trains officially labelled rb and re by their operators , might get a different label , for example '' abr '' for trains operated by abellio , though on platforms , trains and maps or timetables issued by the local transport authority overseeing regional train services , these abbreviations usually do not appear . codeshare agreements . in conjunction with emirates , china airlines , tam airlines , turkish airlines , biman bangladesh airlines , and , operates the airail service between frankfurt airport and köln hauptbahnhof/bonn hauptbahnhof , , , hamburg , hanover , , munich , nuremberg , and . has the iata designator 2a . . tickets . db offers two different pricing models : the flexpreis ( originally normalpreis ) : gives full flexibility , i.e . , all trains on the given date can be used on the chosen route the sparpreis or super-sparpreis is the cheaper , advanced fare . prices for long-distance journeys start as low as €19.90 , but sparpreis tickets are only valid on ice , ic or ec trains noted on the ticket . local trains ( s , rb , re , ire ) also accept tickets issued by local transport associations , which can also be used on buses , trams , and u-bahn trains . db offers concessionary fares with the bahncard , which is available as bahncard 25 ( 25 % discount on flexpreis and sparpreis ) , bahncard 50 ( 50 % discount on flexpreis and 25 % discount on sparpreis ) , and bahncard 100 ( unlimited travel on all deutsche bahn trains , a few private train companies and also in many local transport associations ) . other special tickets , such as interrail or the länder-tickets , give unlimited journeys on local trains and in many transport associations within a state , are also available . these länder-tickets offer group tickets , where up to five people can travel on a single ticket .