Stephen Leacock

early life . stephen leacock was born in swanmore , a village near southampton in southern england . he was the third of the eleven children born to ( walter ) peter leacock ( b.1834 ) , who was born and grew up at oak hill on the isle of wight , an estate that his grandfather had purchased after returning from madeira where his family had made a fortune out of plantations and leacock 's madeira wine , founded in 1760 . stephen 's mother , agnes , was born at soberton , the youngest daughter by his second wife ( caroline linton palmer ) of the rev . stephen butler , of bury lodge , the butler estate that overlooked the village of hambledon , hampshire . stephen butler ( for whom leacock was named ) , was the maternal grandson of admiral james richard dacres and a brother of sir thomas dacres butler , usher of the black rod . leacock 's mother was the half-sister of major thomas adair butler , who won the victoria cross at the siege and capture of lucknow in india . peter 's father , thomas murdock leacock j.p . , had already conceived plans eventually to send his son out to the colonies , but when he discovered that at age eighteen peter had married agnes butler without his permission , almost immediately he shipped them out to south africa where he had bought them a farm . the farm in south africa failed and stephen 's parents returned to hampshire , where he was born . my uncle stephen leacock – elizabeth kimball , 1983 when stephen was six , he came out with his family to canada , where they settled on a farm near the village of sutton , ontario , and the shores of lake simcoe . their farm in the township of georgina was also unsuccessful , and the family was kept afloat by money sent from leacock 's paternal grandfather . his father became an alcoholic ; in the fall of 1878 , he travelled west to manitoba with his brother e.p . leacock ( the subject of stephen 's book my remarkable uncle , published in 1942 ) , leaving behind agnes and the children . stephen leacock , always of obvious intelligence , was sent by his grandfather to the elite private school of upper canada college in toronto , also attended by his older brothers , where he was top of the class and was chosen as head boy . leacock graduated in 1887 , and returned home to find that his father had returned from manitoba . soon after , his father left the family again and never returned . there is some disagreement about what happened to peter leacock . one scenario is that he went to live in argentina , while other sources indicate that he moved to nova scotia and changed his name to lewis . in 1887 , seventeen-year-old leacock started at university college at the university of toronto , where he was admitted to the zeta psi fraternity . his first year was bankrolled by a small scholarship , but leacock found he could not return to his studies the following year because of financial difficulties . he left university to work as a teacher—an occupation he disliked immensely—at strathroy , uxbridge and finally in toronto . as a teacher at upper canada college , his alma mater , he was able simultaneously to attend classes at the university of toronto and , in 1891 , earn his degree through part-time studies . it was during this period that his first writing was published in the varsity , a campus newspaper . academic and political life . disillusioned with teaching , in 1899 he began graduate studies at the university of chicago under thorstein veblen , where he received a doctorate in political science and political economy . he moved from chicago , illinois , to montreal , quebec , where he eventually became the william dow professor of political economy and long-time chair of the department of economics and political science at mcgill university . he was closely associated with sir arthur currie , former commander of the canadian corps in the great war and principal of mcgill from 1919 until his death in 1933 . in fact , currie had been a student observing leacock 's practice teaching in strathroy in 1888 . in 1936 , leacock was forcibly retired by the mcgill board of governors—an unlikely prospect had currie lived . leacock was both a social conservative and a partisan conservative . he opposed giving women the right to vote , and had a mixed record on non-english immigration , having written both in support of expanding immigration beyond anglo-saxons prior to world war ii and in opposition to expanding canadian immigration beyond anglo saxons near the close of world war ii . he was a staunch champion of the british empire and the imperial federation movement and went on lecture tours to further the cause . despite his conservatism , he was a staunch advocate for social welfare legislation and wealth redistribution . he is considered today by some a complicated and controversial historical figure for his views and writings . he was a longtime believer in the superiority of the english , and could be racist towards blacks and indigenous peoples . although prime minister r . b . bennett asked him to be a candidate for the 1935 dominion election , leacock declined the invitation . he did stump for local conservative candidates at his summer home . leacock is mostly forgotten as an economist ; '' what was for many years a virtually final judgement of leacock ’ s scholarly work was pronounced by harold innis in a 1938 lecture at the university of toronto . that lecture , which was intended to pay tribute to leacock as one of the founders of canadian social studies , was eventually published as his obituary in 1944 in the canadian journal of economics and political science '' . innis glossed over leacock 's economics in the article and largely dismissed his humorous writings . for a number of years , leacock used john stuart mill 's text , principles of political economy , in his course at mcgill entitled elements of political economy . according to one source , leacock 's light-hearted and increasingly superficial approach with his political science writings ensured that they are largely forgotten by the public and in academic circles . . literary life . early in his career , leacock turned to fiction , humour , and short reports to supplement ( and ultimately exceed ) his regular income . his stories , first published in magazines in canada and the united states and later in novel form , became extremely popular around the world . it was said in 1911 that more people had heard of stephen leacock than had heard of canada . also , between the years 1915 and 1925 , leacock was the most popular humourist in the english-speaking world . a humourist particularly admired by leacock was robert benchley from new york . leacock opened correspondence with benchley , encouraging him in his work and importuning him to compile his work into a book . benchley did so in 1922 , and acknowledged the nagging from north of the border . near the end of his life , the us comedian jack benny recounted how he had been introduced to leacock 's writing by groucho marx when they were both young vaudeville comedians . benny acknowledged leacock 's influence and , fifty years after first reading him , still considered leacock one of his favorite comic writers . he was puzzled as to why leacock 's work was no longer well known in the united states . anobile , richard j . , the marx bros . scrapbook , new york , outlet , 1973 his works can be described as a balancing act between cutting satire and sheer absurdity . he also wrote extensively on his chosen fields of study , political science and political economy . leacock was a learned professor , and he reflected with wit and ingenuity on various issues related to everyday situations in his works . during the summer months , leacock lived at old brewery bay , his summer estate in orillia , across lake simcoe from where he was raised and also bordering lake couchiching . a working farm , old brewery bay is now a museum and national historic site of canada . gossip provided by the local barber , jefferson short , provided leacock with the material which would become sunshine sketches of a little town ( 1912 ) , set in the thinly-disguised mariposa . although he wrote learned articles and books related to his field of study , his political theory is now all but forgotten . leacock was awarded the royal society of canada 's lorne pierce medal in 1937 , nominally for his academic work . '' the proper punishment for the hohenzollerns , and the habsburgs , and the mecklenburgs , and the muckendorfs , and all such puppets and princelings , is that they should be made to work ; and not made to work in the glittering and glorious sense , as generals and chiefs of staff , and legislators , and land-barons , but in the plain and humble part of labourers looking for a job . ( leacock 1919 : 9 ) '' . memorial medal for humour . the stephen leacock associates is a foundation chartered to preserve the literary legacy of stephen leacock , and oversee the annual award of the stephen leacock memorial medal for humour . it is a prestigious honour , given to encourage canadian humour writing and awarded for the best in canadian humour writing . the foundation was instituted in 1946 and awarded the first leacock medal in 1947 . the presentation occurs in june each year at the stephen leacock award dinner , at the geneva park conference centre in orillia , ontario . . personal life . leacock was born in england in 1869 . his father , peter leacock , and his mother , agnes emma butler leacock , were both from well-to-do families . the family , eventually consisting of eleven children , immigrated to canada in 1876 , settling on a one hundred-acre farm in sutton , ontario . there stephen was home-schooled until he was enrolled in upper canada college , toronto . he became the head boy in 1887 , and then entered the university of toronto to study languages and literature . despite completing two years of study in one year , he was forced to leave the university because his father had abandoned the family . instead , leacock enrolled in a three-month course at strathroy collegiate institute to become a qualified high school teacher . his first appointment was at uxbridge high school , ontario , but he was soon offered a post at upper canada college , where he remained from 1889 through 1899 . at this time , he also resumed part-time studies at the university of toronto , graduating with a b.a . in 1891 . however , leacock 's real interests were turning towards economics and political theory , and in 1899 he was accepted for postgraduate studies at the university of chicago , where he earned his phd in 1903 in 1900 leacock married beatrix hamilton , niece of sir henry pellatt , who had built casa loma , the largest castle in north america . in 1915 , after 15 years of marriage , the couple had their only child , stephen lushington leacock . while leacock doted on the boy , it soon became apparent that '' stevie '' suffered from a lack of growth hormone . growing to be only four feet tall , he had a love-hate relationship with leacock , who tended to treat him like a child . beatrix died in 1925 due to breast cancer . leacock was offered a post at mcgill university , where he remained until he retired in 1936 . in 1906 , he wrote elements of political science , which remained a standard college textbook for the next twenty years and became his most profitable book . he also began public speaking and lecturing , and he took a year 's leave of absence in 1907 to speak throughout canada on the subject of national unity . he typically spoke on national unity or the british empire for the rest of his life . leacock began submitting articles to the toronto humour magazine grip in 1894 , and soon was publishing many humorous articles in canadian and us magazines . in 1910 , he privately published the best of these as literary lapses . the book was spotted by a british publisher , john lane , who brought out editions in london and new york , assuring leacock 's future as a writer . this was confirmed by literary lapses ( 1910 ) , nonsense novels ( 1911 ) – probably his best books of humorous sketches—and by the more sentimental favourite , sunshine sketches of a little town ( 1912 ) . john lane introduced the young cartoonist annie fish to illustrate his 1913 book behind the beyond . leacock 's humorous style was reminiscent of mark twain and charles dickens at their sunniest — for example , in his book my discovery of england ( 1922 ) . however , his arcadian adventures with the idle rich ( 1914 ) is a darker collection that satirizes city life . collections of sketches continued to follow almost annually at times , with a mixture of whimsy , parody , nonsense , and satire that was never bitter . leacock was enormously popular not only in canada but in the united states and britain . in later life , leacock wrote on the art of humour writing and also published biographies of twain and dickens . after retirement , a lecture tour to western canada led to his book my discovery of the west : a discussion of east and west in canada ( 1937 ) , for which he won the governor general 's award . he also won the mark twain medal and received a number of honorary doctorates . other nonfiction books on canadian topics followed and he began work on an autobiography . leacock died of throat cancer in toronto in 1944 . a prize for the best humour writing in canada was named after him , and his house at orillia on the banks of lake couchiching became the stephen leacock museum . death and tributes . predeceased by trix ( who had died of breast cancer in 1925 ) , leacock was survived by son stevie ( stephen lushington leacock ( 1915–1974 ) . in accordance with his wishes , after his death from throat cancer , leacock was buried in the st george the martyr churchyard ( st . george 's church , sibbald point ) , sutton , ontario . shortly after his death , barbara nimmo , his niece , literary executor and benefactor , published two major posthumous works : last leaves ( 1945 ) and the boy i left behind me ( 1946 ) . his physical legacy was less treasured , and his abandoned summer cottage became derelict . it was rescued from oblivion when it was declared a national historic site of canada in 1958 and ever since has operated as a museum called the stephen leacock museum national historic site . in 1947 , the stephen leacock award was created to meet the best in canadian literary humour . in 1969 , the centennial of his birth , canada post issued a six-cent stamp with his image on it . the following year , the stephen leacock centennial committee had a plaque erected at his english birthplace and a mountain in the yukon was named after him . a number of buildings in canada are named after leacock , including the stephen leacock building at mcgill university , stephen leacock public school in ottawa , a theatre in keswick , ontario , and a school stephen leacock collegiate institute in toronto . adaptations . two leacock short stories have been adapted as national film board of canada animated shorts by gerald potterton : my financial career and the awful fate of melpomenus jones . sunshine sketches , based on sunshine sketches of a little town , aired on cbc television in 1952–1953 ; it was the first canadian broadcast of an english-language dramatic series , as it debuted on the first night that television was broadcast in toronto . in 2012 , a screen adaptation based on sunshine sketches of a little town was aired on cbc television to celebrate both the 75th anniversary of the cbc and the 100th anniversary of leacock 's original collection of short stories . the recent screen adaptation featured gordon pinsent as a mature leacock . in the summer of 2018 , a live musical theatre adaptation by craig cassils and robin richardson based on sunshine sketches of a little town premiered at the saskatchewan festival of words and the rubarb theatrefest in moose jaw , saskatchewan . canadian stage actor john stark was most noted for an evening with stephen leacock , a long-running one-man show . carole corbeil , '' stark as leacock is skillful and witty '' . the globe and mail , april 23 , 1980 . an album of his show , released on tapestry records in 1982 , received a juno award nomination for comedy album of the year at the juno awards of 1982 . liam lacey , '' mckenzies vs . rush for best album juno '' . the globe and mail , march 2 , 1982 . stark also later produced a television film adaptation of sunshine sketches of a little town , as well as a stage musical based on leacock 's short story '' the great election '' . bibliography . fiction . literary lapses ( 1910 ) nonsense novels ( 1911 ) sunshine sketches of a little town ( 1912 ) behind the beyond ( 1913 ) - illustrated by annie fish . mark bryant , 'fish , ( harriet ) annie ( 1890–1964 ) ' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , may 2006 accessed 7 april 2017 arcadian adventures with the idle rich ( 1914 ) moonbeams from the larger lunacy ( 1915 ) further foolishness ( 1916 ) essays and literary studies ( 1916 ) frenzied fiction ( 1918 ) the hohenzollerns in america ( 1919 ) winsome winnie ( 1920 ) my discovery of england ( 1922 ) college days ( 1923 ) over the footlights ( 1923 ) the garden of folly ( 1924 ) winnowed wisdom ( 1926 ) short circuits ( 1928 ) the iron man and the tin woman ( 1929 ) laugh with leacock ( 1930 ) the dry pickwick ( 1932 ) afternoons in utopia ( 1932 ) hellements of hickonomics in hiccoughs of verse done in our social planning mill ( 1936 ) model memoirs ( 1938 ) too much college ( 1939 ) my remarkable uncle ( 1942 ) happy stories ( 1943 ) how to write ( 1943 ) last leaves ( 1945 ) the man in asbestos : an allegory of the future . non-fiction . elements of political science ( 1906 ) baldwin , lafontaine , hincks : responsible government ( 1907 ) practical political economy ( 1910 ) adventurers of the far north ( 1914 ) the dawn of canadian history ( 1914 ) the mariner of st . malo : a chronicle of the voyages of jacques cartier ( 1914 ) the unsolved riddle of social justice ( 1920 ) mackenzie , baldwin , lafontaine , hincks ( 1926 ) economic prosperity in the british empire ( 1930 ) the economic prosperity of the british empire ( 1931 ) humour : its theory and technique , with examples and samples ( 1935 ) the greatest pages of american humor ( 1936 ) humour and humanity ( 1937 ) here are my lectures ( 1937 ) my discovery of the west ( 1937 ) our british empire ( 1940 ) canada : the foundations of its future ( 1941 ) our heritage of liberty ( 1942 ) montreal : seaport and city ( 1942 ) canada and the sea ( 1944 ) while there is time ( 1945 ) my lost dollar . biography . mark twain ( 1932 ) charles dickens : his life and work ( 1933 ) . autobiography . the boy i left behind me ( 1946 ) . quotations . '' lord ronald … flung himself upon his horse and rode madly off in all directions . '' & nbsp ; — nonsense novels , '' gertrude the governess '' , 1911 '' professor leacock has made more people laugh with the written word than any other living author . one may say he is one of the greatest jesters , the greatest humorist of the age . '' & nbsp ; — a . p . herbert '' mr leacock is as 'bracing ' as the seaside place of john hassall 's famous poster . his wisdom is always humorous , and his humour is always wise . '' & nbsp ; — sunday times '' he is still inimitable . no one , anywhere in the world , can reduce a thing to ridicule with such few short strokes . he is the grock of literature . '' & nbsp ; — evening standard '' i detest life-insurance agents : they always argue that i shall some day die , which is not so . '' '' hockey captures the essence of canadian experience in the new world . in a land so inescapably and inhospitably cold , hockey is the chance of life , and an affirmation that despite the deathly chill of winter we are alive . '' . reference . external references . legate , david m . stephen leacock : a biography . 1970 . doubleday , toronto . moritz , albert & theresa . leacock : a biography . 1985 . stoddart publishing , toronto . ferris , ina . 1978 . '' the face in the window : sunshine sketches reconsidered , '' studies in canadian literature university of new brunswick , fredericton . external links . guide to the stephen butler leacock papers 1901-1946 at the university of chicago special collections research center . libraries . national library of canada leacock at '' english-canadian writers '' , athabasca university , by lee skallerup , with add . links . electronic editions . works by stephen leacock at the online books page works by stephen leacock at digital archive ( toronto public library ) sunshine sketches radio play cbc radio adaptation 1946 index of twenty-nine stephen leacock stories read in mister ron 's basement podcast