Industrial design

history . precursors . for several millennia before the onset of industrialisation , design , technical expertise , and manufacturing were often done by individual craftsmen , who determined the form of a product at the point of its creation , according to their own manual skill , the requirements of their clients , experience accumulated through their own experimentation , and knowledge passed on to them through training or apprenticeship . the division of labour that underlies the practice of industrial design did have precedents in the pre-industrial era . the growth of trade in the medieval period led to the emergence of large workshops in cities such as florence , venice , nuremberg and bruges , where groups of more specialized craftsmen made objects with common forms through the repetitive duplication of models which defined by their shared training and technique . competitive pressures in the early 16th century led to the emergence in italy and germany of pattern books : collections of engravings illustrating decorative forms and motifs which could be applied to a wide range of products , and whose creation took place in advance of their application . the use of drawing to specify how something was to be constructed later was first developed by architects and shipwrights during the italian renaissance . in the 17th century , the growth of artistic patronage in centralized monarchical states such as france led to large government-operated manufacturing operations epitomised by the gobelins manufactory , opened in paris in 1667 by louis xiv . here teams of hundreds of craftsmen , including specialist artists , decorators and engravers , produced sumptuously decorated products ranging from tapestries and furniture to metalwork and coaches , all under the creative supervision of the king 's leading artist charles le brun . this pattern of large-scale royal patronage was repeated in the court porcelain factories of the early 18th century , such as the meissen porcelain workshops established in 1709 by the grand duke of saxony , where patterns from a range of sources , including court goldsmiths , sculptors and engravers , were used as models for the vessels and figurines for which it became famous . as long as reproduction remained craft-based , however , the form and artistic quality of the product remained in the hands of the individual craftsman , and tended to decline as the scale of production increased . birth of industrial design . the emergence of industrial design is specifically linked to the growth of industrialisation and mechanisation that began with the industrial revolution in great britain in the mid 18th century . the rise of industrial manufacture changed the way objects were made , urbanisation changed patterns of consumerism , the imperialism broadened tastes and diversified markets , and the emergence of a wider middle class created demand for fashionable styles from a much larger and more heterogeneous population . the first use of the term '' industrial design '' is often attributed to the industrial designer joseph claude sinel in 1919 ( although he himself denied this in interviews ) , but the discipline predates 1919 by at least a decade . christopher dresser is considered among the first independent industrial designers . industrial design 's origins lie in the industrialization of consumer products . for instance the deutscher werkbund , founded in 1907 and a precursor to the bauhaus , was a state-sponsored effort to integrate traditional crafts and industrial mass-production techniques , to put germany on a competitive footing with great britain and the united states . the earliest use of the term may have been in the art journal , 1839 . the practical draughtsman 's book of industrial design by jacques-eugène armengaud was printed in 1853 . the subtitle of the ( translated ) work explains , that it wants to offer a '' complete course of mechanical , engineering , and architectural drawing . '' the study of those types of technical drawing , according to armengaud , belong to the field of industrial design . this work paved the way for a big expansion in the field drawing education in france , the united kingdom and the united states . robert lepper helped to establish one of the country 's first industrial design degree programs in 1934 at carnegie institute of technology . '' newsbriefs : lepper show runs at warhol . '' carnegie mellon magazine . winter 2002 . retrieved january 17 , 2014 . . education . product design and industrial design overlap in the fields of user interface design , information design , and interaction design . various schools of industrial design specialize in one of these aspects , ranging from pure art colleges and design schools ( product styling ) , to mixed programs of engineering and design , to related disciplines such as exhibit design and interior design , to schools that almost completely subordinated aesthetic design to concerns of usage and ergonomics , the so-called functionalist school . pulos , arthur j . , the american design adventure 1940-1975 , cambridge , mass : mit press ( 1988 ) , p . 249 except for certain functional areas of overlap between industrial design and engineering design , the former is considered an applied art while the latter is an applied science . educational programs in the u.s . for engineering require accreditation by the accreditation board for engineering and technology ( abet ) in contrast to programs for industrial design which are accredited by the national association of schools of art and design ( nasad ) . of course , engineering education requires heavy training in mathematics and physical sciences , which is not typically required in industrial design education . . institutions . most industrial designers complete a design or related program at a vocational school or university . relevant programs include graphic design , interior design , industrial design , architectural technology , and drafting diplomas and degrees in industrial design are offered at vocational schools and universities worldwide . diplomas and degrees take two to four years of study . the study results in a bachelor of industrial design ( b.i.d . ) , bachelor of science ( b.sc ) or bachelor of fine arts ( b.f.a . ) . afterwards , the bachelor programme can be extended to postgraduate degrees such as master of design , master of fine arts and others to a master of arts or master of science . definition . industrial design studies function and form—and the connection between product , user , and environment . generally , industrial design professionals work in small scale design , rather than overall design of complex systems such as buildings or ships . industrial designers do n't usually design motors , electrical circuits , or gearing that make machines move , but they may affect technical aspects through usability design and form relationships . usually , they work with other professionals such as engineers who focus on the mechanical and other functional aspects of the product , assuring functionality and manufacturability , and with marketers to identify and fulfill customer needs and expectations . references . sources . barnwell , maurice . design , creativity and culture , black dog , 2011 , barnwell , maurice . design evolution : big bang to big data , toronto , 2014 . forty , adrian . objects of desire : design and society since 1750 . thames hudson , may 1992 . heskett , john . industrial design , thames & hudson , 1980 , mayall , wh , industrial design for engineers , london : iliffe books , 1967 , mayall , wh , machines and perception in industrial design , london : studio vista , 1968 , meikle , jeffrey . twentieth century limited : industrial design engineering in america , 1925 - 1939 , philadelphia : temple university press , 1979 . external links . doodles , drafts and designs : industrial drawings from the smithsonian ( 2004 ) smithsonian institution libraries