Prunella Scales

early life . scales was born in sutton abinger , surrey , the daughter of catherine ( née scales ) , an actress , and john richardson illingworth , a cotton salesman . she attended moira house girls school , eastbourne . she had a younger brother , timothy ( '' timmo '' ) illingworth ( 1934–2017 ) . great canal journeys , series 8 , episode marne–rhine canal , timestamp approx 46:45 scales ' parents moved their family to bucks mill near bideford in devon in 1939 at the start of the second world war . scales herself ( and her brother ) were evacuated to near sawrey ( then in lancashire , now in cumbria ) . career . scales started her career in 1951 as an assistant stage manager at the bristol old vic . throughout her career she has often been cast in comic roles . her early work included the ( now believed to be lost ) second uk adaptation of pride and prejudice ( 1952 ) , laxdale hall ( 1953 ) , hobson 's choice ( 1954 ) , room at the top ( 1959 ) and waltz of the toreadors ( 1962 ) . her career break came with the early 1960s sitcom marriage lines starring opposite richard briers . she played her most famous role , sybil fawlty in the sitcom fawlty towers , over two series in 1975 and 1979 . in addition to this , she has had roles in bbc radio 4 sitcoms , and comedy series including after henry , smelling of roses and ladies of letters ; on television she starred in the london weekend television/channel 4 series mapp & lucia based on the novels by e . f . benson . she played elizabeth ii in alan bennett 's a question of attribution . in 1973 , scales was cast with ronnie barker in one man 's meat which formed part of barker 's seven of one series , also for the bbc . her later film appearances include escape from the dark ( 1976 ) , the hound of the baskervilles ( 1978 ) , the boys from brazil ( 1978 ) , the wicked lady ( 1983 ) , the lonely passion of judith hearne ( 1987 ) , consuming passions ( 1988 ) , a chorus of disapproval ( 1989 ) , howards end ( 1992 ) , wolf ( 1994 ) , an awfully big adventure ( 1995 ) and stiff upper lips ( 1997 ) . for the bbc television shakespeare production of the merry wives of windsor ( 1982 ) she played mistress page and the theatre night series ( bbc ) she appeared with her husband timothy west in the joe orton farce what the butler saw ( 1987 ) playing mrs prentice . for ten years , scales appeared as '' dotty '' , together with jane horrocks as her character 's daughter , in advertisements for uk supermarket chain tesco . in 1996 , scales starred in the television film , lord of misrule , alongside richard wilson , emily mortimer and stephen moyer . the film was directed by guy jenkins and filming took place in fowey in cornwall . also in 1996 , she appeared as miss bates in jane austen 's emma . in 1997 , scales starred in chris barfoot 's science-fiction film short phoenix which was first aired in 1999 by nbc universal 's syfy . scales played 'the client ' , an evil government minister funding inter-genetic time travel experiments . the same year she played minny stinkler in the comedy film mad cows , directed by sara sugarman . in 1993 scales voiced mrs tiggy-winkle in the world of peter rabbit and friends . in 2000 , scales appeared in the film the ghost of greville lodge as sarah . the same year she appeared as eleanor bunsall in midsomer murders “ beyond the grave ” . in 2001 she appeared in 2 episodes of silent witness , “ faith ” as mrs parker . in 2003 , she appeared as hilda , '' she who must be obeyed '' , wife of horace rumpole in four bbc radio 4 plays , with timothy west playing her fictional husband . scales and west toured australia at the same time in different productions . scales appeared in a one-woman show called '' an evening with queen victoria '' , which also featured the tenor ian partridge singing songs written by prince albert . scales has performed “ an evening with queen victoria ” more than 400 times , in theatres around the world , over the course of 30 years . also in 2003 , scales voiced the speaking ( '' cawing '' ) role of magpie , the eponymous thief in a recording of gioachino rossini 's opera la gazza ladra ( the thieving magpie ) . in 2006 , scales appeared alongside academy award winners vanessa redgrave and maximilian schell in the mini-series the shell seekers . on 16 november 2007 , scales appeared in children in need , reprising her role as sybil fawlty , the new manager who wants to take over hotel babylon . she appeared in the audio play the youth of old age , produced in 2008 by the wireless theatre company , and available to download free of charge on their website . she appeared in a production of carrie 's war , the nina bawden novel , at the apollo theatre in 2009 . in 2008 , she appeared in agatha christie ’ s miss marple “ a pocket full of rye ” as mrs mackenzie . john cleese said in an interview on 8 may 2009 that the role of sybil fawlty was originally offered to bridget turner , who turned down the part , claiming '' it was n't right for her '' . scales starred in the 2011 british live-action 3d family comedy film horrid henry : the movie as the titular character 's great aunt greta . scales appeared in a short audio story , dandruff hits the turtleneck , written by john mayfield , and available for download . scales starred in a virgin short '' stranger danger '' alongside roderick cowie in 2012 . in 2013 she made a guest appearance in the popular bbc radio comedy cabin pressure as wendy crieff , the mother of captain martin crieff . alongside husband timothy west , scales appeared in great canal journeys for channel 4 from 2014 to 2019 . stuart heritage , writing for the guardian in november 2016 , commented that it '' is ultimately a work about a devoted couple facing something huge together . it ’ s a beautiful , meditative programme '' . '' an emotional but unrooted glimpse of life with dementia '' was christopher howse 's characterization in october 2018 , writing for the telegraph . reviewing the last episode for the guardian , jack seale wrote in october 2019 '' since the first instalment in 2014 , the series has charted the long , slow goodbye that is living with dementia , cherishing every moment of precious normality and celebrating how an immersion in nature is the surest way to bring the old pru back . '' . personal life . scales is married to the actor timothy west , with whom she has two sons ; the elder is actor and director samuel west . their younger son joseph participated in two episodes of great canal journeys filmed in france . scales also has a step-daughter , juliet , by west 's first marriage . in 1992 scales appeared on bbc radio 4 's desert island discs . her chosen book was the complete works of shakespeare in german and the bible in russian , and a russian dictionary ; her luxury item was a tapestry kit . her biography , prunella , written by teresa ransom , was published by uk publishing imprint john murray in 2005 . she was appointed a order of the british empire in the 1992 birthday honours list . her husband received the same honour in the 1984 birthday honours list . other activities . scales was an ambassador of sos children 's villages charity , an international orphan charity providing homes and mothers for orphaned and abandoned children . she supports the charity 's annual world orphan week campaign , which takes place each february . scales is a patron of the lace market theatre in nottingham . in 2005 , she named the p & o cruise ship , artemis . . later life . in march 2014 , her husband told the guardian that scales was living with alzheimer 's disease . the couple discussed practical measures in a radio programme about age and dementia on bbc radio 4 in december 2014 . in june 2018 , her husband characterised her short-term memory as '' no good at all '' , and admitted her condition '' slowed them down '' , but '' not so it closes up opportunities . '' . references . external links .