The World Is Not Enough

release and reception . the world is not enough premiered on 19 november 1999 in the united states and on 26 november 1999 in the united kingdom . its world premiere was 8 november 1999 at the fox bruin theater , los angeles , usa . at that time mgm signed a marketing partnership with mtv , primarily for american youths , who were assumed to have considered bond as '' an old-fashioned secret service agent '' . as a result , mtv broadcast more than 100 hours of bond-related programmes immediately after the film was released , most being presented by denise richards . . box office . the film opened at the top of the north american box office with 35.5 million . its final worldwide gross was 361.8 million worldwide , with 126 million in the united states alone . it became the highest grossing james bond film of all time until the release of die another day . the film was also selected for the first round of nominations for the academy award but failed . the film was nominated for a best action/adventure/thriller film saturn award , pierce brosnan won both the empire award and the blockbuster inc . as best actor , and david arnold won a bmi film music award for his score . the film became the first in the bond series to win a golden raspberry when denise richards was chosen as '' worst supporting actress '' at the 1999 razzie awards . richards and brosnan were also nominated for '' worst screen couple '' ( lost to will smith and kevin kline for wild wild west ) . the initial release of the dvd includes the featurette '' secrets of 007 '' , which cuts into '' making of '' material during the film ; the documentary '' the making of the world is not enough '' ; two audio commentary—one by director michael apted , and the other by production designer peter lamont , second unit director vic armstrong , and composer david arnold ; a trailer for the playstation video game , and the garbage music video . the ultimate edition released in 2006 had as additional extras a 2000 documentary named '' bond cocktail '' , a featurette on shooting the q boat scenes , pierce brosnan in a press conference in hong kong , deleted scenes , and a tribute to desmond llewelyn . . critical reception . reception was mixed . chicago sun-times critic roger ebert said the film was a '' splendid comic thriller , exciting and graceful , endlessly inventive '' , and gave it three-and-a-half stars out of four . on the other hand , eleanor ringel gillespie of the atlanta journal-constitution disliked the film , calling it '' dated and confused '' . rotten tomatoes gave the world is not enough a 52 % rating , the lowest of the brosnan bond films . the site 's consensus states : '' plagued by mediocre writing , uneven acting , and a fairly by-the-numbers plot , the world is not enough is partially saved by some entertaining and truly bond-worthy action sequences . '' metacritic gives the film a score of 59 out of 100 . nathan rabin from the a.v . club opined that '' enough fun moments are scattered throughout to make it a decent bond entry . but the series still needs a massive shot of fresh ideas if it wishes to become anything more than a nostalgia-fueled commercial sure thing '' . antonia quirke from the independent said that the film '' is certainly less definitively feeble than other recent bond offerings , with an at least two-dimensional female character in the bold and oval marceau . but my reaction is much the same as to a new rolling stones album : i 'm just grateful that it 's not embarrassing '' . negative criticism was focused on the execution of the plot , and the action scenes were considered excessive . richards was widely criticized for not being credible in the role of a nuclear scientist , with variety calling her '' the least plausible nuclear physicist in the history of movies , who makes even the electrochemist elisabeth shue played in 1997 ’ s the saint sound like a nobel laureate '' ; nathan rabin panned her performance and called it '' so laughably awful that the film comes to a dead stop whenever she 's on screen '' . howe , desson , 19 november 1999 , 'world ' : bond without end , washington post . she was ranked as one of the worst bond girls of all time by entertainment weekly in 2008 . . retrospective . pete debruge of variety wrote in 2012 that '' the world is not enough presents a conflicted persona torn between the corny antics of the roger moore era and the grim seriousness of where things would eventually go under daniel craig ’ s tenure . it also contains a dose of timothy dalton-esque toughness . much of what made brosnan such a great bond is thrust into the backseat by lame jokes and a premature attempt to mix up the formula '' , concluding that it was '' nothing but a reversion to the franchise ’ s most adolescent tendencies '' . entertainment weekly picked it as the worst bond film of all time in 2006 , saying it had a plot '' so convoluted even pierce brosnan has admitted to being mystified '' . norman wilner of msn chose it as the third worst film , above a view to a kill and licence to kill , while ign chose it as the fifth worst , both in 2007 . adaptations . bond novelist raymond benson wrote his adaptation of the world is not enough from the film 's screenplay . it was benson 's fourth bond novel and followed the story closely , but with some details changed . for instance , elektra sings quietly before her death and bond still carries his walther ppk instead of the newer p99 . the novel also gave the cigar girl/assassin the name giulietta da vinci and retained a scene between her and renard that was cut from the film . in 2000 , the film was adapted by electronic arts to create two first-person shooters of the same name for the nintendo 64 and playstation . the nintendo 64 version was developed by eurocom and the playstation version was developed by black ops . black ops had previously adapted tomorrow never dies for the playstation and would go on to develop nightfire in 2002 . versions of the world is not enough for the pc and the playstation 2 were planned for release in 2000 , but both were cancelled . these versions would have used the id tech 3 game engine from quake iii arena . although this game marks pierce brosnan 's fifth appearance in a bond video game , the game includes only his likeness ; the character is voiced by adam blackwood . . see also . outline of james bond . references . . external links . mgm 's official the world is not enough website