Warrior Soul

history . kory clarke originally started in the music scene as a drummer for several bands , including detroit punks l-seven ( not to be confused with the all female los angeles band , l7 ) , pennsylvania southern rockers raging slab , and a kim fowley project called '' the trial '' . after moving to new york city , clarke did one-man performance art shows . although believing rock bands to be less artistic , he was persuaded to reform a band , which he named warrior soul after a line in a george s . patton docudrama . the band began to play in new york city in 1987 , and soon came to the attention of geffen , who signed the band . geffen directed clarke to shed his hired band and get new players . clarke insisted on keeping pete mcclanahan as his bass player , and recruited guitarist john ricco and former killing joke drummer paul ferguson . in 1990 , warrior soul released their first album , last decade dead century . allmusic reviewer eduardo rivadavia compared it to nirvana 's nevermind , saying that although comparable success eluded warrior soul , it explored similar themes . rivadavia speculated that the nihilism of nevermind may have resonated more with generation x . 1991 saw ferguson replaced on drums by mark evans , and the band 's second album drugs , god and the new republic released , which took their anarchist leanings even further . a nationwide support tour with queensrÿche ( with whom they shared management from the q prime agency ) followed . the following year saw the release of the band 's third album , 1992 's salutations from the ghetto nation , and clarke 's relationship with geffen sour . clarke 's interviews became increasingly bitter , often focusing on the band 's record label , whom he accused of ignoring the group 's potential . eventually , clarke resorted to an all-out war , telling all that the band 's fourth release , 1993 's chill pill had been botched on purpose in order to fulfill the band 's contract . the ploy seemed to work , and by early 1994 warrior soul were dropped by geffen . a number of lineup changes ensued . longtime guitarist john ricco was ousted , replaced by two guitarists : alexander arundel ( aka x-factor aka gene poole ) and chris moffet ( former cycle sluts from hell lead guitarist ) . not long after , mark evans and chris moffet departed . at that time former nuclear assault/cities/cycle sluts from hell drummer scott duboys joined the band . the line-up now consisted of clarke , arundel , mcclanahan and duboys . clarke sought to reinvent warrior soul as self-appointed cyberpunks for their fifth album , 1995 's the space age playboys , released on the independent futurist label . at this time adding old friend and collaborator , peter jay on rhythm guitar . while touring in support of the album , warrior soul headlined the 1995 kerrang ! uk tour , as well as performing at the 1995 dynamo open air festival , and also at the 1995 donnington monsters of rock concert . after the performance of their last live show in september 1995 , arundel , duboys , and longtime bassist mcclanahan quit the band , leading in short order to clarke 's decision to retire the band later that year . in 1996 , odds & ends was released as a collection of demos recorded on an eight-track with arundel , and leftover material that was originally intended for release on elektra records . the '' classic '' lineup of clarke , ricco , mcclanahan , and evans later reunited for a short tour and to go in the studio to re-record twelve of the bands ' songs , released on dream catcher records as classics in 2000 . all warrior soul albums were remastered and re-released on cd and mp3 in 2006 and 2009 , including with bonus material ( mostly live songs originally released as b-sides ) . the first three albums were also re-released on vinyl in 2009 . clarke says many of their songs are politically based , such as '' blown away '' , '' superpower dreamland '' , '' in conclusion '' , and '' children of the winter . '' clarke describes the band 's sound as acid rock , particularly their the space age playboys album . drummer mark evans was murdered in london , england , in 2005 . . reformation . in 2007 clarke revived the name , and has been recording and touring with an ever-changing cast of musicians under the '' warrior soul '' name ever since . initially setting out on a tour of the uk , a live album soon followed . 2008 saw the band released a new studio album , initially titled chinese democracy ( as a dig at the long-delayed guns n ' roses release ) , but quickly renamed destroy the war machine . in 2012 , another new lineup released the studio album stiff middle finger co-produced by sue gere and kory clarke , with lundell still on guitar but joined by '' johnny h '' and xevi '' strings '' abellán , danny engstrom and sue gere on bass and drums by freddie cocker kvarnebrink . former band member john ricco makes a guest appearance on guitar , as does the mission guitarist mark gemini thwaite . the band embarked on a month-long european tour in november 2012 , followed by a brief tour through the eastern united states in december . original bass player pete mcclanahan joined the live lineup for a few months in 2013 . christian kimmett joined the band on bass in 2013 after mcclanahan 's departure , and stevie pearce joined on guitar a year later . this lineup undertook extensive touring of europe and the usa over the next three years and released a live album , tough as fuck in 2016 . 2017 saw the release of a new studio album - back on the lash - with yet another new lineup , including the rhythm section from urge overkill , adam & nate arling , joined by guitarist john 'full throttle ' polachek . in 2014 clarke brought out a solo album recorded in porto , portugal payback 's a bitch . co producer andre indiana and monica ferraz on backing vocals make this album very unusual and diverse demonstrating the different sides to clarke 's musical abilities . rolling stone germany gave the album full score . in addition to his musical output , kory clarke is also known for his radical outspoken original paintings . he had an art exhibition in edinburgh , scotland in 2015 and has three more art exhibitions in 2016 in sweden , usa and italy . on june 25 , 2019 , the new york times magazine listed warrior soul among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 universal fire . . discography . singles . ( 1990 ) '' we cry out '' : 1 . '' we cry out '' ( lp version ) ( 1990 ) '' the losers '' ( 1991 ) '' hero '' : 1 . '' hero '' ( lp version ) 2 . '' twenty four hours '' ( previously unreleased ) 3 . '' ghetto nation '' ( different from released version ) ( 1991 ) '' the wasteland '' : 1 . '' the wasteland '' ( censored version ) 2 . '' the wasteland '' ( lp version ) ( 1992 ) '' ghetto nation '' : 1 . '' ghetto nation '' ( album version ) 2 . '' intro '' ( live ) 3 . '' love destruction '' ( live ) 4 . '' blown '' ( live ) ( 1992 ) '' love destruction '' ( 1995 ) '' space age singles '' : 1 . '' the drug '' ( edit ) 2 . '' i wan na get some '' ( edit ) 3 . '' the drug '' ( album version ) 4 . '' i wan na get some '' ( album version ) . albums . ( 1990 ) last decade dead century ( 1991 ) drugs , god and the new republic ( 1992 ) salutations from the ghetto nation ( 1993 ) chill pill ( 1994 ) the space age playboys ( 1996 ) odds & ends ( also released under the title fucker in europe . ) ( 2000 ) classics ( 2008 ) live in england ( 2009 ) destroy the war machine ( originally released as chinese democracy , also released as . and we rock and roll ! ) ( 2012 ) stiff middle finger ( 2016 ) tough as fuck : live in athens ( 2017 ) back on the lash ( 2019 ) rock ' n ' roll disease . references . external links . the official warrior soul myspace page official warrior soul facebook page audio interview with warrior soul at hard rock hell festival 2008