Necessity and sufficiency

definitions . in the conditional statement , '' if s , then n '' , the expression represented by s is called the antecedent , and the expression represented by n is called the consequent . this conditional statement may be written in several equivalent ways , such as '' n if s '' , '' s only if n '' , '' s implies n '' , '' n is implied by s '' , , and '' n whenever s '' . in the above situation , n is said to be a necessary condition for s . in common language , this is equivalent to saying that if the conditional statement is a true statement , then the consequent n must be true—if s is to be true ( see third column of '' truth table '' immediately below ) . in other words , the antecedent s can not be true without n being true . for example , in order for someone to be called socrates , it is necessary for that someone to be named . similarly , in order for human beings to live , it is necessary that they have air . in the above situation , one can also say s is a sufficient condition for n ( refer again to the third column of the truth table immediately below ) . if the conditional statement is true , then if s is true , n must be true ; whereas if the conditional statement is true and n is true , then s may be true or be false . in common terms , '' the truth of s guarantees the truth of n '' . for example , carrying on from the previous example , one can say that knowing that someone is called socrates is sufficient to know that someone has a name . a necessary and sufficient condition requires that both of the implications s \rightarrow n and n \rightarrow s ( the latter of which can also be written as s \leftarrow n ) hold . the first implication suggests that s is a sufficient condition for n , while the second implication suggests that s is a necessary condition for n . this is expressed as '' s is necessary and sufficient for n '' , '' s if and only if n '' , or s \leftrightarrow n . . necessity . the assertion that q is necessary for p is colloquially equivalent to '' p can not be true unless q is true '' or '' if q is false , then p is false '' . by contraposition , this is the same thing as '' whenever p is true , so is q '' . the logical relation between p and q is expressed as '' if p , then q '' and denoted '' p ⇒ q '' ( p implies q ) . it may also be expressed as any of '' p only if q '' , '' q , if p '' , '' q whenever p '' , and '' q when p '' . one often finds , in mathematical prose for instance , several necessary conditions that , taken together , constitute a sufficient condition ( i.e . , individually necessary and jointly sufficient ) , as shown in example 5 . ; example 1 : for it to be true that '' john is a bachelor '' , it is necessary that it be also true that he is : unmarried , : male , : adult , : since to state '' john is a bachelor '' implies john has each of those three additional predicates . ; example 2 : for the whole numbers greater than two , being odd is necessary to being prime , since two is the only whole number that is both even and prime . ; example 3 : consider thunder , the sound caused by lightning . one says that thunder is necessary for lightning , since lightning never occurs without thunder . whenever there is lightning , there is thunder . the thunder does not cause the lightning ( since lightning causes thunder ) , but because lightning always comes with thunder , we say that thunder is necessary for lightning . ( that is , in its formal sense , necessity does n't imply causality . ) ; example 4 : being at least 30 years old is necessary for serving in the u.s . senate . if you are under 30 years old , then it is impossible for you to be a senator . that is , if you are a senator , it follows that you must be at least 30 years old . ; example 5 : in algebra , for some set s together with an operation \star to form a group , it is necessary that \star be associative . it is also necessary that s include a special element e such that for every x in s , it is the case that e \star x and x \star e both equal x . it is also necessary that for every x in s there exist a corresponding element x & prime ; , such that both x \star x & prime ; and x & prime ; \star x equal the special element e . none of these three necessary conditions by itself is sufficient , but the conjunction of the three is . sufficiency . if p is sufficient for q , then knowing p to be true is adequate grounds to conclude that q is true ; however , knowing p to be false does not meet a minimal need to conclude that q is false . the logical relation is , as before , expressed as '' if p , then q '' or '' p ⇒ q '' . this can also be expressed as '' p only if q '' , '' p implies q '' or several other variants . it may be the case that several sufficient conditions , when taken together , constitute a single necessary condition ( i.e . , individually sufficient and jointly necessary ) , as illustrated in example 5 . ; example 1 : '' john is a king '' implies that john is male . so knowing that john is a king is sufficient to knowing that he is a male . ; example 2 : a number 's being divisible by 4 is sufficient ( but not necessary ) for it to be even , but being divisible by 2 is both sufficient and necessary . ; example 3 : an occurrence of thunder is a sufficient condition for the occurrence of lightning in the sense that hearing thunder , and unambiguously recognizing it as such , justifies concluding that there has been a lightning bolt . ; example 4 : if the u.s . congress passes a bill , the president 's signing of the bill is sufficient to make it law . note that the case whereby the president did not sign the bill , e.g . through exercising a presidential veto , does not mean that the bill has not become a law ( for example , it could still have become a law through a congressional override ) . ; example 5 : that the center of a playing card should be marked with a single large spade ( ♠ ) is sufficient for the card to be an ace . three other sufficient conditions are that the center of the card be marked with a single diamond ( ♦ ) , heart ( ♥ ) , or club ( ♣ ) . none of these conditions is necessary to the card 's being an ace , but their disjunction is , since no card can be an ace without fulfilling at least ( in fact , exactly ) one of these conditions . relationship between necessity and sufficiency . a condition can be either necessary or sufficient without being the other . for instance , being a mammal ( n ) is necessary but not sufficient to being human ( s ) , and that a number x is rational ( s ) is sufficient but not necessary to x being a real number ( n ) ( since there are real numbers that are not rational ) . a condition can be both necessary and sufficient . for example , at present , '' today is the fourth of july '' is a necessary and sufficient condition for '' today is independence day in the united states '' . similarly , a necessary and sufficient condition for invertibility of a matrix m is that m has a nonzero determinant . mathematically speaking , necessity and sufficiency are dual to one another . for any statements s and n , the assertion that '' n is necessary for s '' is equivalent to the assertion that '' s is sufficient for n '' . another facet of this duality is that , as illustrated above , conjunctions ( using '' and '' ) of necessary conditions may achieve sufficiency , while disjunctions ( using '' or '' ) of sufficient conditions may achieve necessity . for a third facet , identify every mathematical predicate n with the set t ( n ) of objects , events , or statements for which n holds true ; then asserting the necessity of n for s is equivalent to claiming that t ( n ) is a superset of t ( s ) , while asserting the sufficiency of s for n is equivalent to claiming that t ( s ) is a subset of t ( n ) . simultaneous necessity and sufficiency . to say that p is necessary and sufficient for q is to say two things : that p is necessary for q , p \leftarrow q , and that p is sufficient for q , p \rightarrow q . equivalently , it may be understood to say that p and q is necessary for the other , p \rightarrow q \land q \rightarrow p , which can also be stated as each is sufficient for or implies the other . one may summarize any , and thus all , of these cases by the statement '' p if and only if q '' , which is denoted by p \leftrightarrow q , whereas cases tell us that p \leftrightarrow q is identical to p \rightarrow q \land q \rightarrow p . for example , in graph theory a graph g is called bipartite if it is possible to assign to each of its vertices the color black or white in such a way that every edge of g has one endpoint of each color . and for any graph to be bipartite , it is a necessary and sufficient condition that it contain no odd-length cycles . thus , discovering whether a graph has any odd cycles tells one whether it is bipartite and conversely . a philosopher stanford university primer , 2006 . might characterize this state of affairs thus : '' although the concepts of bipartiteness and absence of odd cycles differ in intension , they have identical extension . '' meanings , in this sense , are often called intensions , and things designated , extensions . contexts in which extension is all that matters are , naturally , called extensional , while contexts in which extension is not enough are intensional . mathematics is typically extensional throughout . '' stanford university primer , 2006 . in mathematics , theorems are often stated in the form '' p is true if and only if q is true '' . their proofs normally first prove sufficiency , e.g . p \rightarrow q . secondly , the opposite is proven , q \rightarrow p either directly , assuming q is true and demonstrating that the q circle is located within p , or contrapositively , that is demonstrating that stepping outside circle of p , we fall out the q : assuming not p , not q results . this proves that the circles for q and p match on the venn diagrams above . because , as explained in previous section , necessity of one for the other is equivalent to sufficiency of the other for the first one , e.g . p \leftarrow q is equivalent to q \rightarrow p , if p is necessary and sufficient for q , then q is necessary and sufficient for p . we can write p \leftrightarrow q \equiv q \leftrightarrow p and say that the statements '' p is true if and only if q , is true '' and '' q is true if and only if p is true '' are equivalent . see also . causality closed concept material implication ( disambiguation ) principle of sufficient reason wason selection task . argument forms involving necessary and sufficient conditions . . valid forms of argument . modus ponens p1 ) if a then b p2 ) a c ) therefore b modus tollens p1 ) if a then b p2 ) not-b c ) therefore not-a hypothetical syllogism p1 ) if a then b p2 ) if b then c c ) therefore if a then c disjunctive syllogism p1 ) a or b p2 ) not-a ( or not-b ) c ) therefore b ( or a ) constructive dilemma p1 ) a or b p2 ) if a then c p3 ) if b then d c ) therefore c or d . invalid forms of argument ( i.e . fallacies ) . affirming the consequent denying the antecedent . references . external links . critical thinking web tutorial : necessary and sufficient conditions simon fraser university : concepts with examples