Mort Walker

early life . walker was born in el dorado , kansas , as the third of four children in the family . his siblings were peggy w . harman ( 1915–2012 ) , robin ellis walker ( 1918–2013 ) and marilou w . white ( b . 1927 ) . after a couple of years , his family moved to amarillo , texas , and later to kansas city , missouri , in late 1927 , where his father , robin adair walker ( d . 1950 ) , was an architect , while his mother , carolyn richards walker ( d . 1970 ) , worked as a newspaper staff illustrator . he was of scottish , irish , and english descent . one of his ancestors was a doctor aboard the mayflower . during his elementary school years , he drew for a student newspaper . he attended northeast high school , where he was a cheerleader , school newspaper editor , yearbook art editor , stage actor in a radio show and ran neighborhood teen center that belonged to several organizations . he had his first comic published at age 11 and sold his first cartoon at 12 . at age 14 , he regularly sold gag cartoons to child 's life , flying aces , and inside detective magazines . when he was 15 , he drew a comic strip , the lime juicers , for the weekly kansas city journal , and working as a staff artist the same time for an industrial publisher . at age 18 , he was the chief editorial designer for hallmark brothers ( later hallmark cards ) and was instrumental in changing the company 's card from cuddly bears to gag cartoons , which was more suitable for soldiers . graduating from northeast high school , he attended one year at kansas city junior college in 1942–43 before going to the university of missouri . walker 's physical presence in columbia is noted by the shack , which was a rambling burger joint behind jesse hall on conley avenue . images resembling the interior of the shack appeared in beetle bailey cartoons and is mentioned by name in the september 14 , 1950 beetle bailey strip . walker visited the shack on return trips to columbia with the last being to the original structure in 1978 . the shack was destroyed in a fire in 1988 and walker returned in 2010 for dedication of a replica of the building in the student center with dining area now formally called '' mort 's '' . a life-sized bronze statue of beetle bailey stands in front of the alumni center which is near the shack . in 1943 , walker was drafted into the united states army and served in italy , where he was an intelligence and investigating officer and was also in charge of an allied camp for 10,000 german pows . after the war he was posted to italy where he was in charge of an italian guard company . anderson , captain john d . & walker , mort mort walker : conversations univ . press of mississippi , january 28 , 2005 , p . 35 he was discharged as a first lieutenant in 1947 . he graduated in 1948 from the university of missouri , where he was the editor and art director of the college 's humor magazine , showme , and was president of the local kappa sigma chapter . . comic strips . after graduation , walker went to new york to pursue a career in cartooning . he began doing spider , a one-panel series for the saturday evening post , about a lazy , laid-back college student . when he decided he could make more money doing a multi-panel comic strip , spider morphed into beetle bailey , eventually distributed by king features syndicate to 1,800 newspapers in more than 50 countries for a combined readership of 200 million daily . spider in 1954 , walker and dik browne teamed to launch hi and lois , a spin-off of beetle bailey ( lois was beetle 's sister ) . under the pseudonym '' addison '' , walker began boner 's ark in 1968 . other comic strips created by walker include gamin and patches , gamin and patches at don markstein 's toonopedia . archived from the original on august 1 , 2016 . mrs . fitz 's flats , the evermores ( with johnny sajem ) , '' newswatch : evermores debut , '' the comics journal 73 ( july 1982 ) . sam 's strip , and sam and silo ( the last two with jerry dumas ) . in 1974 , walker opened the museum of cartoon art , the first museum devoted to the art of comics . it was initially located in greenwich , connecticut , and rye brook , new york , before moving to boca raton , florida , in 1992 . during his life he drew special drawings for individuals , in particular for those who were ill . from previous marriages , walker and his wife , catherine , had ten children between them . walker 's sons brian and greg walker produce the hi and lois strip with chance browne . '' on today 's comics page in the advocate and greenwich time , beetle bailey offers a salute along with the likes of hi and lois.which is produced by walker 's sons brian and greg walker and chance browne , the son of the late comics legend dik browne '' . mort walker and jason whiton mort walker : conversations , jackson : university press of mississippi , 2005 . ( p . 193 ) . books . in addition to books about comics and children 's books , walker has collected his strips into 92 '' beetle bailey '' paperbacks and 35 '' hi and lois '' paperbacks , plus writing his autobiography , mort walker 's scrapbook : celebrating a life of love and laughter . in his book the lexicon of comicana ( 1980 ) , written as a satire look at the devices cartoonists use , walker invented a vocabulary called symbolia . for example , walker coined the term '' squeans '' to describe the starbusts and little circles that appear around a cartoon 's head to indicate intoxication . the typographical symbols that stand for profanity , which appear in dialogue balloons in the place of actual dialogue , walker called '' grawlixes '' . in 2006 , he launched a 24-page magazine , the best of times , distributed free throughout connecticut and available online . it features artwork , puzzles , editorial cartoons , ads , and a selection of articles , comics and columns syndicated by king features . his son , neal walker , was the editor and publisher . between 2006 and 2010 , they published 27 issues . the best of times . exhibitions . in september 2000 , the university of missouri staged a beetle bailey 50th-anniversary exhibition in the grand concourse of the elmer ellis library , displaying original daily and sunday comics , published reprints and poster-size lithography of selected strips . . awards . in 1974 , walker founded the national cartoon museum , and in 1989 was inducted into its museum of cartoon art hall of fame . he received the reuben award of 1953 for beetle bailey , the national cartoonists society 's humor strip award for 1966 and 1969 , the gold t-square award in 1999 , the e . c . segar award for 1977 and 1999 , and numerous other awards . in 1978 , walker received the american legion 's fourth estate award , and in 2000 , he was given the decoration for distinguished civilian service by the united states army . he was awarded the inkpot award in 1979 . inkpot award walker received the sparky award for lifetime achievement from the cartoon art museum at the 2010 new york comic con . on september 29 , 2017 , walker was honored at yankee stadium , during the 7th-inning stretch , for his service in world war ii . . personal life and death . walker was married in 1949 to his first wife , jean suffill , whom he had met during his time at the university of missouri . they had seven children : greg , brian , polly , morgan , marjorie , neal , and roger . the marriage later ended in a divorce in 1985 . his second wife was catherine prentice , whom he married on august 24 , 1985 . walker had three step-children via cathy and her previous marriage to cartoonist john prentice . walker died from complications of pneumonia on january 27 , 2018 , at his home in stamford , connecticut . he was 94 years old . he was interred at willowbrook cemetery in westport , connecticut . memories of mort walker . notes . references . . external links . 'beetle bailey ' cartoonist mort walker dies at 94 from toons mag national cartoonists society : mort walker mort walker papers 1950-1968 at syracuse university ( primary source material ) mort walker collection at university of missouri ( primary source material )