Petal

corolla . the role of the corolla in plant evolution has been studied extensively since charles darwin postulated a theory of the origin of elongated corollae and corolla tubes . a corolla of separate petals , without fusion of individual segments , is apopetalous . if the petals are free from one another in the corolla , the plant is polypetalous or choripetalous ; while if the petals are at least partially fused , it is gamopetalous or sympetalous . in the case of fused tepals , the term is syntepalous . the corolla in some plants forms a tube . variations . petals can differ dramatically in different species . the merosity may hold clues to a plant 's classification . for example , flowers on eudicots ( the largest group of dicots ) most frequently have four or five petals while flowers on monocots have three or six petals , although there are many exceptions to this rule . the petal whorl or corolla may be either radially or bilaterally symmetrical ( see symmetry in biology and floral symmetry ) . if all of the petals are essentially identical in size and shape , the flower is said to be regular or actinomorphic ( meaning '' ray-formed '' ) . many flowers are symmetrical in only one plane ( i.e . , symmetry is bilateral ) and are termed irregular or zygomorphic ( meaning '' yoke- '' or '' pair-formed '' ) . in irregular flowers , other floral parts may be modified from the regular form , but the petals show the greatest deviation from radial symmetry . examples of zygomorphic flowers may be seen in orchids and members of the fabaceae . in many plants of the asteraceae such as the sunflower , helianthus annuus , the circumference of the flower head is composed of ray florets . each ray floret is anatomically an individual flower with a single large petal . florets in the center of the disc typically have no or very reduced petals . in some plants such as narcissus the lower part of the petals or tepals are fused to form a floral cup ( hypanthium ) above the ovary , and from which the petals proper extend . petal often consists of two parts : the upper , broad part , similar to leaf blade , also called the blade and the lower part , narrow , similar to leaf petiole , called the claw , separated from each other at the limb . claws are developed in petals of some flowers of the family brassicaceae , such as erysimum cheiri . the inception and further development of petals show a great variety of patterns . sattler , r . 1973 . organogenesis of flowers . a photographic text-atlas . university of toronto press . petals of different species of plants vary greatly in color or color pattern , both in visible light and in ultraviolet . such patterns often function as guides to pollinators and are variously known as nectar guides , pollen guides , and floral guides . genetics . the genetics behind the formation of petals , in accordance with the abc model of flower development , are that sepals , petals , stamens , and carpels are modified versions of each other . it appears that the mechanisms to form petals evolved very few times ( perhaps only once ) , rather than evolving repeatedly from stamens . . significance of pollination . pollination is an important step in the sexual reproduction of higher plants . pollen is produced by the male flower or by the male organs of monoecious flowers . pollen does not move on its own and thus requires wind or animal pollinators to disperse the pollen to the stigma ( botany ) of the same or nearby flowers . however , pollinators are rather selective in determining the flowers they choose to pollinate . this develops competition between flowers and as a result flowers must provide incentives to appeal to pollinators ( unless the flower self-pollinates or is involved in wind pollination ) . petals play a major role in competing to attract pollinators . henceforth pollination dispersal could occur and the survival of many species of flowers could prolong . functions and purposes . petals have various functions and purposes depending on the type of plant . in general , petals operate to protect some parts of the flower and attract/repel specific pollinators . function . this is where the positioning of the flower petals are located on the flower is the corolla e.g . the buttercup having shiny yellow flower petals which contain guidelines amongst the petals in aiding the pollinator towards the nectar . pollinators have the ability to determine specific flowers they wish to pollinate . cares-suarez , r , poch , t , acevedo , r.f , acosta-bravo , i , pimentel , c , espinoza , c , cares , r.a , munoz , p , gonzalez , a.v , botto-mahan , c ( 2011 ) do pollinators respond in a dose-dependent manner to flower herbivory ? : an experimental assessment in loasa tricolor ( loasaceae ) . gayana botanica , volume 68 , pages 176-181 using incentives flowers draw pollinators and set up a mutual relation between each other in which case the pollinators will remember to always guard and pollinate these flowers ( unless incentives are not consistently met and competition prevails ) . . scent . the petals could produce different scents to allure desirable pollinators or repel undesirable pollinators . some flowers will also mimic the scents produced by materials such as decaying meat , to attract pollinators to them . . color . various color traits are used by different petals that could attract pollinators that have poor smelling abilities , or that only come out at certain parts of the day . some flowers can change the color of their petals as a signal to mutual pollinators to approach or keep away . science learning hub . ( 2012 ) . the university of waikato . '' attracting pollinators '' . date retrieved : august 2013 . . shape and size . furthermore , the shape and size of the flower/petals are important in selecting the type of pollinators they need . for example , large petals and flowers will attract pollinators at a large distance or that are large themselves . collectively the scent , color , and shape of petals all play a role in attracting/repelling specific pollinators and providing suitable conditions for pollinating . some pollinators include insects , birds , bats , and wind . in some petals , a distinction can be made between a lower narrowed , stalk-like basal part referred to as the claw , and a wider distal part referred to as the blade ( or limb ) . often the claw and blade are at an angle with one another . types of pollination . wind pollination . wind-pollinated flowers often have small , dull petals and produce little or no scent . some of these flowers will often have no petals at all . flowers that depend on wind pollination will produce large amounts of pollen because most of the pollen scattered by the wind tends to not reach other flowers . . attracting insects . flowers have various regulatory mechanisms to attract insects . one such helpful mechanism is the use of color guiding marks . insects such as the bee or butterfly can see the ultraviolet marks which are contained on these flowers , acting as an attractive mechanism which is not visible towards the human eye . many flowers contain a variety of shapes acting to aid with the landing of the visiting insect and also influence the insect to brush against anthers and stigmas ( parts of the flower ) . one such example of a flower is the pohutukawa ( metrosideros excelsa ) which acts to regulate color in a different way . the pohutukawa contains small petals also having bright large red clusters of stamens . another attractive mechanism for flowers is the use of scents which are highly attractive to humans . one such example is the rose . on the other hand , some flowers produce the smell of rotting meat and are attractive to insects such as flies . darkness is another factor that flowers have adapted to as nighttime conditions limit vision and color-perception . fragrancy can be especially useful for flowers that are pollinated at night by moths and other flying insects . . attracting birds . flowers are also pollinated by birds and must be large and colorful to be visible against natural scenery . in new zealand , such bird–pollinated native plants include : kowhai ( sophora species ) , flax ( phormium tenax ) and kaka beak ( clianthus puniceus ) . flowers adapt the mechanism on their petals to change color in acting as a communicative mechanism for the bird to visit . an example is the tree fuchsia ( fuchsia excorticata ) which are green when needing to be pollinated and turn red for the birds to stop coming and pollinating the flower . . bat-pollinated flowers . flowers can be pollinated by short-tailed bats . an example of this is the dactylanthus ( dactylanthus taylorii ) . this plant has its home under the ground acting the role of a parasite on the roots of forest trees . the dactylanthus has only its flowers pointing to the surface and the flowers lack color but have the advantage of containing much nectar and a strong scent . these act as a useful mechanism in attracting the bat . physics.org ( 2012 ) . the university of adelaide . '' flightless parrots , burrowing bats helped parasitic hades flower '' . date retrieved august 2013 .