The Phantom

publication history . creation . after the success of mandrake the magician , king features syndicate asked falk to develop a new feature . his first effort was to write and draw a strip about king arthur and his knights . when king features rejected the strip , falk developed the phantom , a mysterious , costumed crime-fighter . he planned the first few months of the story , and drew the first two weeks as a sample . fascinated by myths and legends ( such as king arthur and el cid ) and the modern fictional characters zorro , tarzan and the jungle book mowgli , falk envisioned the character as wealthy playboy jimmy wells by day and the crime-fighting phantom by night . during his first story , '' the singh brotherhood '' , before disclosing that wells was the phantom , falk changed the setting to a jungle and made the phantom an apparently immortal , mythic figure . thinking that there were already too many characters called '' the phantom '' ( including the phantom detective and the phantom of the opera ) , falk considered calling his hero '' the gray ghost '' . however , he could not find a name he liked better and decided to stay with the phantom . in the a & e american cable tv documentary the phantom : comic strip crusader , the phantom : comic strip crusader , an a & e biography of the phantom aired on may 31 , 1996 falk explained that greek busts inspired him to omit the phantom 's pupils when the character was wearing his mask . he incorrectly believed that ancient greek busts had no pupils ( they were painted on originally and faded with time ) which he said gave them an '' inhuman , awe-inspiring appearance . '' in an interview for comic book marketplace , falk said the phantom 's skin-tight costume was inspired by robin hood , who wore tights in films and onstage . comic book marketplace no . 121 , published may 2005 by gemstone publishing falk was a shakespeare enthusiast and the comic included several references to shakespeare . these include the third phantom playing juliet in the original premiere of romeo and juliet , as well as marrying shakespeare 's niece . . newspaper strips . the phantom began as a daily strip on february 17 , 1936 with '' the singh brotherhood '' , written by falk and drawn by him for two weeks and then by ray moore ( assistant to artist phil davis on mandrake the magician ) . that year , the phantom was serialized in the australian woman 's mirror . a sunday phantom strip was added on may 28 , 1939 . during world war ii falk joined the office of war information , where he became chief of the radio foreign-language division . moore also served during the war and left the strip to his assistant , wilson mccoy . when moore returned he worked sporadically on the strip until 1949 , when mccoy succeeded him . during mccoy 's tenure , the phantom appeared in thousands of newspapers worldwide and was smuggled by boat into nazi-occupied norway during the war ; '' phantom '' was a password for the norwegian resistance movement . the phantom : comic strip crusader ( 1996 a & e biography ) mccoy died unexpectedly in 1961 . carmine infantino and bill lignante ( who later drew several phantom stories for comic books ) filled in before a successor was found in sy barry . during barry 's early years he and falk modernized the strip , laying the foundation for what is considered the phantom 's modern look . under barry , bangalla became a democracy and the character of president lamanda luaga was introduced . barry worked on the phantom for over 30 years until his 1994 retirement , drawing a total of about 11,000 strips . his longtime assistant george olesen remained on the strip as penciller , with keith williams inking the daily strip . the sunday strip was inked by eric doescher until fred fredericks succeeded him in 1995 . falk continued to script the phantom and mandrake until his death on march 13 , 1999 . his last daily and sunday strip stories , '' terror at the opera '' and '' the kidnappers '' , were finished by his wife elizabeth after her husband pulled off his oxygen mask in the hospital to dictate the storyline . after falk 's death king features cooperated with european comic publisher egmont , publisher of the swedish fantomen magazine ( which changed from publishing phantom stories in comic-book format to providing the newspaper strip as well ) by adapting their own phantom comic-book stories into the strip format . fantomen writers tony depaul and claes reimerthi alternated as writers of the newspaper strip after falk died , with depaul handling the daily strips and reimerthi the sunday ones . depaul would later become the strip 's sole writer . some stories were adapted from those originally published in fantomen . in 2000 , olesen and fredericks retired from the sunday strip . it was continued by comic-book artist graham nolan , who had drawn three fantomen covers . in early 2005 olesen and williams left the daily strip after olesen retired , and artist paul ryan ( who had worked on the fantomen comic stories and had been a fan of the character since childhood ) took over the daily strip . ryan succeeded nolan as artist on the sunday strip in 2007 . on july 31 , 2011 , eduardo barreto became the sunday-page artist . he died after only a few months , and ryan temporarily took over the sunday page again on january 15 , 2012 ( which featured a memorial to barreto ) . ryan also did the following week 's strip , before terry beatty became barreto 's replacement . ryan died at his home unexpectedly on march 7 , 2016 . mike manley succeeded ryan as artist on the phantom , beginning with the strip dated may 30 , 2016 . beatty stepped down as sunday artist in 2017 , and was replaced by jeff weigel . internationally . . united states . the phantom has been published by a number of publishers in the united states . during the 1940s the strips were reprinted in ace comics , published by david mckay publications . harvey comics published the phantom during the 1950s . in 1962 gold key comics took over , followed by king comics in 1966 and charlton in 1969 . by 1977 , a total of 73 issues were published . principal phantom artists during this period were bill lignante , don newton , jim aparo and pat boyette . in 1943 , columbia pictures released the 15-episode serial the phantom starring tom tyler as '' the phantom '' and jeanne bates as '' diana palmer '' . dc comics published a phantom comic book from 1988 to 1990 . the initial may–august 1988 miniseries was written by peter david , penciled by joe orlando , and inked by dennis janke . a subsequent series , written by mark verheiden and drawn by luke mcdonnell , ran for 13 issues from march 1989 to march 1990 . in the series , the phantom fought racism , toxic dumping , hunger and modern-day piracy . according to verheiden , the series ended as much because of licensing issues as falling sales . in the final panels of issue 13 , the phantom marries diana . in 1987 , marvel comics published a four-issue miniseries written by stan lee and based on the defenders of the earth tv series . another three-issue marvel miniseries , the phantom : the ghost who walks ( february–april 1995 ) followed which was written and drawn by david de vries and glenn lumsden ; it featured the 22nd phantom with an updated , high-tech costume . marvel later released a four-part miniseries ( may–august 1995 ) , pencilled by spider-man co-creator steve ditko , based on the phantom 2040 tv series . one issue featured a pin-up by the original two spider-man signature artists , ditko and john romita , sr . in the united states and australia , the phantom was released in theaters as a major motion picture starring billy zane as “ the phantom/kit walker , ” the 21st phantom . opened june 7 , 1996 nationwide in the aforementioned markets . moonstone books published phantom graphic novels beginning in 2002 . five books , written by tom defalco , ben raab and ron goulart with art by mike collins were published . in 2003 , moonstone introduced a phantom comic-book series written by raab , rafael nieves and chuck dixon , and drawn by pat quinn , jerry decaire , nick derington , rich burchett , and ericj . after 11 issues mike bullock took over the scripting , with gabriel rearte and carlos magno creating the artwork before silvestre szilagyi became the regular artist in 2007 . bullock 's stories often feature topical issues , based on actual african conflicts . in a 2007 three-part story arc , '' invisible children '' , the phantom fights a fictional warlord called '' him '' ( loosely based on joseph kony ) . in 2006 moonstone published a retcon of the phantom 's origin , '' legacy '' , by raab and quinn . three years later the company reintroduced the series as the phantom : ghost who walks , beginning with issue 0 ( a retelling of the first phantom 's origin ) . the aim was to make the comic darker , grittier and more realistic , similar to the 1930s stories by lee falk and ray moore . it updated the phantom , giving him modern accessories , and introduced a number of supporting characters and villains . in the series , the phantom fights reality-based enemies such as modern terrorists , organ trade and somali pirates . '' mike bullock interview & nbsp ; – the phantom : the ghost who walks '' , ideology of madness ( fan site ) , february 6 , 2009 dynamite entertainment introduced a monthly comic-book series , the last phantom , in august 2010 . dynamite 's phantom sells out the series was written by scott beatty and drawn by eduardo ferigato , with covers painted by alex ross . in 2013 the phantom appeared in dynamite 's five-issue miniseries , kings watch . in the series , written by jeff parker and drawn by marc laming , the phantom joins flash gordon and mandrake the magician to fight ming the merciless and prevent his attempt to take over the planet . it was followed by the 2015 five-issue miniseries king : the phantom in which lothar as the new phantom looks for the rightful heir to the legacy . in 2016 started a new crossover of king features characters ( the phantom , mandrake the magician , flash gordon , prince valiant , jungle jim ) , kings quest . in 2014 hermes press announced that it would publish a phantom comic-book miniseries with new content , written by peter david and illustrated by sal velluto , scheduled for publication in november 2014 . it debuted october 31 , 2014 . for free comic book day 2015 , hermes published a phantom comic book with art by bill lignante and samples of the new miniseries . nordic region . egmont publications has published original phantom stories in a fortnightly phantom comic book in sweden as fantomen , in denmark and norway as fantomet and in finland as mustanaamio ( black mask ) . the first issue of fantomen was dated october 1950 , and over 1,600 issues have been published . the first story created originally for fantomen was published in 1963 , and there are a total of over 900 fantomen stories . the average fantomen story is over 30 pages , compared to 20–24 pages for most american comics . artists and writers who have created stories for fantomen include dick giordano , donne avenell , heiner bade , david bishop , georges bess , jaime vallvé , joan boix , tony depaul , ulf granberg , ben raab , rolf gohs , scott goodall , eirik ildahl , kari leppänen , hans lindahl , janne lundström , cesar spadari , bob mcleod , jean-yves mitton , lennart moberg , claes reimerthi , paul ryan , alex saviuk , graham nolan , romano felmang and norman worker , and they have been nicknamed '' team fantomen '' . the team have experimented with the character and his surroundings , with singh brotherhood leader sandal singh taking over as president of bangalla the new president , by claes reimerthi and sal velluto and the phantom and diana having marriage problems . diana 's crisis , by tony de paul and felmang in 2018 , the norwegian branch of egmont issued a statement that the norwegian fantomet edition would get cancelled at the end of 2018 , det siste fantomenbladet , statement from the norwegian editors . ( norwegian ) thus leaving the swedish edition as the only remaining edition in scandinavia . australia . in australia , the australian woman 's mirror began publishing the strip in 1936 and frew publications has published a fortnightly phantom comic book since 1948 , celebrating 60 years of uninterrupted publication in september 2008 . the comic that will not die , the australian , september 20 , 2008 although frew 's comic book primarily contains reprints from the newspaper strips , fantomen ( translated into english ) and other phantom comic books , it has occasionally included original stories drawn by australian artists such as keith chatto . the editor-in-chief was jim shepherd until his death . frew 's the phantom is the longest-running comic-book series with the character in the world , and australia 's bestselling comic book . '' the phantom is australia 's favourite comic hero , regularly out-selling the flashier , glossier batman , superman and spider-man by as much as ten-to-one '' . russell marks , '' the legend and the phantom '' . overland magazine , june 14 , 2013 . retrieved december 17 , 2015 . richard rae , ‘ the comic book industry in australia ’ , in toby burrows and grant stone ( eds . ) comics in australia and new zealand : the collections , the collectors , the creators . binghamton , ny : haworth press , 1994 , ( pp.23 ) frew phantom comics appear in a number of sydney royal easter show , royal adelaide show , melbourne show and perth royal show showbags . in 2013 publisher jim shepherd , who had bought the rights from the original owners during the late 1980s , died of a heart attack . shepherd had taken over the company and introduced some minor changes to placate king features , which had become unhappy at frew 's treatment of its character . shepherd 's changes included glossy covers ( replacing the standard newsprint covers ) , brief editorials , regular 100-page specials and , most significantly , an annual special of between 200 and 300 pages which included multiple stories and a standalone '' replica '' reprint of a very early frew edition . shepherd also embarked on an ambitious project to reprint the entire backlist of lee falk stories in their original formats : frew 's reprints had often been heavily edited to fit its 32-page format . following shepherd 's death , frew and the phantom were continued by shepherd 's wife judith until she sold the business to artist glenn ford and rene white in 2016 . since then , the new '' frew crew '' ( with new publisher dudley hogarth ) have introduced a range of innovations : kid phantom , a standalone quarterly all-colour , glossy comic book aimed at children , with original material , illustrated by dr paul mason and written by andrew constant . giant-size phantom , a standalone quarterly comic book series reprinting frew 's other characters from the 1950s as well as the phantom . the title revives an earlier title published by frew between 1957 and 1960 . phantom 's world , a standalone quarterly comic book series which features phantom stories from around the world , often seen for the first time in english , as well as original material . new zealand . king features sold the phantom to a number of new zealand newspapers , included the new zealand herald . the phantom also appeared in a successful comic from the wellington-based feature publications during the 1950s . '' wellington 's feature publications was continuing to build on its successful line of re-packed comic strips with jungle jim and mandrake the magician , but it was lee falk 's other famous creation , the phantom , which became a sales phenomenon . the reprint series ran for 550 issues , from 1950 to 1960 , making the jungle hero an icon for an entire generation of new zealand children '' . adrian kinnaird , from earth 's end : the best of new zealand comics . auckland : random house new zealand , 2013 . , p . 31 the frew comics are also available in new zealand . india . in india , the phantom first appeared in the illustrated weekly of india in the 1950s . in 1964 , the indian publisher indrajal comics began publishing a phantom comic book in english . karline mclain , india 's immortal comic books . indiana university press , 2009 , , ( p . 30 , 36 ) . '' indrajal published mainly stories from king features , most famously including lee falk 's mandrake and phantom '' . jeremy stoll , '' telling stories and building community : making comics in india '' . marg ( magazine ) , december 1 , 2014 . later indrajal would also publish the phantom in several indian languages . over the years , other indian publishers have printed phantom comic books , the most prominent being diamond comics , euro books ( formerly egmont imagination india ) , and rani comics . the telugu regional daily eenadu published translated versions of phantom comics during the early days of its sunday supplements . phantom is also published in bengali and hindi language in local newspapers . in hindi it is published by indrajal comics as character name vanbhairav . they have also published it in bengali as character name , betal . in the early 1990s , regal publishers from kerala started publishing phantom comics in malayalam language . after a gap , regal publishers have again started publishing phantom comics in malayalam in 2019 . from august 2020 onwards regal publishers have started publishing phantom comics in english . presently , regal publishers is the only publisher in india publishing phantom comics . leading bengali publishing house , anandabazar patrika , had published the comics in bengali , under the character name , aranyadeb ( the god of the jungle ) , in their elite magazine , desh , later in their children 's periodical , anandamela , and continue to publish the strips in their bengali newspaper , anandabazar patrika . other countries . italian publisher nerbini reprinted the phantom strip in its weekly comic newspaper l ’ avventuroso , starting in issue 101 , september 13 , 1936 . in 1939 , roberto lemmi and emilio fancelli started to produce some new stories . italian publisher fratelli spada produced original phantom stories for their l'uomo mascherato ( the masked man ) series of comic books during the 1960s and 1970s . contributing artists included raul buzzelli , mario caria , umberto sammarini ( '' usam '' ) , germano ferri , senio pratesi , angelo r . todaro , and romano felmang . ferri , usam , felmang and caria later worked for fantomen . brazilian publisher rge and german publisher bastei produced original phantom stories for their comic books ; in brazil , the phantom is known as o fantasma . in 1939 , the phantom appeared in the second story of the yugoslav comic zigomar , '' zigomar versus the phantom '' , as an opponent and then an ally of the title character . in south africa , the phantom ran in afrikaans newspapers as die skim . in the republic of ireland , the phantom appeared in both the irish independent and sunday independent newspapers during the 1950s and 1960s . '' ireland 's most popular cartoon character , the phantom '' . advertisement in the sunday independent , november 20 , 1960 ( p.22 ) also in 1939 , the phantom appeared in turkey as '' kizilmaske '' , which translates to '' red mask '' in turkish , by publishers tay yayinlari . originally , the publishers colored the hero 's costume in red on the covers , and decided to stay with that color throughout the history of the comic in turkey , rather than use the original purple coloring . under the name '' kizilmaske '' and with color covers drawn by turkish artists , older lee falk stories of the phantom has since appeared in turkish comic books primarily in black and white . reprints . the entire run of the phantom newspaper strip was reprinted in australia by frew publications , and edited versions of most stories have been published in the scandinavian phantom comics . in the united states , the following phantom stories ( written by lee falk ) have been reprinted by woody gelman ( np ) , pacific comics club ( pcc ) or comics revue ( cr ) : '' the sky band '' , ray moore , november 9 , 1936 , cr '' the diamond hunters '' , ray moore , april 12 , 1937 , pcc '' little tommy '' , ray moore , september 20 , 1937 , pcc '' the prisoner of the himalayas '' , ray moore , february 7 , 1938 , np '' adventure in algiers '' , ray moore , june 20 , 1938 , cr '' the shark 's nest '' , ray moore , july 25 , 1938 , pcc '' fishers of pearls '' , ray moore , november 7 , 1938 , cr '' the slave traders '' , ray moore , january 30 , 1939 , cr '' the mysterious girl '' , ray moore , may 8 , 1939 , cr '' the golden circle '' , ray moore , september 4 , 1939 , pcc '' the seahorse '' , ray moore , january 22 , 1940 , pcc '' the game of alvar '' , ray moore , july 29 , 1940 , pcc '' diana aviatrix '' , ray moore , december 16 , 1940 , pcc '' the phantom 's treasure '' , ray moore , july 14 , 1941 , pcc '' the phantom goes to war '' , ray moore and wilson mccoy , february 2 , 1942 , pcc '' the slave markets of mucar '' , sy barry , august 21 , 1961 , cr in its october 2009 issue , comics revue began reprinting the sunday story '' the return of the sky band '' in color . as of august 2019 , hermes press has reprinted sixteen volumes of phantom dailies and five volumes of phantom sundays . volumes nine and ten of the dailies also carry the color sundays from 1949 to 1951 , when the stories for dailies and sundays were synchronized . more planned . in 2011 hermes began reprinting the complete gold key volumes 1 & 2 with issues 1–17 and king 's complete phantom issues 18–28 comics side by side . the following year , it began reprinting the charlton years : volume one through volume five issues 30–74 ( there is no issue 29 , it was an international publication . ) hermes has also published a full size phantom sunday archives , 1939–1942 . . tribal pop art . during world war ii , soldiers received care packages containing comics . the soldiers stationed in papua new guinea shared these comics , and the phantom became extremely popular among the tribes . the papuan people who could read english would read the stories and share the images with others ( by the 1970s they were available in pidgin , tok pisin ) . the character 's image is often painted on ceremonial shields or alongside other tribal art . this is sometimes referred to as '' tribal pop art . '' . references . external links . the phantom on imdb