Money supply

money creation by commercial banks . commercial banks play a role in the process of money creation , especially under the fractional-reserve banking system used throughout the world . in this system , credit is created whenever a bank gives out a new loan . this is because the loan , when drawn on and spent , mostly finishes up as a deposit in the banking system ( an asset ) , which is counted as part of money supply ( and offsets the loan - which has yet to be repaid ) . after putting aside a part of these deposits as mandated bank reserves , the balance is available for the making of further loans by the bank . this process continues multiple times , and is called the multiplier effect . as the iterations continue , this multiplier is balanced ( or nullified ) by the equal and cumulative value of the loans , between the banks , creating a zero sum gain , and annulling the '' money creation '' claims or fears , that generally do not include or provision for the reality of reciprocating balancing , and net-offsets in their calculations , excluding double entry ( balanced book ) accounting principles . this new money , in net terms , makes up the non-m0 components in the m1-m3 statistics . in short , there are two types of money in a fractional-reserve banking system : central bank money — obligations of a central bank , including currency and central bank depository accounts commercial bank money — obligations of commercial banks , including checking accounts and savings accounts . in the money supply statistics , central bank money is mb while the commercial bank money is divided up into the m1-m3 components . generally , the types of commercial bank money that tend to be valued at lower amounts are classified in the narrow category of m1 while the types of commercial bank money that tend to exist in larger amounts are categorized in m2 and m3 , with m3 having the largest . in the united states , a bank 's reserves consist of u.s . currency held by the bank ( also known as '' vault cash '' 12 c.f.r . sec . 204.2 ( k ) . ) plus the bank 's balances in federal reserve accounts . 12 c.f.r . sec . 204.5 ( a ) . what is vault cash ? definition and meaning . investorwords.com . for this purpose , cash on hand and balances in federal reserve ( '' fed '' ) accounts are interchangeable ( both are obligations of the fed ) . reserves may come from any source , including the federal funds , deposits by the public , and borrowing from the fed itself . . a reserve requirement is a ratio a bank must maintain between deposit liabilities and reserves . frb : reserve requirements . federal reserve bank . reserve requirements do not apply to the amount of money a bank may lend out . the ratio that applies to bank lending is its capital requirement . . open market operations by central banks . central banks can influence the money supply by open market operations . they can increase the money supply by purchasing government securities , such as government bonds or treasury bills . this increases the liquidity in the banking system by converting the illiquid securities of commercial banks into liquid deposits at the central bank . this also causes the price of such securities to rise due to the increased demand , and interest rates to fall . these funds become available to commercial banks for lending , and by the multiplier effect from fractional-reserve banking , loans and bank deposits go up by many times the initial injection of funds into the banking system . in contrast , when the central bank '' tightens '' the money supply , it sells securities on the open market , drawing liquid funds out of the banking system . the prices of such securities fall as supply is increased , and interest rates rise . this also has a multiplier effect . this kind of activity reduces or increases the supply of short term government debt in the hands of banks and the non-bank public , also lowering or raising interest rates . in parallel , it increases or reduces the supply of loanable funds ( money ) and thereby the ability of private banks to issue new money through issuing debt . the simple connection between monetary policy and monetary aggregates such as m1 and m2 changed in the 1970s as the reserve requirements on deposits started to fall with the emergence of money funds , which require no reserves . at present , reserve requirements apply only to '' transactions deposits '' – essentially checking accounts . the vast majority of funding sources used by private banks to create loans are not limited by bank reserves . most commercial and industrial loans are financed by issuing large denomination cds . money market deposits are largely used to lend to corporations who issue commercial paper . consumer loans are also made using savings account , which are not subject to reserve requirements . this means that instead of the value of loans supplied responding passively to monetary policy , we often see it rising and falling with the demand for funds and the willingness of banks to lend . some economists argue that the money multiplier is a meaningless concept , because its relevance would require that the money supply be exogeny , i.e . determined by the monetary authorities via open market operations . if central banks usually target the shortest-term interest rate ( as their policy instrument ) then this leads to the money supply being endogenous . neither commercial nor consumer loans are any longer limited by bank reserves . nor are they directly linked proportional to reserves . between 1995 and 2008 , the value of consumer loans has steadily increased out of proportion to bank reserves . then , as part of the financial crisis , bank reserves rose dramatically as new loans shrank . in recent years , some academic economists renowned for their work on the implications of rational expectations have argued that open market operations are irrelevant . these include robert lucas , jr . , thomas sargent , neil wallace , finn e . kydland , edward c . prescott and scott freeman . keynesian economists point to the ineffectiveness of open market operations in 2008 in the united states , when short-term interest rates went as low as they could go in nominal terms , so that no more monetary stimulus could occur . this zero bound problem has been called the liquidity trap or '' pushing on a string '' ( the pusher being the central bank and the string being the real economy ) . empirical measures in the united states federal reserve system . : see also european central bank for other approaches and a more global perspective . money is used as a medium of exchange , a unit of account , and as a ready store of value . its different functions are associated with different empirical measures of the money supply . there is no single '' correct '' measure of the money supply . instead , there are several measures , classified along a spectrum or continuum between narrow and broad monetary aggregates . narrow measures include only the most liquid assets , the ones most easily used to spend ( currency , checkable deposits ) . broader measures add less liquid types of assets ( certificates of deposit , etc . ) . this continuum corresponds to the way that different types of money are more or less controlled by monetary policy . narrow measures include those more directly affected and controlled by monetary policy , whereas broad money are less closely related to monetary-policy actions . it is a matter of perennial debate as to whether narrower or broader versions of the money supply have a more predictable link to nominal gdp . the different types of money are typically classified as '' m '' s . the '' m '' s usually range from m0 ( narrowest ) to m3 ( broadest ) but which '' m '' s are actually focused on in policy formulation depends on the country 's central bank . the typical layout for each of the '' m '' s is as follows : inflation ( % δp ) is equal to the rate of money growth ( % δ , plus the change in velocity ( % δ , minus the rate of output growth ( % δ . so if in the long run the growth rate of velocity and the growth rate of real gdp are exogenous constants ( the former being dictated by changes in payment institutions and the latter dictated by the growth in the economy ’ s productive capacity ) , then the monetary growth rate and the inflation rate differ from each other by a fixed constant . as before , this equation is only useful if % δ follows regular behavior . it also loses usefulness if the central bank lacks control over % δ . arguments . historically , in europe , the main function of the central bank is to maintain low inflation . in the usa the focus is on both inflation and unemployment . these goals are sometimes in conflict ( according to phillips curve ) . a central bank may attempt to do this by artificially influencing the demand for goods by increasing or decreasing the nation 's money supply ( relative to trend ) , which lowers or raises interest rates , which stimulates or restrains spending on goods and services . an important debate among economists in the second half of the twentieth century concerned the central bank 's ability to predict how much money should be in circulation , given current employment rates and inflation rates . economists such as milton friedman believed that the central bank would always get it wrong , leading to wider swings in the economy than if it were just left alone . this is why they advocated a non-interventionist approach—one of targeting a pre-specified path for the money supply independent of current economic conditions—even though in practice this might involve regular intervention with open market operations ( or other monetary-policy tools ) to keep the money supply on target . the former chairman of the u.s . federal reserve , ben bernanke , suggested in 2004 that over the preceding 10 to 15 years , many modern central banks became relatively adept at manipulation of the money supply , leading to a smoother business cycle , with recessions tending to be smaller and less frequent than in earlier decades , a phenomenon termed '' the great moderation '' speech , bernanke – the great moderation . federal reserve bank ( february 20 , 2004 ) . this theory encountered criticism during the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 . furthermore , it may be that the functions of the central bank may need to encompass more than the shifting up or down of interest rates or bank reserves : these tools , although valuable , may not in fact moderate the volatility of money supply ( or its velocity ) . impact of digital currencies and possible transition to a cashless society . see also . a program for monetary reform american monetary institute bank regulation capital requirement central bank chartalism chicago plan the chicago plan revisited committee on monetary and economic reform core inflation debt levels and flows economics terminology that differs from common usage fiat currency financial capital float fractional-reserve banking fred ( federal reserve economic data ) full reserve banking great contraction index of leading indicators – money supply is a component inflation monetarism monetary base monetary economics monetary reform money circulation money creation money market money demand liquidity preference seigniorage stagflation . references . further reading . article in the new palgrave on money supply by milton friedman do all banks hold reserves , and , if so , where do they hold them ? ( 11/2001 ) what effect does a change in the reserve requirement have on the money supply ? ( 08/2001 ) st . louis fed : monetary aggregates discontinuance of m3 publication investopedia : money zero maturity ( mzm ) . external links . aggregate reserves of depository institutions and the monetary base ( h.3 ) historical h.3 releases money stock measures ( h.6 ) u.s . mzm magnitude and velocity , used as a predictor of inflation data on monetary aggregates in australia monetary statistics on hong kong monetary authority monetary survey from people 's bank of china