Charleroi

landmarks . the belfry , part of the city hall , is included in the list of world heritage sites . the maison dorée was built in 1899 by art nouveau architect alfred frère . its name is derived from the golden sgraffito that adorn the façade . the city is home to several museums of fine art , glass and other disciplines , as well as a significant one specializing in photography , in the mont-sur-marchienne district . in remembrance to the jews of charleroi being murdered by the nazi regime , the german artist gunter demnig has collocated nine stolpersteine in charleroi . economy . the municipality contains an industrial area for electrical engineering and the production of iron , steel , glass and chemicals . charleroi is in the center of a coal basin . even so , due to the widespread loss in industrial power in the area since the 1970s , the area suffered some of the highest unemployment and poverty rates in europe for most of the 1980s and 1990s . however , from the early 2000s , the overall economy of the area has diversified to include health care , transportation and telecommunications . nevertheless , the poverty rates are still significant . education . charleroi is belgium 's biggest city without having its own university . since 1966 , the uclouvain is implemented in charleroi , with three faculties , on its uclouvain charleroi campus based in the city center and in montignies-sur-sambre , including the louvain school of management and , more recently , the louvain school of engineering , organising bachelor 's and master 's degrees , and research . other universities have since started operations in charleroi , including the universities of namur , mons and the université libre de bruxelles . primary and secondary schools . secondary schools include : athénée royal jules destrée athénée royal orsini dewerpe athénée royal les marlaires athénée royal vauban athénée royal yvonne vieslet centre educatif communal secondaire — la garenne institut d'enseignement technique secondaire de l ’ ut institut jean jaurès de l ’ ut centre educatif communal secondaire de couillet-marcinelle institut provincial d ’ enseignement secondaire paramédical la samaritaine . transport . air . the brussels south charleroi airport in gosselies , north of the centre , opened in 1919 as a flight school . how it all started . charleroi-airport.com later , it housed the fairey aircraft-factory building . avions fairey gosselies . baha.be . retrieved on 21 december 2012 . gosselies is now used as an alternate airport for brussels . low-cost carrier ryanair is the largest airline to provide service there ; others include wizz air , jetairfly . seasonal holiday charters also use the airport . a new terminal opened in january 2008 , replacing a much smaller building which had exceeded capacity . brussels is north of charleroi airport . rail . charleroi is connected by train to other belgian major cities through the main charleroi-south railway station . the city also has a secondary railway station , charleroi-west , on the charleroi-to-ottignies line . public transport . public transport is provided by tec ( transport en commun ) , the walloon public transport service . the greater charleroi region is served by bus lines and a light-rail metro system , ( charleroi pre-metro ) . part of the latter is famous for incorporating one of the few remnants of the vicinal , the former belgian national tramway network . métro léger de charleroi ( mlc ) . the charleroi pre-metro is equally famous for the parts of the system which were never built , partially built or fully completed but not opened . it was planned in the 1960s as a 48 & nbsp ; km ( 30 & nbsp ; mi . ) light-rail network , operating on the heavy rail metro infrastructure , consisting of eight branch lines radiating from a central loop downtown . however , only one line ( to petria ) , part of another line ( to gilly ) and three-quarters of the loop were actually built and opened to traffic , all from 1976 to 1996 . another branch line toward the suburb of châtelet ( châtelineau ) was almost fully built , to the extent of installing power cables , escalators and still-working electric signals in the first three stations but was never opened as passenger numbers would be too low to economically justify the extra staff . the high costs of construction , a decline in charleroi 's traditional '' smokestack '' industries and questioning of the scope of the whole project in proportion to the actual demand for it are cited as reasons for the original plan 's becoming unfulfilled . the central loop and the gilly branch as far as soleilmont were completed in 2012 , with funds from the european investment bank . the gosselies branch opened as a street-level tramline in 2013 . there are no plans to open any part of the châtelet branch . > europe > belgium > charleroi prémétro ( belgium ) . urbanrail.net ( 28 august 1992 ) . retrieved on 21 december 2012 . . crime . during the 1990s , charleroi was notorious for some violence due to its high poverty and unemployment rates . mcneil , donald g . ( 5 september 2001 ) charleroi journal – a rust-belt city 's mean streets keep their edge . nytimes.com . retrieved on 21 december 2012 . marc dutroux lived in marcinelle , a suburb of charleroi . belgian faces trial at last in sex killings – new york times . nytimes.com ( 2 march 2004 ) . retrieved on 21 december 2012 . on 6 august 2016 , a man attacked two policewomen with a machete . . sports . charleroi is home to a number of champion teams in various sports . spirou charleroi in basketball has been an eight-times winner in the basketball league belgium . la villette charleroi in table tennis is the most successful club in the champions league with five titles and has been the belgian champion multiple times . action 21 charleroi in futsal has won one uefa futsal cup and nine titles in the belgian division 1 . in football , r . charleroi s.c . and roc charleroi have finished second in the belgian pro league . the 30,000-capacity stade du pays de charleroi was a venue at uefa euro 2000 . . notable people from charleroi . born in charleroi . jean-marie andre , scientist pierre carette , extreme-left terrorist alexandre czerniatynski , football player jules delhaize , 19th-century grocer and businessman , founder of what would become the delhaize group louis delhaize , founder of the louis delhaize group jules destrée , lawyer and politician , born in marcinelle , 19th century karel erjavec , slovenian lawyer and politician , minister of foreign affairs ; born in aiseau albert frère , businessman and the richest person in belgium régis genaux , football player axel hervelle , real madrid basketball player paul-françois huart-chapel , industrialist , 19th century jean-pierre lecocq ( 1947–1992 ) , molecular biologist and entrepreneur georges lemaître ( 1894–1966 ) , priest , and astronomer , 20th century fabrice lig , music producer , 20th century joseph maréchal , jesuit priest , philosopher , 20th century didier matrige , painter and draughtsman , 20th century joëlle milquet , politician , 20th century chantal mouffe , political theorist , 20th century françois-joseph navez , painter , 18th century paul pastur , lawyer and politician gaston salmon ( 1878–1917 ) – épée fencer , olympic champion marcel thiry , poet , 19th century raymond troye , wartime writer , 20th century annette vande gorne , composer fernand verhaegen , painter and etcher , born in marchienne-au-pont , 19th century . resided in charleroi . robert arcq , writer paul cuvelier , painter and comics artist muriel degauque , suicide bomber in iraq arthur grumiaux , violinist rené magritte , painter johan nunez , drummer for nightrage/firewind arthur rimbaud , poet paul verlaine , poet . twin cities . hirson , france saint-junien , france schramberg , germany waldkirch , germany manoppello , italy casarano , italy follonica , italy himeji , japan donetsk , ukraine pittsburgh , us uşak , turkey alvdal , norway bjugn , norway . see also . aéropole science park dauphines charleroi icdi affair list of municipalities in wallonia municipalities of belgium r . charleroi s.c . r.o.c . charleroi . references . external links . - official web site unofficial history of tramways in charleroi urban adventurers explore and photograph an unused métro line '' welcome to charleroi : tourism trebles in the world 's ugliest town '' scotsman newspaper , april 7 , 2009