Karl von Frisch

career . in 1912 he became a lecturer in zoology and comparative anatomy there ; and in 1919 was promoted to a professorship . his research on honeybees was continued by his student ingeborg beling . in 1921 he went to rostock university as a professor of zoology and director of an institute . in 1923 he accepted the offer of a chair at breslau university , returning in 1925 to munich university , where he became the head of the institute of zoology . von frisch attracted negative attention from the nazi regime , among other things for employing jewish assistants , including many women , and for practicing '' jewish science '' . eventually frisch was forced into retirement , but the decision was reversed because of his research on nosema infections in bees . the institute of zoology was destroyed in the world war ii , and in 1946 frisch went to work at the university of graz , remaining there until 1950 , when he returned to the reopened munich institute . he retired in 1958 but continued his research . personal life . karl von frisch married margarete , née mohr , who died in 1964 . their son , otto von frisch , was director of the brunswick natural history museum between 1977 and 1995 . ( incorrect ) . research . frisch studied aspects of animal behaviour , including animal navigation , in the carniolan honey bee ( apis mellifera carnica ) , a subspecies of the european honey bee . bee perception . frisch discovered that bees can distinguish various blossoming plants by their scent , and that each bee is '' flower constant '' . frisch ( 1962 ) , pp . 45–51 . surprisingly , their sensitivity to a '' sweet '' taste is only slightly stronger than in humans . he thought it possible that a bee 's spatial sense of smell arises from the firm coupling of its olfactory sense with its tactile sense . frisch was the second to demonstrate that honey bees had color vision , the first being charles henry turner which he accomplished by using classical conditioning . he trained bees to feed on a dish of sugar water set on a colored card . he then set the colored card in the middle of a set of gray-toned cards . if the bees see the colored card as a shade of gray , then they will confuse the blue card with at least one of the gray-toned cards ; bees arriving to feed will visit more than one card in the array . on the other hand , if they have color vision , then the bees visit only the blue card , as it is visually distinct from the other cards . a bee 's color vision is comparable to that of humans , but with a shift away from the red toward the ultraviolet part of the spectrum . for that reason bees can not distinguish red from black ( colorless ) , but they can distinguish the colors white , yellow , blue and violet . color pigments which reflect uv radiation expand the spectrum of colors which can be differentiated . for example , several blossoms which may appear to humans to be of the same yellow color will appear to bees as having different colors ( multicolored patterns ) because of their different proportions of ultraviolet . frisch 's investigation of a bee 's powers of orientation were significant . he discovered that bees can recognize the desired compass direction in three different ways : by the sun , by the polarization pattern of the blue sky , and by the earth 's magnetic field , whereby the sun is used as the main compass , with the alternatives reserved for the conditions arising under cloudy skies or within a dark beehive . frisch ( 1962 ) , pp . 93–96 . light scattered in a blue sky forms a characteristic pattern of partially polarized light which is dependent on the position of the sun and invisible to human eyes . with a uv receptor in each of the lens units of a compound eye , and a uv filter oriented differently in each of these units , a bee is able to detect this polarization pattern . a small piece of blue sky is enough for a bee to recognize the pattern changes occurring over the course of a day . this provides not only directional but also temporal information . frisch proved that variations in the position of the sun over the course of a day provided bees with an orientation tool . they use this capability to obtain information about the progression of the day deep inside a dark beehive comparable to what is known from the position of the sun . this makes it possible for the bees to convey always up-to-date directional information during their waggle dance , without having to make a comparison with the sun during long dance phases . this provides them not only with alternative directional information , but also with additional temporal information . bees have an internal clock with three different synchronization or timekeeping mechanisms . if a bee knows the direction to a feeding place found during a morning excursion , it can also find the same location , as well as the precise time at which this source provides food , in the afternoon , based on the position of the sun . frisch ( 1962 ) , pp . 137–147 . based on the magnetic field , the alignment of the plane of a honeycomb under construction ( e.g . , the new honeycomb of a swarm ) will be the same as that of the home hive of the swarm , according to frisch . by experiment , even deformed combs bent into a circle can be produced . the vertical alignment of the honeycomb is attributed by frisch to the ability of bees to identify what is vertical with the help of their head used as a pendulum together with a ring of sensory cells in the neck . dances as language . knowledge about feeding places can be relayed from bee to bee . the means of communication is a special dance of which there are two forms : . round dance . the '' round dance '' provides the information that there is a feeding place in the vicinity of the beehive at a distance between 50 and 100 meters , without the particular direction being given . by means of close contact among the bees it also supplies information about the type of food ( blossom scent ) . the foraging bee . begins to perform a kind of '' round dance '' . on the part of the comb where she is sitting she starts whirling around in a narrow circle , constantly changing her direction , turning now right , now left , dancing clockwise and anti-clockwise , in quick succession , describing between one and two circles in each direction . this dance is performed among the thickest bustle of the hive . what makes it so particularly striking and attractive is the way it infects the surrounding bees ; those sitting next to the dancer start tripping after her , always trying to keep their outstretched feelers on close contact with the tip of her abdomen . they take part in each of her manoeuvrings so that the dancer herself , in her mad wheeling movements , appears to carry behind her a perpetual comet 's tail of bees . frisch ( 1962 ) , p . 102 ff . . waggle dance . the '' waggle dance '' is used to relay information about more distant food sources . in order to do this , the dancing bee moves forward a certain distance on the vertically hanging honeycomb in the hive , then traces a half circle to return to her starting point , whereupon the dance begins again . on the straight stretch , the bee '' waggles '' with her posterior . the direction of the straight stretch contains the information about the direction of the food source , the angle between the straight stretch and the vertical being precisely the angle which the direction of flight has to the position of the sun . the distance to the food source is relayed by the time taken to traverse the straight stretch , one second indicating a distance of approximately one kilometer ( so the speed of the dance is inversely related to the actual distance ) . the other bees take in the information by keeping in close contact with the dancing bee and reconstructing its movements . they also receive information via their sense of smell about what is to be found at the food source ( type of food , pollen , propolis , water ) as well as its specific characteristics . the orientation functions so well that the bees can find a food source with the help of the waggle dance even if there are hindrances they must detour around like an intervening mountain . as to a sense of hearing , frisch could not identify this perceptive faculty , but it was assumed that vibrations could be sensed and used for communication during the waggle dance . confirmation was later provided by dr . jürgen tautz , a apiology at würzburg university 's biocenter . . '' dialects '' . the linguistic findings described above were based on frisch 's work primarily with the carnica variety of bees . investigations with other varieties led to the discovery that language elements were variety-specific , so that how distance and direction information is relayed varies greatly . other work . frisch 's honey bee work included the study of the pheromones that are emitted by the queen bee and her daughters , which maintain the hive 's very complex social order . outside the hive , the pheromones cause the male bees , or drones , to become attracted to a queen and mate with her . inside the hive , the drones are not affected by the odor . . honors and decorations . lieben prize ( 1921 ) pour le mérite for arts and sciences ( 1952 ) foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences ( 1952 ) elected a list of fellows of the royal society elected in 1954 honorary ring of vienna ( 1956 ) kalinga prize for the popularization of science ( 1958 ) bavarian order of merit ( 1959 ) foreign member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences ( 1959 ) austrian medal for science and art ( 1960 ) balzan prize for biology '' for having consecrated his entire life to experimenting on thousands of bees , thus discovering a true language of gestures for communication and opening new insights into the knowledge of insect behaviour '' ( motivation of the balzan general prize committee ) . ( 1962 ) nobel prize for physiology or medicine , with konrad lorenz and nikolaas tinbergen for his achievements in comparative behavioral physiology and pioneering work in communication between insects . ( 1973 ) grand merit cross with star and sash of the federal republic of germany ( großes verdienstkreuz mit stern und schulterband ) ( 1974 ) bavarian maximilian order for science and art ( 1981 ) in his honor , the karl ritter von frisch medal of the german zoological society ( deutschen zoologischen gesellschaft , dzg ) , is awarded every two years to scientists whose work is distinguished by extraordinary zoological achievements which represent an integration of insights from several different biological disciplines . it is germany 's most important science prize in zoology and includes prize money of 10,000 euros . member of the german academy of sciences leopoldina – national academy of sciences honorary doctorates from a number of universities , honorary membership of numerous academies and scientific societies . publications . in german . der farben- und formensinn der bienen . in : zoologische jahrbücher ( physiologie ) 35 , 1–188 , ( 1914–15 ) über den geruchssinn der bienen und seine blütenbiologische bedeutung . in : zoologische jahrbücher ( physiologie ) 37 , 1–238 ( 1919 ) über die ‚sprache ' der bienen . eine tierpsychologische untersuchung . in : zoologische jahrbücher ( physiologie ) 40 , 1–186 ( 1923 ) aus dem leben der bienen . springer verlag berlin ( 1927 ) untersuchung über den sitz des gehörsinnes bei der elritze . in : zeitschrift für vergleichende physiologie 17 , 686–801 ( 1932 ) , it r . stetter über den geschmacksinn der bienen . in : zeitschrift für vergleichende physiologie 21 , 1–156 ( 1934 ) du und das leben – eine moderne biologie für jedermann . ( 1936 ) literally , you and life : a modern biology for everyman über einen schreckstoff der fischhaut und seine biologische bedeutung . in : zeitschrift für vergleichende physiologie 29 , 46–145 ( 1941 ) die tänze der bienen . in : österreichische zoologische zeitschrift 1 , 1–48 ( 1946 ) die polarisation des himmelslichtes als orientierender faktor bei den tänzen der bienen . in : experientia ( basel ) 5 , 142–148 ( 1949 ) die sonne als kompaß im leben der bienen . in : experientia ( basel ) 6 , 210–221 ( 1950 ) das kleine insektenbuch . insel verlag ( 1961 ) tanzsprache und orientierung der bienen . springer-verlag berlin/heidelberg/new york ( 1965 ) aus dem leben der bienen . springer-verlag berlin/heidelberg/new york ( 1927 ; 9 . auflage 1977 ) , erinnerungen eines biologen . springer-verlag , berlin/göttingen/heidelberg 1957 ( autobiographie ) die tanzsprache der bienen . originaltonaufnahmen 1953–1962 , hrsg . v . klaus sander . 2-cd-set . supposé , köln 2005 . tiere als baumeister . frankfurt a.m . , ullstein , 1974 . 309 seiten . 105 zeichnungen & 114 photographien . in english . the dancing bees : an account of the life and senses of the honey bee , harvest books new york ( 1953 ) , a translation of aus dem leben der bienen , 5th revised edition , springer verlag about biology , oliver & boyd ( 1962 ) , a translation of du und das leben animal architecture ( originally published as tiere als baumeister . ) new york , helen and kurt wolff . ( 1974 1st edition ) the dance language and orientation of bees , cambridge , mass . , harvard university press ( 1967 ) , a translation of tanzsprache und orientierung der bienen . notes . references . external links . dance and communication of honey bees with the nobel lecture december 12 , 1973 decoding the language of the bee biography and bibliography in the virtual laboratory of the max planck institute for the history of science