Clue (1998 video game)

development . clue was developed by a branch of engineering animation , inc . called eai interactive . the development team was divided between eai 's interactive division in salt lake city , utah and its main office in ames , iowa . most of the programming and game design took place in salt lake , while most of the art and animations were developed in the ames office . development of the mansion , constructed piece by piece , began in ames , but moved to salt lake city about halfway through the project . it was developed as '' the existing version released in 1992 is not free and is also not that good . the ai , board presentations , and game mechanics of the existing version were all bad '' . this version of clue aimed to '' improve.on all of those areas with most of the emphasis put into the artificial intelligence of computer players in the game . '' development of clue took approximately one year . hasbro interactive , the game 's publisher , funded the project . chris nash , lead programmer on the game , who was interviewed by the official cluedo fansite cluedofan.com in may 2003 , said that while it was a fun project to work on , '' it was hard at times too , e.g . crunch time near the end . '' cluedo & clue computer games he explained , in regard the design of the game : '' we were given some freedom , but in the end hasbro had final say on graphical treatments and such . one big flaw in the game is the lack of a visual for suggestions made . for example , miss scarlet in the kitchen with knife should have a visual representation somewhere on the screen , but it doesn ’ t . this is because of a call by one designer at hasbro '' . this was most probably due to cost/time factors - it would have required 6 6 9 324 suggestion animations . however the final cut-scenes were designed to be dark enough for the room to be unidentifiable , thereby overcoming this problem . he further explains '' the layout of the ui was the only real sore point for the whole game . the game designer wanted it one way , but hasbro wanted it another . we did what hasbro wanted despite the major flaw . for the look of the mansion and such , i think we were given a lot of freedom , however i wasn ’ t involved much in this process . the art was handled in ames , iowa and i was in salt lake city , utah . all i heard was that it should look 1920-30-ish . one early art lead ( she was later replaced ) wanted to make the entire mansion art nouveau or art deco , but hasbro said she could do one room that way , but not the whole mansion '' . he recalled shared a cubicle with the interface designer who wanted to make most of the interface elements art deco , so hasbro green lit the idea on the basis of consistent user interface . he summed up by saying , '' overall , as far as i know , hasbro didn ’ t nit-pick us about every little element . they gave some broad guidelines and let us go . of course they had the final say on everything , but i don ’ t think we bumped heads on too many things '' . when asked if any of the characters were originally designed differently from how they turned out , nash said '' in an early design document , which was never used , it was mentioned that miss scarlet should be from “ indeterminate asian origin '' . however , he adds '' i don ’ t think any of the rest of the team envisioned her that way . i think the only guidelines we were given was that she be drop-dead gorgeous , which of course she is '' . he also refers to an unconfirmed rumour that '' miss scarlet was modeled after our producer , virginia '' . the game does not include credits , however dozens of people were involved in clue 's development . some of the more notable contributors : clue credits from mobygames michael s . glosecki , executive producer , hasbro interactive bryan brandenburg , executive producer , eai interactive tom zahorik , producer , hasbro interactive virginia mcarthur , producer , eai interactive rick raymer , game designer tim zwica , art lead chris nash , lead programmer joshua jensen , lead eagle programmer mike reed , ai programmer greg thoenen , programmer darren eggett , programmer steve barkdull , programmer emily modde , level designer greg german , 3d modeller jonathan herrmann , cinematic lighting jason wintersteller , graphic designer cole harris , lead tester the same 3d characterisations in this game would later appear in the cluedo-inspired title fatal illusion . clue enjoyed an unusually long shelf life for a video game . it went on sale late in 1998 and , as of 2007 was still for sale , available at many retail stores and via the internet . the original game came in a box with holographic images . later it was released in a jewel case , or as part of a collection , the classic game collection ( also including computer versions of monopoly , the game of life , and scrabble ) . at one point the game was offered free inside boxes of cereal alongside other hasbro video games such as operation . this was a call back to the time when the original publisher of clue , parker brothers , was owned by general mills . allgame explains that '' to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the original clue , the european release of cluedo : murder at blackwell grange , by hasbro interactive , introduces an updated version of its earlier computerized release . '' cluedo : murder at blackwell grange - overview - allgame . artificial intelligence . the artificial intelligence ( ai ) used by clue 's computer-controlled opponents is advanced for a computer board game conversion . the ai is so good at deriving solutions that many customers complained that the computer cheated . in fact , this is not the case : the computer-controlled characters are just much better than the average human player . the ai works by keeping track of all players ' suggestions . it even keeps track of information which most human players ignore . for example , if player a suggests that mr . green did it with the rope in the lounge and player b could not disprove it , most players would ignore this fact . but the computer records that player b does not have mr . green , the rope or the lounge cards . thus , if on a subsequent turn , player a makes the suggestion of mr . green , the pipe in the lounge and player b can disprove it , the ai knows that player b has to have the pipe . in this manner the ai is able to determine which players have which cards without ever having to ask about them . the game allows three difficulty levels for the ai . the easier ai 's use a shorter history of game turns and the hardest one uses the entire game history . the ai was programmed by mike reed based on a design by bob pennington , who left eai early in the project . however , a report on a project funded by the national science foundation showed that '' simple propositional reasoning used to encode the knowledge gained over the course of a game of clue in order to deduce whether or not any given card is in any given place . clearly outperforms the “ expert cpu ” players in hasbro interactive 's software clue : murder at boddy mansion , making deductions of the case file contents well before the hasbro interactive 's ai . '' '' unifying an introduction to artificial intelligence course through machine learning laboratory experiences '' a similar finding was released by gettysburg college . mlexai : a project-based application-oriented model . gameplay . the game has the same objective as the board game it is based on : to find the murderer , the room which housed mr . boddy/dr . black 's demise , and the weapon used in addition to play by the original rules , clue has an additional mode that allows movement via '' points . '' each turn begins with nine points and every action the player takes costs points . the player can only do as many things as he has points . for example , moving from square to square costs one point , making a suggestion costs three points . many players prefer this mode of play as it makes the game more balanced since each player gets the same number of '' moves '' each turn . a few features of clue : detailed depictions of the characters made famous by the board game a 3d isometric view a top down view reminiscent of the board game video clips of the characters carrying out the crime ( which garnered the game 's t ( teen ) rating ) online play via the internet the providence journal described the game as having a '' film-noir environment ( like a murder-mystery movie of the 1940s ) '' . archives providencejournal.com the providence journal allgame explains that '' each room is richly created in loving detail , complete with exotic period furniture and secret passages . both the mood and gameplay is enhanced by the deep , sonorous voice of the butler as he announces events as they occur . cluedo : murder at blackwell grange - review - allgame spong says , '' cluedo takes place mostly in the house where the murder was committed , creating a chilling atmosphere . environments are beautifully rendered , featuring all characters from the original board game in full 3d . '' cnet explains , '' clue offers full animations of the characters walking from room to room . while this is interesting for a while , you 'll probably want to play with the standard overhead view of the board . along with the animations is a really good soundtrack that includes sounds of the storm outside the mansion and a forbidding butler who calls out each suggestion as it is played '' . it adds , '' the '' autonotes '' feature that takes notes as to what cards you 've seen does n't record what suggestions have already been made , so making educated guesses as to which cards people do n't have by their suggestions becomes a pen and paper experience '' . clue : murder at boddy mansion review - pc games - cnet reviews the background music is inspired by genres such as jazz and film noir . christian spotlight said '' the music is a bit annoying , simply replaying the same bars over and over and over again . thankfully , the music is quiet and not much of a distraction '' . it also added '' click on some of the objects in each area and be surprised by the many short animations that unfold . '' spong says '' a multi-player option over lan offers something new to cluedo that only a video game can accomplish . whether your playing head to head or co-operatively , the experience makes the game much more sociable and enjoyable . and it ’ s quite possible that this gameplay addition alone makes cluedo : murder at blackwell grange a thoroughly playable experience '' . cluedo : murder at blackwell grange - pc the game was originally connected to the msn gaming zone ; however , msn stopped hosting the game . in-game links to online play now go to an invalid url address . christian spotlight says '' the internet play is absolutely flawless , even over a slow internet connection . the game is stable and is supported quite well . play with a few friends or family members around the computer or across the internet . but for large groups in a single location , the original board game is much more easier than cramping around the computer keyboard and mouse '' . the game uses an algorithm that allows it to be reusable , so that multiple levels are not needed . in clue , '' the idea is that of starting a new game each time . this particular game places a new puzzle to the player every new game so that the game is new to him/her every time '' - having a different 3-card solution - despite using exactly the same game mechanics . . cutscenes . opening . the video opens on a view outside blackwell grange/boddy manor . the view cuts to the inside hall with the game 's murderer , holding a lit candlestick , walking down the hall and entering one of the rooms . the candle is extinguished and silhouetted via a lightning flash , an indeterminate human figure prepares to strike the victim when the video cuts to the game 's title . deal . mr . boddy/dr . black 's spirit has returned to shuffle the cards and hand them out the players , in order for them to discover how he was murdered then puts the three cards representing the game 's murderer , room and weapon in a briefcase . clue is a direct conversion of the original game as a video game . murder . every possible suspect and method of killing the victim is represented via a custom cutscene when a suggestion is made . these cutscenes are played through mr . boddy/dr . black 's perspective . for example : the suspect stabbing with or throwing a knife at him hanging , hitting , or strangling him with the rope hitting him with the candlestick , wrench , or lead pipe shooting him with a revolver . jail . when the game is solved , the game 's true killer walks into a jail cell and the door closes . the character 's actions in the scene are as follows : either miss scarlet , colonel mustard , or mrs . white entering the jail cell mr . green laying on the bed mrs . peacock sitting on the bed a sad professor plum sitting on a toilet . reception . allgame gave the game 3 out of 5 , commenting that '' the game 's graphics and sound are excellent and add to the escalating feel of suspense '' , while adding that '' so much is happening in the visually stunning backgrounds , or the deep , sinister soundtrack '' that the sometimes-slow pace of the board game is unnoticeable . in a 1999 mabm review , helen ubinas said '' whoever thought of moving this classic to disc had a clue '' . clue murder at boddy mansion computer game review : clue / cluedo - the art of murder computer gaming world thought the game was '' stunning '' , and thought the '' sexy.mysterious '' soundtrack could have been made for a feature film . gamespot gave it a rating of 7.6 , saying '' basically , if you love the board game , you 're going to want this version . and if you have n't played the board game , buy this instead '' . clue : murder at boddy mansion - gamespot.com cnet gave the game a 3.5-star rating , saying '' this is probably more fun than playing the board game '' , while concluding that '' overall , this is one of the best translations to the pc that hasbro has ever done . beyond the simple fault of some extra features that were n't implemented to their best effect , there are n't really many faults with the game '' . christian spotlight gave the game a rating of 4.5 out 5 stars . gamezebo gave the game a 4 out of 5 star rating . the game was named '' video game of the week '' on 1999-02-06 in the fresno bee .