Humanity Declaration

dower , john w . this rescript is said to have been drafted by japanese culture scholars reginald horace blyth and harold gould henderson , dower , p . 310 . who also contributed to the popularisation of zen and the poetic form of haiku outside japan . ben-ami shillony . ben-ami shillony ( professor emeritus of japanese history . hebrew university of jerusalem ) the '' human declaration '' has only a few lines in the last paragraph , which is only one sixth of the rescript . the few lines only confirm the facts and do not give up anything in particular . shillony ( 2003 ) 、313頁 ( 第8章『謎多き武人天皇』、21『天照の末裔と神の子イエス』、『「神道指令」と「人間宣言」』及び『守られた神道の聖域』 ) 。 the '' human declaration '' does not deny that '' the ancestors of the emperor is the gods of japanese mythology . '' the deity of successive emperors is not denied . nor did it abolish the sacred rituals performed by the emperors for the worship of mythical gods and successive emperors . shillony ( 2003 ) 、312-314頁 ( 第8章『謎多き武人天皇』、21『天照の末裔と神の子イエス』、『「神道指令」と「人間宣言」』および『守られた神道の聖域』 ) を参照。 . interpretation . the exact meaning of the text , which was published in archaic japanese , has been the subject of considerable debate . in particular , in the passage of the declaration which was officially translated as '' false conception according to which the emperor is divine '' , the unusual term akitsumikami ( 現御神 ) was used instead of the more common word arahitogami ( 現人神 , '' living god '' ) . the word arahitogami was first mentioned in the nihon shoki , where the legendary japanese prince yamato takeru said '' i am the son of an arahitokami '' . nihon shoki , chapter 7 . western view . according to the popular western view , promoted by the douglas macarthur , the rescript challenged the centuries-old claim that the japanese emperor and his predecessors were descendants of the solar deity amaterasu , and thus the emperor had now publicly admitted that he was not a living god . thus , the same day as the rescript was issued , general douglas macarthur announced that he was very much pleased with hirohito 's statement , which he saw as his commitment to lead his people in the democratisation of japan . although akitsumikami is often translated as '' divine '' or '' divinity '' , some western scholars ( including john w . dower and herbert p . bix ) have pointed out that its real meaning is '' manifest kami '' ( or , more generally , '' theophany '' ) , and that therefore the emperor would still be , according to the declaration , an arahitogami ( '' living god '' ) , although not an akitsumikami ( '' manifest kami '' ) . in fact , jean herbert explains that , according to the japanese tradition , the figure of the emperor would be '' the extension in time '' of the goddess amaterasu and the previous emperors , representing a naka ima ( 中今 ? ) '' . consequently , it would be inadmissible to deny its divine origin . . japanese views . on january 1 , 1946 ( showa 21 ) , the rescript was reported on the front page of each newspaper . the headline of the asahi shimbun was '' at the beginning of the year , the rescript of the promotion of national luck , kanpatsu , devoted to peace , improvement of people 's welfare , and confusion of ideas . '' the mainichi shimbun said , '' give me a rescript for the new year . the ties are with trust and respect , my heart , and the people . '' the headlines of the newspaper did not mention the deity , but only reported that japan 's peace and the emperor were with the people . the emperor 's denial of deity had no news value at all . この章は、shillony ( 2003 ) 、313-314頁 ( 第8章21『「神道指令」と「人間宣言」』 ) を参照。 critics of the western interpretation , including the emperor himself , argue that the repudiation of divinity was not the point of the rescript . since this rescript starts with a full quote from the five charter oath of 1868 by the meiji emperor , the emperor 's true intention was that japan had already been democratic since the meiji era and was not democratised by the occupiers . as was clarified at a press interview of 23 august 1977 , the emperor wanted the japanese people not to forget pride in japan . this interpretation is confirmed by the fact that the imperial rescript was published with a commentary by prime minister kijūrō shidehara that dwelt exclusively on the prior existence of democracy in the meiji era and did not make even passing reference to the emperor 's '' renunciation of divinity '' . emperor hirohito was persistent in the idea that the emperor of japan should be considered a descendant of the gods . in december 1945 , he told his vice-grand chamberlain michio kinoshita : '' it is permissible to say that the idea that the japanese are descendants of the gods is a false conception ; but it is absolutely impermissible to call chimerical the idea that the emperor is a descendant of the gods . '' shinto officials and right wing groups throughout japan today do not recognize the declaration as admitting that the emperor and country are not divine . the english rescript was discovered in 2005 ( heisei 17 ) and was published in the mainichi shimbun on january 1 , 2006 ( heisei 18 ) . osamu watanabe has sent the following comments to the newspaper . the minister of education , culture , sports , science and technology , maeda tamon , along with gakushuin university director katsunoshin yamanashi and prime minister kijuro shidehara , are key figures in japan who have read and examined the draft of the human declaration . he was also a quaker ( protestant friend ) believer and , like many japanese christians , revered the emperor . shillony ( 2003 ) 、312頁 ( 第8章21『「神道指令」と「人間宣言」』 ) 。 in december 1945 ( showa 20 ) , he answered in a question and answer session of the national diet ( 帝国議会 ) that '' the emperor is a god . '' '' it is not a god of western concept , but 'in the sense that it is the highest level in the world in the traditional japanese concept 'is a god , '' he replied . creemers , shrine shinto , pp.124-132 ; kodansha encyclopedia , vol.5 , p.80 . japanese manga artist yoshinori kobayashi said , '' the reason why ghq recommended the human declaration is because it misunderstood that the japanese believe the emperor as an . '' in the late meiji era , when american missionaries came to japan , '' god '' was translated as '' shin '' ( 神 , しん ) and japanese people used the ancient '' kami '' ( カミ ) as '' god '' ( 神 ) as well as china . therefore , the mixture of '' kami '' and '' god '' began around the meiji era , and ghq misunderstood that the japanese believed the emperor to be '' god '' ( absolute god ) from this mixture , so he declared humanity to emperor showa . however , if i dare to say that , it is a humorous act that makes '' the god of cartoons ( manga ) '' osamu tezuka and '' the god of management '' konosuke matsushita make a '' human declaration '' . in addition , the emperor used to say that he was '' akitsumikami ( currently god ) '' but never a western-style '' god '' ( absolute god ) . in addition , the traditional concept of '' akitsumikami '' for the emperor is physiologically as if osamu tezuka is called '' god of manga '' , konosuke matsushita is called '' god of management '' , soccer goalkeeper or baseball pitcher is called '' guardian god '' . it is similar to the traditional practice of japanese people , who call extremely precious people '' god '' ( 神様 ) , even if they are humans . in addition , it is difficult for westerners who know only monotheism to understand this kind of feeling of japanese people . 小林 : ja : ゴーマニズム宣言スペシャル・天皇論p169〜p173 . see also . arahitogami douglas macarthur occupation of japan world war ii state shinto . notes . references . dower , john w . ( 1999 ) . embracing defeat . new york : w . w . norton . ; ベン・アミー・シロニー ( 著 ) ben-ami shillony ( 原著 ) 『母なる天皇―女性的君主制の過去・現在・未来』大谷堅志郎 ( 翻訳 ) 、講談社 ( 2003/1/1 ) . external links . full text of the rescript ( in japanese and english , not official ) full text ( official in japanese ) original document ( national archives of japan )