Hysteria

history . the word hysteria originates from the greek word for uterus , hystera . the oldest record of hysteria dates back to 1900 b.c . when egyptians recorded behavioral abnormalities in adult women on medical papyrus . the egyptians attributed the behavioral disturbances to a wandering uterus—thus later dubbing the condition hysteria . to treat hysteria egyptian doctors prescribed various medications . for example , doctors put strong smelling substances on the patients ’ vulvas to encourage the uterus to return to its proper position . another tactic was to smell or swallow unsavory herbs to encourage the uterus to flee back to the lower part of the female ’ s abdomen . the ancient greeks accepted the ancient egyptians ’ explanation for hysteria ; however , they included in their definition of hysteria the inability to bear children or the failure to marry . ancient romans also attributed hysteria to an abnormality in the womb ; however , discarded the traditional explanation of a wandering uterus . instead , the ancient romans credited hysteria to a disease of the womb or a disruption in reproduction ( i.e . , a miscarriage , menopause , etc . ) . hysteria theories from the ancient egyptians , ancient greeks , and ancient romans were the basis of the western understanding of hysteria . between the fifth and thirteenth centuries , however , the increasing influence of christianity in the latin west altered medical and public understanding of hysteria . st . augustine 's writings suggested that human suffering resulted from sin , and thus , hysteria became perceived as satanic possession . with the shift in perception of hysteria came a shift in treatment options . instead of admitting patients to a hospital , the church began treating patients through prayers , amulets , and exorcisms . furthermore , during the renaissance period many patients of hysteria were prosecuted as witches and underwent interrogations , torture , and execution . however , during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries activists and scholars worked to change the perception of hysteria back to a medical condition . particularly , french physician charles lepois insisted that hysteria was a malady of the brain . in addition , in 1697 , english physician thomas sydenham theorized that hysteria was an emotional condition , instead of a physical condition . many physicians followed lepois and sydenham 's lead and hysteria became disassociated with the soul and the womb . during this time period , science started to focalize hysteria in the central nervous system . as doctors developed a greater understanding of the human nervous system , the neurological model of hysteria was created , which further propelled the conception of hysteria as a mental disorder . in 1859 , paul briquet defined hysteria as a chronic syndrome manifesting in many unexplained symptoms throughout the body 's organ systems . what briquet described became known as briquet 's syndrome , or somatization disorders , in 1971 . over a ten year period , briquet conducted 430 case studies of patients with hysteria . following briquet , jean-martin charcot studied women in an asylum in france and used hypnosis as treatment . he also mentored pierre janet , another french psychologist , who studied five of hysteria 's symptoms ( anesthesia , amnesia , abulia , motor control diseases , and character change ) in depth and proposed that hysteria symptoms occurred due to a lapse in consciousness . both charcot and janet inspired sigmund freud 's work . freud theorized hysteria stemmed from childhood sexual abuse or repression , and was also one of the first to apply hysteria to men . during the 20th century , as psychiatry advanced in the west , anxiety and depression diagnoses began to replace hysteria diagnoses in western countries . for example , from 1949 to 1978 , annual admissions of hysteria patients in england and wales decreased by roughly two thirds . with the decrease of hysteria patients in western cultures came an increase in anxiety and depression patients . although declining in the west , in eastern countries such as sudan , egypt , and lebanon hysteria diagnoses remained consistent . theories for why hysteria diagnoses began to decline vary , but many historians infer that world war ii , westernization , and migration shifted western mental health expectations . twentieth century western societies expected depression and anxiety manifest itself more in post world war ii generations and displaced individuals ; and thus , individuals reported or were diagnosed accordingly . in addition , medical advancements explained ailments that were previously attributed to hysteria such as epilepsy or infertility . in 1980 , after a gradual decline in diagnoses and reports , hysteria was removed from the american psychiatric association 's diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( dsm ) , which had included hysteria as a mental disorder from its second publication in 1968 . . historical symptoms . historically , the symptoms of hysteria have a large range . for example : shortness of breath anxiety insomnia fainting amnesia paralysis pain spasms convulsive fits vomiting deafness bizarre movements seizures hallucinations inability to speak . notable figures . jean-martin charcot . in the late nineteenth century , french neurologist jean-martin charcot , attempted to tackle what he referred to as , '' the great neurosis '' or hysteria . charcot theorized that hysteria was a hereditary , physiological disorder . he believed hysteria impaired areas of the brain which provoked the physical symptoms displayed in each patient . while charcot believed hysteria was hereditary , he also thought that environmental factors such as stress could trigger hysteria in an individual . charcot published over 120 case studies of patients who he diagnosed with hysteria , including marie '' blanche '' whittman . whittman was referred to as the '' queen of hysterics , '' and remains the most famous patient of hysteria . to treat his patients , charcot used hypnosis , which he determined was only successful when used on hysterics . using patients as props , charcot executed dramatic public demonstrations of hysterical patients and his cures for hysteria , which many suggest produced the hysterical phenomenon . furthermore , charcot noted similarities between demon possession and hysteria , and thus , he concluded '' demonomania '' was a form of hysteria . . sigmund freud . in 1896 , sigmund freud , who was an austrian psychiatrist , published '' the aetiology of hysteria '' . the paper explains how freud believes his female patients ' neurosis , which he labels hysteria , resulted from sexual abuse as children . freud named the concept of physical symptoms resulting from childhood trauma : hysterical conversion . freud hypothesized that in order to cure hysteria the patient must relive the experiences through imagination in the most vivid form while under light hypnosis . however , freud later changed his theory . his new theory claimed that his patients imagined the instances of sexual abuse , which were instead repressed childhood fantasies . by 1905 , freud retracted the theory of hysteria resulting from repressed childhood fantasies . freud was also one of the first noted psychiatrist to attribute hysteria to men . he diagnosed himself with hysteria -- writing he feared his work exacerbated his condition . . modern perceptions . for the most part , hysteria does not exist as a medical diagnosis in western culture and has been replaced by other diagnoses such as conversion or functional disorders . the term hysterical , applied to an individual , can mean that they are emotional , irrationally upset , or frenzied . when applied to a situation that does not involve panic , hysteria means that situation is uncontrollably amusing ( the connotation being that it invokes hysterical laughter ) . hysteria can also impact groups , medically and colloquially referred to as mass hysteria or mass psychogenic illness . instances of mass hysteria have been recorded throughout history and continue to occur today . . see also . references . further reading . paul briquet ( 1859 ) . traité clinique et thérapeutique de l ’ hystérie from gallica at bnf chodoff , p . et al . ( 1982 ) hysteria , john wiley & sons . halligan , p.w . , bass , c . , & marshall , j.c . ( eds . ) ( 2001 ) contemporary approach to the study of hysteria : clinical and theoretical perspectives , oxford university press sander gilman , roy porter , george rousseau , elaine showalter , and helen king ( 1993 ) . hysteria beyond freud , university of california press andrew scull ( 2009 ) hysteria . the biography , oxford university press . external links . is hysteria real ? brain images say yes at the new york times . the h-word , guardian unlimited , 2002-09-02 hysteria , bbc radio 4 discussion with juliet mitchell , rachel bowlby & brett kahr ( in our time , apr . 22 , 2004 )