Kerry Wendell Thornley

personal life . kerry wendell thornley was born on april 17 , 1938 , in los angeles to kenneth and helen thornley . he had two younger brothers , dick and tom . thornley attended california high school in whittier , california , located within los angeles county . on saturday , december 11 , 1965 , kerry married cara leach at wayfarers chapel in palos verdes , california . they had one son , kreg thornley , born in 1969 . they later divorced . kreg was a photographer , painter , musician and film maker . . military life . having already been a u.s . marine corps reservist for about two years , thornley had been summoned to active duty in 1958 at age 20 , soon after completing his freshman year at the university of southern california . according to principia discordia , it was around this time that he and greg hill—alias malaclypse the younger or mal-2—shared their first eristic vision in a bowling alley in their hometown of whittier , california . in early 1959 , thornley served for a short time in the same radar operator unit as lee harvey oswald at mcas el toro in santa ana , california . both men had shared a common interest in society , culture , literature and politics , and whenever duty placed them together , had discussed such topics as george orwell 's famous novel nineteen eighty-four and the philosophy of marxism , particularly oswald 's interest in the latter . warren commission hearings , volume xi , pp . 87–90 while aboard a troopship returning to the united states from duty in japan ( some time after the two men parted ways as a result of routine reassignment ) , thornley read of oswald 's autumn 1959 defection to the soviet union in the us military newspaper stars and stripes . warren commission hearings , volume xi , p . 109 . 1960s . in february 1962 , thornley completed the idle warriors , which has the historical distinction of being the only book written about lee harvey oswald before kennedy 's assassination in 1963 . due to the serendipitous nature of thornley 's choice of literary subject matter , he was called to testify before the warren commission in washington , d.c . on may 18 , 1964 . the commission subpoenaed a copy of the manuscript and stored it in the national archives , and the book remained unpublished until 1991 . in 1965 , thornley published another book titled oswald , generally defending the '' lone gunman theory '' conclusion of the warren commission . in january 1968 , new orleans district attorney jim garrison , certain there had been a new orleans-based conspiracy to assassinate john f . kennedy , subpoenaed thornley to appear before a grand jury , questioning him about his relationship with oswald and his knowledge of other figures garrison believed to be connected to the assassination . thornley sought a cancellation of this subpoena on which he had to appear before the circuit court . garrison charged thornley with perjury after thornley denied that he had been in contact with oswald in any manner since 1959 . the perjury charge was eventually dropped by garrison 's successor harry connick sr . thornley claimed that , during his initial two-year sojourn in new orleans , he had numerous meetings with two mysterious middle-aged men named '' gary kirstein '' and '' slim brooks '' . according to his account , they had detailed discussions on numerous subjects ranging from the mundane to the exotic , and bordering sometimes on bizarre . among these was the subject of how one might assassinate president kennedy , whose beliefs and policies the aspiring novelist deeply disliked at the time . later , the former marine came to believe that '' gary kirstein '' had in reality been senior cia officer and future watergate burglar e . howard hunt , and '' slim brooks '' to have been jerry milton brooks , a member of the 1960s right-wing activist group '' the minutemen '' . guy banister , another minutemen member in new orleans , had been accused by garrison of involvement in the assassination and was allegedly connected to lee harvey oswald through the fair play for cuba committee leaflet . 544 camp street and related events , house select committee on assassinations – appendix to hearings , volume 10 , 13 , p . 128 . marrs , jim . crossfire : the plot that killed kennedy , ( new york : carroll & graf , 1989 ) , p . 497 . thornley also claimed that '' kirstein '' and brooks had accurately predicted richard m . nixon 's accession to the presidency six years before it happened , as well as anticipating the rise of the 1960s counterculture and the subsequent emergence of charles manson and what became his cult following . this led thornley to believe that the us government had somehow been involved , directly or indirectly , in creating and/or supporting these events , personages and phenomena . after trial of clay shaw , thornley said he wanted garrison to bring him to trial in order to clear his name . . later life and death . for the next 30 years , thornley traveled and lived all over the united states and was involved in a variety of activities , ranging from editing underground newspapers to attending graduate school . he spent most of the remainder of his life in the little five points neighborhood of atlanta . during this time he maintained a free series of fliers titled '' out of order . '' this single page , double sided xeroxed periodical was distributed in the little five points area . thornley became increasingly paranoid and distrustful in the wake of his experiences during the 1960s , both by his own accounts and those of personal acquaintances . for a time , thornley wrote a regular column in the zine factsheet five , until editor mike gunderloy stopped publishing the magazine . struggling with illness in his final days , kerry thornley died of cardiac arrest in atlanta on november 28 , 1998 , at the age of 60 . the following morning , 23 people attended a buddhist memorial service in his honor . his body had been cremated and the ashes scattered over the pacific ocean . shortly before his death , thornley reportedly said he 'd felt '' like a tired child home from a very wild circus '' , a reference to a passage by greg hill from principia discordia : . list of pen names and titles . list of pen names and self-awarded titles provided by kerry himself on the role of pope of the discordian society in an affidavit to the california school employees association ( csea ) , on a legal case concerning a member of the society that refused to join the csea alleging that the discordian religion forbade him from doing so : co-founder of the discordian society and the legion of dynamic discord thereof and co-author of principia discordia grand ballyhoo of egypt of the orthodox discordian society kerry wendell thornley , jfk assassin omar khayyam ravenhurst president of the fair-play-for-switzerland committee reverend doctor jesse sump ancient abbreviated calif . of california sinister minister of the first evangelical and unrepentant church of no faith ho chi zen ( the fifth dealy lama ) purple sage pope '' i further declare that there is no truth whatsoever to the charge that kerry wendell thornley is a fictitious identity created by the warren commission for its own mysterious purposes ( vol . xi , pp . 80+ , commission exhibits and testimony ) '' . bibliography . with malaclypse the younger ( greg hill ) ; principia discordia , or , how i found goddess and what i did to her when i found her , 5th edition , september 1991 , illuminet press ( introduction by kerry thornley ) thornley , kerry ; oswald , new classics house , 1965 thornley , kerry ; zenarchy , illuminet press , june 1991 thornley , kerry ; the idle warriors , illuminet press , june 1991 . see also . omar khayyam rubaiyat of omar khayyam . notes . inline citations . . references . biles , joe g . ; in history 's shadow : lee harvey oswald , kerry thornley & the garrison investigation , writers club press , april 2002 ( foreword by robert buras ) gorightly , adam ; the prankster and the conspiracy : the story of kerry thornley and how he met oswald and inspired the counterculture , paraview press , november 2003 ( foreword by robert anton wilson ) . external links . works : sondra london :