Naseby

geography . the village sits in a commanding position on one of the highest parts of the northamptonshire uplands , close to the county border with leicestershire . history . early history . the original settlement probably owes its existence to its geography ; the village lay in a strong defensive position . in the 6th century a saxon named hnaef established the settlement with the name of hnaefes-burgh ( '' fortified place of hnaef '' ) . evidence for these origins came in the form of a 19th-century discovery of an anglo-saxon trefoil-headed brooch which is now in the collection of the british museum . domesday book to the black death . in 1086 naseby appeared in the domesday book , by which time hnaefes-burgh had evolved into navesberie . in later records the village had been known as navesby and nathesby , eventually becoming naseby . it was believed that the name derived from the old english naefela , meaning navel , because it was thought to be the navel of england . in 1203 , king john granted naseby its market charter and the village became a flourishing market town for many years . during this period the village grew . in 1349 , the black death , which wiped out a third of the population of england , attacked the village and the population greatly reduced , with parts becoming abandoned altogether . extensive earthworks in the fields adjacent to parts of the village show the outlines of lost lanes and the outlines of buildings and enclosures which existed before the black death . battle of naseby . the battle of naseby took place on 14 june 1645 , during the english civil war . in the area called broad moor a small distance north of the village , the cavalier forces , commanded by king charles i , battled the roundhead army commanded by thomas fairfax , 3rd lord fairfax of cameron . the battle resulted in a decisive royalist defeat . a naval warship during the commonwealth period was named the naseby in honour of the battle ; after the restoration the ship was renamed . 18th century . during the 18th century , naseby continued as an agricultural community and during this time several fine georgian buildings were constructed in the parish , including manor farm ( built 1720 ) , shuckburgh house ( 1773 ) , and the old vicarage ( 1785 ) . one of the most significant buildings is naseby house , built in 1818 for the fitzgeralds , lord of the manor . in the 20th century the hall hosted the duke of york , later king george vi , with the duchess of york , elizabeth bowes-lyon ( the queen mother ) and a very young future queen elizabeth . naseby hall , altered by e f law in 1859 was badly damaged by fire in 1948 , and was rebuilt from the ground up using the old materials . rev john mastin was vicar of naseby from 1783 until his death in 1829 . he was the author of “ the history and antiquities of naseby , in the county of northampton ” , which was the earliest published history of the parish . he also left a manuscript account of his life . the texts of both these works are included in a 2004 publication by the northamptonshire record society . . nineteenth century . in 1822 the enclosure commissioners allocated the open land around the village to two landowners , who duly fenced off their newly acquired fields . this action deprived many of the villagers of their traditional plots of land that surrounded the village , that had for years allowed them to grow crops and graze their cattle and sheep . this action did not adversely affect the community as much as it did in other villages ; one reason may have been that the village had other trades . a survey of the time lists 26 different occupations and trades in the village . 1837 baptisms . the local friendly society attracted non-conformists from the end of the eighteenth century and in 1825 , a methodist chapel was erected . the population continued to grow : thus between 1831 and 1841 it increased from 707 to 898 ( including 48 visitors to the annual feast ) . in 1837 , following the passing of the births and deaths registration act 1836 there was a peak in the number of baptisms recorded in the naseby parish register , relating to all saints church . whereas during the previous ten years the number per annum had varied between 7 and 24 , in 1837 there were a total of 91 baptisms which amounted to 10.7 % of the population given in the 1841 census . 50 of these occurred in the week before 1 july when civil registration was made mandatory . most of those baptised were over the age of one , mostly children with the oldest age recorded being 26 . one view is the prevalence of baptisms in this year is that non-conformists wished to ensure their children and young adults were recorded before the introduction of civil registration . . victorian building boom . until around 1870 , most buildings ( except for the church , chapel , school , and the three houses from the georgian period ) were made of mud walls and cob with thatched roofs . during the 1870s lord clifden had most of the cottages demolished and replaced with new red-brick cottages , some of which were semi-detached , to house his estate workers . this gave naseby its well-known victorian appearance . all these victorian houses still survive to this day , along with two remaining 17th-century cob and thatched cottages . churches . the two churches in naseby are : all saints ' church , church street naseby methodist church , church street . river sources . naseby and the plateau of land towards sibbertoft form a watershed and contain the sources of four rivers flowing west , south and east . in the front garden of manor farm at the junction of church street , newlands and welford road is a cone-shaped monument which sits in a depression . this is the source of the river avon , warwickshire . the northern tributary of the river nene ( brampton arm ) arises by the thornby road to the west of the village ( the main source being at arbury hill ( sp 542 581 ) near staverton , northamptonshire ) . the source of the river ise can be found close to sibbertoft road to the north of naseby . the source of the river welland can be found in fields close to welland rise , sibbertoft village , three miles to the north . notable buildings . the historic england website contains details of a total of ten listed buildings in the parish of naseby , all of which are grade ii apart from all saints ' church , which is grade ii . they are : all saints ' church , church street naseby hall shuckburgh house , church street monument , clipston road caton cottage , high street cromwell cottage , high street avon well , south of manor farmhouse , newlands manor farm , newlands whipping cross , newlands , haselbech & clipston road monument , sibbertoft road details of some of these and other notable buildings in the village appear below . within the village at the junction of church street and gynwell , close to the methodist chapel ( 1825 ) there is the shaft of the old whipping post dating to 1203 . in the middle ages this stood opposite the church in what was the marketplace and is now the village street called newlands . also to be found in newlands are examples of the victorian cottages from around 1870 , which continue down the right-hand side of high street ; further down the street to the right is one of the two surviving cob-thatched cottages . it was built around 1630 and is now called cromwell cottage . next door to the cottage in school lane is the village school , built in 1843 . further down school lane are more victorian cottages . at the end of school lane with its intersection with church lane is the village war memorial . this memorial , built in 1918 to commemorate world war i , is a smaller copy of one of edwin henry landseer four lions at nelson 's column in london trafalgar square . on the opposite side of church street from the memorial is the old vicarage , built around 1785 . the two beech trees at the entrance were planted in 1792 . next to the vicarage is shuckburgh house which dates from around 1773 . the other surviving cob thatched cottage can be found at the southern end of high street . transport . naseby is 2.4 & nbsp ; mi ( 3.9 & nbsp ; km ) from junction 2 of the a14 road , giving it access to the national road system . for rail travel , the midland main line can be accessed at the railway station in market harborough . there is a bus service between market harborough and northampton that stops in naseby , but it is very infrequent . references . external links . naseby parish council naseby : - a short guide to the village and its history by a.j . crowley and e.h . westaway