Luis Vigoreaux

early years . vigoreaux was born on april 12 , 1928 in the chupacallos ward of ceiba , puerto rico . he was one of the eight children of eulalia and enrique vigoreaux , a sugarcane worker at fajardo sugar company . his father died when he was young , forcing eulalia to take charge of the family . when vigoreaux was 14 years old , they moved to san juan , specifically río piedras . vigoreaux studied at the vila mayo high school . as a teenager , vigoreaux found work in a radio station named wiac ( am ) , which was managed by tomás muñiz ( father of tommy muñiz ) . there , vigoreaux worked on a show called alma estudiantil . with the beginning of world war ii , most of the professional hosts were enlisted for war , which led to vigoreaux having the opportunity to work at the station . during that period , vigoreaux worked in various areas of entertainment and show business . he served as host , presenter , commentator , among other jobs . he also became the spokesperson for sello rojo rice in puerto rico , which he did for 30 years . first years in comedy . vigoreaux joined ramón rivero ( diplo ) and josé luis torregrosa for the radio comedy el tremendo hotel . this radio slot enjoyed a large audience for years , and vigoreaux continued to work as a comedian . between 1954 and 1955 , he joined fellow comedian josé miguel agrelot in a theater show that took them to many latin american communities in the united states . the theater show eventually led to a radio program named torito and company , after torito , the character that agrelot played . vigoreaux himself played the character of don toribio . arrival of television . with the arrival of television to puerto rico in 1954 , vigoreaux began his transition hosting a show called el show libby 's , sponsored by the libby 's . he then hosted the show el tren de la alegría . vigoreaux later moved to wapa-tv , motivated by the possibility of working with actor mario pabón . they wrote the story for a soap opera , but the project fell through . however , vigoreaux moved on when he and his second wife , lydia echevarria , began hosting the show named la hora cero . the show presented many local and international singers , including celia cruz , josé feliciano and marco antonio muñiz . success in television . the vigoreaux family became one of the most famous families in puerto rico . some even referred to the vigoreaux-echevarria couple as the lucy and desi of puerto rico , in reference to the marriage of american comedians lucille ball and desi arnaz . in 1970 , vigoreaux developed a game show named sube nene , sube . hosted by vigoreaux it became one of the most seen shows in puerto rican television history . due to this success , wapa-tv asked vigoreaux to produce and host a few more game shows . vigoreaux responded by creating pa'rriba , papi , pa'rriba , which was a variation of sube nene , sube , and dale que dale en domingo . with the production and hosting of all those shows at the same time , the vigoreaux family opened a studio , which they named estudio cvc . they were also responsible for the transmission of the mda television marathon in puerto rico . brief change to channel 11 and return to wapa . vigoreaux later jumped to channel 11 , then named the perez-perry network . he bought the teatro nuevo san juan , from where he started transmitting his new show . but this show was not as successful , and soon vigoreaux found himself off the air . in 1980 , vigoreaux went back to wapa-tv and all his shows were rescheduled . he also became the show host of that station 's lunch hour variety show , el show del mediodia , and began playing the role of pedro navaja in a play la verdadera historia de pedro navaja . he would act in that play many times , as well as in a play named angeles caidos . in addition , he returned to the radio with a program named buenos dias , puerto rico , on radio station wbmj-am , radio rock , and worked , for a short period of time , as a television reporter for noticentro 4 . murder and aftermath . on the morning of january 18 , 1983 , vigoreaux did n't show up to work at the radio station or at wapa-tv , causing his co-workers to worry . when his mercedes-benz was found with a burned body inside , it was taken to the medical examiner 's office , where it was confirmed it was vigoreaux . his death launched a wave of rumors and speculations , and led to one of the biggest trials in puerto rico 's history . his wife , lydia echevarría , was accused formally of his murder , along with papo newman and david lópez-watts . allegedly , echevarría had become jealous of a relationship vigoreaux had started with actress nydia castillo , and had paid newman and lópez-watts to either beat him or murder him . vigoreaux 's body was found gagged , stabbed , and burned inside the car 's trunk . echevarría has maintained her innocence , but she was convicted to a life sentence in vega alta , puerto rico . newman and lópez-watts received similar sentences . however , echevarría and lópez-watts only served roughly 12 years in jail . papo newman received immunity from the department of justice of puerto rico to testify in court what happened the night of the murder . newman did not serve time in prison as an agreement . in january 2000 , governor pedro rosselló granted echevarría a pardon , which was largely criticized by the people . at the time of his death , vigoreaux was about to begin another game show , a millón , which eventually became one of the most popular shows in puerto rican television history , under the hosting of hector marcano and produced by vigoreaux 's son , luisito vigoreaux . personal life . vigoreaux was married twice . he married rosaura lorenzana , with whom he had three sons , luisito , jorge enrique and roberto vigoreaux . jorge died in 1962 of leukemia . luisito has followed his father 's footsteps as an actor , comedian , producer , and host . roberto also worked as an actor , host , producer , and singer . he also served as a member of both the house and the senate of puerto rico . in 1958 , vigoreaux met actress lydia echevarría , while still married to his first wife . after divorcing , they married on february 10 , 1960 . he and echevarria had two daughters , vanessa and glendalys vigoreaux . glendalys committed suicide on july 15 , 2008 . see also . list of puerto ricans french immigration to puerto rico list of television presenters . references .