1776 (musical)

history . in 1925 , rodgers and hart wrote a musical about the american revolution called dearest enemy . green , stanley . '' encyclopedia of the musical theatre , pp . 373–74 . jefferson , n.c . : da capo press , 1980 . in 1950 , a musical about the revolution was presented on broadway , titled arms and the girl , with music by morton gould , lyrics by dorothy fields , and book by herbert fields , dorothy fields and rouben mamoulian , the show 's director . sherman edwards , a writer of pop songs with several top 10 hits in the late 1950s and early '60s , spent several years developing lyrics and libretto for a musical based on the signing of the declaration of independence . edwards recounted that '' i wanted to show the founding fathers at their outermost limits . these men were the cream of their colonies . they disagreed and fought with each other . but they understood commitment , and though they fought , they fought affirmatively . '' kantor and maslon , pp . 328-49 producer stuart ostrow recommended that librettist peter stone collaborate with edwards on the book of the musical . stone recalled , the minute you heard '' sit down , john '' , you knew what the whole show was . you knew immediately that john adams and the others were not going to be treated as gods or cardboard characters , chopping down cherry trees and flying kites with strings and keys on them . it had this very affectionate familiarity ; it was n't reverential . adams , the outspoken delegate from massachusetts , was chosen as the central character , and his quest to persuade all 13 colonies to vote for independence became the central conflict . stone confined nearly all of the action to independence hall and the debate among the delegates , featuring only two female characters , abigail adams and martha jefferson , in the entire musical . kantor and maslon , pp . 329 bloom and vlastnik , pp . 285 after tryouts in new haven , conn . , and washington , d.c . the show opened on broadway at the 46th street theatre on march 16 , 1969 . peter hunt directed . synopsis . note : the show can be performed in one or two acts . act i . . scene one . on may 8 , 1776 , in philadelphia , the second continental congress proceeds with its business . john adams , the widely disliked delegate from massachusetts , is frustrated because congress will not even debate his proposals on independence . the other delegates , preoccupied by the rising heat , implore him to “ sit down , john '' . adams ' resplies that congress has done nothing for the last year but dawdle ( '' piddle , twiddle , and resolve '' ) . he reads the latest missive to his loving wife abigail , who appears in his imagination . he asks if she and the other women are making saltpeter for the war effort , but she says they have a more urgent problem : no straight pins . they bicker about it , adams gives in , and they pledge their love to each other ( '' till then '' ) . scene two . later that day , adams meets delegate benjamin franklin , who suggests that a resolution for independence would have more success if proposed by someone else . richard henry lee of virginia enters , summoned by franklin . the cocky lee crows that he can not fail , as a member of the oldest and most glorious family in america : ( '' the lees of old virginia '' ) . he will ask the virginia house of burgesses to authorize him to offer a pro-independence resolution . scene three . june 7 , 1776 . franklin and adams enter , and the delegates , along with the president of congress , john hancock , and the secretary , charles thomson , take their places . hancock gavels the 380th meeting of the congress to order . the entire new jersey delegation is absent . thomas jefferson , a young delegate from virginia , announces that he is leaving that night to visit his wife . soon after hancock opens the floor to new resolutions , richard henry lee enters on horseback and reads lee resolution , but john dickinson of pennsylvania moves to indefinitely postpone the question of independence . five colonies vote for debate and five for indefinite postponement . new york abstains '' courteously '' ( a running gag ) . stephen hopkins of rhode island , after a momentary absence , votes for debate . as the debate proceeds , caesar rodney of delaware is forced to return home due to poor health ; edward rutledge of south carolina moves to proceed with the vote . the new jersey delegation arrives with orders to support independence , resulting in a 6–6 split ; new york again abstains '' courteously '' , and adams reminds hancock , who supports independence , of his privilege as president to break ties . dickinson then moves that any vote for independence must pass unanimity , on the grounds that '' no colony may be torn from its mother country without its own consent . '' this proposal produces the same tie , which hancock breaks by unexpectedly voting for unanimity , prompting an angry outburst from adams . hancock reasons that without unanimity , any colony voting against independence would be forced to fight on england 's side , setting brother against brother . adams , thinking fast , calls for a postponement of the vote on independence : there should be a declaration defining the reasons for independence . franklin seconds adams , but when asked why such a declaration should be written , both are lost for words until thomas jefferson provides them . the vote on postponement produces yet another tie , with new york abstaining '' courteously '' , again . hancock breaks this tie by voting in favor of postponement . he appoints a committee of adams , franklin , roger sherman of connecticut , robert livingston of new york , and jefferson to draft the declaration . hancock adjourns the session over jefferson 's complaints that he must go home to his wife . the five argue about who should write the declaration ( '' but , mr . adams '' ) ; one by one , each member gives a reason why he can not do it , until all eyes turn to jefferson . he tries to wriggle out , pleading that he has not seen his wife in six months . adams is unmoved ( he misses his own wife ) and quotes a passage of jefferson 's declaration of the causes and necessity of taking up arms , bluntly telling jefferson that he is the best writer in congress . jefferson agrees to draft the document . scene four . a week later , adams and franklin visit jefferson , who has spent the week moping , earning a sharp rebuke by adams , he rebuffs . but adams has sent for jefferson 's beloved wife martha , she enters , and adams and franklin leave the young lovers in peace . adams , alone , again exchanges letters with his wife abigail . they pledge eternal love ( '' yours , yours , yours '' ) . the next morning , franklin and adams return and martha appears . they ask her how a man as silent as jefferson won a woman as lovely as she . she tells them that she loves him because of the way “ he plays the violin '' . scene five . on june 22 , congress has reconvened . adams is trying to win over some of the states , sending thomas mckean to try to convince his delaware colleague george read , and franklin to convince judge james wilson of pennsylvania , while himself tackles samuel chase of maryland . adams receives a request for help from george washington , who is in the field . adams , chase and franklin leave to inspect a continental army training ground in new jersey . the other delegates who favor independence also leave the chamber . alone with his fellow conservatives for the first time , dickinson leads them in a minuet , singing of their desire to hold onto their wealth ( '' cool , cool considerate men '' ) . during their dance , another dispatch comes from george washington , warning them of british advances on philadelphia . the warning falls on deaf ears . after the dance , the remaining delegates depart , leaving andrew mcnair ( the custodian ) , the courier , and a workman in the chamber . the workman asks the courier if he has seen any fighting , and the courier replies that his two closest friends were killed on the same day at lexington . he describes the final thoughts of a dying young man as his mother searches for his body ( '' momma look sharp '' ) . act ii . . scene six . jefferson is outside the chamber while mr . thomson reads the declaration to congress . adams and franklin arrive , delighted : an exhibition of shooting by the continental army has convinced chase , and maryland will vote in favor of independence . they congratulate jefferson on his work , and franklin compares the creation of this new country to the hatching of a bird ( '' the egg '' ) . they debate which bird would best represent america ; franklin argues for the turkey , and jefferson suggests the dove , but adams insists on the eagle . the others resign themselves to that choice . scene seven . on june 28 , hancock asks if there are any alterations to be offered to the declaration of independence . many delegates voice suggestions . jefferson acquiesces to each recommendation , much to adams 's consternation , until dickinson demands the removal of a phrase calling king george a tyrant . jefferson refuses , stating that '' the king is a tyrant whether we say so or not . we might as well say so . '' when one delegate wants references to parliament removed for fear of offending possible friends in that body , an exasperated adams exclaims '' this is a revolution , damn it ! we 're going to have to offend somebody ! '' edward rutledge of south carolina objects to a clause condemning the slave trade . he accuses the northern colonies of hypocrisy . they also prosper from slavery , through the triangle trade ( '' molasses to rum '' ) . rutledge leads a walk-out with the delegates from both carolinas and georgia . the resolve of the other delegates is broken , and most of them also leave . franklin tells adams that the slavery clause has to go , angrily reminding him that independence is the primary issue . adams is jeopardizing the cause . adams ' faith in himself is shaken , and only encouragement from abigail , and the delivery of kegs of saltpeter from her and other massachusetts ladies , bolsters his commitment . re-reading a dispatch from washington , adams , now alone in the chamber , echoes his words ( '' is anybody there ? '' ) . discouraged but determined , adams declares his vision of his new country . dr . lyman hall of georgia unexpectedly returns to the chamber , telling adams he is changing georgia 's vote from '' nay '' to '' yea '' . it is now july 2 . the delegates slowly return to the chamber . caesar rodney arrives at the last minute . hancock calls for the vote on the lee resolution . thomson calls on each delegation . pennsylvania passes on the first call , but the rest of the northern and middle colonies ( save new york , which , with some shame , again abstains '' courteously '' ) vote '' yea '' . when the vote reaches south carolina , rutledge again demands the removal of the slavery clause . franklin pleads with adams . adams turns to jefferson , who reluctantly crosses the chamber and scratches out the clause himself . rutledge and the carolinas vote '' yea '' , as does georgia . pennsylvania 's vote is called again . dickinson intends to announce a “ nay ” vote , but franklin stops him and asks hancock to poll the members individually . franklin votes '' yea '' and dickinson '' nay '' , leaving the swing vote to wilson . dickinson and adams vie for his vote , until wilson says he does n't want to be remembered as '' the man who prevented american independence '' and votes '' yea '' . the motion is passed . hancock suggests that no man be allowed to sit in congress without signing the declaration . dickinson announces that he can not in good conscience sign it , and still hopes for reconciliation with england ; however , he resolves to join the army to fight for and defend the new nation . adams leads congress in a salute to dickinson as he leaves the chamber . hancock leads the delegates in signing the declaration , but is interrupted by the courier with another dispatch from washington , '' commander of the army of the united colonies . of the united states of america . '' he reports that preparations for the battle of new york are under way , but expresses concern about america 's badly outnumbered and under-trained troops . washington notifies lewis morris , who still has no instructions from the new york legislature , that his estates have been destroyed , but his family is safe . emboldened , morris says , '' to hell with new york . i 'll sign it anyway . '' new york 's vote is moved into the '' yea '' column . on the evening of july 4 , mcnair rings the liberty bell in the background as thomson calls each delegate to sign the declaration . the delegates freeze in position as the liberty bell rings to a fevered pitch . productions . after out-of-town tryouts , the original broadway production opened on broadway on march 16 , 1969 , at the 46th street theatre ( now the richard rodgers theatre ) barnes , clive . '' theater : spirited '1776 ' ; founding fathers ' tale is a happy musical ( article preview ) '' 1969 new york times review of the original production new york times , march 17 , 1969 and closed on february 13 , 1972 , after 1,217 performances . in its three-year run , it played in three different theatres : the 46th street , the st . james theatre ( 1970 ) and , finally , the majestic theatre ( 1971 ) . '' listing , '1776 ' '' internetbroadwaydatabase , accessed june 8 , 2011 the principal cast included william daniels , howard da silva , paul hecht , clifford david , ronald holgate , david ford , virginia vestoff and ken howard . rex everhart , who was da silva 's understudy , replaced him on the original broadway cast album after da silva suffered a mild heart attack , which required him to leave the show temporarily . betty buckley made her broadway debut as martha jefferson in the original stage production . clifford david left the production soon after opening . he was replaced as rutledge by david cryer who was in turn replaced by john cullum who became one of the few broadway replacements in history to recreate a role on film . ( cullum was succeeded in the broadway production by paul-david richards . ) the musical toured for two years in the united states and was given a london production , opening on june 16 , 1970 , at the new theatre . the production starred lewis fiander as adams , vivienne ross as abigail adams , ronald radd , bernard lloyd , david kernan as rutledge , john quentin as jefferson and cheryl kennedy as martha jefferson . an australian production , also with lewis fiander , opened at her majesty 's theatre in melbourne on 26 june 1971 and moved to the theatre royal in sydney on 11 september 1971 . 1776 was revived by the roundabout theatre company , opening on august 4 , 1997 , in a limited engagement at the roundabout 's home theater , the criterion center , before transferring to the george gershwin theatre on december 3 , 1997 , for a commercial run . bloom , linda . '' curtainup review , '1776 ' '' curtainup.com , accessed june 8 , 2011 it closed on june 14 , 1998 , after 333 performances and 34 previews . '' listing , '1776 ' revival '' internetbroadwaydatabase , accessed june 8 , 2011 the production was directed by scott ellis with choreography by kathleen marshall , and featured brent spiner as adams , michael cumpsty as dickinson , pat hingle as franklin , and paul michael valley as jefferson . rex everhart , who replaced howard da silva on the original cast album , understudied hingle as franklin . the musical was produced in an encores ! city center staged concert from march 30 to april 3 , 2016 . directed by garry hynes , the cast starred santino fontana as john adams , john larroquette as benjamin franklin , john behlmann as thomas jefferson , christiane noll as abigail adams , nikki renée daniels as martha jefferson , bryce pinkham as john dickinson , alexander gemignani as edward rutledge , andré de shields as stephen hopkins , and jubilant sykes as richard henry lee . the cast included macintyre dixon , ric stoneback , and kevin ligon reprising their roles from the 1997 revival as andrew mcnair , samuel chase , and george read respectively . gans , andrew . '' casting complete for encores '1776 ' '' playbill , february 2016 the production notably sported a racially diverse cast in light of the recent success of another musical about the founding fathers , hamilton . scheck , frank . '' theater review '' hollywood reporter , march 31 , 2016 the musical was produced in chicago , illinois by porchlight music theatre as part of their '' porchlight revisits '' series in november 2018 . directed by michael weber , music directed by jeremy ramey , with musical staging by michelle lauto . bylander , jessie . '' theater review '' splash magazines , november 25 , 2018 a broadway revival of 1776 is planned for spring 2021 . it is expected to be a co-production between the american repertory theater and the roundabout theatre company . the play was expected to be seen first at the american repertory theater in may to june 2020 , under the direction of diane paulus , and then in los angeles at the ahmanson theatre , before arriving at the american airlines theatre for roundabout 's 2020–2021 season . mcphee , ryan . '' diane paulus to direct broadway revival of 1776 '' playbill , may 6 , 2019 in 2020 , the show was postponed , due to the covid-19 pandemic . . original casts and characters . film adaptation . the 1972 film version of 1776 was produced by jack l . warner with hunt again directing and stone writing the screenplay . the film featured william daniels as adams , ken howard as jefferson , howard da silva as franklin , john cullum as edward rutledge , ron holgate as richard henry lee , and virginia vestoff as abigail adams , all of whom had performed their roles on broadway . the supporting cast was also mostly recruited from the broadway production . the principal exceptions were donald madden and blythe danner , who took over the roles of john dickinson and martha jefferson . a director 's cut of the original film has been released on dvd and blu-ray . both the look and sound of the original film have been improved through modern technology . many cuts to the original film by the producer jack warner have been restored , including verses from the songs '' piddle twiddle and resolve '' and '' he plays the violin '' and the entire '' cool , cool , considerate men '' . musical underscoring has been removed from several scenes without songs in order to strengthen the focus on dialogue . bonus material includes commentary by director peter hunt and by peter stone , the book/screenwriter . among other topics , they discuss artistic liberties and anachronisms used to dramatize the events . in popular culture . throughout the course of the third season of the netflix original series grace and frankie , robert , played by martin sheen , and his husband sol , played by sam waterston , are persuaded to audition for a local production of 1776 by the local gay men 's theater group , resulting in robert landing the lead role of john adams , much to the disappointment of sol who was not cast .