German Labour Front

history . its leader was robert ley , who stated that its aim was 'to create a true social and productive community' . smelster , 1988 theoretically , the daf existed to act as a medium through which workers and owners could mutually represent their interests . wages were set by the 12 daf trustees . the employees were given security of employment , and dismissal was increasingly made difficult . social security and leisure programmes were started , canteens , breaks , and regular working times were established . however , while some improvements to working conditions were enacted , wages were slightly reduced despite increased cost of living . william l . shirer , the rise and fall of the third reich : a history of nazi germany , new york , ny , simon & schuster , 2011 , p . 266 following the nazis ' volksgemeinschaft approach towards developing a greater '' people 's community '' , the daf expanded or established new social , educational , sports , health , and entertainment programs for german workers via the strength through joy programme , which included factory libraries and gardens , swimming pools , low-priced hot meals , adult education programs , periodic work breaks , physical education , sports facilities , gymnastic training , orchestral music during lunch breaks , free tickets to concerts and opera , and subsidised vacations that saw over 10.3 million germans signed up by 1938 . t.w . mason , social policy in the third reich : the working class and the ‘ national community ’ , 1918-1939 , oxford : uk , berg publishers , 1993 , p . 160 . völkischer beobachter , nov . 21 , 1936 the daf financed the building of ocean-going vessels that permitted german workers to pay minimal prices to sail to many foreign destinations . up to six ocean liners were operating just before the start of world war ii . according to the chief of the associated press in berlin , louis p . lochner , ticket prices for ocean steamer vessels ranged from twelve to sixteen marks for '' a full week on such a steamer '' . louis p . lochner , what about germany ? new york : ny , dodd , mead & company , 1942 , p . 32 for those who desired vacations closer to home , the daf constructed spa and summer resort complexes . the most ambitious was the 4.5 km long prora complex on rugen island , which was to have 20,000 beds , and would have been the largest beach resort in the world . it was never completed and the massive complex largely remained an empty shell right through until the 21st century . hatherly , owen ( 6 november 2017 ) hitler 's holiday camp : how the sprawling resort of prora met a truly modern fate . in theguardian.com . retrieved 15 january 2019 to help finance such ambitious social programmes , the daf also operated one of the largest financial institutions—the bank of german labour—along with additional community programs such as medical screening , occupational training , legal assistance and programs to improve the company 's working environment . richard bessel , nazism and the war , new york : ny , modern library , 2006 , p . 67 the daf was one of the largest nazi organisations , boasting of over 35,000 full-time employees by 1939 . to help hitler keep his promise to have every german capable of owning an affordable car ( volkswagen—the people ’ s car ) the daf subsidised the construction of an automobile factory , which was partially paid from workers ' payroll deductions . none of the 340,000 workers who were paying for a car ever received one , since the factory had to be retooled for war production after nazi germany invaded poland . in the case of workplace abuses , the daf set up worker councils to regulate and manage business practices , along with working hours and wages , and conflicts arising between employers and workers . in 1934 , worker councils dismissed over 50 workers , while in the same year 13 employers were punished through the expropriation of their business . michael t . florinsky , fascism and national socialism : a study of the economic and social policies of the totalitarian state , new york , ny : macmillan , 1936 employment contracts created under the weimar republic were abolished and renewed under new circumstances in the daf . employers could demand more of their workers , while at the same time workers were given increased security of work and increasingly enrolled into social security programmes for workers . the organisation , by its own definition , combated capitalism and liberalism , but also revolution against the factory owners and the nazi regime . the daf , however , did openly prefer to have large companies nationalised by the german state , instead of privately owned companies . daf membership was theoretically voluntary , but any workers in any area of german commerce or industry would have found it hard to get a job without being a member . membership required a fee within the range of 15 pfennig to three reichsmark , depending on the category a member fell into in a large scale of 20 membership groups . a substantially large amount of income was raised through fees . in 1934 , the total intake was 300,000,000 reichsmark . in us dollars , the annual income from dues to the labour front came to 160,000,000 in 1937 and 200,000,000 by 1939 . william l . shirer , the rise and fall of the third reich : a history of nazi germany , new york , ny , simon & schuster , 2011 , p . 266 . organization . there were two main components of the daf and these were : nationalsozialistische betriebszellenorganisation ( nsbo ; national socialist factory organization ) nationalsozialistische handels- und gewerbeorganisation ( nshago ; national socialist trade and industry organization ) several other sub-organisations were set up : kraft durch freude ( kdf ; strength through joy ) & ndash ; organisation giving the workers cheap/free holidays in addition to subsidised sporting and leisure facilities . schönheit der arbeit ( sda ; beauty of labour ) & ndash ; aimed to make workplaces more enticing to workers ( e.g . , renovations of outdated factories , new canteens for workers , smoking-free rooms , cleaner working spaces etc . ) . the front also organised the reichsberufswettkampf , a national vocational competition . see also . arbeitsfront der volksdeutschen in der slowakei national syndicalism . references . notes bibliography mcdonough , frank ( 1999 ) : hitler and nazi germany ( cambridge perspectives in history ) . cambridge : cambridge university press ronald smelser ( 1988 ) : robert ley , hitler 's labour front leader . oxford : berg publishers . external links . daf information for as level history unit 3 deutsche arbeitsfront ( daf ) at lebendiges museum online , in german . erste verordnung des führers und reichskanzlers über wesen und ziel der deutschen arbeitsfront vom 24 . oktober 1934