Ethnic minorities in China

ethnic groups . china is officially composed of 56 ethnic groups ( 55 minorities plus the dominant han ) . however , some of the ethnic groups as classified by the prc government contain , within themselves , diverse groups of people . various groups of the miao minority , for example , speak different dialects of the hmong–mien languages , tai–kadai languages , and chinese , and practice a variety of different cultural customs . xiaobing li , and patrick fuliang shan , ethnic china : identity , assimilation and resistance , lexington and rowman & littlefield , 2015 . whereas in many nations a citizen 's minority status is defined by their self-identification as an ethnic minority , in china minority nationality ( xiaoshu minzu ) is fixed at birth , a practice that can be traced to the foundation of the prc , when the communist party commissioned studies to categorize and delineate groups based on research teams ' investigation of minorities ' social history , economic life , language and religion in china 's different regions . the degree of variation between ethnic groups is not consistent . many ethnic groups are described as having unique characteristics from other minority groups and from the dominant han , but there are also some that are very similar to the han majority group . most hui chinese are indistinguishable from han chinese except for the fact that they practice islam , and most manchu are considered to be largely assimilated into dominant han society . china 's official 55 minorities are located primarily in the south , west , and north of china . only tibet autonomous region and xinjiang uygur autonomous region have a majority population of official minorities , while all other provinces , municipalities and regions of china have a han majority . in beijing itself , the han ethnic composition makes up nearly 96 % of the total population , while the ethnic minority total is 4.31 % , or a population of 584,692 ( as of 2008 ) . much of the dialog within china regarding minorities has generally portrayed minorities as being further behind the han in progress toward modernization and modernity . minority groups are often portrayed as rustic , wild , and antiquated . as the government often portrays itself as a benefactor of the minorities , those less willing to assimilate ( despite the offers of assistance ) are portrayed as masculine , violent , and unreasonable . groups that have been depicted this way include the tibetans , uyghurs and the mongols . groups that have been more willing to assimilate ( and accept the help of the government ) are often portrayed as feminine and sexual , including the miao , tujia and the dai . taiwanese aborigines include 16 roc-government recognized tribes which , as mentioned above , the prc government lumps together as the '' gaoshan '' people . they include : the amis , atayal , bunun , hla ’ alua , kanakanavu , kavalan , puyuma , rukai , saisiat , sakizawa , sakizaya , seediq , taiwan , thao , truku , tsou & yami tribes . these groupings were made by japanese anthropologists on the basis of language and culture , and do not necessarily reflect the felt sense of identity of the people involved , let alone their political organization ; however , the categories have taken on increasing importance over time . a few groups—primarily plains-dwelling ( pingpu ) —were ultimately de-recognized by taiwan 's nationalist government ( among them the siraya people ) , ostensibly for being insufficiently distinct from han chinese ; some activists have been lobbying for their re-recognition . government recognition as an aborigine is otherwise made on the basis of documented blood descent ( from both parents ) , not culture . the number of officially-recognized taiwanese aborigines is estimated at 530,000 , or 2.3 % of taiwan 's population . there is currently a political discussion over whether to establish official territories for recognized tribes , and if so what their rights and boundaries should be . at the same time , many aborigines have migrated to the cities . it has been estimated that some 85 % of all taiwanese people have some degree of aboriginal ancestry . since han chinese settlers in taiwan were disproportionately male , a large number of them married aboriginal women , whose presence may have gone unrecorded due to assimilation and a confucian emphasis on the patriline . demographics . the largest ethnic group , han , according to a 2005 sampling , constitute about 91.9 % of the total population . the next largest ethnic groups in terms of population include the zhuang ( 18 million ) , manchu ( 15 million ) , hui ( 10 million ) , miao ( 9 million ) , uyghur ( 8 million ) , yi ( 7.8 million ) , tujia ( 8 million ) , mongols ( 5.8 million ) , tibetans ( 5.4 million ) , buyei ( 3 million ) , yao ( 3.1 million ) , and koreans ( 2.5 million ) . minority populations have grown fast due to their being unaffected by the one child policy . . list of ethnic groups . ethnic minorities with low populations ( less than 100,000 individuals ) were not taken into account here . ethnic hans beijing hans chonqing hans gan hans gansu hans guizhou hans hainan hans hakka hans hebei hans heilongjian hans henan hans hubei hans jiaoliao hans jilin & liaoning hans lower yangtze hans min hans shaanxi hans shandong hans shanxi hans sichuan hans taiwan hans tianjin hans wu hans xiang hans yue hans yunnan hans ethnic minorities bai chinese koreans dai dong evenki hani hui jingpo kazakhs kyrgyz lahu li lisu manchus maonan miao taiwanese indigenous people tajiks tibetans tujia uyghurs wa yao yi zhuang mongol subgroups : buryats : chinese mongols : daurs : khalka mongols : oirat mongols : sartuul mongols . undistinguished ethnic groups . '' undistinguished '' ethnic groups are ethnic groups that have not been officially recognized or classified by the central government . the group numbers more than 730,000 people , and would constitute the twentieth most populous ethnic group of china if taken as a single group . the vast majority of this group is found in guizhou . these '' undistinguished ethnic groups '' do not include groups that have been controversially classified into existing groups . for example , the mosuo are officially classified as naxi , and the chuanqing are classified as han chinese , but they reject these classifications and view themselves as separate ethnic groups . citizens of mainland china who are of foreign origin are classified using yet another separate label : '' foreigners naturalized into the chinese citizenship '' . however , if a newly naturalized citizen already belongs to a recognized existing group among the 56 ethnic groups , then he or she is classified into that ethnic group rather than the special label . guarantee of rights and interests . the prc 's constitution and laws guarantee equal rights to all ethnic groups in china and help promote ethnic minority groups ' economic and cultural development one notable preferential treatment ethnic minorities enjoy was their exemption from the population growth control of the one-child policy . but according to an investigative report by the associated press published at 28 june 2020 , the chinese government is taking draconian measures to slash birth rates among uighurs and other minorities as part of a sweeping campaign to curb its muslim population , even as it encourages some of the country 's han majority to have more children . while individual women have spoken out before about forced birth control , the practice is far more widespread and systematic than previously known , according to an ap investigation based on government statistics , state documents and interviews with 30 ex-detainees , family members and a former detention camp instructor . the campaign over the past four years in the far west region of xinjiang is leading to what some experts are calling a form of '' demographic genocide '' . additionally , ethnic minorities enjoy other special exemptions which vary by province- these include lower tax thresholds and lower required scores for entry into university . the use of these measures to raise ethnic minorities ' human capital is seen by the central government as important for improving the economic development of ethnic minorities . ethnic minorities are represented in the national people 's congress as well as governments at the provincial and prefectural levels . some ethnic minorities in china live in what are described as ethnic autonomous areas . these '' regional autonomies '' guarantee ethnic minorities the freedom to use and develop their ethnic languages , and to maintain their own cultural and social customs . in addition , the prc government has provided preferential economic development and aid to areas where ethnic minorities live . furthermore , the chinese government has allowed and encouraged the involvement of ethnic minority participation in the party . even though ethnic minorities in china are granted specific rights and freedoms , many ethnic minorities still have headed towards the urban life in order to obtain a well paid job . minorities have widely benefited from china 's minimum livelihood guarantee program ( known as the dibao ) a programme introduced nationwide in 1999 whose number of participants had reached nearly twenty million by 2012 . the nature of the selection process entails that the programme 's providers be proactive and willing in seeking out impoverished prospective participants , as opposed to more comprehensive welfare schemes such as the urban resident basic medical insurance scheme ( urbmi ) , which is universally implemented . as such , the selection process for participants in the dibao programme has generated a perception among observers of the scheme that this programme have been used to mitigate dissent and neutralize any threat to the government that could lead to unrest- including negative performance evaluations of local officials . religions and their most common affiliations . buddhism/taoism — the miao ( minority ) , lisu ( minority ) , bai , bulang , dai , jinuo , jing , jingpo , mongol , manchu , naxi ( including mosuo ) , nu , tai , tibetan , zhuang ( minority ) , yi ( minority ) , and yugur ( '' yellow uyghurs '' ) . chinese orthodox church — the russians islam — the hui , uyghurs , kazakhs , dongxiang people , kyrgyz people , salar , tajiks , uzbeks , bonans , and tatars . judaism — kaifeng jews protestantism in china — the lisu ( 70 % ; see lisu church ) shamanism/animism — daur , ewenkis , oroqen , hezhen , and derung . see also . affirmative action in china han chinese subgroups china national ethnic song and dance ensemble chinese nationality law demographics of the people 's republic of china and taiwan demographics of china ethnic groups in chinese history ethnic issues in china graphic pejoratives in written chinese human rights in china list of china administrative regions by ethnic group list of endangered languages in china list of ethnic groups in china minzu university of china , a university in beijing designated for ethnic minorities . secession in china sinocentrism taiwanese aborigines unrecognized ethnic groups in china zhonghua minzu . notes . references . further reading . tang , wenfang and he , gaochao . '' separate but loyal : ethnicity and nationalism in china . '' policy studies 56 . east–west center . china ethnic statistical yearbook 2016 . external links . chinese national minorities the ethnic publishing house : on customs and autonomous places ( in simplified chinese ) china national ethnic song & dance ensemble brief description of chinese ethnic minority groups descriptions of each ethnic minority group ( china.org.cn ) guarantee of rights and interests of ethnic minorities china : minority exclusion , marginalization and rising tensions , report by minority rights group and human rights in china , april 2007 regional ethnic autonomy law downloadable article : '' evidence that a west-east admixed population lived in the tarim basin as early as the early bronze age '' li et al . bmc biology 2010 , 8:15 . wayback machine