Megatron

films . megatron appears in transformers . several years after being discovered by captain archibald witwicky , megatron 's frozen body is transported from the arctic circle to hoover dam to be guarded by sector 7 , a secret government organization that studies non-biological extraterrestrials ( n.b.e . ) , as well as other alien-related activities . sector 7 agent seymour simmons explains that the earth 's magnetic field may have interfered with megatron 's telemetry , causing him to crash during the ice age . he also explains that his technology was reverse-engineered , producing the world 's modern technology . megatron 's location , as well as the allspark 's , is located by a group of decepticons led by starscream . after sneaking into hoover dam frenzy thaws out megatron , who escapes outside and learns from starscream that the humans and the autobots have taken the allspark . megatron pursues the autobots and their allies to los angeles , where he quickly ( and rather brutally ) disposes of jazz before battling optimus prime . he overpowers optimus and then pursues sam witwicky up a condemned building , attempting to taunt and threaten the human into giving him the allspark . sam declines , prompting megatron to knock the boy off the roof of the building with his flail . optimus saves sam and battles megatron again . towards the end of the battle as megatron and optimus are fighting , blackout attempts to help megatron kill optimus prime . however , blackout is killed by captain lennox and his team . after being weakened by human combat jets , megatron attempts to seize the allspark once again , only to have it shoved into his exposed spark chamber by sam , killing him . megatron 's body is later dumped into the laurentian abyss , along with the other dead decepticons . megatron returns in the sequel film , transformers : revenge of the fallen . in this film , he is revealed to be the fallen 's disciple , and the second commander of the decepticon armies , as the fallen is the true commander of the decepticons . megatron is revived by scalpel and the constructicons with an allspark shard and now takes on the form of a cybertronian winged tank . he then flies to the nemesis , where he is greeted by starscream ( whom he briefly pummels and berates for deserting him on earth ) . he then reunites with the fallen , telling of the allspark 's demise before being told by his master that its knowledge ( which has been passed on to sam ) is the key for providing energon , which is needed by the decepticons in order to awaken their protoform armies . sam , his girlfriend mikaela banes and his dorm mate leo spitz are abducted by grindor into an abandoned factory where megatron meets them . pinning down sam , threatening to torture him after acquiring what he needed , megatron orders scalpel to extract the energon information from sam 's brain ( ordering him to actually remove his brain ) , but they are quickly stopped by optimus prime . megatron and prime have a brief fight in the warehouse and then have a major battle in a forest , with starscream and grindor joining in . the fight ends with megatron killing prime by stabbing and shooting him with his fusion cannon , but then being forced to escape due to the intervention of autobot reinforcements . megatron then declares to starscream that the decepticons must reveal themselves to the humans in order to flush out sam , and assists the fallen in ordering the world 's humans to find sam and bring him to the decepticons . megatron and starscream soon arrive in egypt , and he commands his decepticons ( including several constructicons and starscream ) to prevent sam from getting the matrix of leadership to optimus and retrieve it for the fallen 's machine . he then summons devastator , who destroys the top part of the great pyramid of giza , revealing the star harvester . the fallen soon arrives after devastator 's destruction ( see devastator for more info . ) , and takes the matrix of leadership from a recently revived optimus . megatron then greets him but is blown away by an upgraded optimus prime ( using the parts of jetfire to fly ) . megatron and his master then battle optimus . in one brutal move , optimus grabs megatron 's arm cannon and forces it to fire on megatron 's face , destroying half of it , and then slices off his right arm and shoots him through a wall with jetfire 's afterburners . after seeing the fallen killed , starscream advises that they should retreat . megatron does so , but vows that the war is n't over . megatron returns in transformers : dark of the moon . in the three years since the events of revenge of the fallen , megatron has been hiding out in africa healing his wounds , and taking care of the hatchlings . in the film , it is revealed that megatron allied himself with sentinel prime in an attempt to revitalize cybertron . soundwave and laserbeak inform him of the autobot 's discovery of the ark ship on the moon , and orders them to kill their human allies . when sentinel reveals his true intentions to the autobots , megatron arrives in washington , d.c . to meet with him . after blasting the statue of abraham lincoln and using it as a throne , he witnesses sentinel activate his space bridge to bring his decepticon forces to earth . during the invasion of chicago , sentinel violently demoralizes megatron after the latter makes a suggestion of how they will rule cybertron together after it has arrived through the space bridge . when cybertron appears in earth 's atmosphere , megatron shows a rare example of sadness and regret . towards the end of the battle , megatron is convinced by carly that sentinel will take all of the power and credit for revitalizing cybertron for himself . angered , megatron turns on sentinel and severely damages him , declaring that earth is his planet to rule . when cybertron 's trip through the space bridge fails , megatron slyly proposes a truce to optimus , so long as he remains in charge of the decepticon forces . but the autobot leader , knowing that megatron would not give in so easily , denies the offer and attacks him , overpowering him and ripping megatron 's head off with an axe , finally killing him . shortly after , optimus uses megatron 's shotgun to execute sentinel . in transformers : age of extinction , it is revealed megatron 's mind is actually still alive and in stasis inside his severed head . a few years after the battle of chicago , megatron 's remains are acquired by ksi , who are attempting to forge their own transformers with '' transformium '' . their ceo joshua joyce forces brains to download information from megatron 's head , which the decepticon leader silently allows so joshua will gain the information needed to succeed , which will grant megatron access to a new body . megatron then infects and possesses the unit galvatron . he then pretends to obey orders , only to finally defy his creators at the film 's climax and accept his new identity and rebirth . megatron returns in transformers : the last knight , reborn , having discarded his identity as galvatron and having gained new body that resembles a dark knight , and taken a new vehicle mode in the form of a cybertronian jet , though how remains unspecified in the film ( though it is hinted that quintessa , the creator of cybertronians , is responsible for his new form ) . he first appears when barricade reports to him that cade yeager has received the talisman carried by the cybertronian knight steelbane . he then decides to use the trf ( transformers reaction force ) to lead him to cade . megatron also kidnaps two cia agents to bargain for the release of a new '' crew '' to help him hunt yeager . upon meeting with william lennox , megatron successfully bargains for the release of mohawk , dreadbot , nitro zeus , and onslaught ( only settling for the latter after his first choice , the maniacal berserker , is refused ) to hunt yeager and the autobots . megatron then goes after cade , and attacks his hideout , but cade and his companions lure megatron into a trap , killing all the decepticons except him , barricade and nitro zeus . forced to retreat , megatron later sends barricade after cade and bumblebee , but his plan is thwarted and he instead follows cade , bumblebee and vivianne wembly to the submerged ship of the knights of iacon , where quintessa 's staff of life , once wielded by merlin , is hidden . when optimus prime steals the staff as nemesis prime , megatron steals it himself and takes it to stonehenge , where he uses it to open a portal that will allow quintessa to destroy earth ( revealed to be unicron ) before killing sir edmund burton and facing off against the autobots and optimus in battle . megatron is eventually defeated by optimus during the melee over the staff when he has his arm sliced off and is kicked out of quintessa 's chamber into thin air . animated series . after the events of the revenge of the fallen film , megatron goes into hiding , orchestrating the events from soundwave getting into nest headquarters to lockdown being pursued by ratchet . megatron finally reveals himself in cyber missions 4 , when optimus and sideswipe track his spark 's signal , which leads them to an abandoned warehouse . the two realize that megatron is always one step ahead of them , and megatron slashes at sideswipe from behind . megatron starts dueling optimus , then sideswipe joins in with him . realizing that he is outnumbered , megatron transforms into tank mode and shoots the roof , which collapses on optimus and sideswipe . megatron gets away , but he leaves a trail of tank tread marks that lead out of the warehouse . megatron returns 8 episodes later in cyber missions 12 , where he and starscream scheme in the arctic . he reveals to starscream that he is aware of his ambitions and will punish him if he ever shows it again . optimus prime , who tracked them , soon arrives and combats them . when the rest of optimus 's team arrives , megatron orders starscream to take care of them , which starscream agrees to , but not without complaint . megatron and starscream are simultaneously defeated , and the decepticon commander flees after optimus grants him mercy . most of the decepticons return for the final mission , decepticons attack . after receiving a signal from soundwave emitting from a bullet train , megatron arrived on the other side of the tunnel the train was emerging from and derailed it . ripping open one of the cars , megatron berated soundwave for being captured so easily , until it was revealed it was simply a hologram of his communications officer . megatron declared it a trap , to which optimus replied that it was a moment later . the autobots and decepticons battled for one last time , with optimus telling megatron that his alliances were made out of fear , not friendship . the decepticons are then cornered by the human troops . optimus prime then demands that all decepticons leave earth . all of the decepticons , including megatron , leave earth , but not before the commander declares that he will return . books . megatron appears in the prequel novel transformers : ghosts of yesterday , where it is revealed that reverse-engineering of his body has produced a spacecraft called ghost-1 . the spacecraft is sent into space in 1969 , where the humans on board encounter megatron ( here referred to throughout as the '' ice man '' ) , who is briefly reanimated in the middle of a battle between the americans and the soviets . however , he is placed in cryo-stasis once again . the children 's book transformers – meet the decepticons , by jennifer frantz , has a slightly different ending than the movie . this book has all six decepticons leaving earth together after being defeated by the autobots , instead of having most of their numbers die . the novelization for transformers : dark of the moon ends with megatron laying down his weapons and calling for a truce in earnest . optimus prime spares him and the decepticons leave earth to rebuild cybertron . in the novel , comic and video game adaptations of revenge of the fallen , the slightly different ending gives more depth to megatron 's relationship with the fallen . the fallen prepares for the final battle with optimus prime , it is revealed that the fallen 's promises of power to his apprentice were lies . out of anger , megatron betrays the fallen and allows optimus to kill him for good . he then flies back aboard the nemesis to take command of the remaining decepticon army . in the novel version of dark of the moon , optimus and megatron work together and defeat sentinel prime . though a fight was teased , megatron reveals to optimus he is tired of fighting , and is suing for peace . he declares he will work to restore cybertron to its previous glory and will send for the autobots , so that they may rebuild their planet , as brothers . comics . . idw publishing . the back story of megatron is told in both transformers : defiance and issue 1 of the transformers : movie prequel comic . in the comics , megatron is revealed to have co-ruled cybertron together with optimus prime , serving as lord high protector . megatron and optimus learned of an alien force coming to their planet for the allspark , just as a mysterious artifact was unearthed . megatron is gravely injured , but the artifact ( containing the fallen ) awakens and heals him , swaying him with promises of power . megatron soon desires power over the allspark , and under the fallen 's influence , forms the decepticons , sending the bulk of his soldiers in a craft , the nemesis . the autobots attempt to hide the allspark , but megatron sees through the ruse and launches a full-scale attack , during which the allspark is launched into space . megatron almost catches up with the allspark as it lands on earth . in his reckless desire to possess it , megatron pursues it right into earth 's atmosphere and falls into the icy waters , resulting in his being frozen in stasis lock . in the late 19th century , captain archibald witwicky discovers the decepticon during an arctic expedition . at the turn of the 20th century , a crew of men later take his body—dubbing him the '' ice man '' —and keep him in storage up until the present day , eventually relocating him to hoover dam in nevada . in a flashback in the movie sequel comic transformers : the reign of starscream , megatron 's negative relationship with starscream is shown to be a result of starscream failing on a mission . titan magazines . all events that take place in the alternate reality where megatron won the battle at mission city are in italics . in titan magazines ' transformers magazine , the uk-originated strips ( written by simon furman ) reveal megatron 's actions between issues 1 and 2 of the idw comic . pursuing the allspark into space following the events of movie prequel 1 , megatron is delayed in his pursuit by a tractor beam from cybertron . breaking free and attacking the culprits—jazz , ratchet and ironhide—megatron realizes that if he engages them , he would be delayed further . summoning devastator to deal with them , he resumes his pursuit—but the desperate gamble works and he ( temporarily ) loses the allspark 's trail . the character profile the magazine provided sheds a little more light on megatron 's desire to possess the allspark . he believes that while cybertronians could already transform into other forms via a scanning process , the allspark could allow transformers to simply imagine the form they want and change accordingly . interfacing with the allspark directly , megatron gains his deadly jet mode and now began his plans to obtain it permanently . in '' twilight 's last gleaming '' part 3 , bumblebee attempts to take on megatron in the sector 7 base as mikaela attempts to free optimus prime , but she is attacked by frenzy . in part 4 , mikaela frees prime and freezes frenzy just as autobot reinforcements arrive and assist bumblebee in fighting megatron . cybertron 's most wanted . yet another version of megatron was featured in botcon 's 2015 '' cybertron 's most wanted '' storyline . this version featured a history virtually identical to that of the megatron of the films , up until the final battle of dark of the moon . at this point , some force intervened to save megatron from optimus 's killing blow , allowing megatron to kill not only optimus but sentinel prime as well . after rebuilding himself and conquering earth , megatron set out to reclaim cybertron , only to be forced to contend with a new autobot leader who proved to be an even more dangerous foe than optimus : rodimus prime . defeated and left hanging from the edge of a spacebridge , megatron chose to abandon himself to fate rather than allow rodimus to kill him , and wound up in the interdimensional city of axiom nexus , despite restrictions put in place by the transtech to prevent versions of megatron from taking up residence there . he soon formed a new gang of criminals including maximal thief packrat , decepticon triple-changer battletrap , shattered glass autobot stepper , and a trio of microns . transformers animated . megatron 's cybertronian design hearkens to the movie version but with more human-like features , while his earth design bears similarities to the '' super megatron '' form of his g1 incarnation . he wields his trademark fusion cannon ( which is much larger than usual in this series ) and carries a pair of swords . early artwork depicted them as katana , but this was later changed . his original alternate mode is an unknown cybertronian space vehicle but becomes a tiltrotor aircraft once he is rebuilt to blend in with earth . animated series . in this series , megatron has his own catchphrase : '' decepticons , transform and rise up ! '' , contrasting optimus prime 's classic '' autobots , transform and roll out ! '' line . a marked contrast between this and other series is that megatron and optimus prime 's antagonism is not personal : before their first battle , they had never met , and they continue to clash on the basis that they are on opposite sides rather than on any particular personal hatred . megatron does not even bother to remember optimus 's name until the series finale . unlike several other series , megatron does not upgrade into galvatron ( though a character named cyclonus appears in season 3 mentioning a galvatron ) , he remains as megatron for the full three seasons . the scale chart released for the series indicates megatron stands about 35 feet tall . as revealed in '' transform and roll out '' , megatron had spent 4 million stellar cycles ( years ) in search of the allspark . even though he found it , megatron was betrayed at the beginning of the series by starscream , who planted an explosive device on his back . due to the explosion that crippled the autobots craft , megatron 's lifeless body crashed on earth , contracting '' space barnacles , '' while his disembodied head was found in rural michigan by a young isaac sumdac . megatron 's head subsequently became a keystone for sumdac 's various robotic creations , which he used to help convert detroit into a technological metropolis within the next 50 years . this version is less tolerant of starscream 's treachery : after gaining his new body , he uses sari sumdac 's key to slay starscream , and takes great pleasure in killing him several times once he discovers that starscream has become immortal due to a shard of the allspark embedded in his head , and he would later destroy starscream 's replacement body , moments after he got it , once the treacherous decepticon had outgrown his usefulness . megatron is also the most cool-headed among his other adaptations , despite being just as arrogant as his predecessors . furthermore , he does n't consider optimus of any actual importance until the climactic final battle on earth , where megatron finally acknowledged him as a threat by name . in the end , megatron is captured and brought to cybertron . after the events of the animated series , megatron was placed in detention at the trypticon stronghold in kaon city . if cyclonus is to be believed , in the far future , megatron will become galvatron , under unknown circumstances , and kill oil slick . transtech . the megatron of the transtech world works together with his world 's optimus prime . shockwave is one of his chief scientific researchers . shockwave used to work for the renegade decepticon jhiaxus as a scientist , but after jhiaxus was destroyed shockwave was brought in by megatron as a prisoner . initially put on trial for war crimes he was freed by megatron , who argued to sentinel prime that shockwave 's mind would be an invaluable asset to them . fun publications . in withered hope megatron and optimus prime heard the pleas of six gobots whose home dimension was being destroyed , but he was n't interested in helping them . in transcendent shockwave kidnapped breakaway to examine him under the orders of megatron . after shockwave discovered that certain systems in breakaway were unique and might be useful megatron requested permission from transtech ratbat to take the autobot apart , even if it may kill him . when alpha trion 's forces raided the lab to free skyfall megatron opposed them , but they escaped to another dimension . megatron appeared in invasion prologue by fun publications . . '' shattered glass '' . this megatron , later called galvatron , is a heroic mirror image of the usual megatron character from the botcon exclusive '' shattered glass '' comic , in which the decepticons are on the side of good and the autobots on the side of evil . megatron transforms into a cybertronian jet . he has a drone partner named rumbler , who can act as a cannon for megatron or form a neutronic blade weapon . after nearly being killed in an assassination attempt megatron was rebuilt by nexus prime into galvatron . according to his tech specs megatron was once a young mathematician who lectured at one of cybertron 's most prestigious universities . fun publications . in the fun publications story '' shattered glass '' megatron recruits the autobot cliffjumper from an alternate reality to aid him against the autobots of his world . he later leads an attack on the autobot 's ark launch site . megatron appears in '' dungeons & dinobots '' , a text-based story . he defends the arch-ayr fuel dump from an autobot attack . he later sends several of his troops to capture and reprogram the rogue dinobots built by the mad autobot scientist wheeljack . megatron is captured by the autobot targetmasters in '' do over '' , but was freed thanks to help by the predacons and whisper . when confronted by optimus prime he attempts to use the autobot targetmaster nightstick to shoot the autobot leader , but nightstick takes control of megatron 's arm . megatron then tricks optimus into using megatron 's own weapon to cut megatron 's hand off , freeing him from nightstick . megatron misses the launch of the decepticon ship nemesis , which is taken over by starscream to counter autobot ship ark . in reunification , megatron greets a quintesson and the dimensional travelers breakaway , topspin skyfall and landquake after their escape from the autobot combiner computron . megatron introduces the travelers to heatwave but then is shot by the traitor cyclonus , who is working for alpha trion . the travelers try to combine their powers with heatwave to return megatron to life , but instead , have a vision of skyfall and are combined into nexus prime . nexus prime resurrects megatron as galvatron . megatron appears in a flashback in '' the coming storm '' , depicting his rebirth as galvatron by nexus prime . another character named '' megatron '' would appear in the story '' shattered destiny '' , the final chapter of the beast wars shattered glass comic arc . this version is a heroic counterpart to the beast era megatron . megatron is a heroic predacon . megatron 's ship , the darksyde , was battling the axalon when it was pulled through an unexpected temporal and dimensional rift and crash-landed on prehistoric earth . he and his crew disembarked to find depth charge outside . megatron appears to be based on the deluxe-sized beast wars 10th-anniversary megatron toy with optimus primal 's color scheme . transformers : prime . megatron is the leader of the main group of decepticons in the 2010 computer-animated robot superhero tv series transformers : prime . megatron started out as a nameless worker , numbered d-16 , who took the name megatronus ( after a '' mythical '' character in cybertronian history ) during his days in the gladiator ring . his name was shortened to simply megatron by the chanting crowds at one match , and he took it as his own unique name . he believes that earth-style forms are beneath him , preferring to hold onto his frequently changed cybertronian forms . after infusing dark energon in his system , megatron 's eyes flicker between red and purple . the generations megatron toy was picked at the 6th-best toy of 2010 by topless robot . . animated series . megatron was a regular character in the transformers : prime animated series , the main antagonist along with unicron , and one of the main characters in war for cybertron and fall of cybertron . he is the leader of the decepticons during the great war on cybertron . during the golden age on cybertron , megatron named himself megatronus , named after one the thirteen , megatronus prime . megatronus was a gladiator in the pits of kaon , who grew ambitious and saw corruption within the caste system and sought to put an end to it , with his own rule . megatron began talking with his old friend , orion pax , who became a mentor to him . after leaving the kaon for the political one , megatronus saw fit to shorten his name . when '' megatron '' was rejected by the autobot high council , he waged war on cybertron and left the planet wasted . now he and his long story rival , optimus prime , battle on the planet earth for the control of the human planet . megatron 's first grand plan was to invade earth with an army of undead terrorcons but he himself was gravely wounded , leaving starscream in charge of the decepticon army until he was reawakened by bumblebee who he managed to possess for a brief time where he retook command . megatron then , however , found himself teaming up with team prime , at that time , to counter the threat of unicron . after unicron 's defeat megatron found himself both in a mission to retrieve the iacon relic weapons as well as keep his troops in line from various in fighting among the ranks which resulted in a few casualties and several betrayals . eventually fighting for the restoration of cybertron and cyberforming of earth , which was foiled by optimus , but megatron had his revenge and used the nemesis to destroy the autobot base before setting up the new fortress of darkmount . shortly after the destruction of the base megatron sent massive search parties to find the surviving autobots and was even given a predacon to look for them . however , darkmount was soon destroyed by an all-out attack by the autobots . megatron 's next plan was to create an entire army of predacons to serve him . however , when his lone beast evolved and transformed , megatron became fearful of what he was capable of and scrapped it . in the destruction megatron found the means to restore cybertron once more with synthetic energon , as megatron 's plan to rebuild the omega lock progressed , the autobots invaded the nemesis . as optimus and megatron fought , the tyrant was finally killed by bumblebee . the series ' finale movie , transformers prime beast hunters : predacons rising , though '' killed '' , megatron was awakened by unicron , who took possession of his body and reformatted him with new improvements upon his chassis . unicron would then inflict eternal suffering upon the warlord as unicron attempted to destroy cybertron , but was freed from the chaos lord by optimus prime . megatron then regained control of his body , but then abandoned any plans of conquest , having realized the true meaning of oppression by unicron 's treatment of him . he abandons leading the decepticons and disbands them as a military force , then flies off into space , presumably as banishment and self-imposed exile for his past actions . optimus even stated that every sentient being , including megatron , has the capacity to change for the better . while megatron does n't appear in the sequel series , transformers : robots in disguise , or the spin-off , transformers : rescue bots , which is aimed at younger audiences , he is sometimes referenced or mentioned , tying those series into the larger continuity . books . megatron appears in the short story bumblebee at tyger pax by alex irvine . megatron also appears in the novel transformers : exodus . it shows that he got his name originated from the original name of fallen ( transformers ) . he reappears in the sequels transformers : exiles and transformers : retribution . in the novels , he is portrayed as a miner originally known only by the designation d-17 who fought alongside sentinel prime and others in resisting the quintesson occupation of cybertron . however , the resulting caste system imposed on cybertron left megatron on the lower rungs of society , and he eventually became a gladiator . desiring to establish a new identity for himself and reshape cybertron , he took the name of megatronus , which was eventually shortened to megatron by his followers . he eventually began using his fame as a gladiator to take a political stance , crying for the lower members of cybertronian society to rise up and claim what was rightfully theirs . in the process of this , he attracted the attention of a data clerk named orion pax , who contacted megatron and began consulting with him regarding their agenda . megatron 's followers soon began launching terrorist attacks which he denied involvement in , and he arranged through orion to appear before the high council of cybertron . there megatron argued for the destruction of the old system , while orion called for reform ; it was after their appeals that the council renamed orion , dubbing him optimus prime and charging him with seeking out the matrix of leadership . enraged by this ruling , megatron and his decepticons declared war against optimus and his autobot adherents . the conflict devastated much of cybertron , and in his quest for an advantage , megatron learned of the existence of dark energon . utilizing this new power , the decepticons began to gain ground , and megatron sought a means of infecting all of cybertron with the substance to insure an unending supply . in the process , he was forced to face sentinel prime , whom his forces had previously held prisoner , and starscream , who made a bid to take over the decepticons . after mortally wounding sentinel and humbling starscream into continued subservience , megatron succeeded in defeating omega supreme as well and infecting cybertron with dark energon . the autobots managed to remove the taint , but optimus prime and many of his forces departed cybertron in the ark to give the planet time to heal , prompting megatron to give chase in his nemesis battleship . megatron and his forces pursued the ark to velocitron , where he made contact with a local decepticon faction alerted to his impending arrival by a decepticon double-agent amongst the autobots . continuing on , they arrived on the planet junkion , where they discovered the requiem blaster , megatronus prime 's long-lost weapon of mass destruction . recovering the weapon from within the planet , the decepticons attached it to the nemesis and engaged the autobots in battle . however , the requiem blaster proved too powerful to utilize more than once , prompting the decepticons to jettison it . after dueling optimus prime , who wielded the legendary cyber caliber , megatron was confronted by another member of the thirteen : nexus prime . during his battle with optimus , he briefly saw into his opponent 's mind and got a sense of the direction in which to seek the allspark , a legendary artifact jettisoned from cybertron by optimus to keep it out of megatron 's hands . megatron and his forces set out in search of it but ran afoul of a crew of star seeker pirates led by thundertron , who engaged the decepticons in a heated battle before withdrawing . the supposed allspark signal would prove to be a ruse , generated by the quintessons to lure the autobots and decepticons to one of their conquered worlds . thus , on the planet aquatron , megatron and optimus were commanded to come to a peace agreement . however , this all proved to be another ruse intended to capture both factions of transformers and use them to provide power for the quintessons ' invasion of cybertron . megatron and optimus were forced into another duel and afterward drawn into the sewer-like depths of the quintesson city . while there , megatron discovered prophecies about himself recorded by the sharkticons who had resisted quintesson slavery in times past . eventually , he realized these prophecies by taking into his body a facsimile of the matrix of leadership , which caused him to take on sharkticon qualities . leading the sharkticons in battle , he fought against the quintessons and sought to take over their world , only to be defeated by quintesson-created sharkticon general tyrannicon , who stole the matrix replica from him . the autobots and decepticons subsequently departed aquatron , with their destinies eventually leading them to earth . voice actors . megatron is often voiced by frank welker , who originally voiced the g1 character , and while hugo weaving was chosen to voice megatron in the first three live-action films , welker voiced megatron once again in supporting media and eventually inherited the role in 2017 's transformers : the last knight . he would later reprise his role as megatron for the series transformers : prime . the second most consistent voice actor may be david kaye , who originally voiced the beast wars predacon leader and an alternate version of the decepticon leader in the unicron trilogy . a number of other voice actors have voiced versions of megatron such as garry chalk , daniel riordan , corey burton , and fred tatasciore , in beast wars as the original megatron , transformers : robots in disguise , transformers animated , and transformers : war for cybertron and the transformers : dark of the moon video game , respectively . games . generation 1 megatron has appeared in numerous transformers video games . megatron appeared as a final boss in transformers battle circuit , a simple flash-based video game on the hasbro web site . megatron appeared as a playable character in the fighting games transformers battle universe , a net jet game in which four incarnations of the character are playable , and dreammix tv world fighters , a crossover between various franchises including transformers . the generation 1 version of megatron is offered as a downloadable character for the playstation 3 and xbox 360 versions of the transformers : revenge of the fallen video game . despite being a distinct playable character , he is also summoned in gun mode by generation 1 starscream as an attack move . armada megatron is among the characters appearing in the 2004 transformers video game for the playstation 2 as a boss . atari begins the '' ultimate conflict '' with worldwide release of 'transformers ' video game , business wire , may 12 , 2004 beast era megatron appears in the 1999 game boy color video game kettō transformers beast wars : beast senshi saikyō ketteisen . he is a playable character in the fighting games transformers battle universe , a net jet game . he is among the licensed characters in the pc video game beast wars transformers . movie megatron appears in the first film 's video game adaptation , transformers : the game . in the autobot campaign , megatron appears at the last cut scene on level three being released from hoover dam in the autobot campaign . he later appears as the final boss and is killed when optimus prime shoves the allspark into his chest . in the decepticon campaign , megatron is freed by starscream and blackout at the last cut scene when he goes on a rampage through the city looking for optimus prime , sam and the allspark . he is also playable on the last mission where optimus prime is fought as the final boss . at the end , optimus appears dead , but is then seen sneaking up towards the allspark . megatron stops him in his path and kills him with his flail . he then appears in the last cut scene where he rules earth and orders barricade , starscream , blackout and brawl to kill off the rest of the human race . in transformers autobots , megatron fulfills much of the same role as he had in the 2007 film , awakening from stasis towards the climax and ultimately being killed with the allspark . transformers decepticons revolves around a power struggle between megatron and starscream , who had taken command in his absence . the decepticons ultimately side with megatron as the player-created character learns that the true meaning of being a decepticon is loyalty to megatron . after all of his men are killed in starscream 's bid for power , megatron battles and kills starscream for his treachery . though he has lost the allspark and his troops , megatron is nonetheless satisfied , declaring that the weak all deserve to die and only serve to benefit the strong . movie megatron is among the playable characters in the 2009 revenge of the fallen video game by activision . in the game , he has two modes , megatron ( tank mode ) and megatron flight ( jetpack mode ) , the latter of which is only used in his fight against the fallen after being betrayed . megatron appears as a playable character in the fighting games transformers battle universe , a net jet game . megatron is among the characters who appear in the transformers cvberverse battle builder game . movie megatron is one of the decepticons featured in transformers : the ride at universal studios theme parks . in the ride , megatron and the decepticons invade n.e.s.t . headquarters to steal the allspark shard , but the autobot evac acquires it and rushes across the city to keep it away from the decepticons . ultimately , in a scene similar to the end of the first film , evac stabs megatron in the chest with the allspark shard , killing the decepticon leader . a younger version of prime megatron appears in the 2010 video game transformers : war for cybertron voiced by fred tatasciore . in the decepticon campaign , megatron fights to return cybertron to his version of the '' golden age '' by any means necessary . he discovers a source of all-powerful dark energon guarded by starscream in a research station in orbit . despite warnings from starscream and his partner jetfire that dark energon destroys all those who come into contact with it , megatron obtains it and immerses himself in it , and uses it to power the decepticon war effort . after megatron corrupts the core of cybertron with dark energon , cybertron begins shutting down to recover from the corruption in transformers : fall of cybertron . megatron blames optimus prime for the death of the planet , but is killed by metroplex . after being revived by soundwave , megatron leads his army into space to strip earth of its resources . megatron also appears in transformers : rise of the dark spark , set in between war for cybertron and fall of cybertron , in which he attempts to harness the power of the dark spark . toys . right the hasbro toys predate the film and animation versions of the transformers . through the years , there have been many toys representing the original generation 1 incarnation of megatron , some of which have appeared in fiction , others of which have not . additionally , some toy makers have made unlicensed toys in his image , or accessories for the existing toys . the original 1984 megatron toy was released in japan as part of takara 's microman line under the name '' mc-12 gun robo '' . the toy 's characteristics such as the head design and fusion cannon have been incorporated in other variants and incarnations of megatron toys . today , this toy is on a list of banned items on planes in the u.s . , and a special license is required to own this toy in australia . despite this , takara tomy has reissued this toy numerous times in japan , mostly to commemorate the anniversary of the transformers franchise . due to stricter laws on toys resembling real weapons , toys of megatron have undergone different forms of alternate modes such as tanks , cars and jets . in 2006 , hasbro released the classics voyager megatron figure , which transformed into a nerf maverick rev-6 replica—the first megatron toy in over two decades to have a gun mode . megatron , shockwave and ravage are the three decepticon figures available to play in the monopoly transformers collectors edition game . . cultural legacy . megatron has been parodied by such shows as frank tv , scrubs , robot chicken , drawn together , family guy and mad . frank welker reprised his role for some of megatron 's parodic appearances . american football player calvin johnson is nicknamed '' megatron '' . prime megatron appears as one of the hub carolers in a christmas-themed commercial for the hub . in 2009 , a canadian man was arrested after a three-hour standoff with police , during which he wielded only an '' '80s-style '' megatron toy . 3-hour standoff ends peacefully , by dalton chen , in the windsor star ; published june 3 , 2009 ; retrieved april 3 , 2016 ( via archive.org ) at botcon 2010 , hasbro named megatron as one of the first five robot inductees in the transformers hall of fame . wizard magazine rated megatron the 68th-greatest villain of all time . wizard 177 beast era megatron was named the best upgrade in beast wars history topless robot . by contrast , transmetal megatron was voted the fourth-strangest transformers beast wars figure by topless robot . in 2019 , american rapper nicki minaj released a song entitled '' megatron '' in reference to her 'bad guy ' persona . . references . external links . megatron on imdb tfwiki : megatron ( disambiguation ) tfwiki : megatron ( g1 ) the mc-12 gun robo , megatron 's pre-transformers incarnation as a microman figure original patent for the mc-12 gun robo toy by takashi matsuda brief description of the g1 megatron toy