AA

arts , entertainment and media . america 's army , a 2002 computer game published by the u.s . army ancient anguish , a computer game in existence since 1992 aa ! , a j-pop musical group double-a ( band ) , stylised as aa , south korean boy band aa ( album ) , a 2016 album by baauer ace attorney , a series of video games developed by capcom . aa films , an indian film distribution company aa book ( disambiguation ) aa , the production code for the 1966 doctor who serial the savages . brands and enterprises . a . a . arms , a defunct firearms manufacturer the aa , a trading name of the automobile association in the uk alcoa , an american aluminum-producing company ( stock symbol aa ) american airlines , largest u.s . airline ; headquartered in fort worth , texas anadolu agency , a state-run press agency in turkey audio-animatronics , used at the disney parks . language . aa , latin-script digraph used in the orthographies of dutch , finnish and other languages aa , representation of letter å in several scandinavian languages aa , a romanization of arabic letter alif ا ꜳ , an orthographic ligature afar language ( iso 639-1 language code aa ) aa ( bengali ) , a bengali letter . measurements . aa , a bra size aa , a width in shoe sizes aa battery size . nature . aa ( plant ) , a genus of orchid aa ( snail ) , a subgenus of snail ʻaʻā or aa , a form of lava a term for '' river '' in german hydronymy , see aach ( toponymy ) . organizations . alcoholics anonymous , a worldwide fellowship of persons recovering from alcoholism aa motoring trust , a british road safety charity that merged with iam motoring trust academia de artes , mexico amalgamated association of iron and steel workers , a former union in the united states andecha astur , an asturian nationalist party architectural association school of architecture , london , united kingdom astrological association of great britain , london , united kingdom auswärtiges amt , the foreign office of germany automobile association ( disambiguation ) danish association of architects ( akademisk arkitektforening ) the automobile association , a british motoring organization . philosophy and religion . a∴a∴ , a spiritual organization created in 1907 by aleister crowley abhisamayalankara , or abhisamaya-alaṅkāra , a mahayana buddhist text augustinians of the assumption , a congregation of catholic religious ( priests and brothers ) statue of a ' a from rurutu , a wooden fertility-god sculpture from the pacific island of rurutu '' a is a '' , an expression of the law of identity : each thing is identical with itself . people . aa ( surname ) , a scandinavian surname , including a list of people with this name van der aa ( surname ) , a dutch surname , including a list of people with this name aa ( architect ) , an architect in ancient egypt anthony armstrong ( writer ) ( 1897–1972 ) , anglo-canadian writer who used the pseudonym a.a . places . aa , estonia , a village and beach in estonia aa , indonesia , a populated place in the south sulawesi province of indonesia ann arbor , a city in michigan , united states of america . rivers . belgium . aa , a river in antwerp , which joins the nete . france . aa ( river , france ) , a river in northern france . germany . aabach ( afte ) , formerly called the große aa , a river in north rhine-westphalia aa ( möhne ) , a river in north rhine-westphalia aa ( nethe ) , a river in north rhine-westphalia aa ( werre ) , a river in north rhine-westphalia kleine aa ( aabach ) , a tributary of the aabach in north rhine-westphalia große aa , a tributary of the ems in lower saxony große aa ( aabach ) , a tributary of the aabach in north rhine-westphalia münstersche aa , a river in germany , one of several westphalian rivers called aa . netherlands . aa ( meuse ) , a river in north brabant , which joins the dommel to form the dieze aa of weerijs , a river in north brabant , which joins the mark at breda drentsche aa , a river in drenthe and groningen mussel aa , a river in westerwolde , groningen , a river in westerwolde , groningen westerwoldsche aa , a river near oudeschans , groningen . switzerland . aabach ( aare ) , a tributary of the aare in canton of aargau aabach ( greifensee ) , or usterner aa , a river in canton of zürich aabach ( obersee ) , a tributary of obersee ( zürichsee ) , in canton of st . gallen aabach ( seetal ) , a river in the cantons of lucerne and aargau , runs through lake hallwyl chli aa ( sempachersee ) , a tributary of lake sempach in the canton of lucerne engelberger aa , a river in the cantons of obwalden and nidwalden , tributary of lake lucerne gross aa ( sempachersee ) , a tributary of lake sempach in the canton of lucerne mönchaltorfer aa , a tributary of greifensee in canton of zürich sarner aa ( river ) , a river in obwalden , tributary of lake lucerne . latvia . gauja , a river in latvia , formerly known as livländische aa lielupe , a river in latvia , formerly known as kurländische aa . science and technology . aa amyloidosis , a form of amyloidosis related to serum amyloid a amino acid , often abbreviated aa when indicating positions in a peptide sequence ( e.g . , aa 120–150 ) antiandrogen , a drug which blocks the effects of androgens aplastic anemia , a rare disease arachidonic acid , a polyunsaturated fatty acid advanced architecture , original name of amiga advanced graphics architecture anti-aliasing , various techniques for mitigating certain signal processing artifacts atlas autocode , a computer programming language aa , a proprietary digital audio format of audible.com authoritative answer , in dns , a flag for a query answer aa postulate of euclidean geometry anti-aircraft , in military use abampere ( aa ) , the cgs unit of current attoampere ( aa ) , a unit of electric current equal to 10 −18 ampere aa tree , named after arne andersson aa , the abbreviation for azidoazide azide apparmor . sports . double-a ( baseball ) or class aa , a classification level in minor league baseball american association ( 19th century ) , baseball american association ( 20th century ) , baseball american association of independent professional baseball , started in 2006 athletics australia , national sporting organisation in australia . transportation . aa highway , a state highway in northern kentucky ann arbor railroad ( 1895–1976 ) , a defunct railroad in ohio and michigan ann arbor railroad ( 1988 ) , a railroad operating in ohio and michigan k line , a defunct line on the new york city subway , formerly called '' aa '' nzr aa class , a locomotive class operated by the new zealand railways department . other uses . african american , as a cultural identity asian aerospace , an airshow in asia associate of arts , an academic degree european union association agreement postal abbreviation for united states armed forces in the americas japanese internet slang for shift jis art internet slang for ascii art