Standard German

origins . standard german originated not as a traditional dialect of a specific region but as a written language developed over a process of several hundred years in which writers tried to write in a way that was understood in the largest area . luther bible in 1522 was an important development towards an early standardization of written german . luther based his translation largely on the already developed language of the saxon chancery , which was more widely understood than other dialects and as a central german dialect , was felt to be '' half way '' between the dialects of the north and south . luther drew principally on eastern upper and east central german dialects and preserved much of the grammatical system of middle high german . later in 1748 , a grammar manual by johann christoph gottsched , grundlegung einer deutschen sprachkunst , was key in the development of german writing and standardization of the language . similarly to luther , gottsched based his manual off the central german variant of the upper saxon area . dieter kattenbusch : zum stand der kodifizierung von regional- und minderheitensprachen . in : bruno staib ( hrsg . ) : linguista romanica et indiana . gunter narr , tübingen , 2000 , , p.211 . over the course of the mid-18th century and onward , a written standard then began to emerge and be widely accepted in german-speaking areas , thus ending the period of early new high german . until about 1800 , standard german was almost entirely a written language . people in northern germany who spoke mainly low saxon languages very different from standard german then learned it more or less as a foreign language . however , later the northern pronunciation ( of standard german ) was considered standard and spread southward ; in some regions ( such as around hanover ) , the local dialect has completely died out with the exception of small communities of low german speakers . it is thus the spread of standard german as a language taught at school that defines the german sprachraum , which was thus a political decision rather than a direct consequence of dialect geography . that allowed areas with dialects with very little mutual comprehensibility to participate in the same cultural sphere . currently , local dialects are used mainly in informal situations or at home and also in dialect literature , but more recently , a resurgence of german dialects has appeared in mass media . terminology . in german , standard german is generally called , reflecting the fact that its phonetics are largely those of the high german spoken in the southern uplands and the alps ( including austria , switzerland , liechtenstein and south tyrol as well as southern germany ) . the corresponding term low german reflects the fact that these dialects belong to the lowlands stretching towards the north sea . the widespread but mistaken impression that hochdeutsch is so-called because it is perceived to be '' good german '' has led to use of the supposedly less judgemental ( '' standard german '' ) , ( '' german standard language '' ) . on the other hand , the '' standard '' written languages of switzerland and austria have each been codified as standards distinct from that used in germany . for this reason , '' hochdeutsch '' or '' high german '' , originally a mere geographic designation , applies unproblematically to swiss standard german and austrian german as well as to german standard german and may be preferred for that reason . pluricentricity . standard german is pluricentric with different national varieties , namely : austrian standard german , german standard german , and swiss standard german . these varieties of standard german differ only in a few features , mostly in vocabulary and pronunciation , but in some instances of grammar and orthography . in formal writing the differences are minimal to nonexistent ; in regards to the spoken language , the different varieties of standard german are easily recognized by most speakers . these three national standards ( german , swiss , and austrian ) have each been adopted by other german-speaking countries and communities as their standard form of german . the german standard is applied in luxembourg , belgium , and namibia while the swiss standard has been adopted in liechtenstein . karina schneider-wiejowski , birte kellermeier-rehbein , jakob haselhuber : vielfalt , variation und stellung der deutschen sprache . walter de gruyter , berlin , 2013 , p.46 . the variation of the standard german varieties must not be confused with the variation of the local german dialects . even though the standard german varieties are to a certain degree influenced by the local dialects , they are very distinct . all varieties of standard german are based on the common tradition of the written german language , whereas the local dialects have their own historical roots that go further back than the unification of the written language , and in the case of low german , belong to a different language entirely . continuum between standard german and german dialects . in most regions , the speakers use a continuum of mixtures from more dialectical varieties to more standard varieties according to situation . however , there are two ( or three ) exceptions : in northern germany , there is no continuum in the strict sense between the local indigenous languages and dialects of low german ( '' plattdeutsch '' ) on the one hand , and standard german on the other . since the former have not undergone the high german consonant shift , they are too different from the standard for a continuum to emerge . high german and low german are best seen as separate languages , but because high , middle , and low german form a dialect continuum and standard german serves as dachsprache for all forms of german , they are often described as dialects of german . under a socio-linguistic approach to the problem , even if low german dialects are abstandsprachen ( linguistically quite different ) , they are dialects of german , because they lack ausbau . however , low german did influence the standard-based vernaculars spoken today in northern germany by language transfer ( in pronunciation , vocabulary , grammar , and syntax ) , and it continues to do so to a limited degree . high german heavily influenced by low german has been known as missingsch , but most contemporary northern germans exhibit only an intermediate low german substratum in their speech . in german-speaking switzerland , there is no such continuum between the swiss german varieties and swiss standard german , and the use of standard german is almost entirely restricted to the written language . therefore , this situation has been called a medial diglossia . standard german is seldom spoken among native swiss , and even then the accent and vocabulary is very much swiss , except for instance when speaking with people who do not understand the swiss german dialects at all , and it is expected to be used in school . standard german has , however , left a clear imprint on the contemporary variants of swiss german , regional expressions and vocabulary having been replaced with material assimilated from the standard language . of all the german-speaking countries switzerland has however most fully retained the use of dialect in everyday situations . dialect is used to a lesser extent for some everyday situations in southern germany , austria , liechtenstein , alsace , and south tyrol . the regular use of dialect in swiss media ( radio , internet , and television ) contrasts with its much rarer appearance in the media of austria , germany , east belgium , south tyrol , and liechtenstein . luxembourgish is not considered a german dialect but an independent language ; luxembourgers are generally trilingual , using french and standard german in some areas of life , luxembourgish in others . standard german is taught in schools in luxembourg and close to 90 % of the population can speak it . europeans and their languages – eurobarometer , p . 13 . phonology . while the three principal national varieties are recognized as three distinct standards , the differences are few , perhaps comparable to the difference between british and american english . duden does codify the standard pronunciation for german standard german , allowing for a small number of divergences : for example , the string '' äh '' has two authorized pronunciations , /ɛː/ and /eː/ . some regions see only the first as correct , while others use only the second ; duden now recognizes both as correct . standardized hochdeutsch pronunciation is generally used in radio and television as well as in german learning materials for non-natives , and at least aspirationally by language teachers . this accent is documented in reference works such as deutsches aussprachewörterbuch ( german pronunciation dictionary ) by eva-maria krech et al . , duden 6 das aussprachewörterbuch ( duden volume 6 , the pronunciation dictionary ) by max mangold and the training materials at the westdeutscher rundfunk ( west german broadcasting ) and deutschlandfunk ( radio germany ) . it is an invented accent rather than radiating from any particular german-speaking city . it is often said that the people of hannover speak german with an accent that comes closest to the standard of the duden dictionaries , but the claim is debatable , particularly since it may apply equally well to the rest of northern germany . grammar . orthography . a first standardization , although non-prescriptive , of early new high german was introduced by the luther bible of 1534 . in consequence , the written language of the chancery of saxony-wittenberg rose in importance in the course of the 17th century so much so that it was used in texts such as the 1665 revision of the zürich bible . the first orthographical conference convened in 1876 by order of the government of prussia . konrad duden published the first edition of his dictionary , later simply known as the duden , in 1880 . the first spelling codification by the german orthographic conference of 1901 , based on duden 's work , came into effect in 1902 . in 1944 there was a failed attempt at another reform ; this was delayed on the order of hitler and not taken up again after the end of world war ii . in the following decades german spelling was essentially decided de facto by the editors of the duden dictionaries . after the war , this tradition was followed with two different centers : mannheim in west germany and leipzig in east germany . by the early 1950s , a few other publishing houses had begun to attack the duden monopoly in the west by publishing their own dictionaries , which did not always conform to the '' official '' spellings prescribed by duden . in response , the ministers of culture of the federal states in west germany officially declared the duden spellings to be binding as of november 1955 ( '' duden-monopol '' , '' duden-privileg '' ) . the 1996 spelling reform was based on an international agreement signed by the governments of the german-speaking countries germany , austria , liechtenstein , and switzerland ; but acceptance of the reform was limited . while , , most german print media followed the reform , some newspapers , such as die zeit , nzz and süddeutsche zeitung , created their own in-house orthographies . in 2006 , there was a further revision of the spelling reform because there were disagreements regarding capitalization and splitting of german words . also revised were the rules governing punctuation marks .