Kingdom of Ireland

history . background . the papal bull laudabiliter of pope adrian iv was issued in 1155 . it granted the angevin king henry ii of england the title dominus hibernae ( latin for '' lord of ireland '' ) . laudabiliter authorised the king to invade ireland , to bring the country into the european sphere . in return , henry was required to remit a penny per hearth of the tax roll to the pope . this was reconfirmed by adrian 's successor pope alexander iii in 1172 . when pope clement vii excommunicated the king of england , henry viii , in 1533 , the constitutional position of the lordship in ireland became uncertain . henry had broken away from the holy see and declared himself the head of the church in england . he had petitioned rome to procure an annulment of his marriage to catherine of aragon . clement vii refused henry 's request and henry subsequently refused to recognise the roman catholic church 's vestigial sovereignty over ireland , and was excommunicated again in late 1538 by pope paul iii . the treason act ( ireland ) 1537 was passed to counteract this . tudor ireland . following the failed revolt of silken thomas in 1534–35 , grey , the lord deputy , had some military successes against several clans in the late 1530s , and surrender and regrant . by 1540 most of ireland seemed at peace and under the control of the king 's dublin administration ; a situation that was not to last for long . henry viii was proclaimed king of ireland by the crown of ireland act 1542 , an act of the irish parliament . the new kingdom was not recognised by the catholic monarchies in europe . after the death of edward vi , henry 's son , the papal bull of 1555 recognised the roman catholic mary i as queen of ireland . text of 1555 bull the link of '' personal union '' of the crown of ireland to the crown of england became enshrined in catholic canon law . in this fashion , the kingdom of ireland was ruled by the reigning monarch of england . this placed the new kingdom of ireland in personal union with the kingdom of england . in line with its expanded role and self-image , the administration established the king 's inns for barristers in 1541 , and the ulster king of arms to regulate heraldry in 1552 . proposals to establish a university of dublin were delayed until 1592 . in 1593 war broke out , as hugh o'neill , earl of tyrone , led a confederation of irish lords and spain against the crown , in what later became known as the nine years ' war . a series of stunning irish victories brought english power in ireland to the point of collapse by the beginning of 1600 , but a renewed campaign under charles blount , lord mountjoy forced tyrone to submit in 1603 , completing the tudor conquest of ireland . stuart ireland . in 1603 james vi king of scots became james vi and i , uniting the kingdoms of england , scotland and ireland in a personal union . the political order of the kingdom was interrupted by the wars of the three kingdoms starting in 1639 . during the subsequent interregnum period , england , scotland and ireland were ruled as a republic until 1660 . this period saw the rise of the loyalist irish catholic confederation within the kingdom and , from 1653 , the creation of the republican commonwealth of england , scotland and ireland . the kingdom 's order was restored 1660 with the restoration of charles ii . without any public dissent , charles 's reign was backdated to his father 's execution in 1649 . stuart ireland saw the establishment of the plantation of ulster in 1606 , by king james i . the largest of all english and scottish plantations in ireland , its legacy can be seen today , as most of ulster remains a part of the united kingdom , and retains a protestant and pro-union majority in its population . a.t.q . stewart : the narrow ground : the roots of conflict in ulster . london , faber and faber ltd . new edition , 1989 . page 38 . . grattan 's patriots . poynings ' law was repealed in 1782 in what came to be known as the constitution of 1782 , granting ireland legislative independence . parliament in this period came to be known as grattan 's parliament , after the principal irish leader of the period , henry grattan . although ireland had legislative independence , executive administration remained under the control of the executive of the kingdom of great britain . in 1788–89 a regency crisis arose when king george iii became ill . grattan wanted to appoint the prince of wales , later george iv , as regent of ireland . the king recovered before this could be enacted . united irishmen . the irish rebellion of 1798 , and the rebels ' alliance with great britain 's longtime enemy the french , led to a push to bring ireland formally into the british union . by the acts of union 1800 , voted for by both irish and british parliaments , the kingdom of ireland merged on 1 january 1801 with the kingdom of great britain to form the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . the irish parliament ceased to exist , though the executive , presided over by the lord lieutenant , remained in place until 1922 . the union was later the subject of much controversy . de beaumont , g pp114-115 in 1937 , the link to the british crown was repealed , but the monarch was the de jure king in the new state until 1949 . in the republic of ireland the 1542 act was repealed in 1962 . the statute law revision ( pre-union irish statutes ) act 1962 , section 1 and schedule . viceroy . the kingdom of ireland was governed by an executive under the control of a lord deputy or viceroy . the post was held by senior nobles such as thomas radcliffe . from 1688 the title was usually lord lieutenant . in the absence of a lord deputy , lords justices ruled . while some irishmen held the post , most of the lords deputy were english noblemen . while the viceroy controlled the irish administration as the monarch 's representative , in the eighteenth century the political post of chief secretary for ireland became increasingly powerful . the kingdom of ireland was legislated by the bicameral parliament of ireland , made up of the house of lords and the house of commons . the powers of the irish parliament were circumscribed by a series of restrictive laws , mainly poynings ' law of 1494 . parliament . roman catholics and dissenters , mostly presbyterians , baptists , and methodists , were excluded from membership of the irish parliament from 1693 and their rights were restricted by a series of laws called the penal laws . they were denied voting rights from 1728 until 1793 . the grattan parliament succeeded in achieving the repeal of poynings ' law in 1782 . this allowed progressive legislation and gradual liberalisation was effected . catholics and dissenters were given the right to vote in 1793 , but catholics were still excluded from the irish parliament and senior public offices in the kingdom . as in great britain and the rest of europe , voting and membership of parliament was restricted to property owners . in the 1720s the new irish houses of parliament were built in college green , dublin . church of ireland . when henry viii was excommunicated by the roman catholic church in 1538 , all but two of the bishops of the church in ireland followed the doctrine of the church of england , although almost no clergy or laity did so . having paid their annates to the papacy , the bishops had no reason to step down , and in the 1530s nobody knew how long the reformation would last . unlike henry viii , this hierarchy was not excommunicated by the papacy , and still controlled what became the state church of the new kingdom in 1542 , and retained possession of most church property ( including a great repository of religious architecture and other items , though some were later destroyed ) . in 1553 , irish catholics were heartened by the coronation of queen mary i , who persuaded the papacy to recognise the kingdom in 1555 , via the papal bull '' ilius '' . then in 1558 the protestant queen elizabeth i came to the throne , survived the 1570 bull regnans in excelsis , and all but one of the following monarchs were anglican . contrary to the official plan , the substantial majority of the population remained strongly roman catholic , despite the political and economic advantages of membership in the state church . despite its numerical minority , however , the church of ireland remained the official state church until it was disestablished on 1 january 1871 by the liberal government under william ewart gladstone . ethnic conflict . the legacy of the kingdom of ireland remains a bone of contention in irish-british relations to this day because of the constant ethnic conflict between the native irish inhabitants and primarily the new anglo-irish settlers across the island . their background espoused english culture ( law , language , dress , religion , economic relations and definitions of land ownership ) in ireland as it later did across much of what was to become the british empire . however gaelic culture and irish language , was maintained to a significant extent by the majority of the original native population . sometimes this was presented as '' barbaric '' , '' savage '' which later was perceived by the native population as a mark of undesirability in respect of maintaining and learning the language . while the lordship of ireland had existed since the 12th century and nominally owed allegiance to the english monarchy , many kingdoms of gaelic ireland continued to exist ; this came to an end with the kingdom of ireland , where the whole island was brought under the centralised control of an anglocentric system based in dublin . this phase of irish history marked the beginning of an officially organised policy of settler colonialism , orchestrated from london and the incorporation of ireland into the british empire ( indeed ireland is sometimes called '' england 's first colony '' ) . the theme is prominently addressed in irish postcolonial literature . the nominal religion of the native majority and its clergy ; the catholic church in ireland ; was actively persecuted by the state and a set of penal laws in favour of the church of ireland , highly damaging to the native irish catholics , although a similar experience happened to english , scottish and welsh catholics during the same period . there is some perceprio that during tudor times , elements within the government at times engaged in and advanced a genocidal policy against the irish gaels , while during the plantations of ireland ( particularly successful in ulster ) the local population were displaced in a project of ethnic cleansing where regions of ireland became de-gaelicised , which led in turn to bloody retaliations , which drags on to modern times . some of the native inhabitants , including their leadership were permitted to flee into exile from the country following ending up on the losing side in conflicts ( i.e . the flight of the earls and the flight of the wild geese ) or in the case of the oliver cromwell were forced into indentured servitude ( although the same happened to english persons involved in the cromwellian regime ) in the caribbean , following mass land confiscation for the benefit of new english settlers . on the other hand , the fact that the kingdom had been a unitary state gave irish nationalists in 1912–22 a reason to expect that in the process of increasing self-government the island of ireland would be treated as a single political unit . coat of arms . the arms of the kingdom of ireland were blazoned : azure , a harp or stringed argent . these earliest arms of ireland are described in an entry that reads : le roi d'irlande , d'azur à la harpe d'or , in a 13th century french roll of arms , the armorial wijnbergen , also known as the wijnbergen roll , said to be preserved in the hague , in the netherlands but currently untraced ; a copy is held in the royal library in brussels ( collection goethals , ms . 2569 ) . this may have been an aspirational depiction for a putative high-king , for it was not related to the lordship of ireland at that time by the english king , who only assumed the title '' king of ireland '' later in the reign of henry viii o'donnell , francis martin . the o'donnells of tyrconnell – a hidden legacy , published by academica press llc , washington dc , 2019 , see appendices – notes , the early arms and heraldry of ireland ( page 499 ) a crown was not part of the arms but use of a crowned harp was apparently common as a badge or as a device . a crowned harp also appeared as a crest although the delineated crest was : a wreath or and azure , a tower ( sometime triple-towered ) or , from the port , a hart springing argent . notes . references . bibliography . de beaumont , gustave and william cooke taylor , ireland social , political , and religious : translated by william cooke taylor : contributor tom garvin , andreas hess : harvard university press : 2006 : ( reprint of 1839 original ) keating , geoffrey : the history of ireland , from the earliest period to the english invasion ( foras feasa ar éirinn ) translated by john o'mahony 1866 full text at internet archive pawlisch , hans s . , : sir john davies and the conquest of ireland : a study in legal imperialism : cambridge university press , 2002 : . external links . the english in ireland and the practice of massacre by john minahane