Computer-aided manufacturing

overview . traditionally , cam has been considered a numerical control ( nc ) programming tool , wherein two-dimensional ( 2-d ) or three-dimensional ( 3-d ) models of components are generated in cad . as with other “ computer-aided ” technologies , cam does not eliminate the need for skilled professionals such as manufacturing engineers , nc programmers , or machinists . cam leverages both the value of the most skilled manufacturing professionals through advanced productivity tools , while building the skills of new professionals through visualization , simulation and optimization tools . a cam tool generally converts a model to a language the machine in question , typically g-code . the numerical control can be applied to machining tools , or more recently to 3d printers . history . early commercial applications of cam were in large companies in the automotive and aerospace industries ; for example , pierre béziers work developing the cad/cam application unisurf in the 1960s for car body design and tooling at renault . alexander hammer at delaval steam turbine company invented a technique to progressively drill turbine blades out of a solid metal block of metal with the drill controlled by a punch card reader in 1950 . historically , cam software was seen to have several shortcomings that necessitated an overly high level of involvement by skilled cnc machinists . fallows created the first cad software but this had severe shortcomings and was promptly taken back into the developing stage . cam software would output code for the least capable machine , as each machine tool control added on to the standard g-code set for increased flexibility . in some cases , such as improperly set up cam software or specific tools , the cnc machine required manual editing before the program will run properly . none of these issues were so insurmountable that a thoughtful engineer or skilled machine operator could not overcome for prototyping or small production runs ; g-code is a simple language . in high production or high precision shops , a different set of problems were encountered where an experienced cnc machinist must both hand-code programs and run cam software . the integration of cad with other components of cad/cam/cae product lifecycle management ( plm ) environment requires an effective cad data exchange . usually it had been necessary to force the cad operator to export the data in one of the common data formats , such as iges or stl or parasolid formats that are supported by a wide variety of software . the output from the cam software is usually a simple text file of g-code/m-codes , sometimes many thousands of commands long , that is then transferred to a machine tool using a direct numerical control ( dnc ) program or in modern controllers using a common usb storage device . cam packages could not , and still can not , reason as a machinist can . they could not optimize toolpaths to the extent required of mass production . users would select the type of tool , machining process and paths to be used . while an engineer may have a working knowledge of g-code programming , small optimization and wear issues compound over time . mass-produced items that require machining are often initially created through casting or some other non-machine method . this enables hand-written , short , and highly optimized g-code that could not be produced in a cam package . at least in the united states , there is a shortage of young , skilled machinists entering the workforce able to perform at the extremes of manufacturing ; high precision and mass production . joshua wright . forbes . march 7 , 2013 . as cam software and machines become more complicated , the skills required of a machinist or machine operator advance to approach that of a computer programmer and engineer rather than eliminating the cnc machinist from the workforce . ; typical areas of concern high-speed machining , including streamlining of tool paths multi-function machining 5 axis machining feature recognition and machining automation of machining processes ease of use . overcoming historical shortcomings . over time , the historical shortcomings of cam are being attenuated , both by providers of niche solutions and by providers of high-end solutions . this is occurring primarily in three arenas : ease of usage manufacturing complexity integration with plm and the extended enterprise ; ease in use : for the user who is just getting started as a cam user , out-of-the-box capabilities providing process wizards , templates , libraries , machine tool kits , automated feature based machining and job function specific tailorable user interfaces build user confidence and speed the learning curve . : user confidence is further built on 3d visualization through a closer integration with the 3d cad environment , including error-avoiding simulations and optimizations . ; manufacturing complexity : the manufacturing environment is increasingly complex . the need for cam and plm tools by the manufacturing engineer , nc programmer or machinist is similar to the need for computer assistance by the pilot of modern aircraft systems . the modern machinery can not be properly used without this assistance . : today 's cam systems support the full range of machine tools including : turning , 5 axis machining , waterjet , laser / plasma cutting , and wire edm . today ’ s cam user can easily generate streamlined tool paths , optimized tool axis tilt for higher feed rates , better tool life and surface finish , and ideal cutting depth . in addition to programming cutting operations , modern cam softwares can additionally drive non-cutting operations such as machine tool probing . ; integration with plm and the extended enterpriselm to integrate manufacturing with enterprise operations from concept through field support of the finished product . : to ensure ease of use appropriate to user objectives , modern cam solutions are scalable from a stand-alone cam system to a fully integrated multi-cad 3d solution-set . these solutions are created to meet the full needs of manufacturing personnel including part planning , shop documentation , resource management and data management and exchange . to prevent these solutions from detailed tool specific information a dedicated tool management . machining process . most machining progresses through many stages , cam toolpath strategies . cnc cookbook . retrieved on 2012-01-17 . each of which is implemented by a variety of basic and sophisticated strategies , depending on the part design , material , and software available . ; roughing : this process usually begins with raw stock , known as billet , or a rough casting which a cnc machine cuts roughly to shape of the final model , ignoring the fine details . in milling , the result often gives the appearance of terraces or steps , because the strategy has taken multiple '' steps '' down the part as it removes material . this takes the best advantage of the machine 's ability by cutting material horizontally . common strategies are zig-zag clearing , offset clearing , plunge roughing , rest-roughing , and trochoidal milling ( adaptive clearing ) . the goal at this stage is to remove the most material in the least time , without much concern for overall dimensional accuracy . when roughing a part , a small amount of extra material is purposely left behind to be removed in subsequent finishing operation ( s ) . ; semi-finishing : this process begins with a roughed part that unevenly approximates the model and cuts to within a fixed offset distance from the model . the semi-finishing pass must leave a small amount of material ( called the scallop ) so the tool can cut accurately , but not so little that the tool and material deflect away from the cutting surfaces . common strategies are raster passes , waterline passes , constant step-over passes , pencil milling . ; finishing : finishing involves many light passes across the material in fine steps to produce the finished part . when finishing a part , the steps between passes is minimal to prevent tool deflection and material spring back . in order to reduce the lateral tool load , tool engagement is reduced , while feed rates and spindle speeds are generally increased in order to maintain a target surface speed ( sfm ) . a light chip load at high feed and rpm is often referred to as high speed machining ( hsm ) , and can provide quick machining times with high quality results . the result of these lighter passes is a highly accurate part , with a uniformly high surface finish . in addition to modifying speeds and feeds , machinists will often have finishing specific endmills , which never used as roughing endmills . this is done to protect the endmill from developing chips and flaws in the cutting surface , which would leave streaks and blemishes on the final part . ; contour milling : in milling applications on hardware with four or more axes , a separate finishing process called contouring can be performed . instead of stepping down in fine-grained increments to approximate a surface , the work piece is rotated to make the cutting surfaces of the tool tangent to the ideal part features . this produces an excellent surface finish with high dimensional accuracy . this process is commonly used to machine complex organic shapes such as turbine and impeller blades , which due to their complex curves and overlapping geometry , are impossible to machine with only three axis machines . . software : large vendors .