The Shirelles

initial career and success . the group that later became the shirelles was formed in 1957 by four teenage girls from passaic , new jersey , under the name the poquellos ( or pequellos . the founding members , shirley owens ( born june 10 , 1941 , henderson , nc ) , doris coley ( august 2 , 1941 goldsboro , nc– february 4 , 2000 sacramento , ca ) , addie '' micki '' harris ( january 22 , 1940 , high point , nc – june 10 , 1982 , atlanta , georgia ) , and beverly lee ( born august 3 , 1941 passaic , nj ) , entered a talent show at passaic high school at the suggestion of a teacher . after hearing them sing '' i met him on a sunday '' , a song they had written for the show , their classmate mary jane greenberg convinced the reluctant poquellos to meet with her mother , florence , the owner of tiara records . after several months of avoiding greenberg and telling her that they were not interested in singing professionally , they were booked to tiara . by the end of the year they had changed their name to the shirelles , a combination of the first syllable of owens ' given name and -el , reminiscent of then-popular group the chantels , after briefly using the name the honeytunes . that year , they released their first song , '' i met him on a sunday '' ; after local success , it was licensed to decca records for national broadcast and charted at 50 . the song was influenced by doo-wop , but infused with pop melodies . tiara records , along with the shirelles ' contract , was sold to decca records in 1959 for 4,000 ; greenberg stayed as the manager , securing performances for the group , including one at the howard theatre in washington d.c . after two singles did poorly , including their first release—with coley as lead vocalist—of '' dedicated to the one i love '' , a cover of the '' 5 '' royales song of the same name , decca returned them to greenberg and gave up on them , considering them a one-hit act . on greenberg 's new label , scepter records , they rereleased '' dedicated to the one i love '' as a single , which peaked at 89 ; wayne wadhams , david nathan , and susan lindsay in inside the hits attribute the low rating to poor distribution . in order to better promote the group , greenberg asked songwriter luther dixon , who had previously worked with perry como , nat king cole , and pat boone and co-written the 1959 hit '' 16 candles '' , to write for and produce songs for them . dixon accepted . their first single produced with dixon , '' tonight 's the night '' , was released in 1960 and peaked at 39 . the success of '' tonight 's the night '' led to the girls being booked to perform with several major artists , such as etta james and little richard , and facilitated scepter 's move to a larger office . it was followed by '' will you love me tomorrow '' , written by husband-wife songwriting team gerry goffin and carole king ; the song went on to become the first billboard charts by an african-american girl group , possibly the first by any girl group . '' tonight 's the night '' was later used as the title song for the 1961 album tonight 's the night , which also included '' will you love me tomorrow '' and '' dedicated to the one i love '' . after the success of their singles , the shirelles became frequent guests of murray the k , who hosted them on his '' all star rock shows '' on the new york radio station wins . during this same period they reissued '' dedicated to the one i love '' , which peaked at 3 , followed by '' mama said '' , then '' baby it 's you '' , written by burt bacharach , luther dixon , and mack david , '' soldier boy '' , and '' boys '' , with saxophonist king curtis . in 1963 dixon left scepter , which presaged a tailing-off of the number of the shirelles ' singles to chart . however , they carried on performing and recording . dionne warwick replaced owens and coley , who took leave to marry their fiancés , in concerts and the group continued to record material . that year , their song '' foolish little girl '' reached the pop/r & b top 10 , and they had a cameo in the film it 's a mad , mad , mad , mad world . however , later in 1963 they learned that the trust , holding their royalties , that they were supposed to receive from scepter on their 21st birthdays , did not exist . in response , they left the label , and later filed a breach of contract suit against the company . scepter met this with a countersuit for quitting ; both suits were withdrawn in 1965 , after an agreement was reached . knowing that scepter had lied about the trust disappointed the shirelles , who felt deceived . in a 1981 interview with bruce pollock , owens said that greenberg had put on a '' mother routine '' , which the girls had '' fallen for . completely '' . later career . in later years , the shirelles declined in popularity due in part to pressure from the british invasion and the heavy competition from other girl groups , including the chiffons , the supremes , the ronettes , martha & the vandellas , and the crystals . during this period , warwick often replaced coley on stage due to the latter 's family commitments . the shirelles were still bound to scepter and thus unable to record for another company until the end of their contract in 1966 . their last single to chart was 1967 's '' last minute miracle '' , which peaked at 99 . after the commercial failure of their most recent releases , coley left the group in 1968 to focus on her family . the remaining three shirelles recorded songs for several labels , including bell records , rca , and united artists until 1971 . afterwards , they toured singing their older songs , and participated in the filming of the 1973 documentary let the good times , recording two songs for it . coley returned as lead singer in 1975 , replacing owens , who left that year to pursue a solo career . addie '' micki '' harris died of a heart attack on june 10 , 1982 , in the hyatt regency in atlanta , georgia after two performances with the group . the following year , the remaining three original members performed '' will you love me tomorrow '' with warwick on her album how many times can we say goodbye . current versions of the group . today , the original members tour in different , separate , groups , although the trademark to the shirelles name was eventually acquired by lee . shirley owens performed on the doo wop 51 pbs special in 2000 , and continues to tour under the name 'shirley alston reeves and her shirelles ' . lee currently tours with new members , billed as '' the shirelles '' . doris coley died in sacramento , california , on february 4 , 2000 , of breast cancer . style . wadhams , nathan , and lindsay describe the style of the shirelles early work as '' tight , almost doo-wop harmony '' . owens ' vocals , described by rock n ' roll writer alwyn w . turner as being '' wonderfully expressive '' , were capable of sounding '' almost , but not quite '' out of tune , which in his opinion led to owens ' sounding innocent in her songs ; music critic albin zak describes her vocals as being able to intone desire and vulnerability . the other members , singing backup , also convey what michael campbell , a professor of music at western illinois university , calls a '' naive schoolgirl sound '' . the lyrics sung by the shirelles tended to be fairly simple and '' barely '' concealed the subtexts of the songs . the songs were implicitly directed at female listeners , with the male subjects of songs being referred to as '' he '' instead of '' you '' ; this was a change from previous female-written songs , which tended to be more gender neutral , and helped pave the way for the '' confessional '' songs of 70s singers like joni mitchell and carole king . musically , their works with dixon were influenced by brazilian baião and featured numerous instances of syncopation . influences . steve huey of allmusic notes that the shirelles defined '' the so-called girl group sound with their soft , sweet harmonies and yearning innocence '' , with their songs predating motown in their widespread crossing of racial demographics , both in the us and in britain . he also notes that they spawned '' legions of imitators '' , and laid a blueprint for future female pop stars to follow . turner writes that the shirelles '' launched the girl group genre '' , noting that their early work already included '' the essence '' of the genre ; alwyn zak expands on the statement , noting that the influx of female groups started after the success of '' will you love me tomorrow '' . michael campbell notes that the shirelles ' success reflected the civil rights movement . he indicates that works such as '' will you love me tomorrow '' , written by a white couple , produced by an african-american man , with vocals by young african-american women and strings sounding like they were targeted at a white audience , conveyed a '' color-blind '' message on top of its more obvious sexual one . accolades . in 1994 , the shirelles were honored by the rhythm and blues foundation with the pioneer award for their contributions to music . the award was accepted by owens , lee , and kenner . as coley was accepting her award , she said '' this is dedicated to the one i love '' , and sang an impromptu rendition of '' soldier boy '' together with owens and lee . two years later they were inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame , together with gladys knight & the pips . at the ceremony in the waldorf-astoria hotel in new york , the three surviving members sang a medley of songs after being presented the awards by merry clayton , marianne faithfull , and darlene love . in 2002 , they were inducted into the vocal group hall of fame . lee and owens accepted the award . in 2004 , rolling stone ranked them 76 on their list of the 100 greatest artists of all time . paul shaffer , who did the write-up , wrote that the girl-group sound , originated by them , was '' everything to him '' ; he also described their impromptu performance of '' soldier boy '' as inspiring . they also included two of the shirelles ' songs , '' will you love me tomorrow '' and '' tonight 's the night '' , on their list of the 500 greatest songs of all time . in the 2010 edition , '' will you love me tomorrow '' was ranked 126th , while '' tonight 's the night '' was ranked 409th . the shirelles ' 1963 greatest hits album was included in robert christgau 's '' basic record library '' of 1950s and 1960s recordings , published in christgau 's record guide : rock albums of the seventies ( 1981 ) . in september 2008 , the shirelles ' hometown of passaic honored the group by renaming a section of paulison avenue between passaic and pennington avenues ( the section where passaic high school is located ) '' shirelles boulevard '' . the dedication ceremony was attended by both surviving shirelles . owens said that it was different than when they were inducted into the hall of fame , as it was their home town . she noted that '' the people who loves us and we loved are right here . '' . stage musical . the shirelles ' story was shown in baby it 's you ! ( a musical revue written by floyd mutrux and colin escott ) , which follows the story of greenberg and scepter records . the revue played on broadway for 148 performances , opening at the broadhurst theatre on april 27 , 2011 , and closing on september 4 of the same year . the use of their likenesses without permission led to lee , as well as the estates of coley and harris , to sue warner bros . discography . albums . . external links . the shirelles at doo wop heaven official web site of beverly lee 's the shirelles