Knutsford

history . knutsford , situated in cheshire , england , was recorded in the william the conqueror 's domesday book of 1086 as cunetesford ( '' canute 's ford '' ) . king canute ( knútr in old norse ) was the king of england ( 1016–1035 ) and later king of denmark , norway and parts of sweden as well . local tradition says that king canute blessed a wedding that was taking place and forded the river lily , which was said to be dangerous then , though other reports say it was the birkin brook at or near booth mill . . the english place-name society gives the name as being derived from the old english for knutr 's ford or possibly hillock ford . knutsford gaol was built in 1817 and later extended in 1853 . during the first world war it was used as a military prison . the gaol was demolished in 1934 . knutsford was the place in which general george s . patton , shortly before the normandy invasion , delivered a speech perceived to be critical of the soviets , and to have '' slap ( ped ) the face of every one of the united nations except great britain '' , which nearly ended his career . after the second world war , overspill housing estates were created in the town to accommodate families from manchester . the longridge overspill estate was built in over ward by manchester city council in the 1960s . at the end of the 20th century , all of the homes on the estate that had not already been sold to their occupants were transferred to manchester methodist housing . in 2005 knutsford was named as the most expensive town to buy a house in northern england , followed by nearby town altrincham . there is an extremely large range of house prices in knutsford , varying from approximately £175,000 to nearly £4,000,000 in late 2017 . the average price is above £400,000 . . governance . knutsford has been under the unitary council of cheshire east since april 2009 . prior to that knutsford was in the borough of macclesfield . knutsford town council was created after the abolition of the urban district council in the local government reorganisation of 1974 . the town comprises four wards : nether , norbury booths , bexton and over . each ward returns three councillors except for over which , owing to its size and greater population , returns six . each councillor serves a four-year term . the current town council term started in may 2019 with 12 conservative councillors and 3 independents . the council is elected whole every four years . the current mayor of knutsford and chairman of the town council is cllr stewart gardiner ( conservative ) . prior to brexit in 2020 , knutsford was part of the north west region for the european parliament . transport . road . knutsford has excellent access to the motorway network , with junctions to the m6 ( junction 19 ) and m56 ( junction 7 ) motorways . however , this can also have disadvantages as the a50 which runs through knutsford town centre follows a similar route to the m6 between warrington and stoke-on-trent ; this means that if the m6 is closed due to an accident or roadworks ; then a large volume of traffic transfers to the a50 and causes major traffic jams in knutsford . rail . knutsford railway station is on the mid-cheshire line that runs from chester to manchester ( via altrincham ) . the station was built in 1862 by the cheshire midland railway ( cmr ) . the cmr was absorbed into the cheshire lines committee ( clc ) in august 1867 , this entity continuing to serve knutsford until nationalisation on 1 january 1948 . the rail service to manchester was re-routed via a slower route when the manchester metrolink trams took over the clc direct line between altrincham and manchester , with the heavy rail service being re-routed via stockport to manchester piccadilly . currently there is an hourly service to altrincham , stockport and manchester to the north and northwich and chester to the south-west , with extra trains to and from stockport at peak times on weekdays . on sundays there is a service every two hours to chester and a service every two hours to southport via manchester , bolton and wigan . the number of weekday peak trains to manchester was controversially cut back in december 2008 to allow virgin trains west coast to run extra services between manchester and london . by may 2018 ( delayed from december 2017 ) , knutsford is expected to have half-hourly train services to northwich and manchester for most of the day except on sundays when services will be hourly . . bus . since april 2018 bus service cutbacks has left knutsford with just one regular bus route , which is an hourly altrincham-wilmslow-knutsford service , with most continuing to either macclesfield or northwich , operating monday to saturdays only . there is also one bus per day to warrington , monday to friday only . in the past , it was common for one bus operator to run most or all of the bus routes in knutsford . this was once crosville motor services who ran buses across cheshire and north wales . then later star line travel took over services , who were based in knutsford and wythenshawe . star line travel were taken over by north western road car company , who then later became part of arriva midlands . star line travel 's knutsford depot had been closed which made running bus routes in knutsford an unattractive proposition for arriva , who ceased to serve the town in january 2009 . star line travel 's coach division was split between bullocks coaches and selwyns travel . current bus operators in knutsford are d & g bus and warrington 's own buses . airport . manchester airport is located five miles from knutsford in the civil parish of ringway , manchester . however , there is no direct bus or railway link to it . economy . knutsford town centre has several restaurants and pubs , coffee shops , boutiques , antique shops and art galleries . knutsford has a medium-sized supermarket , booths , also an aldi , a waitrose , a sainsbury 's local , and two co-op stores ( one on princess street and one on parkgate lane ) . tesco used to have a small shop in the town centre , which closed many years ago . the retailer had hoped to open a larger store on the edge of the town on mobberley road , but councillors in mobberley objected to the proposed development , thinking it might result in more cars travelling through their village . in 2008 , aldi announced plans to open a superstore in knutsford , but construction did not begin until september 2012 . aldi buys store land in town centre ( from knutsford guardian ) the store officially opened in july 2013 . barclays has a large campus site at radbroke hall on toft road just outside knutsford , employing approximately 3000 staff in it and support functions . before barclays purchased the site , it was owned by the nuclear power group . parkgate industrial estate on the eastern outskirts of knutsford is home to a variety of businesses , among them instrumentation , subsea and pipeline valves manufacturer oliver valves , loudspeaker manufacturer ohm , saddlery supplier abbey england , water jet cutter service aquacut , the stamp auction house sandafayre . , plastic sheeting supplier middlewich food trays , car repair service autopoint , and various retailers . amec foster wheeler uses office premises in booths park to the south of the town . radbroke hall in neighbouring peover superior is used by barclays as offices and conference venue . canute place had until 2018 the regional mclaren luxury sports car dealership for the north west of england . . religion . knutsford has two anglican churches , st john the baptist and st cross ; a roman catholic church , st vincent 's ; a methodist church , a unitarian church and a gospel church . knutsford is located in the church of england diocese of chester and in the roman catholic diocese of shrewsbury . the nearest baptist church is in altrincham and the nearest united reformed church , polish catholic church and salvation army are located in northwich . education . knutsford has six primary schools ( one of these is a roman catholic school and another is a private school ) . knutsford also has a high school : knutsford academy , which also has a sixth form . some secondary school pupils from the town travel to schools in altrincham , hartford , holmes chapel , hale and macclesfield . some sixth formers from the town travel to colleges in northwich and timperley . macclesfield college run some adult education courses in knutsford and age uk run computer courses for the over 50s at knutsford library ( as well as other libraries in cheshire ) . medical revision resources provider pastest is based in parkgate industrial estate . sport . knutsford badminton club play at knutsford leisure centre every sunday evening , 7 & nbsp ; pm to 9 & nbsp ; pm . also , the knutsford leisure centre has holiday and after school sport clubs and daily sports you can book by going on the website . knutsford hockey club knutsford hockey club official website . retrieval date : 19 december 2016 . plays its home games at knutsford leisure centre and are based at the crosstown bowling club on chelford road . this 100-year-old club runs 3 men 's teams , a ladies team , a mixed team and a badgers team . the men 's 1st xi play in division 1 of the north west hockey league the north west hockey league . retrieval date : 25 september 2007 . toft cricket club is located at booths park , chelford road . the cricket club gets its name from a neighbouring civil parish of toft where the original ground was located when the club was established in 1928 . toft play in the ecb premier division of the cheshire county cricket league cheshire county cricket league official website . retrieval date : 19 december 2016 . it won the national village championship trophy at lords in 1989 . knutsford cricket club knutsford cricket club official website . retrieval date : 25 september 2007 . was established in 1881 and plays its home games on mereheath lane in the cheshire cricket alliance . meller braggins cricket league official website . retrieval date : 25 september 2007 . knutsford rugby club knutsford rugby club official website . retrieval date : 25 september 2007 . was established in 2004 , and is supported by players from sale sharks . it was promoted a division within its first season . in the 2008 season , both its 1st xv and 2nd xv gained promotion in their respective leagues . knutsford f.c . , formed in 1948 , play at their manchester road ground . the club has two saturday teams , the first team in the cheshire league and the second or a team in the altrincham and district league . two associated veterans teams also play on sundays in the cheshire veterans league . in 2015 , a youth team has been fielded again after a break of 127 years . the tatton club a snooker and billiards club formed in 1926 , located on tatton street . the club has one team who play in division 1 in the knutsford and district snooker league . every 10 years knutsford hosts an international three-hour endurance race for penny-farthing bicycles . knutsford harriers & athletics club is a running and athletics club for children aged 8 and above and adults . knutsford vikings swimming club is housed at the knutsford leisure centre . club website retrieved 20 june 2016 . . culture and community . in the parish of tabley , near knutsford . the annual knutsford royal may day festival is where hundreds of people parade through the streets , and the may queen is crowned . during the may day weekend there is also a funfair run on ‘ the heath ’ ( a large field near the centre of knutsford ) where the crowning of the may queen also takes place ) this is said to be one of the largest travelling funfairs in the uk . local folklore claims that edward '' highwayman '' higgins had a tunnel running under the heath , where he hid his booty . the knutsford guardian , established in 1860 , is the only weekly paid for paper dedicated to covering the town and its surrounding villages . the newspaper is teamed with the northwich , middlewich , and winsford guardian . there is a may day custom , still observed today , of '' sanding the streets '' in knutsford . the streets are decorated with coloured sands in patterns and pictures . tradition has it that king cnut , while fording the river lily , threw sand from his shoes into the path of a wedding party , wishing the newly wed as many children as the grains of sand at their feet . the custom can be traced to the late 1600s . queen victoria , in her journal of 1832 recorded : '' we arrived at knutsford , where we were most civilly received , the streets being sanded in shapes which is peculiar to this town '' . knutsford was the model for elizabeth gaskell 's novel cranford . she lived in the town for some time , on what is now known as gaskell avenue , and she is buried in the unitarian chapel graveyard . many of the places and people described in her books can be identified as being based on places and people in the town . in 2007 the bbc adapted the novel and produced a popular tv series cranford . despite several references to knutsford , including king street and the heath , the tv adaptation was actually filmed in lacock , wiltshire . notably , in 1987 legh road in knutsford , designed by richard harding watt , doubled for colonial shanghai in the opening scenes from steven spielberg 's film empire of the sun . a gaskell protégé who died in knutsford in 1859 was the once-popular novelist selina davenport , who abandoned writing despairingly in 1834 and kept a tiny knutsford shop instead . knutsford amateur drama society was established in 1925 and moved to its premises in queen street , knutsford shortly after the end of the second world war . now known by the name of the building it occupies , knutsford little theatre continues to produce a selection of plays each year , including an annual pantomime . knutsford heritage centre is situated in a 17th-century timber-framed building just off king street , which was a blacksmith 's forge in the 19th century . it has a museum , garden , shop and gallery featuring various exhibitions , talks and events , and walking tours are also available . on permanent exhibition are the may queen 's dress shoes and crown from 1887 . scenes from the george c . scott film patton were filmed in the centre of knutsford , in front of the old town hall . '' the old town hall '' , knutsford . retrieval date : 25 september 2007 the building was designed by alfred waterhouse , and for much of the 20th century was home to knutsford boys ' club and latterly a furniture show room and post office . it is now home to the lost & found pub and cocktail bar . the lost & found , knutsford retrieval date : 21 january 2021 . . notable people . 17th and 18th century . peter leycester ( 1614 in nether tabley – 1678 ) an english antiquarian and historian edward penny ra ( 1714 in knutsford – 1791 ) an english portrait and historical painter , one of the founder members of the royal academy dictionary of national biography , 1885-1900 , volume 44 , penny , edward retrieved 16 july 2018 james neild ( 1744 in knutsford – 1814 ) an english jeweller , prison reformer and philanthropist . dictionary of national biography , 1885-1900 , volume 40 , neild , james retrieved 16 july 2018 john leicester , 1st baron de tabley ( 1762 in tabley house – 1827 ) an english landowner , politician , amateur artist and patron of the arts . selina davenport ( 1779–1859 ) an english novelist until 1834 when she ran a tiny shop in knutsford sir henry holland , 1st baronet frs ( 1788 in knutsford – 1873 ) a british physician and travel writer . 19th century . edmund sharpe ( 1809 in knutsford – 1877 ) an english architect , architectural historian , railway engineer and sanitary reformer dictionary of national biography , 1885-1900 , volume 51 , sharpe , edmund retrieved 16 july 2018 elizabeth gaskell ( 1810–1865 ) an english novelist , biographer and short story writer , grew up in knutsford evelyn gleeson ( 1855 in knutsford – 1944 ) an english embroidery , carpet and tapestry designer henry royce obe ( 1863–1933 ) an english engineer , car designer and joint founder of the rolls-royce company . lived in knutsford 1898-1912 brigadier-general sir ernest makins kbe cb dso ( 1869–1959 ) a british military officer , statesman and conservative mp for knutsford 1922-1945 frank boyd merriman , 1st baron merriman gcvo obe pc ( 1880 in knutsford – 1962 ) a british conservative politician and judge . sir edward peel kbe , dso , mc ( 1884 in knutsford – 1961 ) a british army officer , businessman , amateur sportsman and big-game fisherman . lived mainly in egypt . 20th century . lieutenant-colonel sir walter henry bromley-davenport td dl ( 1903–1989 ) conservative mp for knutsford 1945–1970 . barrie cooke ( 1931 in knutsford – 2014 ) an irish abstract expressionist painter martin edwards ( born 1955 in knutsford ) a british crime novelist , critic and solicitor . john bason ( born 1957 in knutsford ) is a british businessman , also on the board of trustees of voluntary service overseas robert heaton ( 1961 in knutsford – 2004 ) an english musician , drummer in the english rock band new model army edward timpson cbe ( born 1973 in knutsford ) a british conservative politician . mp for crewe and nantwich 2008-2017 and for eddisbury since 2019 tom walker ( born 1991 ) brit award-winning singer-songwriter , grew up in knutsford matthew falder ( born 1988/1989 ) a convicted english paedophile and blackmailer , lived in knutsford . 21st century . ruby barnhill ( born 2004 in knutsford ) , an english child actress , played the lead role in steven spielberg 's 2016 film the bfg . sport . john payne ( 1828 in knutsford ) a cricketer who played for the north of england cricket team and manchester tom barber ( 1894 in knutsford – 1936 ) an english professional golfer , twice finished in the top 10 in the open championship . lucy morton ( 1898 at new tatton – 1980 ) an english competition swimmer , gold medallist in the 200-metre breaststroke event in the 1924 summer olympics emma davies ( born 1978 in knutsford ) a british olympic cyclist , competed in the 2000 and 2004 summer olympics aaron wilbraham ( born 1979 in knutsford ) an english professional footballer over 500 pro appearances , plays for rochdale