Peranakans

in popular culture . interest in the peranakan culture had begun as early as the 1950s with films from hong kong such as the niangre / nyonyah ( yue feng , 1952 ) , fengyu niuche shui / rainstorm in chinatown ( yan jun 1956 ) , niangre yu baba / nonya and baba ( yan jun 1956 ) , and niangre zhi lian / love with a malaysian girl ( lui kei , 1969 ) . in malaysia , a comedy drama series , baba nyonya was popular in the 1990s . the series is recognised by the malaysian book of records as the longest-running tv series in the country ever , lasting from the late 1980s till 2000 , with 509 episodes in total . along the passing of the reform era in indonesia and the removal of the ban on chinese culture , in 1999 , indonesian writer remy sylado released a novel called ca-bau-kan : hanya sebuah dosa raised the peranakan culture and history in indonesia . the novel was adapted into a film called ca-bau-kan by nia dinata in 2002 . riri riza directed a biographical film on an indonesian student activist named soe hok gie ( played by nicholas saputra ) , entitled gie in 2005 . the film is based on a diary catatan seorang demonstran written by soe hok gie , features a glimpse into the everyday life of an indonesian peranakan family in the 1960s . a novel that elevates the history and culture of the benteng chinese ( cina benteng is another term in indonesian referring to peranakan ) titled bonsai : hikayat satu keluarga cina benteng written by pralampita lembahmata and published by gramedia in 2011 . in 2008 , a singaporean drama series the little nyonya was aired in singapore , and later gained popularity in asia especially within south east asia region . the filming of the drama took place in malacca , penang and ipoh , malaysia . in yasmin ahmad films sepet and gubra has featured peranakan character as the lead actor 's mother played by peranakan actress tan mei ling . lead actors from the 1990s baba nyonya series were also featured in namewee 's multi-language and multi-cultural film , nasi lemak 2.0 in 2011 , showcasing peranakan culture . notable peranakans . indonesia . agnes monica : artist , singer arief budiman : also known as soe hok djin , the older brother of soe hok gie auwjong peng koen : indonesian journalist , founder of kompas a national newspaper basuki tjahaja purnama : politician chris john : professional boxer christian hadinata : badminton player christianto wibisono : business analyst fifi young : actress han bwee kong : magnate , government official and landlord in east java hok hoei kan : colonial politician , landlord , patrician and a member of the han family of lasem kho sin-kie : professional tennis player khouw kim an : bureaucrat , last chinese head of colonial jakarta , member of the khouw family of tamboen o . g . khouw : philanthropist , landlord and member of the khouw family of tamboen khouw tian sek : landlord , magnate and patriarch of the khouw family of tamboen kwee tek hoay : journalist , novelist kwik kian gie : economist , coordinating minister of economics and finance ( 1999–2000 ) , and national development planning minister ( 2001–2004 ) of indonesia lie kim hok : teacher , writer and a social worker of the dutch east indies liem swie king : national shuttler loa sek hie : colonial politician , community leader , landlord and founder of pao an tui marga t : novelist mari pangestu : economist , trade minister ( 2004–2011 ) , and tourism and creative economy minister ( 2011 ) of indonesia mira w : author , daughter of othniel oei tiong ham : businessman and founder of the largest conglomerate in the dutch east indies , oei tiong ham concern oey tamba sia : playboy , tycoon 's heir and criminal phoa keng hek : social worker and entrepreneur phoa liong gie : colonial politician , jurist and newspaper owner , great-nephew of phoa keng hek rudy hartono : national shuttler soe hok gie : student activist priyayi soero pernollo : chinese-javanese nobleman , bureaucrat and police chief susi susanti : national shuttler tan joe hok : national shuttler tan liok tiauw : colonial landlord , plantation owner , industrialist tio ie soei : writer and journalist of the dutch east indies titi dj : artist , singer thung sin nio ( 1902-1996 ) : physician , politician , suffragist . malaysia . chuah guat eng : novelist chung thye phin : last kapitan china of the state of perak and british malaya damian yeo shen li : politician and lawyer gan eng seng : malaccan born businessman and philanthropist in singapore and malaya kenny chan : actor and chef khoo kay kim : historian eddin khoo : culture advocate , son of khoo kay kim mavin khoo : dancer , son of khoo kay kim nathaniel tan : politician and writer tan chay yan : rubber plantation merchant and philanthropist , grandson of tan tock seng tan cheng lock : founder and first president of malaysian chinese association ( mca ) tan siew sin : third president of malaysian chinese association ( mca ) and first finance minister of malaysia ( 1959–1974 ) , son of tan cheng lock tan tock seng : malaccan born merchant and philanthropist in singapore tan twan eng : penang-born novelist known for being the first malaysian recipient of the man asian literary prize . azizan baba : former professional footballer desmond ho : landscape designer . singapore . david lim kim san : head of music department in the ministry of education ( 1969 ) dick lee : celebrity pop singer , composer and playwright gan eng seng : malaccan born businessman and philanthropist in straits settlement of singapore and malaya goh keng swee : deputy prime minister of singapore ivan heng : actor lee hsien loong : third prime minister of singapore lee kuan yew : first prime minister of modern singapore lim boon keng : penang born physician and social activist in singapore violet oon : chef , restaurateur , and food writer specializing in peranakan cuisine lim kim san : former cabinet minister lim nee soon : merchant and entrepreneur of the straits settlement of singapore pierre png : mediacorp artiste piya tan : buddhist writer and teacher seow poh leng : banker , philanthropist and a committee member of the straits settlement ( settlement of singapore ) song hoot kiam : teacher , cashier and a community leader song ong siang : lawyer and active citizen of the straits settlement of singapore , son of song hoot kiam tan chin tuan : chairman of ocbc tan kim ching : politician and businessman , the eldest son of tan tock seng , major donor of tan si chong su tan kim seng : malaccan born philanthropist and merchant tan tock seng : malaccan born merchant and philanthropist of the straits settlement of singapore , leader of hokkien clan and major donor of thian hock keng toh chin chye : deputy prime minister of singapore tony tan : seventh president of singapore walter woon : lawyer , academic , diplomat , politician and 7th attorney-general of singapore wee kim wee : fourth president of singapore . see also . minh hương overseas chinese sangley . notes . further reading . . external links . '' benteng chinese : barely indonesian '' in '' invisible people : poverty and empowerment in indonesia forbes , andrew , and henley , david , phuket 's historic peranakan community interactive 360 x 360 degree vr preview of the peranakan museum gunong sayang association the peranakan association of singapore nus baba house asosiasi peranakan tionghoa indonesia peranakan association australia incorporated singapore 's mother tongue policy petition for a peranakan town in singapore pinang peranakan mansion baba & nyonya house museum , melaka the intan museum , singapore review over one of the peranakan in penang from photo-outing.com some articles on peranakan communities in java peranakan collections from the peranakan museum , singapore the peranakan story islands and peoples of the indies