1980 in literature

events . march 6 – marguerite yourcenar becomes the first woman elected to the académie française . june 5 the royal shakespeare company opens a production at the aldwych theatre , london , of the life and adventures of nicholas nickleby , adapted from charles dickens 's novel by david edgar . freeman , john , the greatest shows on earth : world theatre from peter brook to the sydney olympics . libri : oxford willy russell 's comedy educating rita opens in a royal shakespeare company production with julie walters in the title rôle , at the warehouse in london . august 25 – pramoedya ananta toer 's this earth of mankind ( bumi manusia ) , the first of a tetralogy of historical novels , the buru quartet , is published in indonesia after toer 's release from ten years ' political imprisonment . it is banned in the country the following year . september – a production of shakespeare 's macbeth with peter o'toole in the lead opens at the old vic theatre , london . it is often seen one of the disasters in theatre history . september 23 – the field day theatre company presents its first production , the première of brian friel 's translations , at the guildhall , derry , northern ireland . november 27 – the english playwright harold pinter marries the biographer and novelist lady antonia fraser after divorcing the actress vivien merchant . december 8 – mark david chapman shoots john lennon to death in new york city while carrying a copy of j . d . salinger 's 1951 novel the catcher in the rye , which he claims '' is my statement . '' unknown dates kane and abel by jeffrey archer ( published 1979 ) , tops the new york times best seller list . vasily grossman 's novel life and fate ( « жизнь и судьба » , completed 1959 ) is published for the first time , in switzerland . the first tibetan-language literature journal , tibetan literature and art , is published by the tibet autonomous region writers association ( tarwa ) ; it features short stories . the national library of indonesia is created by a merger . . new books . children and young people . richard adams the girl in a swing the iron wolf and other stories vivien alcock – the haunting of cassie palmer lynne reid banks – the indian in the cupboard jill barklem – brambly hedge series : spring story summer story autumn story winter story ruskin bond – the cherry tree matt christopher – wild pitch roald dahl – the twits thomas m . disch – the brave little toaster buchi emecheta – titch the cat ruth manning-sanders – a book of spooks and spectres thomas meehan – annie : an old-fashioned story robert munsch – the paper bag princess susan musgrave gullband hag head ruth park – playing beatie bow avril rowlands – god 's wonderful railway marjorie w . sharmat – gila monsters meet you at the airport mary stewart – a walk in wolf wood . drama . howard brenton – the romans in britain andrea dunbar – the arbor david edgar ( adaptation ) – the life and adventures of nicholas nickleby ronald harwood – the dresser ron hutchinson – the irish play kenneth ross – breaker morant willy russell – educating rita sam shepard – true west . poetry . valerio magrelli – ora serrata retinae oxford book of contemporary verse . non-fiction . tony benn – arguments for socialism pierre berton – the invasion of canada maryanne blacker and pamela clark – australian women 's weekly children 's birthday cake book david bohm – wholeness and the implicate order l . sprague de camp – the ragged edge of science l . sprague de camp ( as editor ) – the spell of conan graham chapman et al . – a liar 's autobiography marilyn ferguson – the aquarian conspiracy stanley fish – is there a text in this class ? the authority of interpretive communities julien gracq – reading writing graham greene – ways of escape jerry hopkins and danny sugerman – no one here gets out alive jános kornai – economics of shortage ( hiány ) paul h . lewis - paraguay under stroessner samuel liddell macgregor mathers – grimoire of armadel translation from french ( posthumous ) michael medved and harry medved – the golden turkey awards tom o'carroll – paedophilia : the radical case carl sagan – cosmos anastasio somoza debayle and jack cox - nicaragua betrayed ram swarup – the word as revelation : names of gods alvin toffler – the third wave bertram myron gross - friendly fascism ( book ) . deaths . january 3 joy adamson , silesian-born conservationist and writer living in kenya ( murdered , born 1910 ) '' around the world kenyan is convicted in death of joy adamson '' . interview with paul nakware ekai . george sutherland fraser , scottish poet and critic ( born 1915 ) january 11 – barbara pym , english novelist ( cancer , born 1913 ) february 25 – caradog prichard , welsh poet and novelist in welsh ( born 1904 ) march 12 – eugeniu ștefănescu-est , romanian poet , novelist and cartoonist ( born 1881 ) march 25 – james wright , american poet ( born 1927 ) march 26 – roland barthes , french literary theorist ( born 1915 ) april 15 – jean-paul sartre , french philosopher , novelist and dramatist ( born 1905 ) april 24 – alejo carpentier , french cuban novelist and writer ( cancer , born 1904 ) may 7 – margaret cole , english political writer , biographer and activist ( born 1893 ) may 16 – marin preda , romanian novelist ( asphyxiation , born 1922 ) scriitorul marin preda , moartea ca o povara ( romanian ) . june 7 – henry miller , american novelist ( born 1891 ) july 1 – c . p . snow , english novelist and scientist ( born 1905 ) july 6 – mart raud , estonian poet , playwright and writer ( born 1903 ) july 9 – vinicius de moraes , brazilian poet and songwriter ( born 1913 ) july 17 – traian herseni , romanian social scientist and journalist ( born 1907 ) july 26 – kenneth tynan , english-born theater critic ( pulmonary emphysema , born 1927 ) august 8 – david mercer , english dramatist ( born 1928 ) august 10 – gareth evans , british philosopher ( lung cancer ( born 1946 ) september 18 – katherine anne porter , american novelist and essayist ( born 1890 ) november 9 – patrick campbell , irish journalist and wit ( born 1913 ) december 2 – romain gary ( roman kacew ) , french novelist ( suicide , born 1914 ) bona , d . ( 1987 ) . romain gary . paris : mercure de france-lacombe . pp . 397-398 . december 8 – john lennon , english musician , songwriter and author ( murdered , born 1940 ) december 12 – ben travers , english playwright , screenwriter and novelist ( born 1886 ) december 27 – todhunter ballard , american genre novelist ( born 1903 ) december 31 – marshall mcluhan , canadian philosopher ( born 1911 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : czesław miłosz . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : inaugural award to archie weller , the day of the dog ; the award is initially given to paul radley , who , in 1996 , admits that his manuscript was actually written by his uncle . kenneth slessor prize for poetry : david campbell , man in the honeysuckle miles franklin award : jessica anderson , the impersonators . canada . see 1980 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : yves navarre , le jardin d'acclimatation prix médicis french : jean-luc benoziglio , cabinet-portrait who refused the prize , thus it was given to jean lahougue 's comptine des height prix médicis international : andre brink , une saison blanche et sèche . united kingdom . booker prize : william golding , rites of passage carnegie medal for children 's literature : peter dickinson , city of gold cholmondeley award : george barker , terence tiller , roy fuller eric gregory award : robert minhinnick , michael hulse , blake morrison , medbh mcguckian james tait black memorial prize for fiction : j . m . coetzee , waiting for the barbarians james tait black memorial prize for biography : robert b . martin , tennyson : the unquiet heart 1980 whitbread awards : david lodge , how far can you go ? . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medals drama : edward albee caldecott medal : barbara cooney , ox-cart man dos passos prize : graham greene nebula award : gregory benford , timescape newbery medal for children 's literature : joan blos , a gathering of days : a new england girl 's journal pulitzer prize for drama : lanford wilson , talley 's folly pulitzer prize for fiction : norman mailer , the executioner 's song pulitzer prize for poetry : donald justice , selected poems . elsewhere . hugo award for best novel : arthur c . clarke , the fountains of paradise premio cervantes : juan carlos onetti premio nadal : juan ramón zaragoza , concerto grosso . references .