Midland Counties Railway

origin . the east midlands had for some years been at centre of plans to link the major cities throughout the country . however , the mcr came about as a result of competition to supply coal to leicester , a town which was rapidly industrialising and was a valuable market for coal . the competition was between the coalville area of leicestershire , and the erewash valley area of nottinghamshire . for many years , the nottinghamshire coal miners had enjoyed a competitive advantage over their counterparts in leicestershire , but in 1832 the latter opened the leicester and swannington railway . on 16 august 1832 , at one of the nottinghamshire miner 's regular meetings at the sun inn , at eastwood the idea was mooted to extend the mansfield and pinxton railway to leicester . the decision was taken to involve outside finance , and , on 27 august 1832 , a public meeting to attract subscriptions was held at the george inn at alfreton and on 26 september 1832 the scheme was formally approved at eastwood , though at that time the possibility of using steam locomotives had not been discussed . in the derby mercury of 17 october 1832 , the new railway was referred to as the midland counties ' railway . josias jessop was retained as engineer , and reporting in 1833 , noted that it would not be possible to put it before parliament that year . subscriptions had been obtained from lancashire investors and with the imminent completion of the london and birmingham railway , they insisted that the line should continue to join it at rugby , warwickshire . george rennie was brought in to assess the scheme and plan the southward extension . not surprisingly there had been opposition from leicestershire to the proposal . in october an alternative plan was proposed of bringing in nottingham and derby , as well as leicester , using a junction at long eaton , with the stated aim that it would reduce any differences in coal prices between them . at last the plans were ready to put before parliament in its 1834 session . however investment fell far short of the expected cost of over £125,000 . the scheme was delayed for yet another year , during which time charles vignoles was asked to review the plans and become the company 's engineer . at this point , the citizens of northampton campaigned for the line to pass through their town rather than rugby . not surprisingly , at that late stage , it was refused . it has been suggested that , having opposed the london and birmingham , they had seen the error of their ways . such a line would have been longer and more expensive , shortening the journey to london by very little , but extending that to birmingham excessively . by that time , the north midland railway and birmingham and derby junction railway had been formed with the intention of meeting at derby . the line to pinxton threatened it , particularly as , in 1834 , the midland counties had mooted the possibility of an extension to clay cross . at the same time , the birmingham and derby link with the london and birmingham railway in a southwards direction at hampton-in-arden , threatened the midland counties . the two railways came to a private agreement to withdraw the competing lines from their bills . at last in 1836 the midland counties ' railway bill went before parliament and survived its passage through the house of commons . however , there were still powerful interests ranged against it . firstly there were the canal owners with which it was being built to compete . secondly , the bill still included the pinxton line , to the extreme annoyance of the birmingham and derby line 's directors . there was a distinct possibility that the lords would insist that the north midland was connected to it instead of proceeding to derby , losing the nmr some twenty miles of line and its connection to birmingham and the west country . accordingly , it was dropped . the bill received royal assent on 21 june 1836 without the connection to pinxton . since this was the original reason for building the railway , one can imagine the feelings of the nottinghamshire miners . construction . nottingham to derby . in january 1837 the company issued invitations to tender for three contracts , derby to trent junction , nottingham to trent junction and trent junction to sutton bonington . by february 1837 , the engineers had marked out the whole of the line . the principal contractors struggled to meet the deadline of 22 february to quote for the construction of 22 miles of railway , so the deadline was extended to 28 february , with the additional requirement of a cast-iron bridge over the river trent at thrumpton . contracts were awarded for the derby to trent junction portion by april 1837 for £3,000 under the estimate with an forecast of completion by september 1838 . the contract for the section from trent junction to sutton bonington was let in may 1837 . the contract for the works in nottingham were signed in june 1837 and construction started immediately . by september 1837 it was reported that 400 men were employed in three different places on the line between nottingham and derby . the engineer was charles blacker vignoles , and the superintendent was thomas jackson woodhouse . the contractor for the works between derby , long eaton and loughborough was william mackenzie of chorley , lancashire . the contractor for long eaton to nottingham was messrs . taylor , sharpe and johnson . the only obstacle was the derby canal which would need to be diverted at borrowash , the canal owners asking £2 for every hour that it was closed . however quick action allowed the work to be completed , when a drought fortuitously occurred , closing the canal . initially the railway ran into a temporary platform at derby , but at nottingham a magnificent terminus had been built in carrington street . the inaugural run took place from nottingham on 30 may 1839 , with a timetabled public service beginning on 4 june . butt , r.v.j . , ( 1995 ) the directory of railway stations , yeovil : patrick stephens . to leicester and rugby . the portion of the contract from leicester to the trent viaduct was let in december 1837 at which point it was reported that 900 men were engaged in the construction . the contractor for loughborough to syston was messrs . gordon and hector mcleod , and the contractor for the syston to leicester , and leicester to rugby portions was messrs david macintosh . it had three main obstacles , the first being the crossing of the trent . this was done by means of an elegant three arched bridge built by the butterley company . immediately following this was redhill tunnel , provided with elegant castellated portals to placate the local landowner . the bridge was replaced with the present girder bridge in 1900 when the line was quadrupled , and a second bore was provided for the tunnel with identical portals . finally a substantial cutting was needed at sutton bonington . while the derby-nottingham tracks had been supported on stone blocks , the section to rugby used kyanised timber sleepers . at leicester there was another magnificent station in campbell street , originally planned as a terminus on a spur from the main line . however , it was built as a loop with a single long platform next to the through running lines . it was replaced by the present london road station in 1892 . progress to rugby was hampered by wet weather and the need for several long cuttings and embankments . there were two tunnels , at knighton and near ullesthorpe and a bridge over the river avon and the oxford canal at rugby . this last was not completed in time for the opening and , for seven weeks , passengers had to alight at a temporary platform , to be taken by road into rugby . engineering . there were 148 bridges in all , and three tunnels . the rails were double headed in lengths at at a gauge throughout of . these were laid either on gritstone blocks from cromford , laid diagonally , or on embankments , timber sleepers of oak or kyanised larch . for a length near rugby , evans 's dovetailed bridge rails of , were tried , mounted on longitudinal memel fir timbers with pine cross sleepers . the earthworks ensured that the maximum gradient of the line was 1 in 330 ( 0.3 % ) . the largest were on the rugby line at the leire cutting and embankment . the whole project required approximately of earthworks . there were only two significant bridges and viaducts , one being trent viaducts , which comprised three cast iron arches of each and the viaduct over the valley of the avon ( now grade ii listed ) which consisted of 11 arches of each , elevating the line above the valley floor . the total cost of construction was just under £1,400,000 . opening . the line was finally opened in three stages : derby to nottingham 4 june 1839 trent junction to leicester 4 may 1840 leicester to rugby 1 july 1840 on 4 june 1839 the company provided four trains at nottingham for passenger services on opening day . the first two with six coaches , and the others with two coaches each . each train was headed by a separate engine , ariel , mersey , hawk and sunbeam . the brass band of the 5th dragoon guards entertained the passengers , and played god save the queen as each train departed . the first train headed by sunbeam with four first class and two second class carriages departed for derby at 12:30 & nbsp ; pm . five minutes later ariel was attached to a train and departed for derby . ariel arrived at long eaton at 12:48 & nbsp ; pm , and derby by 1:19 & nbsp ; pm . after a wait in derby of just over an hour , the trains returned to nottingham , where the band of the dragoons struck up see , the conqu'ring hero comes . one notable event was the first large organised excursion by rail , got up by the nottingham mechanics ' institute . a week later the leicester mechanics ' institute returned the compliment to nottingham . after thomas cook began the tourist business , the mcr began organising excursions on its own account , on one occasion conveying some 2,400 people in a single train of 65 four-wheeled carriages and wagons . the fact that mcr 's locomotives were all either single driving-wheeled or 0-4-0s , and small at that meant that the heavier the train , the more were added . the excursion must have been a sight to behold . competition . initially the midland counties ' railway did not prosper due to competition from the birmingham and derby junction railway which also transported coal from the east midlands to london , via hampton-in-arden . an ensuing price war between the two companies almost drove both of them out of business . the mcr made an agreement with the north midland for exclusive access to its passengers . in retaliation the birmingham board opposed a bill that the mcr had submitted to parliament . both lines were in dire straits and paying minuscule dividends . the north midland was also suffering severe financial problems arising from the original cost of the line and its buildings . at length george hudson took control of the nmr and adopted robert stephenson 's suggestion that the best outcome would be for the three lines to merge . hudson foresaw that the directors of the mcr would resist the idea and made a secret agreement with the b & djr for the nmr to take it over . this would of course take away the mcr 's customers from derby and the north and , when news leaked out , shares in the b & djr rose dramatically . hudson was able to give the mcr directors an ultimatum , and persuaded the line 's shareholders to override their board and the stage was set for amalgamation . midland railway . in 1844 , the birmingham and derby junction railway , the midland counties ' railway and the north midland railway merged to form the new midland railway . the mansfield and pinxton railway was finally connected in 1847 , and the extension to chesterfield was built in 1862 . now known as the erewash valley line , it joined near where the three original lines met at trent junction , crossing to the up ( london ) line on the level at platt 's crossing . this potentially dangerous arrangement was removed when trent station was built in 1862 and the whole junction was remodelled . this underwent many changes over the years , the station finally closing in 1968 . legacy . most of the original midland counties ' railway line between nottingham , derby and leicester is still operating today as part of the midland main line . the original line into derby , through what later became the site of chaddesden sidings , closed in 1969 . also part of the original route was abandoned when track alterations were put in with the opening of trent station in the 1860s . the stretch between leicester and rugby was closed in 1961 . the line between trent junction and chesterfield , known locally as the erewash valley line , is still today the second most busy in the east midlands , with freight to the south east of the country . the daily southbound master cutler travels along it directly from sheffield to london , while a few expresses divert at trowell just north of trent , to call at nottingham , before travelling to london . although the old north midlands through derby is the main express line ( since trains have to reverse at nottingham ) , there is still a half-hourly service from nottingham itself to london . in january 2019 , campaign for better transport released a report identifying the line between rugby and leicester which was listed as priority 2 for reopening . priority 2 is for those lines which require further development or a change in circumstances ( such as housing developments ) . p.42 . see also . midland counties railway locomotives . references . the derby railway history research group ( 1989 ) the midland counties railway , railway & canal historical society , anon . ( 1979 1839 ) the nottingham and derby railway companion , radford , j.b . ( intro . ) , occasional paper : derbyshire record society , 3 , first publ . : nottingham : r.allen , anon . ( 1989 ) the midland counties railway : 1839-1989 a pictorial survey , midland railway trust , billson , p . ( 1996 ) derby and the midland railway , derby : breedon books , ellis , c . hamilton ( 1953 ) the midland railway , london : ian allan , 192 p . williams , r . ( 1988 ) the midland railway : a new history , newton abbot : david and charles , whishaw , f . ( 1969 1842 ) whishaw 's railways of great britain and ireland , ( 1842 ) the railways of great britain and ireland , 2nd ed . reprint with a new introduction by c.r . clinker , newton abbot : david and charles , . further reading . frederick smeeton williams ( 1876 ) the midland railway : its rise and progress