Baikonur Cosmodrome

buran facilities . as part of the buran programme , several facilities were adapted or newly built for the buran-class space shuttle orbiters : site 110 – used for the launch of the buran-class orbiters . like the assembly and processing hall at site 112 , the launch complex was originally constructed for the soviet crewed lunar programs and later converted for the energia-buran program . site 112 – used for orbiter maintenance and to mate the orbiters to their energia launchers ( thus fulfilling a role similar to the vab at ksc ) . the main hangar at the site , called mik rn or mik 112 , was originally built for the assembly of the n1 ( rocket ) . after cancellation of the n-1 program in 1974 , the facilities at site 112 were converted for the energia-buran program . it was here that orbiter k1 was stored after the end of the buran program and was destroyed when the hangar roof collapsed in 2002 . site 251 – used as buran orbiter landing facility , also known as yubileyniy airfield ( and fulfilling a role similar to the slf at ksc ) . it features one runway , called 06/24 , which is long and wide , paved with '' grade 600 '' high quality reinforced concrete . at the edge of the runway was a special mate-demate device , designed to lift an orbiter off its antonov an-225 mriya carrier aircraft and load it on a transporter , which would carry the orbiter to the processing building at site 254 . a purpose-built orbiter landing control facility , housed in a large multi-store office building , was located near the runway . yubileyniy airfield was also used to receive heavy transport planes carrying elements of the energia-buran system . after the end of the buran program , site 251 was abandoned but later reopened as a commercial cargo airport . besides serving baikonur , kazakh authorities also use it for passenger and charter flights from russia . site 254 – built to service the buran-class orbiters between flights ( thus fulfilling a role similar to the opf at ksc ) . constructed in the 1980s as a special four-bay building , it also featured a large processing area flanked by several floors of test rooms . after cancellation of the buran program it was adapted for pre-launch operations of the soyuz and progress spacecraft . . baikonur railway . all baikonur 's logistics are based on its own intra-site gauge railway network , which is the largest industrial railway on the planet . the railway is used for all stages of launch preparation , and all spacecraft are transported to the launchpads by the special schnabel cars . once part of the russian railway troops , the baikonur railway is now served by a dedicated civilian state company . there are several rail links connecting the baikonur railway to kazakhstan temir zholy and the rest of the world . baikonur airports . the baikonur cosmodrome has two on-site multi-purpose airports , serving both the personnel transportation needs and the logistics of space launches ( including the delivery of the spacecraft by planes ) . there are scheduled passenger services from moscow to the smaller krayniy airport , which however are not accessible to the public . the larger yubileyniy airport ( юбилейный аэропорт ) was where the buran orbiter was transported to baikonur on the back of the antonov an-225 mriya cargo aircraft . icbm testing . although baikonur has always been known around the world as the launch site of soviet and russian space missions , from its outset in 1955 and until the collapse of the ussr in 1991 the primary purpose of this center was to test liquid-fueled ballistic missiles . the official ( and secret ) name of the center was state test range no . 5 or 5 gik . it remained under the control of the soviet and russian ministry of defense until the second half of the 1990s , when the russian civilian space agency and its industrial contractors started taking over individual facilities . in 2006 , the head of roskosmos , anatoly perminov , said that the last russian military personnel would be removed from the baikonur facility by 2007 . however , on 22 october 2008 , an ur-100n missile was test-fired from baikonur , indicating this may not be the case . . future projects . on 22 december 2004 , kazakhstan and russia signed a contract establishing the '' russia–kazakhstan baiterek jv '' joint venture , in which each country holds a 50 % stake . the goal of the project is the construction of the bayterek ( '' poplar tree '' ) space launch complex , to facilitate operations of the russian angara rocket launcher . this will allow launches with a payload of 26 tons to low earth orbit , compared to 20 tons using the proton system . an additional benefit will be that the angara uses kerosene as fuel and oxygen as the oxidiser , which is less hazardous to the environment than the toxic fuels used by older boosters . the total expenditure on the kazakh side will be us 223 & nbsp ; million over 19 years . as of 2010 , the project was stalling due to insufficient funding . it was thought that the project still had good chances to succeed because it will allow both parties – russia and kazakhstan – to continue the joint use of baikonur even after the vostochny cosmodrome is commissioned . the first scheduled launch of the baiterek rocket and space complex is scheduled for 2025 . . baikonur museum . baikonur cosmodrome has a small museum , next to two small cottages , once residences of the rocket engineer sergei korolev and the first cosmonaut , yuri gagarin . both cottages are part of the museum complex and have been preserved . the museum is home to a collection of space artifacts . a restored test artifact from the soviet buran programme sits next to the museum entrance . the vehicle that flew a single orbital test mission in 1988 was destroyed in a hangar collapse in 2002 ; for a complete list of buran artifacts , see buran ( spacecraft ) . the museum also houses photographs related to the cosmodrome 's history , including images of all cosmonauts . every crew of every expedition launched from baikonur leaves behind a signed crew photograph that is displayed behind the glass . baikonur 's museum holds many objects related to gagarin , including the ground control panel from his flight , his uniforms , and soil from his landing site , preserved in a silver container . one of the museum rooms also holds an older version of the soyuz descent capsule . see also . plesetsk cosmodrome . references . further reading . j . k . golovanov , m . , '' korolev : facts and myths '' , nauka , 1994 , '' rockets and people '' – boris chertok , m : '' mechanical engineering '' , 1999 . '' a breakthrough in space '' – konstantin vasilyevich gerchik , m : llc '' veles '' , 1994 , – '' at risk , '' – a . a . toul , kaluga , '' the golden path '' , 2001 , – '' testing of rocket and space technology – the business of my life '' events and facts – a.i . ostashev , korolev , 2001 . bibliography 1996–2004 '' baikonur . korolev . yangel . '' – m . i . kuznetsk , voronezh : ipf '' voronezh '' , 1997 , '' look back and look ahead . notes of a military engineer '' – rjazhsky a . a . , 2004 , sc . first , the publishing house of the '' heroes of the fatherland '' . '' rocket and space feat baikonur '' – vladimir порошков , the '' patriot '' publishers 2007 . '' unknown baikonur '' – edited by b . i . posysaeva , m . : '' globe '' , 2001 . '' bank of the universe '' – edited by boltenko a . c . , kyiv , 2014 . , publishing house '' phoenix '' , . external links . baikonur cosmodrome historical note ( in russian ) and historical pictures ( 2002 ) on buran.ru – npo molniya , maker of russian space shuttle buran . russianspaceweb.com on baikonur 360° interactive panoramas of baikonur cosmodrome baikonur : the town , the cosmodrome , the metop-a launch campaign '' world ’ s oldest space launch facility : the baikonur cosmodrome . '' sometimes interesting . 26 may 2014 nedelin disaster // russianspaceweb.com the official website of the city administration baikonur // baikonur commemorated a test rocket and space technology . the russian union of veterans // day of memory and grief .