Statistical significance

history . statistical significance dates to the 1700s , in the work of john arbuthnot and pierre-simon laplace , who computed the p-value for the human sex ratio at birth , assuming a null hypothesis of equal probability of male and female births ; see for details . in 1925 , ronald fisher advanced the idea of statistical hypothesis testing , which he called '' tests of significance '' , in his publication statistical methods for research workers . fisher suggested a probability of one in twenty ( 0.05 ) as a convenient cutoff level to reject the null hypothesis . in a 1933 paper , jerzy neyman and egon pearson called this cutoff the significance level , which they named \alpha . they recommended that \alpha be set ahead of time , prior to any data collection . despite his initial suggestion of 0.05 as a significance level , fisher did not intend this cutoff value to be fixed . in his 1956 publication statistical methods and scientific inference , he recommended that significance levels be set according to specific circumstances . . related concepts . the significance level \alpha is the threshold for p below which the null hypothesis is rejected even though by assumption it were true , and something else is going on . this means that \alpha is also the probability of mistakenly rejecting the null hypothesis , if the null hypothesis is true . this is also called false positive and type i error . sometimes researchers talk about the confidence level instead . this is the probability of not rejecting the null hypothesis given that it is true . '' conclusions about statistical significance are possible with the help of the confidence interval . if the confidence interval does not include the value of zero effect , it can be assumed that there is a statistically significant result . '' statnews 73 : overlapping confidence intervals and statistical significance confidence levels and confidence intervals were introduced by neyman in 1937 . . role in statistical hypothesis testing . statistical significance plays a pivotal role in statistical hypothesis testing . it is used to determine whether the null hypothesis should be rejected or retained . the null hypothesis is the default assumption that nothing happened or changed . for the null hypothesis to be rejected , an observed result has to be statistically significant , i.e . the observed p-value is less than the pre-specified significance level \alpha . to determine whether a result is statistically significant , a researcher calculates a p-value , which is the probability of observing an effect of the same magnitude or more extreme given that the null hypothesis is true . the null hypothesis is rejected if the p-value is less than ( or equal to ) a predetermined level , \alpha . \alpha is also called the significance level , and is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis given that it is true ( a type i error ) . it is usually set at or below 5 % . for example , when \alpha is set to 5 % , the conditional probability of a type i error , given that the null hypothesis is true , is 5 % , and a statistically significant result is one where the observed p-value is less than ( or equal to ) 5 % . when drawing data from a sample , this means that the rejection region comprises 5 % of the sampling distribution . these 5 % can be allocated to one side of the sampling distribution , as in a one-tailed test , or partitioned to both sides of the distribution , as in a two-tailed test , with each tail ( or rejection region ) containing 2.5 % of the distribution . the use of a one-tailed test is dependent on whether the research question or alternative hypothesis specifies a direction such as whether a group of objects is heavier or the performance of students on an assessment is better . a two-tailed test may still be used but it will be less powerful than a one-tailed test , because the rejection region for a one-tailed test is concentrated on one end of the null distribution and is twice the size ( 5 % vs . 2.5 % ) of each rejection region for a two-tailed test . as a result , the null hypothesis can be rejected with a less extreme result if a one-tailed test was used . the one-tailed test is only more powerful than a two-tailed test if the specified direction of the alternative hypothesis is correct . if it is wrong , however , then the one-tailed test has no power . significance thresholds in specific fields . in specific fields such as particle physics and manufacturing , statistical significance is often expressed in multiples of the standard deviation or sigma ( σ ) of a normal distribution , with significance thresholds set at a much stricter level ( e.g . 5σ ) . for instance , the certainty of the higgs boson particle 's existence was based on the 5σ criterion , which corresponds to a p-value of about 1 in 3.5 million . in other fields of scientific research such as genome-wide association study , significance levels as low as are not uncommon —as the number of tests performed is extremely large . limitations . researchers focusing solely on whether their results are statistically significant might report findings that are not substantive and not replicable . there is also a difference between statistical significance and practical significance . a study that is found to be statistically significant may not necessarily be practically significant . . effect size . effect size is a measure of a study 's practical significance . a statistically significant result may have a weak effect . to gauge the research significance of their result , researchers are encouraged to always report an effect size along with p-values . an effect size measure quantifies the strength of an effect , such as the distance between two means in units of standard deviation ( cf . cohen 's d ) , the correlation coefficient between two variables or its square , and other measures . . reproducibility . a statistically significant result may not be easy to reproduce . in particular , some statistically significant results will in fact be false positives . each failed attempt to reproduce a result increases the likelihood that the result was a false positive . . challenges . overuse in some journals . starting in the 2010s , some journals began questioning whether significance testing , and particularly using a threshold of 5 % , was being relied on too heavily as the primary measure of validity of a hypothesis . some journals encouraged authors to do more detailed analysis than just a statistical significance test . in social psychology , the journal basic and applied social psychology banned the use of significance testing altogether from papers it published , requiring authors to use other measures to evaluate hypotheses and impact . other editors , commenting on this ban have noted : '' banning the reporting of p-values , as basic and applied social psychology recently did , is not going to solve the problem because it is merely treating a symptom of the problem . there is nothing wrong with hypothesis testing and p-values per se as long as authors , reviewers , and action editors use them correctly . '' some statisticians prefer to use alternative measures of evidence , such as likelihood ratios or bayes factors . using bayesian statistics can avoid confidence levels , but also requires making additional assumptions , and may not necessarily improve practice regarding statistical testing . the widespread abuse of statistical significance represents an important topic of research in metascience . . redefining significance . in 2016 , the american statistical association ( asa ) published a statement on p-values , saying that '' the widespread use of 'statistical significance ' ( generally interpreted as p & nbsp ; ≤ 0.05 ' ) as a license for making a claim of a scientific finding ( or implied truth ) leads to considerable distortion of the scientific process '' . in 2017 , a group of 72 authors proposed to enhance reproducibility by changing the p-value threshold for statistical significance from 0.05 to 0.005 . other researchers responded that imposing a more stringent significance threshold would aggravate problems such as data dredging ; alternative propositions are thus to select and justify flexible p-value thresholds before collecting data , or to interpret p-values as continuous indices , thereby discarding thresholds and statistical significance . additionally , the change to 0.005 would increase the likelihood of false negatives , whereby the effect being studied is real , but the test fails to show it . in 2019 , over 800 statisticians and scientists signed a message calling for the abandonment of the term '' statistical significance '' in science , and the american statistical association published a further official statement declaring ( page 2 ) : . see also . a/b testing , abx test fisher 's method for combining independent tests of significance look-elsewhere effect multiple comparisons problem sample size texas sharpshooter fallacy ( gives examples of tests where the significance level was set too high ) . references . further reading . lydia denworth , '' a significant problem : standard scientific methods are under fire . will anything change ? '' , scientific american , vol . 321 , no . 4 ( october 2019 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 62–67 . '' the use of p value for nearly a century since 1925 to determine statistical significance of experimental results has contributed to an illusion of certainty and to reproducibility in many science . there is growing determination to reform statistical analysis . some researchers suggest changing statistical methods , whereas others would do away with a threshold for defining '' significant '' results . '' ( p . 63 . ) stephen ziliak and deirdre mccloskey ( 2008 ) , the cult of statistical significance : how the standard error costs us jobs , justice , and lives . ann arbor , university of michigan press , 2009 . reviews and reception : ( compiled by ziliak ) chow , siu l . , ( 1996 ) . statistical significance : rationale , validity and utility , volume 1 of series introducing statistical methods , sage publications ltd , – argues that statistical significance is useful in certain circumstances . kline , rex , ( 2004 ) . beyond significance testing : reforming data analysis methods in behavioral research washington , dc : american psychological association . regina nuzzo ( 2014 ) . scientific method : statistical errors . nature vol . 506 , p . & nbsp ; 150-152 ( open access ) . highlights common misunderstandings about the p value . cohen , joseph ( 1994 ) . the earth is round ( p < . 05 ) . american psychologist . vol 49 , p . & nbsp ; 997-1003 . reviews problems with null hypothesis statistical testing . . external links . the article '' earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics ( s ) '' contains an entry on significance that provides some historical information . '' the concept of statistical significance testing '' ( february 1994 ) : article by bruce thompon hosted by the eric clearinghouse on assessment and evaluation , washington , d.c . '' what does it mean for a result to be '' statistically significant '' ? '' ( no date ) : an article from the statistical assessment service at george mason university , washington , d.c .