Bernice Johnson Reagon

early life and education . bernice johnson was the daughter of beatrice and j.j . johnson , a baptist minister . she was born and raised in southwest georgia , where church and school were an integrated part of her life , with music heavily intertwined in both of those settings . reagon began school at the age of three when she was asked by her teacher to attend early , and she passed that first year . by the time she was in the 4th , 5th , and 6th grade , she was requested to tutor students in the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd , and she claims it was because there had only been one teacher . she entered albany state college in 1959 ( since july 1996 albany state university ) where she began her study of music . she also became active in the local naacp chapter and then the sncc . after being expelled from albany state because of an arrest as an activist , she briefly attended spelman college . later , she returned to spelman to complete her undergraduate degree in 1970 . she received a ford foundation fellowship to do graduate study at howard university , where she was awarded the ph.d . degree in 1975 . . career . activism . reagon 's first demonstration had been in protest against the arrest of bertha gober , and blanton hall , organized by sncc along with the initial arrest of the two individuals , for they planned to be arrested in a discussion during a sncc meeting . reagon was an active participant in the civil rights movement of the 1960s . she was a member of the freedom singers , organized by the student nonviolent coordinating committee ( sncc ) , for which she also served as a field secretary . reagon explains her first encounter with sncc as a confusion , for she did not understand the name , or its organization , but she claims that she understood that they were for freedom and full-time . the freedom singers were organized by cordell reagon in 1962 . the group was the first of the civil rights singers to travel nationally . the singers realized that singing helped provide an outlet and unifier for protestors struggling with mob behavior and police brutality . thanks to her roles with sncc and the freedom singers , reagon became a highly respected song leader during the civil rights movement . activist james forman later said , '' i remember seeing you lift your beautiful black head , stand squarely on your feet , your lips trembling as the melodious words 'over my head , i see freedom in the air ' came forth with an urgency and a pain that brought out a sense of intense renewal and commitment of liberation . and when the call came to protest the jailings , you were up front . you led the line . your feet hit the dirty pavement with a sureness of direction . you walked proudly onward singing 'this little light of mine , 'and the people echoed , 'shine , shine , shine . ' '' . academic . in 1974 , reagon was appointed as a cultural historian in music history at the smithsonian institution , where she directed a program called black american culture in 1976 , and was later a curator of music history for the national museum of american history . ida jones from the smithsonian institution had stated , '' dr . reagon collected photographs , sheet music , and other primary and secondary sources chronicling the development of african american sacred music tradition from its birth during the period of slavery through the creation of concert spiritual , gospel music , jazz , and the performance of protest song in the century following emancipation . '' on behalf on reagon 's initial job at the museum . in 1989 , she was awarded a macarthur fellowship . after reagon retired in 1993 , she continued to work in african american songs of protest as a curator emeritus . she held an appointment as distinguished professor of history at american university ( au ) in washington dc from 1993 to 2003 . reagon has since been named professor emerita of history at au , and holds the title of curator emeritus at the smithsonian . . music . reagon claimed that she grew up in a church without a piano , so her early music was a cappella , and her first instruments were her hands and feet , and she explains , '' that 's the only way i can deal comfortably with creating music . '' when reagon speaks upon her upbringing in the musical culture , she explains that even her early schooling was heavily involved with music , not just the church . reagon says that her teacher would lead the students outside to play games that entailed singing with their hands and feet , as well as their voices . there was also competitions among the students , and reagon won first place as a child when running against the older students reciting langston hughes , '' i 've known rivers '' . reagon is a specialist in african-american oral history , performance and protest traditions . she has served as music consultant , producer , composer , and performer on several award-winning film projects , notably pbs television productions such as eyes on the prize ( 1987 ) ( in which she also appeared ) and ken burns ' the civil war ( 1990 ) . reagon was also featured in a film , '' we shall overcome '' which was about the song and its placement in the movement , being produced by ginger records and made by henry hampton , the same creator of eyes on the prize . she was the conceptual producer and narrator of the peabody award-winning radio series , wade in the water , african american sacred music traditions . reagon claimed , '' these days , i come as a 'songtalker ' , one who balances talk and song in the creation of a live performance conversation with those who gather within the sound of my voice . '' reagon joined her first and only gospel choir when she was eleven years old , which was organized by her sister at the mt . early baptist church . she and the choir would listen to the local radio station wgpc to learn black gospel for the choir to recite . as a child , the five blind guys was her favorite quartet . reagon states that her role models in terms of music are harriet tubman , sojourner truth , and bessie jones , because they assisted her understanding of traditional singing and the fight for justice . she also sees deacon reardon as an importance to her work as a historian studying african american sacred worship traditions , and she states that he impacted both her spiritual and musical development . reagon 's work as a scholar and composer is reflected in her publications on african-american culture and history , including : a collection of essays entitled if you don ’ t go , don ’ t hinder me : the african american sacred song tradition ( university of nebraska press , 2001 ) ; we who believe in freedom : sweet honey in the rock : still on the journey , ( anchor books , 1993 ) ; and we 'll understand it better by and by : pioneering african american gospel composers ( smithsonian press , 1992 ) . reagon has recorded several albums on folkways records including folk songs : the south , wade in the water , and lest we forget , vol . 3 : sing for freedom . bernice johnson reagon discography on folkways . folkways.si.edu . retrieved on 2011-12-09 . in 1973 reagon founded a six-member , all-female a cappella group called sweet honey in the rock . in addition to reagon , the women in the original group were : ysaye maria barnwell , nitanju bolade casle , shirley childress johnson , aisha kahil , and carol maillard . the only instrument they used was their voices , along with shekere and tambourine . they have toured internationally , including to europe , japan , mexico , and australia . the group 's fan base is of different ethnic backgrounds , religions , and sexual orientations . reagon 's musical roots come from the rural south baptist church . she has advocated '' music 's informational and transformative power to ask '' and the strong effects that music has had on the civil rights movement . honors . in 1991 reagon received a candace award from the national coalition of 100 black women . in 1995 she received a charles frankel prize for her contributions to the public understanding of the humanities . the award was presented at the white house by bill clinton . other notable awards include the 9th annual heinz award in the arts and humanities given in 2003 . the heinz awards , bernice johnson reagon profile . heinzawards.net . retrieved on 2011-12-09 in april 2009 reagon received an honorary doctoral degree from the berklee college of music . in 2000 she won the first national leeway laurel award at the leeway foundation in philadelphia . in 1996 reagon won the isadora duncan award . . personal life . in 1963 she married cordell reagon , another member of the freedom singers . hopkinson , natalie . crisis , the . sep/oct 2003 their daughter toshi reagon is also a singer-songwriter . reagon believes that '' life 's challenges are not supposed to paralyze you , they 're supposed to help you discover who you are . '' she believes that black people have created their own world . african americans had to use what ever territory at their disposal to create a people . and that territory was not land , it was culture . she also said there was so much done because black culture was the only thing black people could call their own . that is why she feels black culture is the most powerful in the world . . see also . women 's music black feminism protest song . references . buffalo , audreen . '' sweet honey : a cappella activists . '' ms 03 1993 : 24 . proquest . web . 17 may 2014 . dr . bernice johnson reagon 1999 folk alliance international lifetime achievement award recipient . performer , dr . bernice johnson reagon . folk alliance international , 2 sept . 2011 . web . 12 may 2014 . reagon , bernice j . '' bernice johnson reagon . '' music : freedom singers . songtalk publishing . web . 13 may 2014 . '' bernice johnson reagon . '' smithsonian folkways . smithsonian institution , n.d . web . 16 may 2014 . external links . official website sncc digital gateway : bernice johnson reagon , documentary website created by the sncc legacy project and duke university , telling the story of the student nonviolent coordinating committee & grassroots organizing from the inside-out the heinz awards , bernice johnson reagon profile