Liturgical colours

roman catholic church . current rubrics . in the roman rite , as reformed by pope paul vi , the following colours are used , in accordance with the rubrics of the girm , section 346 . institutio generalis missalis romani , no . 346 ; cf . text for australia , england and wales , united states . coptic rite . the copts tradition , followed by the coptic orthodox church and the coptic catholic church , only uses white vestments , with gold and silver being considered variations of white . the only exception is during passion week when black is used . nonetheless , trimmings of red , gold or blue may be found on some vestments . ethiopian rite . the liturgical tradition of ethiopia , followed by the ethiopian orthodox church and the ethiopian catholic church , embraces a wide variety of liturgical colours . in eritrea , similar traditions are followed . lutheran churches . the evangelical lutheran church in america ( elca ) , uses the same colour scheme as that of the anglicans and their scandinavian lutheran counterparts , but with the use of gold only for the easter vigil and easter sunday services , with holy week using scarlet in place of crimson . both the lutheran church–missouri synod ( lcms ) and the wisconsin evangelical lutheran synod ( wels ) use a similar system , but with purple being the primary colour for both advent and lent ( with blue being the alternate colour for advent only ) , and the use of gold in place of white for both christmas and easter ( in similar practice to the catholic church ) . in the wels , the use of red is also done during the period of end times , a period of the church regarding the teachings of the book of revelation , culminating in the creation of the new jerusalem ( corresponding to christ the king in the elca ) . in all three churches , including the elca , red is also worn on the last sunday of october , in celebration of the reformation on october 31 , when martin luther nailed the 95 theses onto the door of wittenberg castle church . anglicanism . image : lenten array edgbaston.jpg thumb right lenten array altar frontal by george pace at st augustine 's , edgbaston most anglican churches use the colours appointed in the roman rite , usually in its post-1969 form , with the exception of sarum blue replacing violet for advent , but some use the earlier form , with , for instance , black in place of red on good friday . some churches use black at masses for the dead , but more commonly white or purple is used . for historical reasons much of the worldwide anglican communion takes a noticeable lead from the practice of the church of england . since the 1980 alternative service book , liturgical colours have been recommended for seasons , with more detailed advice offered as part of the common worship series of liturgies , including colours for all sundays and festivals printed in the 'core volume ' next to collects . the church 's published lectionary now makes detailed suggestions for liturgical colour throughout the year , which corresponds almost exactly with the above table of roman rite ( post-1969 usage ) usage with five minor exceptions , and one more significant one : : there is no reference in anglican usage to masses of deceased popes and cardinals ; : no liturgical colour at all is suggested for holy saturday ( the words '' hangings removed '' are printed ) ; : the recommendation of red for confirmation rites is extended also to ordination rites ; : lenten array ( unbleached linen ) continues to be listed as an alternative option to purple during lent ; : the option exists for using red instead of green during the '' kingdom season '' , the four last sundays of the liturgical year , culminating in christ the king , as is common is some lutheran traditions ( see below ) ; : finally , and more significantly , the church of england provision suggests white throughout the sundays after epiphany as a distinct '' epiphany season '' , with ordinary time commencing the day after candlemas . the colour scheme suggested by the church of england also indicates where gold vestments should be used in those churches that possess gold and white as distinct colours . the use of rose-pink vestments , as in the roman rite table above , was mentioned as an option in early editions of common worship , the use of rose-pink vestments is suggested in the liturgical colour sequence notes of common worship of which an on-line version may be found here . and is a listed option in the annual published lectionary ; however , later common worship publications have begun to refer to this practice as '' traditional '' reflecting its resurgence . for example , see '' common worship - times & seasons '' , added to the common worship series in 2006 , page 50 , paragraph 1 : '' rose-pink vestments are traditionally worn '' . . sarum rite . the sarum rite was a medieval liturgical rite used in england before the reformation which had a distinct set of liturgical colours . after the anglo-catholic revival of the 19th century , certain church of england churches began adopting sarum liturgical colours as an attempt to produce something that was an english expression of catholicism rather than a roman expression . one of the chief advocates behind this was percy dearmer . the exact colours used by the mediaeval sarum rite are a matter of dispute , but colours adopted by contemporary churches claiming to use the sarum scheme include in particular deep blue for advent , which may be popularly referred to as '' sarum blue '' , and unbleached linen for lent . the sarum rite has never received official approval in the church of england or episcopal church ( united states ) , but has influenced a number of cathedrals and parish churches . methodist churches . methodism use a colour scheme similar to those used by lutherans and catholics , although the practice is not universally followed . the united methodist church , prior to the early-1990s , used red solely for pentecost , even including the sundays after pentecost sunday , with the use of green being reserved for the season of kingdomtide , which usually lasted from late august/early september until christ the king ( the last sunday in kingdomtide ) . since the publication of the 1992 book of worship , the umc has followed the elca practice of wearing red only for pentecost and reformation sunday and green for the rest of the pentecost season . reformed churches . the presbyterian church ( usa ) , or its predecessor denominations , has sanctioned the use of liturgical colours and promoted their use in the worshipbook of 1970 , the 1993 book of common worship and the 2018 book of common worship . advent and lent are periods of preparation and repentance and are represented by the colour purple . the feasts of christmas day and christmastide , epiphany sunday , baptism of the lord sunday , transfiguration sunday , easter season , trinity sunday , and christ the king sunday are represented by white . green is the colour for periods of ordinary time . red is for pentecost sunday , but may also be used for ordinations , church anniversaries , and memorial services for ordained clergy . red or purple are appropriate for palm sunday . during holy week , purple is used until the church is stripped bare on maundy thursday ; the church remains stripped bare on good friday and holy saturday , though in some places black might be used on those days . similarly , the united church of christ includes indications of which liturgical colour to use for each sunday in its annual calendar . the general western pattern is followed , with either purple or blue recommended for advent . united church of christ desk calendar and plan book 2016 ,