Great Zimbabwe

name . zimbabwe is the shona name of the ruins , first recorded in 1531 by vicente pegado , captain of the portuguese garrison of sofala . pegado noted that '' the natives of the country call these edifices symbaoe , which according to their language signifies 'court ' '' . the name contains , the shona term for '' houses '' . there are two theories for the etymology of the name . the first proposes that the word is derived from , translated from the karanga dialect of shona as '' large houses of stone '' plural of , '' house '' ; plural of , '' stone '' ) . . see also a second suggests that zimbabwe is a contracted form of , which means '' venerated houses '' in the zezuru dialect of shona , as usually applied to the houses or graves of chiefs . garlake ( 1973 ) 13 . description . image : great-zimbabwe.jpg right thumb overview of great zimbabwe . the large walled construction is the great enclosure . some remains of the valley complex can be seen in front of it . settlement . the majority of scholars believe that it was built by members of the gokomere culture , who were the ancestors of the modern shona in zimbabwe . the great zimbabwe area was settled by the fourth century ad . between the fourth and the seventh centuries , communities of the gokomere or ziwa cultures farmed the valley , and mined and worked iron , but built no stone structures . pikirayi ( 2001 ) p129 these are the earliest iron age settlements in the area identified from archaeological diggings . summers ( 1970 ) p163 . construction and growth . construction of the stone buildings started in the 11th century and continued for over 300 years . the ruins at great zimbabwe are some of the oldest and largest structures located in southern africa , and are the second oldest after nearby mapungubwe in south africa . its most formidable edifice , commonly referred to as the great enclosure , has walls as high as extending approximately , making it the largest ancient structure south of the sahara desert . david beach believes that the city and its state , the kingdom of zimbabwe , flourished from 1200 to 1500 , although a somewhat earlier date for its demise is implied by a description transmitted in the early 1500s to joão de barros . its growth has been linked to the decline of mapungubwe from around 1300 , due to climatic change or the greater availability of gold in the hinterland of great zimbabwe . traditional estimates are that great zimbabwe had as many as 18,000 inhabitants at its peak . however , a more recent survey concluded that the population likely never exceeded 10,000 . the ruins that survive are built entirely of stone ; they span . features of the ruins . in 1531 , vicente pegado , captain of the portuguese garrison of sofala , described zimbabwe thus : the ruins form three distinct architectural groups . they are known as the hill complex , the valley complex and the great enclosure . the hill complex is the oldest , and was occupied from the ninth to thirteenth centuries . the great enclosure was occupied from the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries , and the valley complex from the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries . notable features of the hill complex include the eastern enclosure , in which it is thought the zimbabwe birds stood , a high balcony enclosure overlooking the eastern enclosure , and a huge boulder in a shape similar to that of the zimbabwe bird . garlake ( 1973 ) 27 the great enclosure is composed of an inner wall , encircling a series of structures and a younger outer wall . the conical tower , in diameter and high , was constructed between the two walls . garlake ( 1973 ) 29 the valley complex is divided into the upper and lower valley ruins , with different periods of occupation . there are different archaeological interpretations of these groupings . it has been suggested that the complexes represent the work of successive kings : some of the new rulers founded a new residence . the focus of power moved from the hill complex in the twelfth century , to the great enclosure , the upper valley and finally the lower valley in the early sixteenth century . the alternative '' structuralist '' interpretation holds that the different complexes had different functions : the hill complex as a temple , the valley complex was for the citizens , and the great enclosure was used by the king . structures that were more elaborate were probably built for the kings , although it has been argued that the dating of finds in the complexes does not support this interpretation . . notable artefacts . thumb the most important artefacts recovered from the monument are the eight zimbabwe birds . these were carved from a micaceous schist ( soapstone ) on the tops of monoliths the height of a person . garlake ( 2002 ) 158 slots in a platform in the eastern enclosure of the hill complex appear designed to hold the monoliths with the zimbabwe birds , but as they were not found in situ it can not be determined which monolith and bird were where . garlake ( 1973 ) 119 other artefacts include soapstone figurines ( one of which is in the british museum ) , pottery , iron gongs , elaborately worked ivory , iron and copper wire , iron hoes , bronze spearheads , copper ingots and crucibles , and gold beads , bracelets , pendants and sheaths . garlake ( 2002 ) 159–162 summers ( 1970 ) p166 glass beads and porcelain from china and persia among other foreign artefacts were also found , attesting the international trade linkages of the kingdom . in the extensive stone ruins of the great city , which still remain today , include eight , monolithic birds carved in soapstone . it is thought that they represent the bateleur eagle- a good omen , protective spirit and messenger of the gods in shona culture . . trade . archaeological evidence suggests that great zimbabwe became a centre for trading , with artefacts suggesting that the city formed part of a trade network linked to kilwa garlake ( 2002 ) 184–185 and extending as far as china . copper coins found at kilwa kisiwani appear to be of the same pure ore found on the swahili coast . this international trade was mainly in gold and ivory ; some estimates indicate that more than 20 million ounces of gold were extracted from the ground . that international commerce was in addition to the local agricultural trade , in which cattle were especially important . the large cattle herd that supplied the city moved seasonally and was managed by the court . chinese pottery shards , coins from arabia , glass beads and other non-local items have been excavated at zimbabwe . despite these strong international trade links , there is no evidence to suggest exchange of architectural concepts between great zimbabwe and centres such as kilwa . garlake ( 2002 ) 185 . decline . causes for the decline and ultimate abandonment of the site around 1450 have been suggested as due to a decline in trade compared to sites further north , the exhaustion of the gold mines , political instability and famine and water shortages induced by climatic change . the mutapa state arose in the fifteenth century from the northward expansion of the great zimbabwe tradition , having been founded by nyatsimba mutota from great zimbabwe after he was sent to find new sources of salt in the north ; ( this supports the belief that great zimbabwe 's decline was due to a shortage of resources ) . great zimbabwe also predates the khami and nyanga cultures . . history of research and origins of the ruins . from portuguese traders to karl mauch . the first european visit may have been made by the portuguese traveler antónio fernandes in 1513-1515 , who crossed twice and reported in detail the region of present-day zimbabwe ( including the shona kingdoms ) and also fortified centers in stone without mortar . however , passing en route a few kilometres north and about south of the site , he did not make a reference to great zimbabwe . rhodesiana : the pioneer head oliver , roland & anthony atmore ( 1975 ) . medieval africa 1250–1800 . cambridge : cambridge university press . p . 738 portuguese traders heard about the remains of the ancient city in the early 16th century , and records survive of interviews and notes made by some of them , linking great zimbabwe to gold production and long-distance trade . two of those accounts mention an inscription above the entrance to great zimbabwe , written in characters not known to the arab merchants who had seen it . in 1506 , the explorer diogo de alcáçova described the edifices in a letter to the then king of portugal , writing that they were part of the larger kingdom of ucalanga ( presumably karanga , a dialect of the shona people spoken mainly in masvingo and midlands provinces of zimbabwe ) . joão de barros left another such description of great zimbabwe in 1538 , as recounted to him by moors traders who had visited the area and possessed knowledge of the hinterland . he indicates that the edifices were locally known as symbaoe , which meant '' royal court '' in the vernacular . as to the actual identity of the builders of great zimbabwe , de barros writes : additionally , with regard to the purpose of the great zimbabwe ruins , de barros asserted that : '' in the opinion of the moors who saw it great zimbabwe it is very ancient and was built to keep possessions of the mines , which are very old , and no gold has been extracted from them for years , because of the wars . it would seem that some prince who has possession of these mines ordered it to be built as a sign thereof , which he afterwards lost in the course of time and through their being so remote from his kingdom . '' . de barros further remarked that symbaoe '' is guarded by a nobleman , who has charge of it , after the manner of a chief alcaide , and they call this officer symbacayo . and there are always some of benomotapa 's wives therein of whom symbacayo takes care . '' thus , great zimbabwe appears to have still been inhabited as recently as the early 16th century . . karl mauch and the queen of sheba . the ruins were rediscovered during a hunting trip in 1867 by adam render , a german-american hunter , prospector and trader in southern africa , who in 1871 showed the ruins to karl mauch , a german explorer and geographer of africa . karl mauch recorded the ruins 3 september 1871 , and immediately speculated about a possible biblical association with king solomon and the queen of sheba , an explanation which had been suggested by earlier writers such as the portuguese joão dos santos . mauch went so far as to favour a legend that the structures were built to replicate the palace of the queen of sheba in jerusalem , and claimed a wooden lintel at the site must be cedrus libani , brought by phoenicians . pikirayi ( 2001 ) p9 the sheba legend , as promoted by mauch , became so pervasive in the white settler community as to cause the later scholar james theodore bent to say , . carl peters and theodore bent . carl peters collected a ceramic ushabti in 1905 . flinders petrie examined it and identified a cartouche on its chest as belonging to the 18th dynasty egyptian pharaoh thutmose iii and suggested that it was a statuette of the king and cited it as proof of commercial ties between rulers in the area and the ancient egyptians during the new kingdom ( c . 1550 bc–1077 bc ) , if not a relic of an old egyptian station near the local gold mines . johann heinrich schäfer later appraised the statuette , and argued that it belonged to a well-known group of forgeries . after having received the ushabti , felix von luschan suggested that it was of more recent origin than the new kingdom . he asserted that the figurine instead appeared to date to the subsequent ptolemaic era ( c . 323 bc–30 bc ) , when alexandria-based greek merchants would export egyptian antiquities and pseudo-antiquities to southern africa . j . theodore bent undertook a season at zimbabwe with cecil rhodes 's patronage and funding from the royal geographical society and the british association for the advancement of science . this , and other excavations undertaken for rhodes , resulted in a book publication that introduced the ruins to english readers . bent had no formal archaeological training , but had travelled very widely in arabia , greece and asia minor . he was aided by the expert cartographer and surveyor robert m.w . swan ( 1858-1904 ) , who also visited and surveyed a host of related stone ruins nearby . bent stated in the first edition of his book the ruined cities of mashonaland ( 1892 ) that the ruins revealed either the phoenicians or the arabs as builders , and he favoured the possibility of great antiquity for the fortress . by the third edition of his book ( 1902 ) he was more specific , with his primary theory being '' a semitic race and of arabian origin '' of '' strongly commercial '' traders living within a client african city . other theories on the origin of the ruins , among both white settlers and academics , took a common view that the original buildings were probably not made by local bantu peoples . bent indulged these theories alongside his arab theory , to the point where his more tenuous theories had become somewhat discredited by the 1910s . thumb . the lemba . the construction of great zimbabwe is also claimed by the lemba . members of this ethnic group speak the bantu languages spoken by their geographic neighbours and resemble them physically , but they have some religious practices and beliefs similar to those in judaism and islam , which they claim were transmitted by oral tradition . they have a tradition of ancient jewish or south arabian descent through their male line . genetic y-dna analyses in the 2000s have established a partially middle-eastern origin for a portion of the male lemba population . more recent research argues that dna studies do not support claims for a specifically jewish genetic heritage . the lemba claim was also reported by a william bolts ( in 1777 , to the austrian habsburg authorities ) , and by an a.a . anderson ( writing about his travels north of the limpopo river in the 19th century ) . both explorers were told that the stone edifices and the gold mines were constructed by a people known as the balemba . however , archaeological evidence and recent scholarship support the construction of great zimbabwe ( and the origin of its culture ) by the shona and venda peoples . ndoro , w . , and pwiti , g . ( 1997 ) . marketing the past : the shona village at great zimbabwe . conservation and management of archaeological sites 2 ( 3 ) : 3–8 . beach , d . n . ( 1994 ) . a zimbabwean past : shona dynastic histories and oral traditions . . david randall-maciver and medieval origin . the first scientific archaeological excavations at the site were undertaken by david randall-maciver for the british association in 1905–1906 . in medieval rhodesia , he wrote of the existence in the site of objects that were of bantu origin . more importantly he suggested a wholly medieval date for the walled fortifications and temple . this claim was not immediately accepted , partly due to the relatively short and undermanned period of excavation he was able to undertake . gertrude caton-thompson . in mid 1929 gertrude caton-thompson concluded , after a twelve-day visit of a three-person team and the digging of several trenches , that the site was indeed created by bantu . she had first sunk three test pits into what had been refuse heaps on the upper terraces of the hill complex , producing a mix of unremarkable pottery and ironwork . she then moved to the conical tower , and tried to dig under the tower , arguing that the ground there would be undisturbed , but nothing was revealed . some further test trenches were then put down outside the lower great enclosure and in the valley ruins , which unearthed domestic ironwork , glass beads , and a gold bracelet . caton-thompson immediately announced her bantu origin theory to a meeting of the british association in johannesburg . caton-thompson 's claim was not immediately favoured , although it had strong support among some scientific archaeologists due to her modern methods . her most important contribution was in helping to confirm the theory of a medieval origin for the masonry work of circa the 14th-15th century . by 1931 , she had modified her bantu theory somewhat , allowing for a possible arabian influence for the towers through the imitation of buildings or art seen at the coastal arabian trading cities . post-1945 research . since the 1950s , there has been consensus among archaeologists as to the african origins of great zimbabwe . artefacts and radiocarbon dating indicate settlement in at least the fifth century , with continuous settlement of great zimbabwe between the twelfth and fifteenth centuries garlake ( 2002 ) 146 and the bulk of the finds from the fifteenth century . the radiocarbon evidence is a suite of 28 measurements , for which all but the first four , from the early days of the use of that method and now viewed as inaccurate , support the twelfth to fifteenth centuries chronology . in the 1970s , a beam that produced some of the anomalous dates in 1952 was reanalysed and gave a fourteenth-century date . garlake ( 1982 ) 34 dated finds such as chinese , persian and syrian artefacts also support the twelfth and fifteenth century dates . garlake ( 1982 ) 10 . gokomere . archaeologists generally agree that the builders probably spoke one of the shona languages , based upon evidence of pottery , summers ( 1970 ) p195 oral traditions summers ( 1970 ) p164 and anthropology and were probably descended from the gokomere culture . the gokomere culture , an eastern bantu subgroup , existed in the area from around 200 ad and flourished from 500 ad to about 800 ad . archaeological evidence indicates that it constitutes an early phase of the great zimbabwe culture . summers ( 1970 ) p35 the gokomere culture likely gave rise to both the modern mashona people , an ethnic cluster comprising distinct sub-ethnic groups such as the local karanga clan and the rozwi culture , which originated as several shona states . isichei , elizabeth allo , a history of african societies to 1870 cambridge university press , 1997 , page 435 gokomere peoples were probably also related to certain nearby early bantu groups like the mapungubwe civilisation of neighbouring north eastern south africa , which is believed to have been an early venda-speaking culture , and to the nearby sotho . recent research . more recent archaeological work has been carried out by peter garlake , who has produced the comprehensive descriptions of the site , garlake ( 2002 ) garlake ( 1973 ) garlake ( 1982 ) david beach beach , david n . ( 1990 ) '' publishing the past : progress in the ‘ documents from the portuguese ’ series '' . zambezia , vol . 17 , no . 2 , 1990 , pp . 175–183 . beach , david n . ( 1999 ) '' pre-colonial history , demographic disaster and the university '' . zambezia , vol . 26 , no . 1 , 1999 , pp . 5–33 . and thomas huffman , huffman , thomas n . ( 05-1985 ) '' the soapstone birds from great zimbabwe . '' african arts , vol . 18 , no . 3 , may 1985 , pp . 68–73 & 99–100 . who have worked on the chronology and development of great zimbabwe and gilbert pwiti , who has published extensively on trade links . pwiti , gilbert ( 1996 ) . continuity and change : an archaeological study of farming communities in northern zimbabwe ad 500–1700 . studies in african archaeology , no.13 , department of archaeology , uppsala university , uppsala : . today , the most recent consensus appears to attribute the construction of great zimbabwe to the shona people . ndoro , w . , and pwiti , g . ( 1997 ) . marketing the past : the shona village at great zimbabwe . conservation and management of archaeological sites 2 ( 3 ) : 3–8 . beach , d . n . ( 1994 ) . a zimbabwean past : shona dynastic histories and oral traditions . some evidence also suggests an early influence from the probably venda-speaking peoples of the mapungubwe civilization . . damage to the ruins . damage to the ruins has taken place throughout the last century . the removal of gold and artefacts in amateurist diggings by early colonial antiquarians caused widespread damage , notably diggings by richard nicklin hall . more extensive damage was caused by the mining of some of the ruins for gold . reconstruction attempts since 1980 caused further damage , leading to alienation of the local communities from the site . another source of damage to the ruins has been due to the site being open to visitors with many cases of people climbing the walls , walking over archaeological deposits , and the over-use of certain paths all have had major impacts on the structures at the site . these are in conjunction with damages due to the natural weathering that occurs over time due to vegetation growth , the foundations settling , and erosion from the weather . . political implications . thumb martin hall writes that the history of iron age research south of the zambezi shows the prevalent influence of colonial ideologies , both in the earliest speculations about the nature of the african past and in the adaptations that have been made to contemporary archaeological methodologies . preben kaarsholm writes that both colonial and black nationalist groups invoked great zimbabwe 's past to support their vision of the country 's present , through the media of popular history and of fiction . examples of such popular history include alexander wilmot 's monomotapa ( rhodesia ) and ken mufuka 's dzimbahwe : life and politics in the golden age ; examples from fiction include wilbur smith 's the sunbird and stanlake samkange 's year of the uprising . when white colonialists like cecil rhodes first saw the ruins , they saw them as a sign of the great riches that the area would yield to its new masters . pikirayi and kaarsholm suggest that this presentation of great zimbabwe was partly intended to encourage settlement and investment in the area . pikirayi ( 2001 ) p11 gertrude caton-thompson recognised that the builders were indigenous africans , but she characterised the site as the '' product of an infantile mind '' built by a subjugated society . garlake ( 2002 ) 23 ucko ( 1995 ) 37 the official line in rhodesia during the 1960s and 1970s was that the structures were built by non-blacks . archaeologists who disputed the official statement were censored by the government . garlake ( 2002 ) 24 according to paul sinclair , interviewed for none but ourselves : this suppression of archaeology culminated in the departure from the country of prominent archaeologists of great zimbabwe , including peter garlake , senior inspector of monuments for rhodesia , and roger summers of the national museum . thumb to black nationalist groups , great zimbabwe became an important symbol of achievement by africans : reclaiming its history was a major aim for those seeking majority rule . in 1980 the new internationally recognised independent country was renamed for the site , and its famous zimbabwe bird were retained from the rhodesian flag and coat of arms as a national symbol and depicted in the new zimbabwean flag . after the creation of the modern state of zimbabwe in 1980 , great zimbabwe has been employed to mirror and legitimise shifting policies of the ruling regime . at first it was argued that it represented a form of pre-colonial '' african socialism '' and later the focus shifted to stressing the natural evolution of an accumulation of wealth and power within a ruling elite . garlake ( 2002 ) 23–25 an example of the former is ken mufuka 's booklet , although the work has been heavily criticised . a tower of the great zimbabwe is also depicted on the coat of arms of zimbabwe . some of the carvings had been taken from great zimbabwe around 1890 and sold to cecil rhodes , who was intrigued and had copies made which he gave to friends . most of the carvings have now been returned to zimbabwe , but one remains at rhodes ' old home , groote schuur , in cape town . the great zimbabwe university . in the early 21st century , the government of zimbabwe endorsed the creation of a university in the vicinity of the ruins . this university is an arts and culture based university which draws from the rich history of the monuments . it was created to preserve the rich history of this country which was facing a dark future due to globalisation . the university main site is near the monuments with other campuses in the city centre and mashava . the campuses include herbet chitepo law school , robert mugabe school of education , gary magadzire school of agriculture and natural science , simon muzenda school of arts , and munhumutapa school of commerce . gallery . file : great zimbabwe ( donjon ) . jpg the conical tower file : zimbabwe wall.jpg the great enclosure file : wall of the great enclosure , great zimbabwe.jpg the great enclosure ( close ) file : wall of the great enclosure ( far ) , great zimbabwe.jpg the great enclosure ( far ) file : great-zimbabwe-3.jpg the hill complex from the valley file : zimbabwe stone lintel.jpg wooden lintel in doorway