Locked-room mystery

history of the genre . the earliest fully-fledged example of this type of story is generally held to be edgar allan poe 's '' the murders in the rue morgue '' ( 1841 ) . robert adey credits sheridan le fanu for a passage in the secret history of an irish countess which was published three years before poe 's “ rue morgue ” . other early locked-room mysteries include israel zangwill 's the big bow mystery ( 1892 ) , le mystère de la chambre jaune ( the mystery of the yellow room ) written in 1907 by french journalist and author gaston leroux and '' the problem of cell 13 '' by jacques futrelle and featuring '' the thinking machine '' augustus s . f . x . van dusen . g . k . chesterton 's father brown stories often featured locked-room mysteries and other mystery authors dabbled in the genre such as s . s . van dine in the canary murder case , ellery queen in the chinese orange mystery and freeman wills crofts in such novels as sudden death and the end of andrew harrison . john dickson carr , who also wrote as carter dickson , was known as '' master of the locked-room mystery '' . his 1935 novel the hollow man ( us title : the three coffins ) was in 1981 voted the best locked-room mystery novel of all time by 17 authors and reviewers , although carr himself names gaston leroux 's the mystery of the yellow room ( 1907-1908 ) as his favorite . ( leroux 's novel was named third in that same poll ; hake talbot 's rim of the pit ( 1944 ) was named second . ) three other carr/dickson novels were in the top ten of the 1981 list : the crooked hinge ( 1938 ) , the judas window ( 1938 ) , and the peacock feather murders ( 1937 ) . in french , pierre boileau , thomas narcejac , gaston boca , marcel lanteaume , pierre very , noel vindry and the belgian stanislas-andre steeman were other important impossible crime writers , vindry being the most prolific with 16 novels . edgar faure , later to become prime minister of france , was a not particularly successful contemporary . during the golden age of detective fiction , english-speaking writers dominated the genre , but after the 1940s there was a general waning of english-language output . french authors continued writing into the 1950s and early 1960s , notably martin meroy and boileau-narcejac , who joined forces to write several locked-room novels . they also co-authored the psychological thrillers which brought them international fame , two of which were adapted for the screen as vertigo ( 1954 novel ; 1958 film ) and diabolique ( 1955 film ) . the most prolific writer during the period immediately following the golden age was japanese : akimitsu takagi wrote almost 30 locked-room mysteries , starting in 1949 and continuing to his death in 1995 . a number have been translated into english . the genre continued into the 1970s and beyond . bill pronzini 's nameless detective novels feature locked-room puzzles . the most prolific creator of impossible crimes is edward d . hoch , whose short stories feature a detective , dr . sam hawthorne , whose main role is as a country physician . the majority of hoch stories feature impossible crimes ; one appeared in eqmm every month from may 1973 through january 2008 . hoch 's protagonist is a gifted amateur detective who uses pure brainpower to solve his cases . the french writer paul halter , whose output of over 30 novels is almost exclusively of the locked-room genre , has been described as the natural successor to john dickson carr . although strongly influenced by carr and agatha christie , he has a unique writing style featuring original plots and puzzles . a collection of ten of his short stories , entitled the night of the wolf , has been translated into english . the japanese writer soji shimada has been writing impossible crime stories since 1981 and has created 13 to date . the first , the tokyo zodiac murders ( 1981 ) and the second , murder in the crooked house ( 1982 ) are the only ones to have been translated into english . the themes of the japanese novels are far more grisly and violent than those of the more genteel anglo-saxons . dismemberment is a preferred murder method . despite the gore , the norms of the classic detective fiction novel are strictly followed . umberto eco , in the 2000 novel baudolino , takes the locked-room theme into medieval times . the book 's plot suggests that emperor frederick i had not drowned in a river , as history records , but died mysteriously at night while a guest at the castle of a sinister armenian noble . the book features various suspects , each of whom had a clever means of killing the emperor without entering the room where he slept – all these means having been available in medieval times . the locked-room genre also appears in children 's detective fiction , although the crime committed is usually less severe than murder . one notable example is enid blyton , who wrote several juvenile detective series , often featuring seemingly impossible crimes that her young amateur detectives set out to solve . the hardy boys novel while the clock ticked was ( originally ) about a locked and isolated room where a man seeks privacy , but receives mysterious threatening messages there . the messages are delivered by a mechanical device lowered into the room through a chimney . king ottokar 's sceptre ( 1938 & ndash ; 1939 ) is the only tintin adventure that is a locked-room mystery . no homicide is involved . the crime is the disappearance of the royal sceptre that is bound to have disastrous consequences for the king . the tv series jonathan creek has a particular 'speciality ' for locked-room-murder style mysteries ; creek designs magic tricks for stage magicians , and is often called on to solve cases where the mystery is clearly how the crime was committed as the most important element , such as a man who allegedly shot himself in a sealed bunker when he had crippling arthritis in his hands , how a woman was shot in a sealed room with no gun and without the window being opened or broken , how a dead body could have vanished from a locked room when the only door was in full view of someone else , etc . pulp magazines in the 1930s often contained impossible crime tales , dubbed weird menace , in which a series of supernatural or science-fiction type events is eventually explained rationally . notable practitioners of the period were fredric brown , paul chadwick and , to a certain extent , cornell woolrich , although these writers tended to rarely use the private eye protagonists that many associate with pulp fiction . quite a few comic book impossible crimes seem to draw on the '' weird menace '' tradition of the pulps . however , celebrated writers such as g . k . chesterton , arthur conan doyle , clayton rawson , and sax rohmer have had their works adapted to comic book form . in 1934 , dashiell hammett created the comic strip secret agent x9 , illustrated by alex raymond , which contained a locked-room episode . one american comic book series that made good use of locked-room mysteries is mike w . barr 's maze agency . in the 21st century , examples of popular detective series novels that include locked-room type puzzles are the girl with the dragon tattoo ( 2005 ) by stieg larssen , bloodhounds ( 2004 ) by peter lovesey and in the morning i 'll be gone ( 2014 ) by adrian mckinty . real-life examples . according to a report in the new york times , march 10 and 11 , 1929 , isidore fink , of 4 east 132nd street , new york city , was in his fifth avenue laundry on the night of march 9 , 1929 , with the windows closed and door of the room bolted . a neighbor heard screams and the sound of blows ( but no shots ) , and called the police , who were unable to get in . a young boy was lifted through the transom and was able to unbolt the door . on the floor lay fink with two bullet wounds in his chest and one in his left wrist . he was dead . there was money in his pockets , and the cash register had not been touched . no weapon was found . there was a theory that the murderer had crawled through the transom , but to do so they would have to have been no bigger than a small child and would have had to leave the same way , as the door was bolted . another theory had the murderer firing through the transom , but fink 's wrist was powder-burned , indicating that he had not been fired at from a distance . more than two years later , police commissioner mulrooney , in a radio talk , called this murder in a closed room an '' insoluble mystery '' . on may 16 , 1937 , laetitia toureaux was found stabbed to death in an otherwise empty first-class compartment of the paris métro . the subway train had left the terminus , porte de charenton , at 6:27 & nbsp ; p.m . and had arrived at the next station , porte dorée , at 6:28 & nbsp ; p.m . witnesses did not see anyone else enter or leave the compartment where mlle . toureaux 's body was found . the murderer had one minute and twenty seconds at their disposal . neither the murderer nor the method of their escape was ever discovered . in 2010 , the body of gareth williams , a mi6 employee , was found in a bag that was zipped up and padlocked from the outside , with a key inside . there was no forensic evidence of anyone else 's involvement . despite suggestions that he may somehow have locked himself inside the bag , two escapologists failed to replicate the feat despite 400 attempts , though one would not rule it out .