Period 5 element

physical properties . this period contains technetium , one of the two elements until lead that has no stable isotopes ( along with promethium ) , as well as molybdenum and iodine , two of the heaviest elements with a known biological role , and niobium has the largest magnetic known penetration depth of all the elements . zirconium is one of the main components of zircon crystals , currently the oldest known minerals in the earth 's crust . many later transition metals , such as rhodium , are very commonly used in jewelry due to the fact that they are incredibly shiny . this period is known to have a large number of exceptions to the madelung rule . elements and their properties . : ( ) exception to the madelung rule . s-block elements . rubidium . rubidium is the first element placed in period 5 . it is an alkali metal , the most reactive group in the periodic table , having properties and similarities with both other alkali metals and other period 5 elements . for example , rubidium has 5 electron shells , a property found in all other period 5 elements , whereas its electron configuration 's ending is similar to all other alkali metals : s 1 . rubidium also follows the trend of increasing reactivity as the atomic number increases in the alkali metals , for it is more reactive than potassium , but less so than caesium . in addition , both potassium and rubidium yield almost the same hue when ignited , so researchers must use different methods to differentiate between these two 1st group elements . rubidium is very susceptible to redox in air , similar to most of the other alkali metals , so it readily transforms into rubidium oxide , a yellow solid with the chemical formula rb 2 o . . strontium . strontium is the second element placed in the 5th period . it is an alkaline earth metal , a relatively reactive group , although not nearly as reactive as the alkali metals . like rubidium , it has 5 electron shells or energy levels , and in accordance with the madelung rule it has two electrons in its 5s subshell . strontium is a soft metal and is extremely reactive upon contact with water . if it does come in contact with water , though , it will combine with the atoms of both oxygen and hydrogen to form strontium hydroxide and pure hydrogen gas which quickly diffuses in the air . in addition , strontium , like rubidium , redox in air and turns a yellow color . when ignited , it will burn with a strong red flame . d-block elements . yttrium . yttrium is a chemical element with symbol y and atomic number 39 . it is a silvery-metallic transition metal chemically similar to the lanthanides and it has often been classified as a '' rare earth element '' . yttrium is almost always found combined with the lanthanides in rare earth minerals and is never found in nature as a free element . its only stable isotope , 89 y , is also its only naturally occurring isotope . in 1787 , carl axel arrhenius found a new mineral near ytterby in sweden and named it ytterbite , after the village . johan gadolin discovered yttrium 's oxide in arrhenius ' sample in 1789 , yttrium krogt and anders gustaf ekeberg named the new oxide yttria . elemental yttrium was first isolated in 1828 by friedrich wöhler . the most important use of yttrium is in making phosphors , such as the red ones used in television set cathode ray tube ( crt ) displays and in leds . other uses include the production of electrodes , electrolytes , electronic filters , lasers and superconductors ; various medical applications ; and as traces in various materials to enhance their properties . yttrium has no known biological role , and exposure to yttrium compounds can cause lung disease in humans . ( public domain text ) . zirconium . zirconium is a chemical element with the symbol zr and atomic number 40 . the name of zirconium is taken from the mineral zircon . its atomic mass is 91.224 . it is a lustrous , gray-white , strong transition metal that resembles titanium . zirconium is mainly used as a refractory and opacifier , although minor amounts are used as alloying agent for its strong resistance to corrosion . zirconium is obtained mainly from the mineral zircon , which is the most important form of zirconium in use . zirconium forms a variety of inorganic and organometallic compounds such as zirconium dioxide and zirconocene dichloride , respectively . five isotopes occur naturally , three of which are stable . zirconium compounds have no biological role . niobium . niobium , or columbium , is a chemical element with the symbol nb and atomic number 41 . it is a soft , grey , ductile transition metal , which is often found in the pyrochlore mineral , the main commercial source for niobium , and columbite . the name comes from greek mythology : niobe , daughter of tantalus . niobium has physical and chemical properties similar to those of the element tantalum , and the two are therefore difficult to distinguish . the english chemistcharles hatchett reported a new element similar to tantalum in 1801 , and named it columbium . in 1809 , the english chemist william hyde wollaston wrongly concluded that tantalum and columbium were identical . the german chemist heinrich rose determined in 1846 that tantalum ores contain a second element , which he named niobium . in 1864 and 1865 , a series of scientific findings clarified that niobium and columbium were the same element ( as distinguished from tantalum ) , and for a century both names were used interchangeably . the name of the element was officially adopted as niobium in 1949 . it was not until the early 20th century that niobium was first used commercially . brazil is the leading producer of niobium and ferroniobium , an alloy of niobium and iron . niobium is used mostly in alloys , the largest part in special steel such as that used in gas pipelines . although alloys contain only a maximum of 0.1 % , that small percentage of niobium improves the strength of the steel . the temperature stability of niobium-containing superalloys is important for its use in jet and rocket engines . niobium is used in various superconducting materials . these type-ii superconductor , also containing titanium and tin , are widely used in the superconducting magnets of mri scanners . other applications of niobium include its use in welding , nuclear industries , electronics , optics , numismatics and jewelry . in the last two applications , niobium 's low toxicity and ability to be colored by anodizing are particular advantages . molybdenum . molybdenum is a group 6 chemical element with the symbol mo and atomic number 42 . the name is from neo-latin molybdaenum , from ancient greek , meaning lead , itself proposed as a loanword from anatolian luvian and lydian languages , since its ores were confused with lead ores . the free element , which is a silvery metal , has the sixth-highest melting point of any element . it readily forms hard , stable carbides , and for this reason it is often used in high-strength steel alloys . molybdenum does not occur as a free metal on earth , but rather in various oxidation states in minerals . industrially , molybdenum compounds are used in high-pressure and high-temperature applications , as pigments and catalysis . molybdenum minerals have long been known , but the element was '' discovered '' ( in the sense of differentiating it as a new entity from the mineral salts of other metals ) in 1778 by carl wilhelm scheele . the metal was first isolated in 1781 by peter jacob hjelm . most molybdenum compounds have low solubility in water , but the molybdate ion moo 4 2− is soluble and forms when molybdenum-containing minerals are in contact with oxygen and water . technetium . technetium is the chemical element with atomic number 43 and symbol tc . it is the lowest atomic number element without any stable isotopes ; every form of it is radioactive . nearly all technetium is produced synthetically and only minute amounts are found in nature . naturally occurring technetium occurs as a spontaneous fission product in uranium ore or by neutron capture in molybdenum ores . the chemical properties of this silvery gray , crystalline transition metal are intermediate between rhenium and manganese . many of technetium 's properties were predicted by dmitri mendeleev before the element was discovered . mendeleev noted a gap in his periodic table and gave the undiscovered element the provisional name ekamanganese ( em ) . in 1937 technetium ( specifically the technetium-97 isotope ) became the first predominantly artificial element to be produced , hence its name ( from the greek , meaning '' artificial '' ) . its short-lived gamma ray-emitting nuclear isomer—technetium-99m—is used in nuclear medicine for a wide variety of diagnostic tests . technetium-99 is used as a gamma ray-free source of beta particles . long-lived technetium isotopes produced commercially are by-products of fission of uranium-235 in nuclear reactors and are extracted from nuclear fuel rods . because no isotope of technetium has a half-life longer than 4.2 & nbsp ; million years ( technetium-98 ) , its detection in red giants in 1952 , which are billions of years old , helped bolster the theory that stars can produce heavier elements . ruthenium . ruthenium is a chemical element with symbol ru and atomic number 44 . it is a rare transition metal belonging to the platinum group of the periodic table . like the other metals of the platinum group , ruthenium is inert to most chemicals . the russian scientist karl ernst claus discovered the element in 1844 and named it after ruthenia , the latin word for rus ' . ruthenium usually occurs as a minor component of platinum ores and its annual production is only about 12 tonnes worldwide . most ruthenium is used for wear-resistant electrical contacts and the production of thick-film resistors . a minor application of ruthenium is its use in some platinum alloys . rhodium . rhodium is a chemical element that is a rare , silvery-white , hard , and chemically inert transition metal and a member of the platinum group . it has the chemical symbol rh and atomic number 45 . it is composed of only one isotope , 103 rh . naturally occurring rhodium is found as the free metal , alloyed with similar metals , and never as a chemical compound . it is one of the rarest precious metals and one of the most costly ( gold has since taken over the top spot of cost per ounce ) . rhodium is a so-called noble metal , resistant to corrosion , found in platinum- or nickel ores together with the other members of the platinum group metals . it was discovered in 1803 by william hyde wollaston in one such ore , and named for the rose color of one of its chlorine compounds , produced after it reacted with the powerful acid mixture aqua regia . the element 's major use ( about 80 % of world rhodium production ) is as one of the catalysts in the catalytic converter three-way of automobiles . because rhodium metal is inert against corrosion and most aggressive chemicals , and because of its rarity , rhodium is usually alloyed with platinum or palladium and applied in high-temperature and corrosion-resistive coatings . white gold is often plated with a thin rhodium layer to improve its optical impression while sterling silver is often rhodium plated for tarnish resistance . rhodium detectors are used in nuclear reactors to measure the neutron detection . palladium . palladium is a chemical element with the chemical symbol pd and an atomic number of 46 . it is a rare and lustrous silvery-white metal discovered in 1803 by william hyde wollaston . he named it after the 2 pallas , which was itself named after the epithet of the greek goddess athena , acquired by her when she slew pallas . palladium , platinum , rhodium , ruthenium , iridium and osmium form a group of elements referred to as the platinum group metals ( pgms ) . these have similar chemical properties , but palladium has the lowest melting point and is the least dense of them . the unique properties of palladium and other platinum group metals account for their widespread use . a quarter of all goods manufactured today either contain pgms or have a significant part in their manufacturing process played by pgms . over half of the supply of palladium and its congener platinum goes into catalytic converters , which convert up to 90 % of harmful gases from auto exhaust ( hydrocarbons , carbon monoxide , and nitrogen dioxide ) into less-harmful substances ( nitrogen , carbon dioxide and water vapor ) . palladium is also used in electronics , dentistry , medicine , hydrogen purification , chemical applications , and groundwater treatment . palladium plays a key role in the technology used for fuel cells , which combine hydrogen and oxygen to produce electricity , heat , and water . ore deposits of palladium and other pgms are rare , and the most extensive deposits have been found in the norite belt of the bushveld igneous complex covering the transvaal basin in south africa , the stillwater complex in montana , united states , the thunder bay district of ontario , canada , and the norilsk in russia . recycling is also a source of palladium , mostly from scrapped catalytic converters . the numerous applications and limited supply sources of palladium result in the metal attracting considerable investment interest . silver . silver is a metallic chemical element with the chemical symbol ag , from the indo-european root arg- for '' grey '' or '' shining '' ) and atomic number 47 . a soft , white , lustrous transition metal , it has the highest electrical conductivity of any element and the highest thermal conductivity of any metal . the metal occurs naturally in its pure , free form ( native silver ) , as an alloy with gold and other metals , and in minerals such as argentite and chlorargyrite . most silver is produced as a byproduct of copper , gold , lead , and zinc refining . silver has long been valued as a precious metal , and it is used to make ornaments , jewelry , high-value tableware , utensils ( hence the term silverware ) , and currency coins . today , silver metal is also used in electrical contacts and conductors , in mirrors and in catalysis of chemical reactions . its compounds are used in photographic film , and dilute silver nitrate solutions and other silver compounds are used as disinfectants and microbiocides . while many medical antimicrobial uses of silver have been supplanted by antibiotics , further research into clinical potential continues . cadmium . cadmium is a chemical element with the symbol cd and atomic number 48 . this soft , bluish-white metal is chemically similar to the two other stable metals in group 12 , zinc and mercury . like zinc , it prefers oxidation state +2 in most of its compounds and like mercury it shows a low melting point compared to transition metals . cadmium and its congeners are not always considered transition metals , in that they do not have partly filled d or f electron shells in the elemental or common oxidation states . the average concentration of cadmium in the earth 's crust is between 0.1 and 0.5 parts per million ( ppm ) . it was discovered in 1817 simultaneously by stromeyer and hermann , both in germany , as an impurity in zinc carbonate . cadmium occurs as a minor component in most zinc ores and therefore is a byproduct of zinc production . it was used for a long time as a pigment and for corrosion resistant plating on steel while cadmium compounds were used to stabilize plastic . with the exception of its use in nickel–cadmium battery and cadmium telluride solar panels , the use of cadmium is generally decreasing . these declines have been due to competing technologies , cadmium 's toxicity in certain forms and concentration and resulting regulations . . p-block elements . indium . indium is a chemical element with the symbol in and atomic number 49 . this rare , very soft , malleable and easily fusible other metal is chemically similar to gallium and thallium , and shows the intermediate properties between these two . indium was discovered in 1863 and named for the indigo blue line in its spectrum that was the first indication of its existence in zinc ores , as a new and unknown element . the metal was first isolated in the following year . zinc ores continue to be the primary source of indium , where it is found in compound form . very rarely the element can be found as grains of native ( free ) metal , but these are not of commercial importance . indium 's current primary application is to form transparent electrodes from indium tin oxide in liquid crystal displays and touchscreens , and this use largely determines its global mining production . it is widely used in thin-films to form lubricated layers ( during world war ii it was widely used to coat bearings in high-performance aircraft ) . it is also used for making particularly low melting point alloys , and is a component in some lead-free solders . indium is not known to be used by any organism . in a similar way to aluminium salts , indium ( iii ) ions can be toxic to the kidney when given by injection , but oral indium compounds do not have the chronic toxicity of salts of heavy metals , probably due to poor absorption in basic conditions . radioactive indium-111 ( in very small amounts on a chemical basis ) is used in nuclear medicine tests , as a radiotracer to follow the movement of labeled proteins and white blood cells in the body . tin . tin is a chemical element with the symbol sn ( for and atomic number 50 . it is a main group metal in group 14 of the periodic table . tin shows chemical similarity to both neighboring group 14 elements , germanium and lead and has two possible oxidation states , +2 and the slightly more stable +4 . tin is the 49th most abundant element and has , with 10 stable isotopes , the largest number of stable isotopes in the periodic table . tin is obtained chiefly from the mineral cassiterite , where it occurs as tin dioxide , sno 2 . this silvery , malleable other metal is not easily oxidized in air and is used to coat other metals to prevent corrosion . the firstalloy , used in large scale since 3000 bc , was bronze , an alloy of tin and copper . after 600 bc pure metallic tin was produced . pewter , which is an alloy of 85–90 % tin with the remainder commonly consisting of copper , antimony and lead , was used for tableware from the bronze age until the 20th century . in modern times tin is used in many alloys , most notably tin/lead soft solders , typically containing 60 % or more of tin . another large application for tin is corrosion-resistant tin plating of steel . because of its low toxicity , tin-plated metal is also used for food packaging , giving the name to tin cans , which are made mostly of steel . antimony . antimony is a toxic chemical element with the symbol sb and an atomic number of 51 . a lustrous grey metalloid , it is found in nature mainly as the sulfide mineral stibnite ( sb 2 s 3 ) . antimony compounds have been known since ancient times and were used for cosmetics , metallic antimony was also known but mostly identified as lead . for some time china has been the largest producer of antimony and its compounds , with most production coming from the xikuangshan mine in hunan . antimony compounds are prominent additives for chlorine and bromine containing fire retardants found in many commercial and domestic products . the largest application for metallic antimony is as alloying material for lead and tin . it improves the properties of the alloys which are used as in solders , bullets and ball bearings . an emerging application is the use of antimony in microelectronics . tellurium . tellurium is a chemical element that has the symbol te and atomic number 52 . a brittle , mildly toxic , rare , silver-white metalloid which looks similar to tin , tellurium is chemically related to selenium and sulfur . it is occasionally found in native form , as elemental crystals . tellurium is far more common in the universe than on earth . its extreme rarity in the earth 's crust , comparable to that of platinum , is partly due to its high atomic number , but also due to its formation of a volatile hydride which caused the element to be lost to space as a gas during the hot nebular formation of the planet . tellurium was discovered in transylvania ( today part of romania ) in 1782 by franz-joseph müller von reichenstein in a mineral containing tellurium and gold . martin heinrich klaproth named the new element in 1798 after the latin word for '' earth '' , tellus . gold telluride minerals ( responsible for the name of telluride , colorado ) are the most notable natural gold compounds . however , they are not a commercially significant source of tellurium itself , which is normally extracted as by-product of copper and lead production . tellurium is commercially primarily used in alloys , foremost in steel and copper to improve machinability . applications in solar panels and as a semiconductor material also consume a considerable fraction of tellurium production . iodine . iodine is a chemical element with the symbol i and atomic number 53 . the name is from greek ioeidēs , meaning violet or purple , due to the color of elemental iodine vapor . online etymology dictionary , s.v . iodine . retrieved 2012-02-07 . iodine and its compounds are primarily used in nutrition , and industrially in the production of acetic acid and certain polymers . iodine 's relatively high atomic number , low toxicity , and ease of attachment to organic compounds have made it a part of many radiocontrast materials in modern medicine . iodine has only one stable isotope . a number of iodine radioisotopes are also used in medical applications . iodine is found on earth mainly as the highly water-soluble iodide i − , which concentrates it in oceans and brine pools . like the other halogens , free iodine occurs mainly as a diatomic molecule i 2 , and then only momentarily after being oxidized from iodide by an oxidant like free oxygen . in the universe and on earth , iodine 's high atomic number makes it a relatively rare element . however , its presence in ocean water has given it a role in biology ( see below ) . xenon . xenon is a chemical element with the symbol xe and atomic number 54 . a colorless , heavy , odorless noble gas , xenon occurs in the earth 's atmosphere in trace amounts . although generally unreactive , xenon can undergo a few chemical reactions such as the formation of xenon hexafluoroplatinate , the first noble gas compound to be synthesized . —national standard reference data service of the ussr . volume 10 . naturally occurring xenon consists of isotopes of xenon . there are also over 40 unstable isotopes that undergo radioactive decay . the isotope ratios of xenon are an important tool for studying the early history of the solar system . radioactive xenon-135 is produced from iodine-135 as a result of nuclear fission , and it acts as the most significant neutron absorber in nuclear reactors . xenon is used in flash lamps and arc lamps , and as a general anesthetic . the first excimer laser design used a xenon dimer molecule ( xe 2 ) as its lasing medium , and the earliest laser designs used xenon flash lamps as pumps . xenon is also being used to search for hypothetical weakly interacting massive particles and as the propellant for ion thrusters in spacecraft . . biological role . rubidium , strontium , yttrium , zirconium , and niobium have no biological role . yttrium can cause lung disease in humans . molybdenum-containing enzymes are used as catalysts by some bacteria to break the chemical bond in atmospheric molecular nitrogen , allowing biological nitrogen fixation . at least 50 molybdenum-containing enzymes are now known in bacteria and animals , though only the bacterial and cyanobacterial enzymes are involved in nitrogen fixation . owing to the diverse functions of the remainder of the enzymes , molybdenum is a required element for life in higher organisms ( eukaryotes ) , though not in all bacteria . technetium , ruthenium , rhodium , palladium , silver , tin , and antimony have no biological role . although cadmium has no known biological role in higher organisms , a cadmium-dependent carbonic anhydrase has been found in marine diatoms . indium has no biological role and can be toxic as well as antimony . tellurium has no biological role , although fungi can incorporate it in place of sulfur and selenium into amino acids such as tellurocysteine and telluromethionine . in humans , tellurium is partly metabolized into dimethyl telluride , ( ch 3 ) 2 te , a gas with a garlic-like odor which is exhaled in the breath of victims of tellurium toxicity or exposure . iodine is the heaviest essential element utilized widely by life in biological functions ( only tungsten , employed in enzymes by a few species of bacteria , is heavier ) . iodine 's rarity in many soils , due to initial low abundance as a crust-element , and also leaching of soluble iodide by rainwater , has led to many deficiency problems in land animals and inland human populations . iodine deficiency affects about two billion people and is the leading preventable cause of intellectual disabilities . iodine is required by higher animals , which use it to synthesize thyroid hormones , which contain the element . because of this function , radioisotopes of iodine are concentrated in the thyroid gland along with nonradioactive iodine . the radioisotope iodine-131 , which has a high fission product yield , concentrates in the thyroid , and is one of the most carcinogenic of nuclear fission products . xenon has no biological role , and is used as a general anaesthesia . references .