Gene expression

mechanism . transcription . the production of a rna copy from a dna strand is called transcription , and is performed by rna polymerases , which add one ribonucleotide at a time to a growing rna strand as per the complementarity law of the nucleotide bases . this rna is complementary to the template 3′ → 5′ dna strand , with the exception that thymines ( t ) are replaced with uracils ( u ) in the rna . in prokaryotes , transcription is carried out by a single type of rna polymerase , which needs to bind a dna sequence called a pribnow box with the help of the sigma factor protein ( σ factor ) to start transcription . in eukaryotes , transcription is performed in the nucleus by three types of rna polymerases , each of which needs a special dna sequence called the promoter and a set of dna-binding proteins—transcription factors—to initiate the process ( see regulation of transcription below ) . rna polymerase i is responsible for transcription of ribosomal rna ( rrna ) genes . rna polymerase ii ( pol ii ) transcribes all protein-coding genes but also some non-coding rnas ( e.g . , snrnas , snornas or long non-coding rnas ) . rna polymerase iii transcribes 5s rrna , transfer rna ( trna ) genes , and some small non-coding rnas ( e.g . , 7sk ) . transcription ends when the polymerase encounters a sequence called the terminator . mrna processing . while transcription of prokaryotic protein-coding genes creates mrna ( mrna ) that is ready for translation into protein , transcription of eukaryotic genes leaves a primary transcript of rna ( pre-rna ) , which first has to undergo a series of modifications to become a mature rna . types and steps involved in the maturation processes vary between coding and non-coding prernas ; i.e . even though prerna molecules for both mrna and trna undergo splicing , the steps and machinery involved are different . the processing of non-coding rna is described below ( non-coring rna maturation ) . the processing of premrna include 5′ capping , which is set of enzymatic reactions that add 7-methylguanosine ( m 7 g ) to the 5′ end of pre-mrna and thus protect the rna from degradation by exonucleases . the m 7 g cap is then bound by cap binding complex heterodimer ( cbc20/cbc80 ) , which aids in mrna export to cytoplasm and also protect the rna from decapping . another modification is 3′ cleavage and polyadenylation . they occur if polyadenylation signal sequence ( 5′- aauaaa-3′ ) is present in pre-mrna , which is usually between protein-coding sequence and terminator . the pre-mrna is first cleaved and then a series of ~200 adenines ( a ) are added to form poly ( a ) tail , which protects the rna from degradation . the poly ( a ) tail is bound by multiple poly ( a ) -binding protein necessary for mrna export and translation re-initiation . in the inverse process of deadenylation , poly ( a ) tails are shortened by the ccr4-not 3′-5′ exonuclease , which often leads to full transcript decay . right a very important modification of eukaryotic pre-mrna is rna splicing . the majority of eukaryotic pre-mrnas consist of alternating segments called exons and introns . during the process of splicing , an rna-protein catalytical complex known as spliceosome catalyzes two transesterification reactions , which remove an intron and release it in form of lariat structure , and then splice neighbouring exons together . in certain cases , some introns or exons can be either removed or retained in mature mrna . this so-called alternative splicing creates series of different transcripts originating from a single gene . because these transcripts can be potentially translated into different proteins , splicing extends the complexity of eukaryotic gene expression and the size of a species proteome . extensive rna processing may be an evolution made possible by the nucleus of eukaryotes . in prokaryotes , transcription and translation happen together , whilst in eukaryotes , the nuclear membrane separates the two processes , giving time for rna processing to occur . non-coding rna maturation . in most organisms ncrna are transcribed as precursors that undergo further processing . in the case of ribosomal rnas ( rrna ) , they are often transcribed as a pre-rrna that contains one or more rrnas . the pre-rrna is cleaved and modified ( 2′-o-methylation and pseudouridine formation ) at specific sites by approximately 150 different small nucleolus-restricted rna species , called snornas . snornas associate with proteins , forming snornps . while snorna part basepair with the target rna and thus position the modification at a precise site , the protein part performs the catalytical reaction . in eukaryotes , in particular a snornp called rnase , mrp cleaves the 45s pre-rrna into the 28s , 5.8s , and 18s rrnas . the rrna and rna processing factors form large aggregates called the nucleolus . in the case of transfer rna ( trna ) , for example , the 5′ sequence is removed by rnase p , whereas the 3′ end is removed by the trnase z enzyme and the non-templated 3′ cca tail is added by a nucleotidyl transferase . in the case of mirna , mirnas are first transcribed as primary transcripts or pri-mirna with a cap and poly-a tail and processed to short , 70-nucleotide stem-loop structures known as pre-mirna in the cell nucleus by the enzymes drosha and pasha . after being exported , it is then processed to mature mirnas in the cytoplasm by interaction with the endonuclease dicer , which also initiates the formation of the rna-induced silencing complex , composed of the argonaute protein . even snrnas and snornas themselves undergo series of modification before they become part of functional rnp complex . this is done either in the nucleoplasm or in the specialized compartments called cajal body . their bases are methylated or pseudouridinilated by a group of small cajal body-specific rna , which are structurally similar to snornas . rna export . in eukaryotes most mature rna must be exported to the cytoplasm from the nucleus . while some rnas function in the nucleus , many rnas are transported through the nuclear pores and into the cytosol . export of rnas requires association with specific proteins known as exportins . specific exportin molecules are responsible for the export of a given rna type . mrna transport also requires the correct association with exon junction complex ( ejc ) , which ensures that correct processing of the mrna is completed before export . in some cases rnas are additionally transported to a specific part of the cytoplasm , such as a synapse ; they are then towed by motor proteins that bind through linker proteins to specific sequences ( called '' zipcodes '' ) on the rna . . translation . for some rna ( non-coding rna ) the mature rna is the final gene product . in the case of messenger rna ( mrna ) the rna is an information carrier coding for the synthesis of one or more proteins . mrna carrying a single protein sequence ( common in eukaryotes ) is monocistronic whilst mrna carrying multiple protein sequences ( common in prokaryotes ) is known as polycistronic . every mrna consists of three parts : a 5′ untranslated region ( 5′utr ) , a protein-coding region or open reading frame ( orf ) , and a 3′ untranslated region ( 3′utr ) . the coding region carries information for protein synthesis encoded by the genetic code to form triplets . each triplet of nucleotides of the coding region is called a codon and corresponds to a binding site complementary to an anticodon triplet in transfer rna . transfer rnas with the same anticodon sequence always carry an identical type of amino acid . amino acids are then chained together by the ribosome according to the order of triplets in the coding region . the ribosome helps transfer rna to bind to messenger rna and takes the amino acid from each transfer rna and makes a structure-less protein out of it . each mrna molecule is translated into many protein molecules , on average ~2800 in mammals . in prokaryotes translation generally occurs at the point of transcription ( co-transcriptionally ) , often using a messenger rna that is still in the process of being created . in eukaryotes translation can occur in a variety of regions of the cell depending on where the protein being written is supposed to be . major locations are the cytoplasm for soluble cytoplasmic proteins and the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum for proteins that are for export from the cell or insertion into a cell membrane . proteins that are supposed to be expressed at the endoplasmic reticulum are recognised part-way through the translation process . this is governed by the signal recognition particle—a protein that binds to the ribosome and directs it to the endoplasmic reticulum when it finds a signal peptide on the growing ( nascent ) amino acid chain . . folding . thumb each protein exists as an unfolded polypeptide or random coil when translated from a sequence of mrna into a linear chain of amino acids . this polypeptide lacks any developed three-dimensional structure ( the left hand side of the neighboring figure ) . the peptide then folds into its characteristic and functional protein structure from a random coil . amino acids interact with each other to produce a well-defined three-dimensional structure , the folded protein ( the right hand side of the figure ) known as the native state . the resulting three-dimensional structure is determined by the amino acid sequence ( anfinsen 's dogma ) . the correct three-dimensional structure is essential to function , although some parts of functional proteins may remain unfolded . failure to fold into the intended shape usually produces inactive proteins with different properties including toxic prions . several neurodegenerative and other diseases are believed to result from the accumulation of misfolded proteins . many allergies are caused by the folding of the proteins , for the immune system does not produce antibodies for certain protein structures . enzymes called chaperones assist the newly formed protein to attain ( fold into ) the 3-dimensional structure it needs to function . similarly , rna chaperones help rnas attain their functional shapes . assisting protein folding is one of the main roles of the endoplasmic reticulum in eukaryotes . translocation . secretory proteins of eukaryotes or prokaryotes must be translocated to enter the secretory pathway . newly synthesized proteins are directed to the eukaryotic sec61 or prokaryotic secyeg translocation channel by signal peptides . the efficiency of protein secretion in eukaryotes is very dependent on the signal peptide which has been used . . protein transport . many proteins are destined for other parts of the cell than the cytosol and a wide range of signalling sequences or signal peptide are used to direct proteins to where they are supposed to be . in prokaryotes this is normally a simple process due to limited compartmentalisation of the cell . however , in eukaryotes there is a great variety of different targeting processes to ensure the protein arrives at the correct organelle . not all proteins remain within the cell and many are exported , for example , digestive enzymes , hormones and extracellular matrix proteins . in eukaryotes the export pathway is well developed and the main mechanism for the export of these proteins is translocation to the endoplasmic reticulum , followed by transport via the golgi apparatus . . regulation of gene expression . regulation of gene expression refers to the control of the amount and timing of appearance of the functional product of a gene . control of expression is vital to allow a cell to produce the gene products it needs when it needs them ; in turn , this gives cells the flexibility to adapt to a variable environment , external signals , damage to the cell , and other stimuli . more generally , gene regulation gives the cell control over all structure and function , and is the basis for cellular differentiation , morphogenesis and the versatility and adaptability of any organism . numerous terms are used to describe types of genes depending on how they are regulated ; these include : a constitutive gene is a gene that is transcribed continually as opposed to a facultative gene , which is only transcribed when needed . a housekeeping gene is a gene that is required to maintain basic cellular function and so is typically expressed in all cell types of an organism . examples include actin , gapdh and ubiquitin . some housekeeping genes are transcribed at a relatively constant rate and these genes can be used as a reference point in experiments to measure the expression rates of other genes . a facultative gene is a gene only transcribed when needed as opposed to a constitutive gene . an inducible gene is a gene whose expression is either responsive to environmental change or dependent on the position in the cell cycle . any step of gene expression may be modulated , from the dna-rna transcription step to post-translational modification of a protein . the stability of the final gene product , whether it is rna or protein , also contributes to the expression level of the gene—an unstable product results in a low expression level . in general gene expression is regulated through changes in the number and type of interactions between molecules that collectively influence transcription of dna and translation of rna . some simple examples of where gene expression is important are : control of insulin expression so it gives a signal for blood glucose regulation . x-inactivation in female mammals to prevent an '' overdose '' of the genes it contains . cyclin expression levels control progression through the eukaryotic cell cycle . transcriptional regulation . regulation of transcription can be broken down into three main routes of influence ; genetic ( direct interaction of a control factor with the gene ) , modulation interaction of a control factor with the transcription machinery and epigenetic ( non-sequence changes in dna structure that influence transcription ) . direct interaction with dna is the simplest and the most direct method by which a protein changes transcription levels . genes often have several protein binding sites around the coding region with the specific function of regulating transcription . there are many classes of regulatory dna binding sites known as enhancers , insulators and silencers . the mechanisms for regulating transcription are very varied , from blocking key binding sites on the dna for rna polymerase to acting as an activator and promoting transcription by assisting rna polymerase binding . the activity of transcription factors is further modulated by intracellular signals causing protein post-translational modification including phosphorylated , acetylated , or glycosylated . these changes influence a transcription factor 's ability to bind , directly or indirectly , to promoter dna , to recruit rna polymerase , or to favor elongation of a newly synthesized rna molecule . the nuclear membrane in eukaryotes allows further regulation of transcription factors by the duration of their presence in the nucleus , which is regulated by reversible changes in their structure and by binding of other proteins . environmental stimuli or endocrine signals may cause modification of regulatory proteins eliciting cascades of intracellular signals , which result in regulation of gene expression . more recently it has become apparent that there is a significant influence of non-dna-sequence specific effects on transcription . these effects are referred to as epigenetic and involve the higher order structure of dna , non-sequence specific dna binding proteins and chemical modification of dna . in general epigenetic effects alter the accessibility of dna to proteins and so modulate transcription . in eukaryotes the structure of chromatin , controlled by the histone code , regulates access to dna with significant impacts on the expression of genes in euchromatin and heterochromatin areas . dna methylation and demethylation in transcriptional regulation . dna methylation is a widespread mechanism for epigenetic influence on gene expression and is seen in bacteria and eukaryotes and has roles in heritable transcription silencing and transcription regulation . methylation most often occurs on a cytosine ( see figure ) . methylation of cytosine primarily occurs in dinucleotide sequences where a cytosine is followed by a guanine , a cpg site . the number of cpg sites in the human genome is about 28 million . depending on the type of cell , about 70 % of the cpg sites have a methylated cytosine . methylation of cytosine in dna has a major role in regulating gene expression . methylation of cpgs in a promoter region of a gene usually represses gene transcription while methylation of cpgs in the body of a gene increases expression . tet enzymes play a central role in demethylation of methylated cytosines . demethylation of cpgs in a gene promoter by tet enzyme activity increases transcription of the gene . . transcriptional regulation in learning and memory . in a rat , contextual fear conditioning ( cfc ) is a painful learning experience . just one episode of cfc can result in a life-long fearful memory . after an episode of cfc , cytosine methylation is altered in the promoter regions of about 9.17 % of all genes in the hippocampus neuron dna of a rat . the hippocampus is where new memories are initially stored . after cfc about 500 genes have increased transcription ( often due to demethylation of cpg sites in a promoter region ) and about 1,000 genes have decreased transcription ( often due to newly formed 5-methylcytosine at cpg sites in a promoter region ) . the pattern of induced and repressed genes within neurons appears to provide a molecular basis for forming the first transient memory of this training event in the hippocampus of the rat brain . in particular , the brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene ( bdnf ) is known as a '' learning gene . '' after cfc there was upregulation of bdnf gene expression , related to decreased cpg methylation of certain internal promoters of the gene , and this was correlated with learning . . transcriptional regulation in cancer . the majority of gene promoters contain a cpg island with numerous cpg sites . when many of a gene 's promoter cpg sites are methylated the gene becomes silenced . colorectal cancers typically have 3 to 6 driver mutations and 33 to 66 hitchhiker or passenger mutations . however , transcriptional silencing may be of more importance than mutation in causing progression to cancer . for example , in colorectal cancers about 600 to 800 genes are transcriptionally silenced by cpg island methylation ( see regulation of transcription in cancer ) . transcriptional repression in cancer can also occur by other epigenetic mechanisms , such as altered expression of micrornas . in breast cancer , transcriptional repression of brca1 may occur more frequently by over-expressed microrna-182 than by hypermethylation of the brca1 promoter ( see low expression of brca1 in breast and ovarian cancers ) . post-transcriptional regulation . in eukaryotes , where export of rna is required before translation is possible , nuclear export is thought to provide additional control over gene expression . all transport in and out of the nucleus is via the nuclear pore and transport is controlled by a wide range of importin and exportin proteins . expression of a gene coding for a protein is only possible if the messenger rna carrying the code survives long enough to be translated . in a typical cell , an rna molecule is only stable if specifically protected from degradation . rna degradation has particular importance in regulation of expression in eukaryotic cells where mrna has to travel significant distances before being translated . in eukaryotes , rna is stabilised by certain post-transcriptional modifications , particularly the 5′ cap and polyadenylation . intentional degradation of mrna is used not just as a defence mechanism from foreign rna ( normally from viruses ) but also as a route of mrna destabilisation . if an mrna molecule has a complementary sequence to a small interfering rna then it is targeted for destruction via the rna interference pathway . three prime untranslated regions and micrornas . three prime untranslated regions ( 3′utrs ) of messenger rnas ( mrnas ) often contain regulatory sequences that post-transcriptionally influence gene expression . such 3′-utrs often contain both binding sites for micrornas ( mirnas ) as well as for regulatory proteins . by binding to specific sites within the 3′-utr , mirnas can decrease gene expression of various mrnas by either inhibiting translation or directly causing degradation of the transcript . the 3′-utr also may have silencer regions that bind repressor proteins that inhibit the expression of a mrna . the 3′-utr often contains microrna response elements ( mres ) . mres are sequences to which mirnas bind . these are prevalent motifs within 3′-utrs . among all regulatory motifs within the 3′-utrs ( e.g . including silencer regions ) , mres make up about half of the motifs . as of 2014 , the mirbase web site , mirbase.org an archive of mirna sequences and annotations , listed 28,645 entries in 233 biologic species . of these , 1,881 mirnas were in annotated human mirna loci . mirnas were predicted to have an average of about four hundred target mrnas ( affecting expression of several hundred genes ) . friedman et al . estimate that > 45,000 mirna target sites within human mrna 3′utrs are conserved above background levels , and > 60 % of human protein-coding genes have been under selective pressure to maintain pairing to mirnas . direct experiments show that a single mirna can reduce the stability of hundreds of unique mrnas . other experiments show that a single mirna may repress the production of hundreds of proteins , but that this repression often is relatively mild ( less than 2-fold ) . the effects of mirna dysregulation of gene expression seem to be important in cancer . for instance , in gastrointestinal cancers , nine mirnas have been identified as epigenetics altered and effective in down regulating dna repair enzymes . the effects of mirna dysregulation of gene expression also seem to be important in neuropsychiatric disorders , such as schizophrenia , bipolar disorder , major depression , parkinson 's disease , alzheimer 's disease and autism spectrum disorders . . translational regulation . direct regulation of translation is less prevalent than control of transcription or mrna stability but is occasionally used . inhibition of protein translation is a major target for toxins and antibiotics , so they can kill a cell by overriding its normal gene expression control . protein synthesis inhibitors include the antibiotic neomycin and the toxin ricin . post-translational modifications . post-translational modifications ( ptms ) are covalent modifications to proteins . like rna splicing , they help to significantly diversify the proteome . these modifications are usually catalyzed by enzymes . additionally , processes like covalent additions to amino acid side chain residues can often be reversed by other enzymes . however , some , like the proteolysis of the protein backbone , are irreversible . ptms play many important roles in the cell . for example , phosphorylation is primarily involved in activating and deactivating proteins and in signaling pathways . ptms are involved in transcriptional regulation : an important function of acetylation and methylation is histone tail modification , which alters how accessible dna is for transcription . they can also be seen in the immune system , where glycosylation plays a key role . one type of ptm can initiate another type of ptm , as can be seen in how ubiquitination tags proteins for degradation through proteolysis . proteolysis , other than being involved in breaking down proteins , is also important in activating and deactivating them , and in regulating biological processes such as dna transcription and cell death . . measurement . measuring gene expression is an important part of many life sciences , as the ability to quantify the level at which a particular gene is expressed within a cell , tissue or organism can provide a lot of valuable information . for example , measuring gene expression can : identify viral infection of a cell ( viral protein expression ) . determine an individual 's susceptibility to cancer ( oncogene expression ) . find if a bacterium is resistant to penicillin ( beta-lactamase expression ) . similarly , the analysis of the location of protein expression is a powerful tool , and this can be done on an organismal or cellular scale . investigation of localization is particularly important for the study of development in multicellular organisms and as an indicator of protein function in single cells . ideally , measurement of expression is done by detecting the final gene product ( for many genes , this is the protein ) ; however , it is often easier to detect one of the precursors , typically mrna and to infer gene-expression levels from these measurements . mrna quantification . levels of mrna can be quantitatively measured by northern blotting , which provides size and sequence information about the mrna molecules . a sample of rna is separated on an agarose gel and hybridized to a radioactively labeled rna probe that is complementary to the target sequence . the radiolabeled rna is then detected by an autoradiograph . because the use of radioactive reagents makes the procedure time consuming and potentially dangerous , alternative labeling and detection methods , such as digoxigenin and biotin chemistries , have been developed . perceived disadvantages of northern blotting are that large quantities of rna are required and that quantification may not be completely accurate , as it involves measuring band strength in an image of a gel . on the other hand , the additional mrna size information from the northern blot allows the discrimination of alternately spliced transcripts . another approach for measuring mrna abundance is rt-qpcr . in this technique , reverse transcription is followed by quantitative pcr . reverse transcription first generates a dna template from the mrna ; this single-stranded template is called cdna . the cdna template is then amplified in the quantitative step , during which the fluorescence emitted by labeled hybridization probes or intercalating dyes changes as the dna amplification process progresses . with a carefully constructed standard curve , qpcr can produce an absolute measurement of the number of copies of original mrna , typically in units of copies per nanolitre of homogenized tissue or copies per cell . qpcr is very sensitive ( detection of a single mrna molecule is theoretically possible ) , but can be expensive depending on the type of reporter used ; fluorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes are more expensive than non-specific intercalating fluorescent dyes . for expression profiling , or high-throughput analysis of many genes within a sample , quantitative pcr may be performed for hundreds of genes simultaneously in the case of low-density arrays . a second approach is the dna microarrays . a single array or '' chip '' may contain probes to determine transcript levels for every known gene in the genome of one or more organisms . alternatively , '' tag based '' technologies like serial analysis of gene expression ( sage ) and rna-seq , which can provide a relative measure of the cellular concentration of different mrnas , can be used . an advantage of tag-based methods is the '' open architecture '' , allowing for the exact measurement of any transcript , with a known or unknown sequence . next-generation sequencing ( ngs ) such as rna-seq is another approach , producing vast quantities of sequence data that can be matched to a reference genome . although ngs is comparatively time-consuming , expensive , and resource-intensive , it can identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms , splice-variants , and novel genes , and can also be used to profile expression in organisms for which little or no sequence information is available . rna profiles in wikipedia . profiles like these are found for almost all proteins listed in wikipedia . they are generated by organizations such as the genomics institute of the novartis research foundation and the european bioinformatics institute . additional information can be found by searching their databases ( for an example of the glut4 transporter pictured here , see citation ) . these profiles indicate the level of dna expression ( and hence rna produced ) of a certain protein in a certain tissue , and are color-coded accordingly in the images located in the protein box on the right side of each wikipedia page . protein quantification . for genes encoding proteins , the expression level can be directly assessed by a number of methods with some clear analogies to the techniques for mrna quantification . the most commonly used method is to perform a western blot against the protein of interest—this gives information on the size of the protein in addition to its identity . a sample ( often cellular lysate ) is separated on a polyacrylamide gel , transferred to a membrane and then probed with an antibody to the protein of interest . the antibody can either be conjugated to a fluorophore or to horseradish peroxidase for imaging and/or quantification . the gel-based nature of this assay makes quantification less accurate , but it has the advantage of being able to identify later modifications to the protein , for example proteolysis or ubiquitination , from changes in size . mrna-protein correlation . quantification of protein and mrna permits a correlation of the two levels . the question of how well protein levels correlate with their corresponding transcript levels is highly debated and depends on multiple factors . regulation on each step of gene expression can impact the correlation , as shown for regulation of translation or protein stability . post-translational factors , such as protein transport in highly polar cells , can influence the measured mrna-protein correlation as well . localisation . analysis of expression is not limited to quantification ; localisation can also be determined . mrna can be detected with a suitably labelled complementary mrna strand and protein can be detected via labelled antibodies . the probed sample is then observed by microscopy to identify where the mrna or protein is . by replacing the gene with a new version fused to a green fluorescent protein ( or similar ) marker , expression may be directly quantified in live cells . this is done by imaging using a fluorescence microscope . it is very difficult to clone a gfp-fused protein into its native location in the genome without affecting expression levels so this method often can not be used to measure endogenous gene expression . it is , however , widely used to measure the expression of a gene artificially introduced into the cell , for example via an expression vector . it is important to note that by fusing a target protein to a fluorescent reporter the protein 's behavior , including its cellular localization and expression level , can be significantly changed . the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay works by using antibodies immobilised on a microtiter plate to capture proteins of interest from samples added to the well . using a detection antibody conjugated to an enzyme or fluorophore the quantity of bound protein can be accurately measured by fluorometric or colourimetric detection . the detection process is very similar to that of a western blot , but by avoiding the gel steps more accurate quantification can be achieved . expression system . 500px an expression system is a system specifically designed for the production of a gene product of choice . this is normally a protein although may also be rna , such as trna or a ribozyme . an expression system consists of a gene , normally encoded by dna , and the molecular machinery required to transcribe the dna into mrna and translate the mrna into protein using the reagents provided . in the broadest sense this includes every living cell but the term is more normally used to refer to expression as a laboratory tool . an expression system is therefore often artificial in some manner . expression systems are , however , a fundamentally natural process . viruses are an excellent example where they replicate by using the host cell as an expression system for the viral proteins and genome . inducible expression . doxycycline is also used in '' tet-on '' and '' tet-off '' tetracycline controlled transcriptional activation to regulate transgene expression in organisms and cell cultures . in nature . in addition to these biological tools , certain naturally observed configurations of dna ( genes , promoters , enhancers , repressors ) and the associated machinery itself are referred to as an expression system . this term is normally used in the case where a gene or set of genes is switched on under well defined conditions , for example , the simple repressor switch expression system in lambda phage and the lac operator system in bacteria . several natural expression systems are directly used or modified and used for artificial expression systems such as the tet-on and tet-off expression system . gene networks . genes have sometimes been regarded as nodes in a network , with inputs being proteins such as transcription factors , and outputs being the level of gene expression . the node itself performs a function , and the operation of these functions have been interpreted as performing a kind of information processing within cells and determines cellular behavior . gene networks can also be constructed without formulating an explicit causal model . this is often the case when assembling networks from large expression data sets . covariation and correlation of expression is computed across a large sample of cases and measurements ( often transcriptome or proteome data ) . the source of variation can be either experimental or natural ( observational ) . there are several ways to construct gene expression networks , but one common approach is to compute a matrix of all pair-wise correlations of expression across conditions , time points , or individuals and convert the matrix ( after thresholding at some cut-off value ) into a graphical representation in which nodes represent genes , transcripts , or proteins and edges connecting these nodes represent the strength of association ( see name '' pmid 15114364 '' > . techniques and tools . the following experimental techniques are used to measure gene expression and are listed in roughly chronological order , starting with the older , more established technologies . they are divided into two groups based on their degree of multiplexity . low-to-mid-plex techniques : reporter gene northern blot western blot fluorescent in situ hybridization reverse transcription pcr higher-plex techniques : sage dna microarray tiling array rna-seq . gene expression databases . gene expression omnibus ( geo ) at ncbi expression atlas at the ebi mouse gene expression database at the jackson laboratory collectf : a database of experimentally validated transcription factor-binding sites in bacteria . colombos : collection of bacterial expression compendia . many microbe microarrays database : microbial affymetrix data