Robert Capa

chinese resistance to imperial japan , 1938 . in 1938 , he traveled to the chinese city of hankou , now within wuhan , to document the resistance to the japanese invasion . stephen r . mackinnon includes photographs by robert capa , in wuhan , 1938 : war , refugees , and the making of modern china ( berkeley : university of california press , 2008 ) . he sent his images to life magazine , which published some of them in its may 23 , 1938 issue . capa photos of the chinese resistance , life , may 23 , 1938 . world war ii . at the start of world war ii , capa was in new york city , having moved there from paris to look for work , and to escape nazi persecution . during the war , capa was sent to various parts of the european theatre on photography assignments . he first photographed for collier 's weekly , before switching to life after he was fired by collier 's . he was the only '' enemy alien '' photographer for the allies . on october 7 , 1943 robert capa was in naples with life reporter will lang jr . , and there he photographed the naples post office bombing . slightly out of focus , henry holt and company , new york , 1947 , p . 104 . d-day , omaha beach , 1944 . a group of images known as '' the magnificent eleven '' were taken by capa on d-day . taking part in the allied invasion , capa was attached to the 16th infantry regiment , 1st infantry division ( '' big red one '' ) on omaha beach . d-day , national wwii museum the us personnel attacking omaha beach faced some of the heaviest resistance from german troops inside the bunkers of the atlantic wall . photographic historian a . d . coleman has suggested that capa traveled to the beach in the same landing craft as colonel george a . taylor , commander of the 16th infantry regiment , who landed 1½ hours after the first wave , near colleville-sur-mer . capa subsequently stated that he took 106 pictures , but later discovered that all but 11 had been destroyed . this incident may have been caused by capa 's cameras becoming waterlogged at normandy , although the more frequent allegation is that a young assistant accidentally destroyed the pictures while they were being developed at the photo lab in london . simon kuper , '' interview : john morris on his friend robert capa '' , financial times , may 31 , 2013 . retrieved june 1 , 2013 . however , this narrative has been challenged by coleman and others . in 2016 , john g . morris , who was picture editor at the london bureau of life in 1944 , agreed that it was more likely that capa captured 11 images in total on d-day . the 11 prints were included in life magazine 's issue on june 19 , 1944 , with captions written by magazine staffers , as capa did not provide life with notes or a verbal description of what they showed . the captions have since been shown to be erroneous , as were subsequent descriptions of the images by capa himself . for example , men described by life as taking cover behind a hedgehog obstacle were members of gap assault team 10 – a combined us navy/us army demolition unit tasked with blowing up obstacles and clearing the way for landing craft . lt . ( jg ) h . l . blackwell , jr . report on naval combat demolition units & 91 ; ncdus & 93 ; in operation '' neptune '' as part of task force 122 ( 5 july , 1944 ) ( 19 february 2019 ) . . the shaved woman of chartres . after the liberation of france , capa documented several events that took then place . one of the most famous is the one depicted in his famous picture , the shaved woman of chartres , taken on 16 august 1944 , that shows a woman after being head shaved as a punishment for collaborationism with the nazis as she is being escorted home , followed by several people . . the picture of the last man to die . on april 18 , 1945 , capa captured images of a fight to secure a bridge in leipzig , germany . these pictures included an image of raymond j . bowman 's death by sniper fire . this image was published in a spread in life magazine with the caption '' the picture of the last man to die . '' . post-war soviet union , 1947 . in 1947 capa traveled to the soviet union with his friend , the american writer john steinbeck . they originally met when they shared a room in an algiers hotel with other war correspondents before the allied invasion of italy in 1943 . they reconnected in new york , where steinbeck told him he was thinking about visiting the soviet union , now that the war was over . capa suggested they go there together and collaborate on a book , with capa documenting the war-torn nation with photographs . the trip resulted in steinbeck 's , a russian journal , which was published both as a book and a syndicated newspaper serial . photos were taken in moscow , kyiv , tbilisi , batumi and among the ruins of stalingrad . railsback , brian e . , meyer , michael j . a john steinbeck encyclopedia , greenwood publishing group ( 2006 ) p . 50 photo of stalingrad , taken by capa they remained good friends until capa 's death ; steinbeck took the news of capa 's death very hard . . magnum photos agency , 1947 . in 1947 , capa founded the cooperative venture magnum photos in paris with henri cartier-bresson , william vandivert , david seymour , and george rodger . it was a cooperative agency to manage work for and by freelance photographers , and developed a reputation for the excellence of its photo-journalists . in 1952 , he became the president . founding of israel , 1948 . capa toured israel during its founding and while it was being attacked by neighboring states . he took the numerous photographs that accompanied irwin shaw 's book , report on israel . '' robert capa 's road to jerusalem '' , jewish review of books , winter 2016 . documenting film productions , 1953 . in 1953 he joined screenwriter truman capote and director john huston in italy where capa was assigned to photograph the making of the film , beat the devil . '' robert capa remembered '' , independent uk , october 12 , 1996 during their off time they , and star humphrey bogart , enjoyed playing poker . . first indochina war and death , 1954 . in the early 1950s , capa travelled to japan for an exhibition associated with magnum photos . while there , life magazine asked him to go on assignment to southeast asia , where the french had been fighting for eight years in the first indochina war . although he had claimed a few years earlier that he was finished with war , capa accepted the job . he accompanied a french regiment located in thái bình province with two time-life journalists , john mecklin and jim lucas . on 25 may 1954 , the regiment was passing through a dangerous area under fire when capa decided to leave his jeep and go up the road to photograph the advance . capa was killed when he stepped on a landmine near the road . he was 40 at the time of his death . he is buried in plot 189 at amawalk hill cemetery ( also called friends cemetery ) , amawalk , westchester county , new york along with his mother , julia , and his brother , cornell capa . personal life . capa was born into a middle-class jewish family in budapest , '' robert capa '' , jewish history , hungary where his parents were tailors ; capa 's mother was a successful fashion shop owner , and his father was an employee of her shop . capa had two brothers , a younger brother , cornell capa and an older brother , lászló friedmann . cornell moved to paris in 1936 to join his older brother capa , where he found an interest in photography instead of staying in the field of medicine . not much is known of capa 's older brother lászló , except that he married angela maria friedmann-csordas in 1933 . he died a year later and was buried next to his father in the kozma street cemetery . at the age of 18 , capa moved to vienna , later relocated to prague , and finally settled in berlin : all cities that were centers of artistic and cultural ferment in this period . he started studies in journalism at the german political college , but the nazi party instituted restrictions on jews and banned them from colleges . capa relocated to paris , where he adopted the name 'robert capa ' in 1934 . at that time , he had already been a hobby-photographer . in 1934 '' andré friedman '' , as he still called himself then , met gerda pohorylle , a german jewish refugee . the couple lived in paris where andré taught gerda photography . together they created the name and image of '' robert capa '' as a famous american photographer , and at the beginning of the war both photographers published their work under the pseudonym of robert capa . gerda took the name gerda taro and became successful in her own right . she travelled with capa to spain in 1936 intending to document the spanish civil war . in july 1937 , capa traveled briefly to paris while gerda remained in madrid . she was killed near brunete during a battle . capa , who was reportedly engaged to her , was deeply shocked and never married . in february 1943 capa met elaine justin , then married to the actor john justin . they fell in love and the relationship lasted until the end of the war . capa spent most of his time in the frontline . capa called the redheaded elaine '' pinky , '' and wrote about her in his war memoir , slightly out of focus . in 1945 , elaine justin broke up with capa ; she later married chuck romine . some months later capa became the lover of the actress ingrid bergman , who was touring in europe to entertain american soldiers . p . & nbsp ; 176 in december 1945 , capa followed her to hollywood . the relationship ended in the summer of 1946 when capa traveled to turkey . . legacy . the government of hungary issued a postage stamp in capa 's honor in 2013 . that same year it issued a 5,000 forint ( 20 ) gold coin , also in his honor , showing an engraving of capa . his younger brother , cornell capa , also a photographer , worked to preserve and promote robert 's legacy as well as develop his own identity and style . he founded the international fund for concerned photography in 1966 . to give this collection a permanent home , he founded the international center of photography in new york city in 1974 . this was one of the foremost and most extensive conservation efforts on photography to be developed . indeed , capa and his brother believed strongly in the importance of photography and its preservation , much like film would later be perceived and duly treated in a similar way . the overseas press club created the robert capa gold medal in the photographer 's honor . overseas press club of america , awards archive . capa is known for redefining wartime photojournalism . his work came from the trenches as opposed to the more arms-length perspective that was the precedent . he was famed for saying , '' if your photographs are n't good enough , you 're not close enough . '' he is credited with coining the term generation x . he used it as a title for a photo-essay about the young people reaching adulthood immediately after the second world war . it was published in 1953 in picture post ( uk ) and holiday ( usa ) . capa said , '' we named this unknown generation , the generation x , and even in our first enthusiasm we realised that we had something far bigger than our talents and pockets could cope with . '' in 1947 , for his work recording world war ii in pictures , u.s . general dwight d . eisenhower awarded capa the medal of freedom citation george stevens jr . , '' robert capa : a photographer at war '' , washington post , september 29 , 1985 the international center of photography organized a travelling exhibition titled this is war : robert capa at work , which displayed capa 's innovations as a photojournalist in the 1930s and 1940s . it includes vintage prints , contact sheets , caption sheets , handwritten observations , personal letters and original magazine layouts from the spanish civil war , the second sino-japanese war and world war ii . the exhibition appeared at the barbican art gallery , the international center of photography of milan , and the museu nacional d'art de catalunya in the fall of 2009 , before moving to the nederlands fotomuseum from october 10 , 2009 until january 10 , 2010 . travelling exhibitions : this is war ! robert capa at work , international center of photography . politics . as a young boy , capa was drawn to the munkakör ( employment circle ) , a group of socialism and avant-garde artists , photographers , and intellectuals centered around budapest . he participated in the demonstrations against the miklós horthy regime . in 1931 , just before his first photo was published , capa was arrested by the hungarian secret police , beaten , and jailed for his radical political activity . a police official 's wife—who happened to know his family—won capa 's release on the condition that he would leave hungary immediately . the boston review has described capa as '' a leftist , and a democrat—he was passionately pro-loyalist and passionately anti-fascist . '' during the spanish civil war , capa travelled with and photographed the workers ' party of marxist unification ( poum ) , which resulted in his best-known photograph . the british magazine picture post ran his photos from spain in the 1930s accompanied by a portrait of capa , in profile , with the simple description : '' he is a passionate democrat , and he lives to take photographs . '' . in popular culture . in 2013 , the japanese female musical theater group , takarazuka revue , produced a musical piece based on the life of capa . ms . ouki kaname performed the lead role as capa . the group performed the musical in 2012 in takarazuka and tokyo and in 2014 in nagoya . in patrick modiano 's novella afterimage capa is a mentor for the subject of the novella , francis jansen , a photographer who retires to mexico . in alfred hitchcock 's movie rear window , the protagonist l . b . '' jeff '' jefferies ( james stewart ) was partly based on capa . poet owen sheers wrote a poem about capa , named happy accidents . it can be found in the anthology skirrid hill . in english indie rock group alt-j 's 2012 album an awesome wave , the love between capa and taro , and the circumstances of his death are described in the last track , taro the austrian rock singer falco wrote the song '' kamikaze cappa '' in tribute to capa . . collections . art institute of chicago , chicago , il metropolitan museum of art , new york the falling soldier , metropolitan museum of art museum of modern art , new york robert capa : the definitive collection , magnum photos robert capa , international center of photography robert capa photographs , worcester art museum robert capa , the j . paul getty museum robert capa , international photography hall of fame . publications . publications by capa . the battle of waterloo road . new york : random house , 1941 . photographs by capa . with text by diana forbes-robertson . invasion ! . new york , london : d . appleton-century , 1944 . photographs by capa . with text by charles wertenbaker . slightly out of focus . new york : henry holt and company , 1947 . new york : modern library , 2001 . text and photographs by capa . with a foreword by cornell capa and an introduction by richard whelan . a memoir . images of war . new york : grossman , 1964 . text and photographs by capa . with a text by john steinbeck . robert capa : photographs . new york : aperture , 1996 . new york : aperture , 2004 . heart of spain : robert capa 's photographs of the spanish civil war . new york : aperture , 1999 . new york : aperture , 2005 . robert capa : the definitive collection . london , new york : phaidon , 2001 . london , new york : phaidon , 2004 . edited by richard whelan . robert capa at work : this is war ! . göttingen : steidl , 2009 . photographs by capa . with a foreword by willis e . hartshorn , an introduction by christopher phillips , and text by richard whelan . published to accompany an exhibition at the international center of photography , new york , september 2007 – january 2008 . '' a detailed examination of six of robert capa 's most important war reportages from the first half of his career : the falling soldier ( 1936 ) , chinese resistance to the japanese invasion ( 1938 ) , the end of the spanish civil war in catalonia ( 1938–39 ) , d-day , the us paratroop invasion of germany and the liberation of leipzig ( 1945 ) . '' questa è la guerra ! : robert capa al lavoro . italy : contrasto , 2009 . published to accompany an exhibition in milan , march–june 2009 . . publications with others . death in the making . new york : pascal covici , 1938 . photographs by capa and taro . a russian journal . new york : viking , 1948 . text by john steinbeck , illustrated with photographs by capa . report on israel . new york : simon & schuster , 1950 . by irwin shaw and capa . publications about capa . robert capa : a biography . new york : knopf , 1985 . by richard whelan . blood and champagne : the life and times of robert capa . macmillan , 2002 ; thomas dunne , 2003 ; . da capo press , 2004 ; . by alex kershaw . la foto de capa . córdoba : paso de cebra ediciones , 2011 . a fictionalised account of the discovery of the exact location of the '' falling soldier '' photograph . nizza oder die liebe zur kunst . bad könig : vantage point world , 2013 . by axel dielmann . text in german . notes . references . external links . american masters ; robert capa : in love and war interviews . thirteen wnet , oct 1985 . retrieved from the american archive of public broadcasting . the macneil/lehrer newshour ; '' images of world war ii '' , pbs newshour,17 oct 1985 . retrieved from the american archive of public broadcasting . robert capa 's photography portfolio — magnum photos magnum photos pbs biography and analysis of falling soldier authenticity discussion on the authenticity of capa 's '' fallen republican soldier '' does it matter if it was faked ? robert capa 's '' lost negatives '' photography temple . “ photographer robert capa ” the woman who captured robert capa 's heart , the independent , 13 june 2010 driven to shoot on the frontlines , the japan times , 14 february 2014