Tottenham Court Road

geography . tottenham court road runs from euston road in the north , to st giles circus ( the junction of oxford street and charing cross road ) at its southern end . the road lies almost entirely within the london borough of camden near its boundary with the city of westminster , a distance of about three-quarters of a mile ( 1.2 & nbsp ; km ) . south of torrington place the road marks the traditional boundary of the parishes of st pancras , london to the west , and st giles to the east ( due to long-standing shared administrative arrangements , st giles is often described as a part of bloomsbury ) . north of torrington place both sides of the road are in st pancras . the term fitzrovia was first coined in the late 1930s as an informal description for some of the surrounding area . tottenham court road is sometimes used to distinguish fitzrovia to the west from bloomsbury to the east ( st giles often being thought of as part of bloomsbury ) . fitzrovia has never had any formal limits applied , and its informal extent is sometimes also said to extend further east to gower street , thus potentially overlapping with the more formal definitions applied to st giles and bloomsbury . the south end of the road is close to the british museum and to centre point , the west end 's tallest building . there are a number of buildings belonging to university college london along the road , and university college hospital is near the north end of the road . history . the origin of the road 's name is that it is the road to the manor of tottenham court . the manor house lay just to the north of the road 's junction with euston road . manor of tottenham court . the first surviving record of the manor is , as þottanheale , from a charter from around ad 1000 , the initial ' þ ' ( pronounced th ) may have been a mistake by the scribe who should perhaps have used a 't ' , as all subsequent records use an initial 't' . oxford dictionary of english place-names , eilert ekwall , 4th edition the manor was subsequently described as totehele in the domesday book of 1086 . the area was described as totenhale in 1184 and totenhale court by 1487 . although the road 's name has a similar word root to tottenham in the london borough of haringey , the two are not directly related . the manor occupied the south-western part of the parish of st pancras , whose boundaries are now used to delineate most of the south-west of the wider modern london borough of camden , of which st pancras is the principal component . south of torrington place , tottenham court ( and therefore st pancras ) lay between tottenham court road and what is now the borough boundary with the city of westminster . north of torrington place tottenham court ( and hence also st pancras ) occupied both the east and west sides of the road . the manor house lay just to the north of what is now euston road . the manor is mentioned in the domesday book as belonging to the dean and chapter of st paul 's cathedral . in the time of henry iii ( 1216–1272 ) , a manor house slightly north-west of what is now the corner of tottenham court road and euston road belonged to one william de tottenhall . in about the 15th century , the area was known variously as totten , totham , or totting hall . after changing hands several times , the manor was leased for 99 years to queen elizabeth , and it came to be popularly called tottenham court . in 1639 , the land was leased to charles i until his execution ten years later , when it was sold to ralph harrison . it regained crown ownership upon the restoration ( england ) , where it was given a 41-year lease to charles ii . urbanisation . the manor became the property of the fitzroys , who built fitzroy square on a part of the manor estate towards the end of the 18th century . there was a manor house at the northwest end of the road , this subsequently became the adam and eve pub . this was demolished to build the euston tower . tottenham court road had become a place of entertainment by the mid-17th century . in 1645 , three people were fined for drinking on a sunday . a gooseberry fair was held sporadically throughout the century and featured numerous booths with street entertainers . the horse shoe brewery was established in 1764 on the junction of tottenham court road and oxford street . the current horseshoe pub was built in the 19th century . whitefield 's tabernacle was built in 1756 for the george whitefield , and subsequently became the world 's largest methodist church after it was extended in 1760 . it was rebuilt in 1857 after being destroyed by fire , and again in 1888 after the building collapsed . it was bombed during world war ii and rebuilt as the memorial chapel . tottenham court road was predominantly rural in nature until well into the 19th century . when heal 's was established on former farmland , the lease stipulated there must be appropriate accommodation for 40 cows . these cowsheds were destroyed in a fire in 1877 . a 17th century farmhouse at the rear of no . & nbsp ; 196 tottenham court road was demolished in 1917 . . fairyland shooting range . during the period leading up to and during world war i , a shooting range called fairyland was at no . & nbsp ; 92 tottenham court road . in 1909 , madan lal dhingra practised shooting here prior to his assassination of sir william hutt curzon wyllie . other residents of india house and members of abhinav bharat practised shooting at the range and rehearsed assassinations they planned to carry out . also in 1909 it was reported in a police investigation that the range was being used by two suffragettes in a possible conspiracy to assassinate prime minister h . h . asquith . it was also where donald lesbini shot alice eliza storey . r v lesbini ( 1914 ) was a case establishing in common law that with regard to voluntary manslaughter a reasonable man always has reasonable powers of self-control and is never intoxicated . the shooting range was owned and run by henry stanton morley ( 1875-1916 ) . . transport . the road was , for many years , a one-way street : all three lanes were northbound only ; the corresponding southbound traffic used the parallel gower street , to the east . the road is served by three stations on the london underground—from south to north these are tottenham court road , goodge street and warren street—and by numerous bus routes . when it opens , the elizabeth line is expected to increase passenger traffic at tottenham court road station by 40 percent . on 3 june 2014 camden council announced plans to reserve the road for buses and bicycles only , during daylight hours from monday to saturday . the council claimed it would make the street safer and boost business ahead of the opening of the new crossrail station . the current one-way system would be replaced with two-way traffic flows . wider pavements , cycle lanes and safer pedestrian crossings would also be installed as part of the £26m plan . as of spring 2019 , tottenham court road has been 2-way , with buses , cycles and motorbikes permitted to use the southbound road towards the junction towards ( new ) oxford street . economy . entertainment . the dominion theatre opened in 1929 , on the site of the old horseshoe brewery on tottenham court road . it became a cinema in 1932 , before reverting to being a theatre . it has a capacity of 2,000 . retail . tottenham court road is a significant high street , best known for its high concentration of consumer electronics shops , which range from shops specialising in cables and computer components to those dealing in package computers and audio-video systems . further north there are several furniture shops , including habitat and heal 's . another well-known store was the furniture maker maple & co . in the 1950s and 1960s , tottenham court road and a few of the adjoining streets became well known for stores selling world war ii surplus radio and electronics equipment and all kinds of electro-mechanical and radio parts . shops such as proops brothers ( established in 1946 ) lined both sides of the road at that time . by the 1960s they were also selling japanese transistor radios , audio mixers and other electronic gadgets . many british-made valve stereos were offered too . in the early twenty-first century , the growth of e-commerce has reduced the importance of electronics retailing in the area , and cafes and fashion stores like primark have become more prevalent . whilst tottenham court road still has some specialist furniture and electronics retailers , it is becoming more of a general business district . however , some of the original electronics stores on tottenham court road still trade , such as house of computers , well-known in the area for offering a range of computers and accessories . . whitfield gardens . opposite habitat and heal 's is a small public open space called whitfield gardens , built on the former site of a chapel . on the side of a house is a painting , the '' fitzrovia mural '' , which is about 20 metres ( over 60 feet ) high and shows many people at work and at leisure . it was painted in 1980 in a style resembling that of diego rivera . the mural has suffered from neglect and has been daubed with graffiti . there is a proposal to restore the mural after the current works to renovate the gardens are completed . mural could return to its former grace , news reporters , 6 september 2010 , fitzrovia news , accessed 20 september 2010 iconic london mural could be restored , wikinews , 20 september 2010 accessed 20 september 2010 in 2005 , 12 so-called '' our glass '' panels were erected in the gardens . each is about five feet ( 1.5 m ) high , with two sides showing a collage of people associated with the area , from satirical cartoonist hogarth to the popular singer boy george . there is a 13th panel showing an index of the people depicted . in popular culture . art . william hogarth 's painting the march of the guards to finchley is set outside the adam and eve at the northwest end of tottenham court road . music . pink floyd played many early concerts at the ufo club at 31 tottenham court road where they were the house band . '' syd barrett '' ( obituary ) , daily telegraph , london , 12 july 2006 . the road is referred to in the lyrics of underworld 's born slippy . nuxx . the kinks reference the road in their song denmark street ( 1970 ) . the pogues mention tottenham court road in the song transmetropolitan ( 1984 ) , written by shane macgowan . david gray references tottenham court road in the song everytime on his 1996 album sell , sell , sell . books . tottenham court road is mentioned in many works of fiction . it is featured briefly in harry potter and the deathly hallows by j.k . rowling when harry and his friends are escaping from death eaters ; in the woman in white by wilkie collins ; in mrs . dalloway by virginia woolf ; in postern of fate by agatha christie ; in pygmalion by george bernard shaw and its musical adaptation , my fair lady ; in saturday and atonement by ian mcewan ; in several sherlock holmes stories by sir arthur conan doyle ; in the saki story reginald on christmas presents ; several stories by john collier ; in a room with a view by e.m . forster ; in the london eye mystery by siobhan dowd ; in the late mr elvesham and the invisible man the invisible man , chapter 21 and 22 by h . g . wells ; in the wish house by celia rees ; in the short story rumpole and the judge 's elbow from the book rumpole 's last case by john mortimer ; in a the matrix-based story , goliath , by neil gaiman . it features often in novels by mark billingham and in the lonely londoners by sam selvon . sherlock holmes once said that he purchased his stradivarius from '' a jew broker in the tottenham court road . '' . films . it is mentioned briefly as the location where ' i ' was allegedly arrested for 'cottaging ' in the 1986 bruce robinson cult-classic movie withnail and i . mrs . eynsford-hill , freddy 's mother , lives in tottenham court road , according to professor henry higgins ( my fair lady ) . also , tottenham court road tube station is where one person becomes victim to the werewolf 's rampage in an american werewolf in london . musicals . in the lerner-loewe musical my fair lady , tottenham court road is mentioned as the place where eliza doolittle sells her flowers . andrew lloyd webber 's musical cats references the area in the song grizabella the glamour cat , the lyrics coming from an unpublished poem fragment by t . s . eliot . tottenham court road station was replicated as part of the set for the queen musical we will rock you , which played at the dominion theatre between 2002 and 2014 , directly above the actual underground station . references . citations sources . external links .