Corporate farming

definitions and usage . the varied and fluid meanings of '' corporate farming '' have resulted in conflicting definitions of the term , with implications in particular for legal definitions . legal definitions . most legal definitions of corporate farming in the united states pertain to tax laws , anti–corporate farming laws , and census data collection . these definitions mostly reference farm income , indicating farms over a certain threshold as corporate farms , as well as ownership of the farm , specifically targeting farms that do not pass ownership through family lines . common definitions . in public discourse , the term '' corporate farming '' lacks a firmly established definition and is variously applied . however , several features of the term 's usage frequently arise : it is largely used as a pejorative with strong negative connotations . it most commonly refers to corporations that are large-scale farms , market agricultural technologies ( in particular pesticides , fertilizers , and gmo 's ) , have significant economic and political influence , or some combination of the three . it is usually used in opposition to family farms and new agricultural movements , such as sustainable agriculture and the local food movement . . family farms . '' family farm '' and '' corporate farm '' are often defined as mutually exclusive terms , with the two having different interests . this mostly stems from the widespread assumption that family farms are small farms while corporate farms are large-scale operations . while it is true that the majority of small farms are family owned , many large farms are also family businesses , including some of the largest farms in the us . according to food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , a family farm '' . is a means of organizing agricultural , forestry , fisheries , pastoral and aquaculture production which is managed and operated by a family and predominantly reliant on family labour , both women ’ s and men ’ s . the family and the farm are linked , coevolve and combine economic , environmental , reproductive , social and cultural functions . ” additionally , there are large economic and legal incentives for family farmers to incorporate their businesses . . contract farming . farming contracts are agreements between a farmer and a buyer that stipulates what the farmer will grow and how much they will grow usually in return for guaranteed purchase of the product or financial support in purchase of inputs ( e.g . feed for livestock growers ) . in most instances of contract farming , the farm is family owned while the buyer is a larger corporation . this makes it difficult to distinguish the contract farmers from '' corporate farms , '' because they are family farms but with significant corporate influence . this subtle distinction left a loop-hole in many state laws that prohibited corporate farming , effectively allowing corporations to farm in these states as long as they contracted with local farm owners . . non-farm entities . many people also choose to include non-farming entities in their definitions of corporate farming . beyond just the farm contractors mentioned above , these types of companies commonly considered part of the term include cargill , monsanto , and dupont pioneer among others . these corporations do not have production farms , meaning they do not produce a significant amount of farm products . however , their role in producing and selling agricultural supplies and their purchase and processing of farm products often leads to them being grouped with corporate farms . while this is technically incorrect , it is widely considered substantively accurate because including these companies in the term '' corporate farming '' is necessary to describe their real influence over agriculture . arguments against corporate farming . family farms maintain traditions including environmental stewardship and taking longer views than companies seeking profits . family farmers may have greater knowledge about soil and crop types , terrains , weather and other features specific to particular local areas of land can be passed from parent to child over generations , which would be harder for corporate managers to grasp . north america . the 2012 us census of agriculture indicates that 5.06 percent of us farms are corporate farms . these include family corporations ( 4.51 percent ) and non-family corporations ( 0.55 percent ) . of the family farm corporations , 98 percent are small corporations , with 10 or fewer stockholders . of the non-family farm corporations , 90 percent are small corporations , with 10 or fewer stockholders . non-family corporate farms account for 1.36 percent of us farmland area . family farms ( including family corporate farms ) account for 96.7 percent of us farms and 89 percent of us farmland area ; united states department of agriculture . 2014 . 2012 census of agriculture . united states summary and state data . volume 1 . geographic area series . part 51 ac-12-a-51 . a usda study estimated that family farms accounted for 85 percent of us gross farm income in 2011 . hoppe , r.a . 2014 . structure and finances of u.s . farms : family farm report , 2014 edition . united states department of agriculture , economic research service eib-132 . other farmland in the us is accounted for by several other categories , including single proprietorships where the owner is not the farm operator , non-family partnerships , estates , trusts , cooperatives , collectives , institutional , research , experimental and american indian reservation farms . in the us , the average size of a non-family corporate farm is 1078 acres , i.e . smaller than the average family corporate farm ( 1249 acres ) and smaller than the average partnership farm ( 1131 acres ) . in canada , 17.4 percent of farms are owned by family corporations and 2.4 percent by non-family corporations . statistics canada . 2011 census of agriculture . in canada ( as in some other jurisdictions ) conversion of a sole proprietorship family farm to a family corporation can have tax planning benefits , bdo canada llp . 2014 . tax bulletin . incorporating your farm business . and in some cases , the difference in combined provincial and federal taxation rates is substantial . alberta agriculture . to incorporate or not to incorporate ? also , for farm families with significant off-farm income , incorporating the farm can provide some shelter from high personal income tax rates . fbc . 2006 . off-farm income is reason to incorporate the farm . another important consideration can be some protection of the corporate shareholders from liability . ontario ministry of agriculture , food and rural affairs . 2010 . farm corporations . agdex 812 ; order 10-031 . incorporating a family farm can also be useful as a succession tool , bdo canada llp . 2014 . tax bulletin . succession planning for the transition of the family farm . among other reasons because it can maintain a family farm as a viable operation where subdivision of the farm into smaller operations among heirs might result in farm sizes too small to be viable . farm incorporation has advantages and disadvantages . . europe . family farms across europe are heavily protected by eu regulations , which have been driven in particular by french farmers and the french custom splitting land inheritance between children to produce many very small family farms . in regions such as east anglia , uk , some agribusiness is practiced through company ownership , but most large uk land estates are still owned by wealthy families such as traditional aristocrats , as encouraged by favourable inheritance tax rules . eurasia . most farming in the soviet union and its eastern bloc satellite states was collectivized . after the dissolution of those states via the revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the soviet union , decades of decollectivization and land reform have occurred , with the details varying substantially by country . in russia , some amount of family farming has developed , but many former collective farms ( kolkhozy ) and state farms ( sovkhozy ) retained their collective/joint nature and instead became corporate farms with stock ownership , the farmers having incorporated . africa . corporate farming has begun to take hold in some african countries , where listed companies such as zambeef , zambia are operated by mbas as large businesses . in some cases , this has caused debates about land ownership where shares have been bought by international investors , especially from china . middle east . some oil-rich middle east countries operate corporate farming including large-scale irrigation of desert lands for cropping , mostly through partially or fully state-owned companies . anti–corporate farming laws . to date , nine us states have enacted laws that restrict or prohibit corporate farming . the first of these laws were enacted in the 1930s by kansas and north dakota respectively . in the 1970s , similar laws were passed in iowa , minnesota , missouri , south dakota and wisconsin . in 1982 , after failure to pass an anti–corporate farming law , the citizens of nebraska enacted by initiative a similar amendment into their state constitution . the citizens of south dakota similarly amended their state constitution in 1998 . all nine laws have similar content . they all restrict corporate ability to own and operate on farmland . they all outline exceptions for specific types of corporations . generally , family farm corporations are exempted , although certain conditions may have to be fulfilled for such exemption ( e.g . one or more of : shareholders within a specified degree of kinship owning a majority of voting stock , no shareholders other than natural persons , limited number of shareholders , at least one family member residing on the farm ) . however , the laws vary significantly in how they define a corporate farm , and in the specific restrictions . definitions of a farm can include any and all farm operations , or be dependent on the source of income , as in iowa , where 60 percent of income must come from farm products . additionally , these laws can target a corporation 's use of the land , meaning that companies can own but not farm the land , or they may outright prohibit corporations from buying and owning farmland . the precise wording of these laws has significant impact on how corporations can participate in agriculture in these states with the ultimate goal of protecting and empowering the family farm . . see also . agribusiness agricultural education food industry history of agriculture intensive farming list of agricultural universities and colleges organic farming outline of agriculture sustainable agriculture united states department of agriculture . external links . '' family farming is a lifestyle '' 2014 - international year of family farming – european economic and social committee . references .