Music of Brazil

art music . origins . little is known of the music of brazil before the area 's first encounter with portuguese explorers on 22 april 1500 . during the colonial period , documents detail the musical activities of the major roman catholic cathedrals and the parlors of the upper classes , but data about musical life outside these domains are sparse . some information is available in writings left by such travellers as jean de léry , who lived in brazil from 1557 to 1558 and produced the first known transcriptions of native american music : two chants of the tupinambá , near rio de janeiro . further registration of musical activity in brazil came from the activities of two jesuit priests in 1549 . ten years later , they had already founded settlements for indigenous people ( the reduções ) , with a musical-educational structure . one century later , the reduções of the southern brazil , which were founded by spaniard jesuits , had a strong cultural development , where some music schools were founded . some of the reports of that time show the fascination of the indigenous people for european music . apud padre noel berthold , in : '' trevisan , armindo '' , in a escultura dos sete povos . brasília : editora movimento / instituto nacional do livro , 1978 . ( portuguese ) the indigenous people also took part in the music , with both the construction of musical instruments and practice of vocal and instrumental performance . the 18th-century school . in the 18th century , there was intense musical activity in all the more developed regions of brazil , with their moderately stable institutional and educational structures . the previously few private orchestras became more common and the churches presented a great variety of music . in the first half of this century , the most outstanding works were composed by luís álvares pinto , caetano de mello de jesus and antônio josé da silva ( '' the jew '' ) , who became successful in lisbon writing librettos for comedies , which were performed also in brazil with music by antónio teixeira . in the second part of the 18th century , there was a great flourishing in minas gerais , mostly in the regions of vila rica ( currently ouro preto ) , mariana and arraial do tejuco ( currently diamantina ) , where the mining of gold and diamonds for the portuguese metropolis attracted a sizable population . at this time , the first outstanding brazilian composers were revealed , most of them mulattoes . the musical pieces were mostly sacred music . some of the noteworthy composers of this period were lobo de mesquita , manoel dias de oliveira , francisco gomes da rocha , marcos coelho neto and marcos coelho neto filho . all of them were very active , but in many cases few pieces have survived until the present day . some of the most famous pieces of this period are the magnificat by manoel dias de oliveira and the our lady 's antiphon by lobo de mesquita . in the city of arraial do tejuco , nowadays diamantina , there were ten conductors in activity . in ouro preto about 250 musicians were active , and in all of the territory of minas gerais almost a thousand musicians were active . mariz , vasco . história da música no brasil . rio de janeiro : nova fronteira , 2005 . 6ª ed . ( portuguese ) with the impoverishment of the mines at the end of the century , the focus of the musical activity changed to other centers , specially rio de janeiro and são paulo , where andré da silva gomes , a composer of portuguese origin , released a great number of works and dynamized the musical life of the city . the classical period . a crucial factor for the changes in the musical life was the arrival of the portuguese royal family to rio de janeiro in 1808 . until then , rio de janeiro was musically similar to other cultural centers of brazil but was even less important than minas gerais . the presence of the portuguese royal family , in exile , radically changed this situation , as the capela real of rio de janeiro was established . the king john vi of portugal brought with him to brazil the great musical library from the house of bragança , one of the best of europe at that time , and ordered the arrival of musicians from lisbon and the castrati from italy , re-ordering the royal chapel . later , john vi ordered the construction of a sumptuous theater , called the royal theater of são joão . the secular music had the presence of marcos portugal , who was designated as the official composer of the household , and of sigismund von neukomm , who contributed with his own work and brought the works of the austrian composers wolfgang amadeus mozart and joseph haydn . the works of these composers strongly influenced the brazilian music of this time . josé maurício nunes garcia , the first of the great brazilian composers , emerged at this time . with a large culture for his origin – he was poor and mulatto – he was one of the founders of the irmandade de santa cecília , in rio de janeiro , teacher and mestre de capela of the royal chapel during the presence of john vi in brazil . nunes garcia was the most prolific brazilian composer of this time . he also composed the first opera written in brazil , le due gemelle ( the two twins ) , with text in italian , but the music is now lost . other important composers of this period are gabriel fernandes da trindade , who composed the only brazilian chamber music from the 19th century which has survived to the present times , castagna , paulo . encarte do cd gabriel fernandes da trindade – duetos concertantes . são paulo : paulus , 1995 . ( portuguese ) and joão de deus de castro lobo , who lived in the cities of mariana and ouro preto , which were decadent at this time . this period , however , was brief . in 1821 , john vi went back to lisbon , taking with him the household , and the cultural life in rio de janeiro became empty . and , despite the love of peter i of brazil for the music – he was also author of some musical pieces like the brazilian independence anthem – the difficult financial situation did n't allow many luxuries . the conflagration of the royal theater in 1824 was another symbol of decadence , which reached the most critical point when peter i renounced the throne , going back to portugal . the romantic period . the only composer who had a relevant work in this period was francisco manuel da silva , disciple of nunes garcia , who succeeded him as kapellmeister . in spite of his few resources , he founded the musical conservatory of rio de janeiro . he was the author of the brazilian national anthem 's melody . his work reflected the musical transition for the romanticism , when the interest of the national composers was focused in the opera . the most outstanding brazilian composer of this period was antônio carlos gomes , who composed italian-styled operas with national themes , such as il guarany ( based on josé de alencar 's novel o guarani ) and lo schiavo . these operas were very successful in european theaters , like the teatro alla scala , in milan . other important composer of this time is elias álvares lobo , who wrote the opera a noite de são joão , the first brazilian opera with text in portuguese . the opera in brazil was very popular until the middle of the 20th century , and many opera houses were built at this time , like teatro amazonas in manaus , teatro municipal ( rio de janeiro ) , theatro municipal ( são paulo ) , and many others . at the end of the 19th century , the greatest composers for the symphonic music were revealed . one of the most outstanding name of this period was leopoldo miguez , who followed the wagnerian style and henrique oswald , who incorporated elements of the french impressionism . nationalism . in the beginning of the 20th century , there was a movement for creating an authentically brazilian music , with less influences of the european culture . in this sense , the folklore was the major font of inspiration for the composers . some composers like brasílio itiberê da cunha , luciano gallet and alexandre levy , despite having a european formation , included some typically brazilian elements in their works . this trend reached the highest point with alberto nepomuceno , who used largely the rhythms and melodies from the brazilian folklore . an important event , later , was the modern art week , in 1922 , which had a large impact on concepts of national art . in this event the composer heitor villa-lobos , regarded as the most outstanding name of the brazilian nationalism , was revealed . villa-lobos did researches about the musical folklore of brazil , and mixed elements both from classical and popular music . he explored many musical genres such as concertos , symphony , modinhas , fados , and other symphonic , vocal and chamber music . some of his masterworks are the ballet uirapuru and the two series of chôros and bachianas brasileiras . other composers of brazilian national music of this era include oscar lorenzo fernández , radamés gnattali , camargo guarnieri , osvaldo lacerda , francisco mignone , and ernesto nazareth . the avant-garde movement . as a reaction against the nationalist school , who was identified as '' servile '' to the centralizing politics of getúlio vargas , in 1939 the movimento música viva ( living music movement ) appeared , led by hans joachim koellreutter and by egídio de castro e silva , defending the adoption of an international style , derived from the dodecaphonism of arnold schoenberg . this group was integrated by composers like cláudio santoro , césar guerra-peixe , eunice catunda and edino krieger . koellreutter adopted revolutionary methodes , in respect to the individuality of each student and giving to the students the freedom of creativity before the knowledge of the traditional rules for composition . the movement edited a magazine and presented a series of radio programs showing their fundaments and works of contemporary music . later , guerra-peixe and santoro followed an independent way , centered in the regional music . other composers , who used freely the previous styles were marlos nobre , almeida prado , and armando albuquerque , who created their own styles . after 1960 , the brazilian avant-garde movement received a new wave , focusing on serial music , microtonal music , concrete music and electronic music , employing a completely new language . this movement was called música nova ( new music ) and was led by gilberto mendes and willy corrêa de oliveira . brazilian opera . carlos gomes was the first composer on non-european origin to achieve wide recognition in the classical music environment of the golden age of opera in italy . bossa nova was created as anti-opera in a time when opera seemed to represent the art-form of the elite . 5 in recent years the style has been revived with works by jorge antunes , flo menezes , and others . since 2014 the international brazilian opera ( iboc ) has been producing new works , most notably by its artistic director and resident composer joao macdowell . contemporary . nowadays , brazilian music follows the guidelines of both experimentalism and traditional music . some of the contemporary brazilian composers are amaral vieira , sílvio ferraz , flo menezes , marcos balter , alexandre lunsqui , rodolfo caesar , felipe lara , edson zampronha , marcus siqueira , rodrigo lima , jorge antunes , roberto victorio and joão macdowell . from the new generation of brazilian composers , caio facó has achieved international recognition for his work . brazil has a large number of internationally recognized orchestras and performers , despite the relatively low support of the government . the most famous brazilian orchestra is probably the são paulo state symphony orchestra , currently under conductor thierry fischer . other brazilian orchestras worthy of note are the são paulo university symphony , the brazilian symphony orchestra , orquestra filarmônica de minas gerais and the petrobras sinfônica , supported by the brazilian state oil company petrobras . there are also regular operas scheduled every year in cities such as são paulo and rio de janeiro . the state of são paulo also hosts the winter festival in the city of campos do jordão . some of the most famous brazilian conductors are roberto minczuk , john neschling and isaac karabtchevsky . the instrumentalists include , among others : roberto szidon , antonio meneses , cussy de almeida , gilberto tinetti , arnaldo cohen , nelson freire , eudóxia de barros , guiomar novaes and magda tagliaferro . and some of the most famous brazilian singers were , historically , zola amaro , constantina araújo and bidu sayão ; living singers include eliane coelho , kismara pessatti , maria lúcia godoy , sebastião teixeira , and others . in the 1980s , a wave of brazilian heavy metal bands gained public attention . the most commercially successful of these was sepultura , founded in são paulo in 1983 , preceded by dorsal atlantica and followed by sarcofago . the intrusion of alien elements into brazil 's cultural system is not a destructive process . the return of a democratic government allowed for freedom of expression . the brazilian music industry opened up to international styles and this has allowed for both foreign and local genres to co-exist and identify people . each different style relates to the people socially , politically , and economically . '' brazil is a regionally divided country with a rich cultural and musical diversity among states . as such , musicians in the country choose to define their local heritage differently depending on where they come from . '' this shows how globalization has not robbed brazil of its identity but instead given it the ability to represent its people both in brazil and the rest of the world . in recent years brazilian artists have become more interested in africa , the caribbean and their own indigenous and folk music . while there are some artists who continue to perform rock and western pop , there are now just as many contemporaries playing a fusion of african and european influences with those from across the americas . some artists have even become influenced by asian music , noticing some parallels between music from the north-east of brazil and music from india . indigenous and folk music . the native peoples of the brazilian rainforest play instruments including whistles , flutes , horns , drums and rattles . much of the area 's folk music imitates the sounds of the amazon rainforest . when the portuguese arrived in brazil , the first natives they met played an array of reed flutes and other wind and percussion instruments . the jesuit missionary introduced songs which used the tupi language with christian lyrics , an attempt to convert the people to christianity , music . fmpsd.ab.ca . retrieved on 23 november 2011 . and also introduced gregorian chant and the flute , bow , and the clavichord . the earliest music in what is now brazil must have been that of the native peoples of the area . little is known about their music , since no written records exist of this era . with the arrival of europeans , brazilian culture began to take shape as a synthesis of native musical styles with portuguese music and african music . capoeira music . the afro-brazilian sport of capoeira is never played without its own music , which is usually considered to be a call-and-response type of folk music . the main instruments of capoeira music include the berimbau , the atabaque and the pandeiro . capoeira songs may be improvised on the spot , or they may be popular songs written by older , and ancient mestres ( teachers ) , and often include accounts of the history of capoeira , or the doings of great mestres . maracatu . this type of music is played primarily in the recife and olinda regions during carnaval . it is an afro-brazilian tradition . the music serves as the backdrop for parade groups that evolved out of ceremonies conducted during colonial times in honour of the kings of congo , who were african slaves occupying symbolic leadership positions among the slave population . the music is played on large alfaia drums , large metal gonguê bells , snare drums and shakers . an important variant is found in and around fortaleza , ceará ( called maracatu cearense ) , which is different from the recife/olinda tradition in many respects : triangles are used instead of gonguês , surdos or zabumbas instead of alfaias . also , important female characters are performed by cross-dressed male performers , and all african and afrobrazilian personages are performed using blackface makeup . afoxé . afoxé is the name given to a group dedicated to playing ijexá , which is a kind of religious music , part of the candomblé tradition . in 1949 , a group called filhos de gandhi began playing afoxé during carnaval parades in salvador ; their name translates as sons of gandhi , associating black brazilian activism with mahatma gandhi 's indian independence movement . the filhos de gandhi 's 1949 appearance was also revolutionary because , until then , the carnaval parades in salvador were meant only for light-skinned people . repente . northeastern brazil is known for a distinctive form of literature called cordel literature , which are a type of ballads that include elements incorporated into music as '' repentismo '' , an improvised lyrical contest on themes suggested by the audience . similar to repentismo , appears among the caipira culture a musical form derived from viola caipira , which is called cururu . popular music . choro . choro ( literally '' cry '' in portuguese , but in context a more appropriate translation would be '' lament '' ) , traditionally called chorinho ( '' little cry '' or '' little lament '' ) . instrumental , its origins are in 19th century rio de janeiro . originally choro was played by a trio of flute , guitar and cavaquinho ( a small chordophone with four strings ) . the young pianist ernesto nazareth published his first choro ( não caio noutra ) in 1878 at the age of 14 . childhood secrets . bn.br nazareth 's choros are often listed as polkas ; ernesto nazareth – rei do choro . chiquinhagonzaga.com . retrieved on 23 november 2011 . he also composed waltzes , schottisches , milongas and brazilian tangos . ( he resisted the popular term maxixe to represent brazilian tango . ) chiquinha gonzaga was another important composer of choros and started shortly after nazareth . chiquinha gonzaga composed her first success , the polka-choro '' atraente '' , in 1877 . in the beginning , the success of choro came from informal groups of friends which played in parties , pubs ( botecos ) , streets , home balls ( forrobodós ) , and also the musical scores published by print houses . by the 1910s , much of the brazilian first phonograph records are choros . the mainstream success of this style of music ( by the 1930s ) came from the early days of radio , when bands performed live on the air . by the 1950s and 1960s it was replaced by samba and bossa nova and other styles of brazilian popular music , but was still alive in amateur circles called '' rodas de choro '' ( informal choro gatherings in residences and botecos ) . however , in the late 1970s there was a successful effort to revitalize the genre carried out by some famous artists : pixinguinha , waldir azevedo and jacob do bandolim . samba . in 1929 , prompted by the opening of the first radio station in rio de janeiro , the so-called radio era began spreading songs – especially the novelty samba in its current format – to larger masses . this period was dominated by few male interpreters – notably almirante , braguinha , mário reis , sílvio caldas , francisco alves and singer/composer noel rosa and even fewer chanteuses such as aracy de almeida and sisters aurora miranda and carmen miranda , who eventually came to hollywood becoming a movie star . a nação das cantoras . veja.abril.com.br . retrieved on 23 november 2011 . popular music included instruments like cuicas , tambourines , frying pans ( 'played ' with a metal stick ) , flutes and guitars . noteworthy samba composers at this early stage included said noel rosa plus lamartine babo and , around world war ii time , ary barroso . mpb ( popular brazilian music ) . mpb 's early stage ( from world war ii to the mid-1960s ) was populated by male singers such as orlando silva , nelson gonçalves , jamelão , agostinho dos santos , anísio silva , ataulfo alves , carlos galhardo , ciro monteiro , ismael silva , joão dias , jorge goulart , miltinho , jorge veiga and francisco egídio and female singers started to mushroom : nora ney , dolores duran , ângela maria , emilinha borba , marlene , dalva de oliveira , maysa matarazzo , sisters linda batista and dircinha batista , among others . mpb 's second stage – after the split bossa nova ( 1959 ) / jovem guarda ( 1965 ) / tropicalismo ( both 1967 ) – refers to mainstream brazilian pop music . well-known mpb artists include , among many others , singers such as elis regina , gal costa , nara leão , maria bethânia , mônica da silva , simone , chico buarque , caetano veloso , roberto carlos , jorge ben jor , milton nascimento , gilberto gil , joão bosco , ivan lins , djavan . bossa nova . the first bossa nova records by joão gilberto , in the last years of the 1950s , quickly became huge hits in brazil . antonio carlos jobim and other composers helped further develop this fusion of jazz harmonies and a smoother , often slower , samba beat , which developed at the beach neighborhoods of ipanema and , later , the copacabana nightclubs . bossa nova was introduced to the rest of the world by american jazz musicians in the early 1960s , and song '' the girl from ipanema '' remains probably the best known brazilian musical export , eventually becoming a jazz standard . brazilian gospel . gospel music emerged in brazil before the 1960s with hymnals that were brought and translated into portuguese by american missionaries . from the late 1960s the first singers of christian music groups emerged in brazil , but the songs were not highly valued . gospel music became popular in brazil in the late 1990s , with the emergence of congregational singing and bands such as diante do trono , led by ana paula valadão . diante do trono has become the largest contemporary worship music ministry in latin america . brazilian rock . the musical style known in brazil as '' brazilian rock n ' roll '' dates back to nora ney 's '' ronda das horas '' , a portuguese version of '' rock around the clock '' in 1954 . in the 1960s , young singers like roberto carlos and the jovem guarda movement were very popular . the 1960s also saw the rise of bands such as the '' tropicalismo '' os mutantes and the experimental ( mixing progressive rock , jazz and música popular brasileira ) som imaginário . the 1970s saw the emergence of many progressive rock and/or hard rock bands such as o terço , a bolha , a barca do sol , som nosso de cada dia , vímana and bacamarte , some of which attained some recognition internationally ; rita lee , in her solo career after os mutantes , championed the glam-rock aesthetics in brazil ; casa das máquinas and patrulha do espaço were more bona-fide hard rock bands , and the likes of ( raul seixas , secos & molhados , novos baianos and a cor do som ) mixed the genre with traditional brazilian music . in the late 1970s , the brazilian punk rock scene kicked off mainly in são paulo and in brasília , booming in the 1980s , with inocentes , cólera , ratos de porão , garotos podres , etc . the real commercial boom of brazilian rock was in the 1980s , with many bands and artists like blitz , gang 90 , barão vermelho , legião urbana , lobão , engenheiros do hawaii , titãs , kid abelha , paralamas do sucesso , and many others , and festivals like rock in rio and hollywood rock . the late 1980s and early 1990s also witnessed the beginnings of an electronica-inspired scene , with a lot more limited commercial potential but achieving some critical acclaim : suba , loop b , harry , etc . in the 1990s , the meteoric rise of mamonas assassinas , which sold more than 3 million copies of its only cd ( a record , by brazilian standards ) came to a tragic end when the band 's plane crashed , killing all five members of the band , the pilot and the co-pilot . other commercially successful bands included jota quest , raimundos and skank , while chico science & nação zumbi and the whole mangue bit movement received much critical attention and accolades , but very little commercial success – success that declined after the death of one of its founders , chico science . it was also in the 1990s that the first seeds of what would grow into being the brazilian indie scene were planted , with the creation of indie festivals such as abril pro rock and , later in the decade , porão do rock . the band pato fu was considered by time magazine one of the ten best bands in the world outside the united states . it is also known to re-record hits brazilian and international versions of toy instruments . female singer pitty is also very popular . the indie scene has been growing exponentially since the early 2000s , with more and more festivals taking place all around the country . however , due to several factors including but not limited to the worldwide collapse of the music industry , all the agitation in the indie scene has so far failed in translating into international success , but in brazil they developed a real , substantial cultural movement . that scene is still much of a ghetto , with bands capturing the attention of international critics , but many playing again in brazil when they become popular in the exterior , due to the lack of financial and material support which would allow for careers to be developed . one notable exception is css , an alternative electro rock outfit that has launched a successful international career , performing in festivals and venues in north america , europe , asia and australia . other unique example of success through independent music scene that made to the mainstream is the band móveis coloniais de acaju . the band has its own style , somewhere between rock and folk , and is recognized as the most important independent band in brazil . the record company trama tries to support some bands with structure and exposure , and can be credited with early support to css and later to móveis coloniais de acaju . brazilian heavy metal . brazilian metal originated in the mid 1980s with three prominent scenes : belo horizonte , são paulo and rio de janeiro . the most famous brazilian metal bands are sepultura , angra , krisiun , rebaelliun , nephasth , dr . sin , shaaman , violator and the singer andre matos . sepultura is considered an influential thrash metal band , influencing the development of death metal . famous bands of the 1980s include korzus , sarcófago , overdose , bands from the 1990s include andralls , mqn , macaco bong , black drawing chalks , superguidis , mental hor , the mist , scars , distraught , torture squad , eterna and silent cry . bands from the 2000s include it 's all red , eyes of shiva , autoramas , tuatha de danann , claustrofobia , quimere , apokalyptic raids , project46 , wizards and andragonia . today , the best known band in the country is massacration , a brazilian satirical heavy metal band , self-proclaimed the '' greatest band in the world '' . '' maior banda de metal do mundo '' , massacration anuncia turnê pelo brasil massacration : tosco , politicamente incorreto e absurdamente engraçado . brazilian folk/folk-rock . the new brazilian folk scene is not to be mistaken with folkloric brazilian music . the first to break into the mainstream was internet phenomenon mallu magalhães , who played covers of her favourite artists in english and her own songs in both english and portuguese ( as well as other languages ) . magalhães only released her first album in 2008 , though by then she was already widely recognised as the voice of this sudden new brazilian folk scene . her ex-boyfriend hélio flanders is the lead singer of another brazilian folk group called vanguart . though vanguart had an album released before mallu magalhães , it was her emergence that consolidated them both and others as a fully recognised mainstream scene , topping charts and being featured in prime time television and advertising . other acts emerged after the market was opened up to folk . writing in english is more and more common among brazilian rock and folk artists . this has been highly criticised by portuguese language purists , though it has helped to promote brazilian artists in other countries ( css is a perfect example ) . the new brazilian folk scene has just come to the public 's attention and it continues to thrive . brazilian psychedelic rock . brazil has a long tradition of psychedelic music since artists like os mutantes , ronnie von and other rock bands from the late 60s . nowadays , there exists a revival of this psychedelic/vintage inspired music represented by artists like jupiter apple , violeta de outono , nação zumbi , mundo livre s/a , cidadão instigado , otto , china , kassin , pata de elefante , orquestra abstrata , among others . sertanejo . música sertaneja or sertanejo is a term for brazilian country music . it originally referred to music originating among sertão and musica caipira . ( caipira music appeared in the state of são paulo , and some the regions of mato grosso do sul , goiás , minas gerais , paraná and mato grosso . musical rhythm is very spread out in the southeastern and southern regions of brazil . ) the genre is extremely famous in the country , having as some of its greatest exponents chitãozinho & xororó , leandro e leonardo , zezé di camargo & luciano , chrystian & ralf , joão paulo & daniel and sérgio reis . additionally , over the past few years , artists such as jorge & mateus and marília mendonça have been on the rise . northeastern music . north eastern music is a generic term for any popular music from the large region of northeastern brazil , including both coastal and inland areas . rhythms are slow and plodding , and are derived from guitars instead of percussion instruments like in the rest of brazil—in this region , african rhythms and portuguese melodies combined to form maracatu . most influentially , however , the area around the state of pernambuco , the home of frevo and maracatu . gaucho music ( southern music ) . southern music is a general term used for the music originally from the rio grande do sul state , in southern brazil . some of the most famous musicians of this genre are teixeirinha , gaúcho da fronteira , renato borghetti , yamandu costa , jayme caetano braun and luiz marenco , among others . music of salvador : late 60s to mid-70s . in the latter part of the 1960s , a group of black bahians began dressing as native americans during the salvadoran carnaval , identifying with their shared struggles through history . these groups included comanches do pelô and apaches de tororó and were known for a forceful and powerful style of percussion , and frequent violent encounters with the police . starting in 1974 , a group of black bahians called ilê aiyê became prominent , identifying with the yoruba people of west africa . along with a policy of loosening restrictions by the brazilian government , ilê aiyê 's sound and message spread to groups like olodum , who established community centers and other philanthropic efforts . frevo . frevo is a style of music from olinda and recife . frevo bands always play during the carnival . sambass . sambass is a fusion of samba and drum & bass . the most famous sambass musicians are dj marky and dj patife whose hit sambassim might be the most known sambass track . funk carioca . funk carioca is a type of dance music from rio de janeiro , derived from and was until the late 1990s , superficially similar to miami bass . in rio it is most often simply known as funk , although it is very different musically from what funk means in most other places and contexts . funk carioca , like other types of hip-hop lifts heavily from samples such as international rips or from previous funk music . many popular funk songs sampled music from the movie rocky . funk was introduced to brazil in a systematic way in the 1980s . many funk artists have openly associated themselves with black movements and often in the lyrics of their songs , comment on race relations and openly express black pride . the genre went public with great impact in the 80s , with songs like feira de acari by mc batata , with furacão 2000 , mc marlboro and brazilian versions of freestyle songs by the singer latino , later turning into a more aggressive song , with an apology for violence , drugs , weapons and promiscuity in the 1990s , with precarious lyrics and several mcs with direct links with drug trafficking . brazilian pop music . national pop music was slow to gain popularity in brazil . only from 2013 , with the song '' show das poderosas '' , the singer anitta became the first name of the genre in brazil . the singer ludmilla was also a relevant name in brazilian pop music , the singer emerged from funk carioca and passed a mix of the genres . ludmilla 's success propelled other funk carioca singers to adopt pop music in their repertoire . thus a new generation of singers emerged , among them , valesca popozuda , pabllo vittar , mc biel and melody . the expansion of the pop genre in brazil prompted singers of other styles to join the movement , such as luan santana , banda vingadora , jhama , gaby amarantos , tiago iorc , among others . hip hop music . in são paulo and other places in the south of brazil , in more urban areas , hip hop music is very popular . they dress similarly to american rappers . early brazilian rap was based upon rhyming speeches delivered over dance bases sampled from funk albums , with occasional scratches . brazilian hip hop is heavily associated with racial and economic issues in the country , where a lot of afro-brazilians live in economically disadvantaged communities , known in brazil as favelas . são paulo is where hip hop began in the country , but it soon spread all over brazil , and today , almost every big brazilian city , including rio de janeiro , salvador , curitiba , porto alegre , belo horizonte , recife and brasilia , has a hip hop scene . são paulo has gained a strong , underground brazilian rap scene since its emergence in the late 1980s with many independent labels forming for young rappers to establish themselves on . in the 1990s in rio de janeiro , funk as well as rap were reported by the press to have been adopted by the drug lords of the city as a way to market their drugs at dance hall events . some crime groups were known to subsidize funk parties to recruit young kids into the drug dealing business . these events were often called baile funk ( which can mean a funk dance party ) and were sometimes notorious for their blatant sexuality and violence . funk carioca : the beat goes on however , while some rap music was used to send messages out about slums and drugs , others were used mostly to deliver socio-political messages about local , regional , or national issues they are affected by . in fact , some groups adhered to what they called rap consciência , socially conscious rap , and opposed hip-hop which some considered too alienated and consumerist . despite these differences , both hip hop and rap consciência continue to thrive in brazil today . one of brazil 's most popular rappers , mv bill , has spent his career advocating for black youth in rio de janeiro . . brazilian bass . brazilian bass is a style of brazilian electronic music originated as a fusion of techno music with bass house , as well as some minimalistic influences from deep house . the tempos typically range from 120 to 126 bpm . the genre was created in brasília around the decade of 2010 , but its national and international repercussion only happened in 2016 with djs alok , bruno martini and sevenn . . notable record labels . far out recordings malandro records mr bongo records som livre