Jean-Jacques Dessalines

early life . taking the last name of the person who owned his mother at the time , jean-jacques duclos was born into slavery on cormier , a plantation near grande-riviere-du-nord . '' jean jacques dessalines '' , educando , march 2007 . his father had adopted the surname from his owner henri duclos . the identity of jean-jacques ' parents , as well as his region of ancestral origin in africa , are not known , but most slaves trafficked to haiti came from west and central west africa . dessalines had two brothers , louis and joseph duclos , who also later took the name dessalines . the first was the father of maréchal de camp monsieur raymond dessalines , created 1st baron de louis dessalines on 8 april 1811 , aide-de-camp to king henry i , privy councilor , secretary-general of the ministry of war between 1811 and 1820 and member of the royal chamber of public instruction between 1818 and 1820 , who received the degree of knight of the order of st . henry on 1 may 1811 . he was killed by the revolutionaries at cap-henri on 10 october 1820 . the second was the father of maréchal de camp monsieur dessalines , created 1st baron de joseph dessalines in 1816 , chamberlain to prince jacques-victor henry , the prince royal of haiti , and major of the grenadiers de la garde , who received the degree of knight of the order of st . henry on 28 october 1815 . working in the sugarcane fields as a laborer , dessalines rose to the rank of commandeur , or foreman . he worked on duclos 's plantation until he was about 30 years old . the slave jean-jacques was bought by a free black man named dessalines , who assigned his own surname to him . from then on he was called jean-jacques dessalines . dessalines kept this name in freedom . he worked for that master for about three years , until the slave uprising of 1791 , which spread across the plaine du nord . dessalines became increasingly embittered toward both the whites and gens de couleur libres ( the mixed-race residents of saint-domingue ) during the years of fighting the revolution against residents and foreign troops : french , british and spanish . after the defeat of french royalists during the haitian revolution , he ordered the killing of all royalists to ensure that saint-domingue would be a nation . yet , after declaring himself governor-for-life in 1804 , jean-jacques dessalines was still willing to take his old master dessalines into his house and gave him a job . revolution . ending slavery . in 1791 , along with thousands of other enslaved persons , jean-jacques dessalines joined the slave rebellion of the northern plains led by jean françois papillon and georges biassou . this rebellion was the first action of what would become the haitian revolution . dessalines became a lieutenant in papillon 's army and followed him to santo domingo , where he enlisted to serve spain 's military forces against the french colony of saint-domingue . it was then that dessalines met the rising military commander toussaint bréda ( later known as toussaint louverture ) , a mature man also born into slavery , who was fighting with spanish forces on hispaniola . these men wanted above all to defeat slavery . in 1794 , after the french declared an end to slavery , toussaint louverture switched allegiances to the french . sue peabody , french emancipation accessed 27 october 2019 . he fought for the french republic against both the spanish and british . dessalines followed , becoming a chief lieutenant to toussaint louverture and rising to the rank of brigadier general by 1799 . dessalines commanded many successful engagements , including the captures of jacmel , petit-goâve , miragoâne and anse-à-veau . in 1801 , dessalines quickly ended an insurrection in the north led by louverture 's own nephew , general moyse . dessalines gained a reputation for his '' no quarter '' policy , and for burning homes and entire villages to the ground . the rebellious slaves were able to restore most of saint-domingue to france , with louverture in control and finally appointed by the french as governor-general of the colony . louverture wanted saint-domingue to have more autonomy . he directed the creation of a new constitution to establish that , as well as rules for how the colony would operate under freedom . he also named himself governor-for-life , while still swearing his loyalty to france . the french government had been through changes and was led by napoleon i , whose wife , josephine de beauharnais , was part of a slave-owning family . many white and mulatto planters had been lobbying the government to reimpose slavery in saint-domingue . napoleon was committed to restoring slavery in saint-domingue . perry , james arrogant armies great military disasters and the generals behind them , ( edison : castle books , 2005 ) pages 78–79 . . leclerc campaign to restore slavery . the french responded by dispatching an expeditionary force to restore french rule to the island , an army and ships led by general charles leclerc . louverture and dessalines fought against the invading french forces , with dessalines defeating them at the battle for which he is most famous , crête-à-pierrot . during the 11 march 1802 battle , dessalines and his 1,300 men defended a small fort against 18,000 attackers . to motivate his troops at the start of the battle , he waved a lit torch near an open powder keg and declared that he would blow the fort up should the french breakthrough . the defenders inflicted heavy casualties on the attacking army , but after a 20-day siege they were forced to abandon the fort due to a shortage of food and munitions . nonetheless , the rebels were able to force their way through the enemy lines and into the cahos mountains , with their army still largely intact . the french soldiers under leclerc were accompanied by mulatto troops led by gens de couleur alexandre pétion and andré rigaud from saint-domingue . pétion and rigaud , both sons of the wealthy with white fathers , had opposed louverture 's leadership . they had tried to establish separate independence in the south of saint-domingue , an area where wealthy gens de couleur were concentrated in plantations . toussaint louverture 's forces had defeated them three years earlier . after the battle of crête-à-pierrot , dessalines defected from his long-time ally louverture and briefly sided with leclerc , pétion , and rigaud . dessalines was at least partially responsible for louverture 's arrest , as asserted by several authors , including louverture 's own son isaac . on 22 may 1802 , after dessalines '' learned that louverture had failed to instruct a local rebel leader to lay down his arms per the recent ceasefire agreement , he immediately wrote leclerc to denounce louverture ’ s conduct as '' extraordinary '' . '' . for this action , dessalines and his spouse received gifts from jean baptiste brunet . when it became clear that the french intended to re-establish slavery on saint-domingue , as they had on guadeloupe , dessalines and pétion switched sides again in october 1802 , to oppose the french . by november 1802 , dessalines had become the leader of the alliance light skinned free coloreds with the blessing of the most prominent of free coloreds , mulatto general alexandre pétion . trouillot , michel-rolph . silencing the past : power and the production of history . boston , mass : beacon press , 1995 . print . leclerc died of yellow fever , which also took many french troops . the brutal tactics of leclerc 's successor , rochambeau , helped to unify rebel forces against the french . dessalines , the leader of the revolution after toussaint 's capture on 7 june 1802 , commanded the rebel forces against a french army weakened by a yellow fever epidemic . trouillot , michel-rolph . silencing the past : power and the production of history . boston , mass : beacon press , 1995 . print . his forces achieved a series of victories against the french , culminating in the last major battle of the revolution , the battle of vertières . on 18 november 1803 , black and mulatto forces under dessalines and pétion attacked the fort of vertières , held by rochambeau , near cap-français in the north . rochambeau and his troops surrendered the next day . on 4 december 1803 , the french colonial army of napoleon bonaparte surrendered its last remaining territory to dessalines ' forces . this officially ended the only slave rebellion in world history which successfully resulted in establishing an independent nation . in the process , dessalines became arguably the most successful military commander in the struggle against napoleonic france . christer petley , white fury : a jamaican slaveholder and the age of revolution ( oxford : oxford university press , 2018 ) , p . 182 . dessalines then promulgated the declaration of independence in 1804 , and declared himself emperor . william alexander maccorkle , the monroe doctrine in its relation to the republic of haiti , neale publishing company , 1915 , p . 42 . . emperor of independent haiti . on 1 january 1804 , from the city of gonaïves , dessalines officially declared the former colony 's independence and renamed it '' ayiti '' after the indigenous taíno name . he had served as governor-general of saint-domingue since 30 november 1803 . after the declaration of independence , dessalines named himself governor-general-for-life of haiti and served in that role until 22 september 1804 , when he was proclaimed later emperor of haiti by the generals of the haitian revolution army . he was crowned emperor jacques i in a coronation ceremony on 6 october in the city of le cap . on 20 may 1805 , his government released the imperial constitution , naming jean-jacques dessalines emperor for life with the right to name his successor . abolition of slavery . in declaring haiti an independent country , dessalines also abolished slavery in the new country . thus , haiti became the first country in the americas to permanently abolish slavery . c.l.r . james , black jacobins ( london : penguin , 1938 ) . dessalines tried hard to keep the sugar industry and plantations running and producing without slavery . born into slavery and having worked under white masters for 30 years , as well as having seen many atrocities by all peoples , dessalines did not trust the white french people . '' a brief history of dessalines '' , from 1825 missionary journal between february and april 1804 , he had the white haitian minority killed by ordering the 1804 haiti massacre . dessalines declared haiti an all-black nation and forbade whites from owning property or land there . the remaining french forces meanwhile had fled to the spanish side of the island and had holed themselves up in santo domingo . dessalines and christophe went after them at the head of 20,000 men . the spanish side was a colony of fewer than 175,000 souls . the french force numbered perhaps 500 and the local colonial militia had no more than 1000 men . the armed haitian juggernaut advanced sweeping everything in its path . in the town of moca , one of the places that fell to christophe , 40 children were beheaded ; altogether more than 600 perished or were taken away in captivity as spoils of war , according to the eyewitness gaspar de arredondo y pichardo . economic policies . dessalines enforced a harsh regimen of plantation labor , described by the historian michel-rolph trouillot as caporalisme agraire ( agrarian militarism ) . as had toussaint louverture , dessalines demanded that all blacks work either as soldiers to defend the nation or as labourers on the plantations to raise crops and help sustain the nation . his forces were strict in enforcing this , to the extent that some blacks felt as if they were again enslaved . dessalines believed in the tight regulation of foreign trade , which was essential for haiti 's sugar and coffee based export economy . like toussaint louverture , dessalines encouraged merchants from britain and the united states over those from france . for his administration , dessalines needed literate and educated officials and managers . he placed in these positions well-educated haitians , who were disproportionately from the mulatto elite , as gens de couleur were most likely to have been educated . expulsion and killing of the white population . with victory secured and thus the brutal war concluded , jean-jacques dessalines would promptly order the execution of all french people on the island . the ensuing massacre took place in 1804 during the first several months , and the killings spanned the entire territory of haiti . the death toll was estimated to be between 3,000 and 5,000 people of all ages and sexes . death . disaffected members of dessalines ' administration , including alexandre pétion and henri christophe , began a conspiracy to overthrow the emperor . dessalines was assassinated north of the capital city , port-au-prince , at larnage ( now known as pont-rouge ) , on 17 october 1806 , on his way to fight the rebels . dessalines ' assassination did not solve the tensions within the haitian government , as his removal created a power vacuum that led to a civil war and a temporary partition of haiti between pétion and christophe . the exact circumstances of his death are uncertain . some historians claim that he was actually killed at pétion 's house at rue l'enterrement , after a meeting to negotiate the power and the future of the young nation . some reports say that he was arrested and was dealt a deadly blow to the head . bob corbet , '' a brief history of dessalines '' . from american missionary register ( october 1825 , vol . vi , no . 10 , pp . 292–297 ) . another report says he was ambushed and killed at first fire . w . m . wells brown , '' the rising son '' . '' chapter xvi of the rising son the antecedents and advancement of the colored race 1874 ( 1874 ) . yet another account recalls a brutal attack on him by his men . it says he was shot at twice and hit once . then his head was split open by a sabre 's blow and he was finally stabbed three times with a dagger , with the crowd shouting '' the tyrant is killed '' . thomas madiou , '' histoire of haiti '' , henri dechamps , t.3 , ( port-au-prince , 1989 ) . the mob desecrated and disfigured his remains , which were abandoned on government square . david patrick geggus , the world of the haitian revolution , indiana university press , 2009 , p . 368 . there was a lot of resistance to providing him with a proper burial , but défilée ( dédée bazile ) , a black woman from a humble background , took the mutilated body of the emperor and buried it . a monument at the northern entrance of the haitian capital marks the place where the emperor was killed . legacy . in 1804 , the city of marchand was renamed to dessalines in his honour . shortly after his death , many men on the island changed their last names from their slave names to '' jean-jacques '' in honour of dessalines . some historians believe these men were soldiers of dessalines . for the remainder of the 19th century , dessalines was generally reviled by generations of haitians for his autocratic ways . however , by the beginning of the 20th century , dessalines began to be reassessed as an icon of haitian nationalism . the national anthem of haiti , '' la dessalinienne '' , written in 1903 , is named in his honour . the haitian humanitarian organization fondasyon félicité ( ff ) , established in 1999 by bayyinah bello , is named after dessalines ' spouse marie-claire heureuse félicité . dessalines was a great-grandfather of cincinnatus leconte , who served as president of haiti from 1911 to 1912 . jacques carmeleau , jean price-mars and haiti ( three continents press , 1981 ) , p . 77 . dantès bellegarde , histoire de du peuple haïtien , 1492–1952 ( held , 1953 ) , p . 233 . dessalines was a grandfather of florvil hyppolite , who served as president of haiti from 1889 to 1896 . dessalines was a grand-uncle of nissage saget , who served as president of haiti from 1870 to 1874