Battle of Malplaquet

prelude . after a late start to the campaigning season because it was preceded by an unusually-harsh winter , the allied campaign of 1709 began in mid-june . unable to bring the french army , under marshal villars , battle because of the strong french defensive lines and his orders from versailles not to risk battle , the duke of marlborough concentrated instead on taking the fortresses of tournai and ypres . tournai fell after an unusually-long siege of almost 70 days . since it was by now early september , rather than run the risk of disease spreading in his army in the poorly-draining land around ypres , marlborough moved eastwards towards the lesser fortress of mons . he hoped to take it and to outflank the french defensive lines in the west . villars moved after him , under new orders from louis xiv to prevent the fall of mons at all costs , which was effectively an order for the aggressive marshal to give battle . after several complicated manoeuvres , the two armies faced each other across the gap of malplaquet , southwest of mons . battle . the allied army , with mainly dutch and austrian troops but also considerable british and prussian contingents , was led by the duke of marlborough and prince eugene of savoy . the french were commanded by villars and marshal boufflers . boufflers was officially villars ' superior but voluntarily served under him . the allies had about 86,000 troops and 100 guns , lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 332 and the french had about 75,000 and 80 guns . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 331 they were encamped within cannon range of each other near what is now the french-belgian border , but the area was then still part of the spanish netherlands . at 9:00 a.m . , on 11 september , the austrians attacked with the support of prussian and danish troops , under the command of count albrecht konrad finck von finckenstein , pushing the french left wing back into the forest behind them . prince eugene was wounded twice in the fighting . the dutch , under the command of john william friso , prince of orange , on the allied left wing , attacked the french right flank half an hour later and succeeded with heavy casualties in distracting boufflers enough that he could not come to villars ' aid . villars was able to regroup his forces , but marlborough and savoy attacked again , assisted by the advance of a detachment under general henry withers . they advanced on the french left flank , which forced villars to divert forces from his centre to confront them . at around 1:00 p.m . , villars was badly wounded by a musket ball that smashed his knee , and command passed to boufflers . the decisive final attack was made on the now-weakened french centre by british infantry , under the command of the earl of orkney , which managed to occupy the french line of redan . that enabled the allied cavalry to advance through the line and confront the french cavalry behind it . in the fierce cavalry battle , boufflers personally led the elite troops of the maison du roi . he managed six times to drive the allied cavalry back upon the redans , but every time , the french cavalry was driven back by british infantry fire . finally , by 3:00 p.m . , boufflers , realising that the battle could not be won , ordered a retreat , which was made in good order . the allies had suffered so many casualties in their attack that they could not pursue him . by now , they had lost over 24,000 men , including 6,500 killed , almost twice as many as the french . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 334 villars himself remarked on the enemy 's pyrrhic victory and adapted a famous quote of king pyrrhus . weir , p . 95 a firsthand account of the battle of malplaquet is given in the book amiable renegade : the memoirs of peter drake ( 1671–1753 ) on pages 163 to 170 . captain drake , an irishman who served as a mercenary in various european armies , served the french cause in the battle and was wounded several times . drake wrote his memoirs at an advanced age ( another irish émigré , féilim ó néill , died in the battle ) . aftermath . by the norms of warfare of the era , the battle was an allied victory since the french withdrew at the end of the day 's fighting and left marlborough 's army in possession of the battlefield . unlike in his previous victories , however , the french army was able to withdraw in good order and relatively intact , and remained a potent threat to further allied operations . as winston churchill noted in marlborough : his life and times , '' the enemy had been beaten . but they had not been routed ; they had not been destroyed . they retreated , but they cheered . they were beaten , but they boasted '' . indeed , villars wrote to louis xiv that another such french defeat would destroy the allied armies , in a letter to louis xiv , villars wrote : '' si dieu nous fait la grâce de perdre encore une pareille bataille , votre majesté peut compter que tous ses ennemis seront détruits '' . '' if god lets us have the grace of losing such a battle again , your majesty can count on all of his enemies being destroyed '' . ; louis-pierre anquetil , histoire de france depuis les gaulois jusqu ' à la mort de louis xvi ( 1819 ) , paris : chez janet et cotelle , p . 241 . and historian john a . lynn in the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 terms the battle a pyrrhic victory . lynn , 1999 , p . 334 : '' marlborough 's triumph proved to be a pyrrhic victory '' . delbrück , history of the art of war , p . 370 : '' malplaquet was what has been termed with the age-old expression a '' pyrrhic victory . '' however , the attempt to save mons failed and the fortress fell on 20 october . news of malplaquet , the bloodiest battle of the 18th century , stunned europe . the rumour that even marlborough had died possibly inspired the popular french folk song , '' marlbrough s'en va-t-en guerre '' . for the last of his four great battlefield victories , marlborough received no personal letter of thanks from queen anne . richard blackmore 's instructions to vander beck was virtually alone among english poems in attempting to celebrate the '' victory '' of marlborough at malplaquet , and it moved the english tories to begin agitating for a withdrawal from the alliance once they formed a government the next year . the battle is notable for the peculiarity that swiss mercenaries were fighting on both sides . on the french side , there were two batallions of swiss guards and four other mercenary regiments . on the allied side , there were six mercenary regiments in dutch service . two regiments were even commanded by members of the same patrician family of bern : gabriel von may on the dutch side , and hans rudolf von may on the french side . with more than 8,000 swiss casualties , the battle caused heavy controversy in the swiss diet . malplaquet was the last battle where swiss mercenaries directly engaged one another for a full century , until the battle of bailén of 1808 . '' die von may in der schlacht von malplaquet '' , in : andreas z'graggen , adel in der schweiz . wie herrschaftsfamilien unser land über jahrhunderte prägten , nzz libro ( 2018 ) , p . 51 . . gallery . file : malplaquet-map.png location in modern northern france ( yellow ) file : battleofmalplaquet.jpg map of forces . upper right : allied . lower left : french file : eb1911 - malplaquet.jpg another map of forces . notes .