Suggestibility

definition . attempts to isolate a global trait of '' suggestibility '' have not been successful , due to an inability of the available testing procedures to distinguish measurable differences between the following distinct types of '' suggestibility '' : to be affected by a communication or expectation such that certain responses are overtly enacted , or subjectively experienced , without volition , as in automatism . deliberately to use one 's imagination or employ strategies to bring about effects ( even if interpreted , eventually , as involuntary ) in response to a communication or expectation . to accept what people say consciously , but uncritically , and to believe or privately accept what is said . to conform overtly to expectations or the views of others , without the appropriate private acceptance or experience ; that is , to exhibit behavioral compliance without private acceptance or belief . wagstaff 's view is that , because '' a true response to a hypnotic suggestion is not a response brought about at any stage by volition , but rather a true non-volitional response , and perhaps even brought about despite volition '' , the first category really embodies the true domain of hypnotic suggestibility . self-report measures of suggestibility became available in 2004 , and they made it possible to isolate and study the global trait . . examples . suggestibility can be seen in people 's day-to-day lives : someone witnesses an argument after school . when later asked about the '' huge fight '' that occurred , he recalls the memory , but unknowingly distorts it with exaggerated fabrications , because he now thinks of the event as a '' huge fight '' instead of a simple argument . children are told by their parents they 're good singers , so from then on they believe they are talented while their parents were in fact being falsely encouraging . a teacher could trick his ap psych students by saying , '' suggestibility is the distortion of memory through suggestion or misinformation , right ? '' it 's likely that the majority of the class would agree with him because he 's a teacher and what he said sounds correct . however , the term is really the misinformation effect . however , suggestibility can also be seen in extremes , resulting in negative consequences : a witness ' testimony is altered because the police or attorneys make suggestions during the interview , which causes their already uncertain observations to become distorted memories . a young girl began suffering migraines which led to sleep deprivation and depression . her therapist , who was a specialist in cases involving child abuse , repeatedly asked her whether her father had sexually abused her . this suggestion caused the young girl to fabricate memories of her father molesting her , which led to her being placed in foster care and her father being tried on charges of abuse . . hypnosis . hypnotic suggestibility is a trait-like , individual difference variable reflecting the general tendency to respond to hypnosis and hypnotic suggestions . research with standardized measures of hypnotic suggestibility has demonstrated that there are substantial individual differences in this variable . the extent to which a subject may or may not be '' suggestible '' has significant ramifications in the scientific research of hypnosis and its associated phenomena . most hypnotherapists and academics in this field of research work from the premise that hypnotic susceptibility ( or suggestibility ) is a factor in inducing useful hypnosis states . that is , the depth of hypnosis a given individual can achieve in a given context with a particular hypnotherapist and particular set of beliefs , expectations and instructions . dr . john kappas ( 1925–2002 ) identified three different types of suggestibility in his lifetime that have improved hypnosis : emotional suggestibility – a suggestible behavior characterized by a high degree of responsiveness to inferred suggestions that affect emotions and restrict physical body responses ; usually associated with hypnoidal depth . thus the emotional suggestible learns more by inference than by direct , literal suggestions . physical suggestibility – a suggestible behavior characterized by a high degree of responsiveness to literal suggestions affecting the body , and restriction of emotional responses ; usually associated with cataleptic stages or deeper . intellectual suggestibility – the type of hypnotic suggestibility in which a subject fears being controlled by the operator and is constantly trying to analyze , reject or rationalize everything the operator says . with this type of subject the operator must give logical explanations for every suggestion and must allow the subject to feel that he is doing the hypnotizing himself . however , it is not clear or agreed what suggestibility ( i.e . , the factor on hypnosis ) actually is . it is both the indisputable variable and the factor most difficult to measure or control . what has not been agreed on is whether suggestibility is : a permanent fixed detail of character or personality ; a genetic or chemical psychiatric tendency ; a precursor to or symptom of an activation of such a tendency ; a learned skill or acquired habit ; synonymous with the function of learning ; a neutral , unavoidable consequence of language acquisition and empathy ; a biased terminology provoking one to resist new externally introduced ideas or perspectives ; a mutual symbiotic relation to the other , such as the african conception of ubunthu or ubuntu ; related to the capacity of empathy and communication ; a matter of concordant personal taste between speaker / hypnotist and listener and listener 's like of / use for speaker 's ideas ; a skill or a flaw or something neutral and universal . conceptually , hypnotizability has always been defined as the increase in suggestibility produced by hypnosis . in practice , hypnotizability is measured as suggestibility following a hypnotic induction . the data indicates that these are different constructs . although the induction of hypnosis increases suggestibility to a substantial degree , the correlation between hypnotic and non-hypnotic suggestibility approximates the reliability coefficients of so-called hypnotizability scales . this indicates that hypnotic susceptibility scales are better measures of waking suggestibility than they are of hypnotizability . existing research into the phenomena of hypnosis is extensive and randomized controlled trials predominantly support the efficacy and legitimacy of hypnotherapy , but without a clearly defined concept of the entity or aspect being studied , the level an individual is objectively '' suggestible '' can not be measured empirically . it makes exact therapeutic outcomes impossible to forecast . moreover , it logically hinders the development of non-bespoke hypnotherapy protocol . on this latter point , it must be pointed out that while some persuasion methods are more universally effective than others , the most reliably effective method with individuals is to personalize the approach by first examining their motivational , learning , behavioral and emotional styles ( et al . ) . few hypnotherapists do not take a case history , or story so far , from the clients they will be working with . autonomy . the intrigue of differences in individual suggestibility even crops up in the early greek philosophers . aristotle had an unconcerned approach : this perhaps is a more accurate echo of the experience of practicing hypnotherapists and hypnotists . when anyone is absorbed in someone else 's inspiring words as they outline an idea or way of thinking , the subjective attention is held because of the logic , the aesthetic , and the relevance of the words to one 's own personal experience and motivations . in these natural trance states , like those orchestrated purposefully by a hypnotherapist , the 'critical faculties ' are naturally less active when there is less to be naturally critical of . it is perhaps the '' necessarily believing it '' that is problematic , as this conception of suggestibility raises issues of the autonomy of attributing belief to an introduced idea , and how this happens . . susceptibility . popular media and layman 's articles occasionally use the terms '' suggestible '' and '' susceptible '' interchangeably , with reference to the extent to which a given individual responds to incoming suggestions from another . the two terms are not synonymous , however , as the latter term carries inherent negative bias absent from the neutral psychological factor described by '' suggestibility '' . in scientific research and academic literature on hypnosis and hypnotherapy , the term '' suggestibility '' describes a neutral psychological and possibly physiological state or phenomena . this is distinct from the culturally biased common parlance of the term '' suggestible '' . both terms are often bound with undeserved negative social connotations not inherent in the word meanings themselves . to be suggestible is not to be gullible . the latter pertains to an empirical objective fact that can be shown accurate or inaccurate to any observer ; the former term does not . to be open to suggestion has no bearing on the accuracy of any incoming suggestions , nor whether such an objective accuracy is possible ( as is with metaphysical belief ) . some therapists may examine worries or objections to suggestibility before proceeding with therapy : this is because some believe there is a rational or learned deliberate will to hold a belief , even in the case of more convincing new ideas , when there is a compelling cognitive reason not to 'allow oneself ' to be persuaded . perhaps this can be seen in historical cases of mass hypnosis where also there has been media suppression . in the individual , unexamined actions are sometimes described by hypno- and psycho-therapists based on outgrown belief systems . the term '' susceptible '' implies weakness or some increased danger that one is more likely to become victim to and must guard against . it therefore has a negative effect on expectation and itself is a hypnotic suggestion that suggestions must be noticed and guarded against . hypnotic suggestions include terms , phrases , or whole concepts where to understand the concept includes making sense of a subjective sensation , or a framework for the appropriate response . simple one-word forms of this include the word terrorism where to understand the concept , one must understand the notion of terror and then understand in the sentence that it is meant to refer to '' that '' given object . language acquisition . cognition of a phrase must occur before the decision how to act next can occur : because the concepts must exist before the mind . either they are suggested from the mind itself , or in response to introduced suggestions of concepts from outside – the world and its scenarios and facts , or suggestions from other people . a suggestion may direct the thoughts to notice a new concept , focus on a specific area within the world , offer new perspectives that later may influence action-choices , offer triggers for automatic behavior ( such as returning a smile ) , or indicate specific action types . in hypnotherapy the portrayed realistic experience of the client 's requested outcome is suggested with flattery or urgency , as well as personalized to the client 's own motivations , drives , and tastes . common experience of suggestions . suggestions are not necessarily verbal , spoken , or read . a smile , a glare , a wink , a three-piece suit , a scientist 's white coat , are all suggestive devices that imply more than the immediate action . a hypnotist uses techniques that use these instinctive '' fillings-in of gaps '' and changes to how we respond to a scenario or moment . in the therapy setting , a hypnotist or hypnotherapist will likely evaluate these automatic cognitive leaps , or dogma , or any self-limiting or self-sabotaging beliefs . being under the influence of suggestion can be characterized as exhibiting behavioral compliance without private acceptance or belief . that is , actions being inconsistent with one 's own volition and belief system and natural unhindered action-motivations . this could hinder the autonomy , expression or self-determination of an individual . it could equally supersede emotions with rationally chosen , deliberate long-term results . experimental vs . clinical . the applications of hypnosis vary widely and investigation of responses to suggestion can be usefully separated into two non-exclusive broad divisions : experimental hypnosis : the study of '' experimental suggestion '' , of the form : : : '' what is it that my group of test subjects actually do when i deliver the precise standard suggestion abc to each of them in the same experimental context ? '' : : ( i.e . , given a fixed suggestion , what is the outcome ? ) clinical hypnosis : the study of clinical suggestion directed at the question : : : '' what is it that i can possibly say to this particular subject , in this specific context , to generate my goal of having them do xyz ? '' ( i.e . , given a fixed outcome , what is the suggestion ? ) . non-state explanations of hypnotic responsiveness . according to some theoretical explanations of hypnotic responses , such as the role-playing theory of nicholas spanos , hypnotic subjects do not actually enter a different psychological or physiological state ; but , rather , simply acting on peer pressure – and , therefore , it is easier for them to comply than to disobey . whilst this view does not dispute that hypnotized individuals truly experience the suggested effects , it asserts that the mechanism this takes place by has , in part , been '' socially constructed '' and does not , therefore , require any explanation involving any sort of an '' altered state of consciousness '' . . child . children have a developing mind that is constantly being filled with new information from sources all around them . this predisposes children towards higher levels of suggestibility , and as such children are an important area of suggestibility investigation . researchers have identified key factors , both internal and external , that are strong markers for suggestibility in children . . internal . age : children have a remarkable ability to remember events in their lives . the real variability between ages in suggestibility is the amount of detail provided for an event . memory detail will be great for older children . some younger children may need help recalling past events with the help of an adult . the problem as it relates to suggestibility is when children , and even adults , blend previous knowledge of similar experiences into their recollection of a single event . children , particularly younger children , are prone to including details that are similar yet unrelated to the specific event showing that the age of a person is critical in their susceptibility to influence . prior knowledge : as mentioned before , the possession of prior knowledge that relates to an event can be particularly dangerous when dealing with child suggestibility . prior knowledge , as it relates to suggestibility is the use of past experiences to help reconstruct past or current events . prior knowledge of an event can actually be effective at producing accurate recall of a particular situation , but can also be equally as effective at producing false memories . research showed that when presented with a previously familiar situation , children were likely to falsely recall events as if they had happened . gist extraction : although children are extremely likely to recall false memory when past events are similar to a current event , they will also recall false memory details that are seemingly unrelated to the event . researchers named this phenomenon global gist , which is a representation that identifies connections across multiple events . children will falsely recall information that fits with their representation of the events around them . external . interviewer bias : interviewer bias is the opinion or prejudice on the part of an interviewer , which is displayed during the interview process and thus affects the outcome of the interview . this happens when interviewers pursue only a single hypothesis that supports what they already think , and ignore any details that counter their hypothesis . the goal is not to get the truth , but to simply corroborate what is already believed . interviewer bias is commonly experienced when extracting information from children . repeated questions : it has been shown that asking children the same question over and over again in an interview will often cause the child to reverse their first answer , especially in yes or no questions . it is the child 's belief that since the question is being repeated that they must have not answered correctly and need to change their answer . interviewer 's tone : children are extremely perceptive of people 's tones , especially in an interview situation . when an interviewer 's tone dictates the questioning , a child is likely to construct memories of past events when they actually have no memory of that event . an example would be that when a positive tone is used , it has shown to produce more detailed accounts of events . however , it has also been shown to produce false information intended to appease the interviewer . peer interactions : children 's accounts of events can be greatly distorted by information from their peers . in some cases , children who were not present for an event will later recall witnessing the event as well as details about the event . this information come from hearing about the event as described by their peers . these children may speak up in order to feel included . repeating misinformation : repeating misinformation is simply when an interviewer gives a child incorrect details of an event . this technique is used over several interviews and occurs several times within a single interview . it has been shown to have a great effect on the accuracy of a child 's recollection of an event , and eventually , the misinformation will be included in the child 's account of a given event . extreme events . in extreme events such as sexual abuse , extreme anxiety or mistreatment , children can in fact be greatly subjected to suggestibility . it is possible that a child may recall something that did n't actually happen or they are so traumatized that they do not want to think about what actually happened . little research has been carried out into the effects of anxious mood at the time of either the encoding of misleading post‐event information or the time of its possible retrieval , on subsequent suggestibility . memory accuracy for non‐suggestible items was unaffected by the anxious mood induction . with respect to suggestibility , there was a strong effect of misleading information . this is just one example of how a highly emotional situation such as an anxiety attack can create suggestibility misconception . another example of research is that memory , suggestibility , stress arousal , and trauma-related psychopathology were examined in 328 3- to 16-year-olds involved in forensic investigations of abuse and neglect . children 's memory and suggestibility were assessed for a medical examination and venipuncture . being older and scoring higher in cognitive functioning were related to fewer inaccuracies . in addition , cortisol level and trauma symptoms in children who reported more dissociative tendencies were associated with increased memory error . this again proves how a stressful or traumatic experience in young children can be affected by suggestibility . other cases . it is claimed that sufferers of posttraumatic stress disorder and dissociative identity disorder ( did ) are particularly suggestible . while it is true that did sufferers tend to score to the higher end of the hypnotizability scale , there have not been enough studies done to support the claim of increased suggestibility . aspects of crowd dynamics and mob behavior , as well as the phenomenon of groupthink are further examples of suggestibility . common examples of suggestible behavior in everyday life include '' contagious yawning '' ( multiple people begin to yawn after observing a person yawning ) and the medical student syndrome ( a person begins to experience symptoms of an illness after reading or hearing about it ) . placebo response is also thought to be based on individual differences in suggestibility , at least in part . suggestible persons may be more responsive to various forms of alternative health practices that seem to rely upon patient belief in the intervention more than on any known mechanism . studies of effects of health interventions can be enhanced by controlling for individual differences in suggestibility . a search of the mental measurements yearbook shows no extant psychological test for this personality characteristic . the gudjonsson suggestibility scale is questionable for this kind of purpose due to its narrow focus . in addition to health-related implications , persons who are highly suggestible may be prone to making poor judgments because they did not process suggestions critically and falling prey to emotion-based advertising .