1913 in literature

events . january – acmeist poetry , with roots back to 1909 , is officially born as a reaction to russian futurism . manifestos are printed in the journal apollon by nikolay gumilyov and sergey gorodetsky , with illustrative works by both , and by anna akhmatova , vladimir narbut , and osip mandelstam — the last with '' hagia sophia '' . january 1 – the german national library is founded in leipzig . january 8 – harold monro founds the poetry bookshop in london , which becomes a noted literary meeting-place . january 24 – franz kafka stopped working on his novel amerika , which he never finished april 5 – serialization of the adventures of gaston leroux 's character chéri-bibi begins in le matin ( france ) . april – bernhard kellermann 's novel der tunnel sells 100,000 copies in its first six months . c . april – humphrey s . milford becomes publisher to the university of oxford and head of the london operations of oxford university press , after the retirement of henry frowde . september – f . scott fitzgerald enters princeton university , where he meets edmund wilson and john peale bishop . november 8 – georg büchner 's play woyzeck , unfinished on his death in 1837 , receives its first performance at the residenztheater , munich . november 13 – marcel proust 's swann 's way ( du côté de chez swann ) , volume 1 of in search of lost time ( à la recherche du temps perdu ) , is published by éditions grasset in paris at the author 's expense . december 21 – arthur wynne 's '' word-cross '' , the first crossword puzzle , appears in the new york world . december 26 – ambrose bierce , an observer with pancho villa 's army in the mexican revolution , sends his last known correspondence . he is never seen again . unknown dates zaynab , by husayn haykal , is published ; it is sometimes called the first modern arabic novel . norbert von hellingrath begins publishing his edition of friedrich hölderlin 's complete works ( sämtliche werke : historisch-kritische ausgabe , the '' berliner ausgabe '' ) , restoring it to literary prominence . henri stahl publishes excerpts from his novel un român în lună ( '' a romanian on the moon '' , republished as a book in 1914 ) , one of the earliest works of romanian science fiction . . new books . fiction . alain-fournier – le grand meaulnes maurice barrès – the sacred hill andrei bely – petersburg ( петербургъ , peterburg ) arnold bennett – the regent e . f . benson dodo 's daughter thorley weir the weaker vessel edmund clerihew bentley – trent 's last case algernon blackwood – a prisoner in fairyland ivana brlić-mažuranić – the brave adventures of lapitch ( čudnovate zgode šegrta hlapića ) mary grant bruce – norah of billabong john buchan – the power-house ( serialization ) edgar rice burroughs – the return of tarzan hall caine – the woman thou gavest me ethel carnie – miss nobody willa cather – o pioneers ! joseph conrad – chance ( book publication ) miguel de unamuno – el espejo de la muerte ( the mirror of death , stories ) grazia deledda – canne al vento ( reeds in the wind ) ethel m . dell – the knave of diamonds arthur conan doyle – the poison belt roger martin du gard – jean barois edna ferber – roast beef , medium ellen glasgow – virginia elinor glyn the sequence the contrast and other stories knut hamsun – børn av tiden husayn haykal – zaynab franz hessel – der kramladen des glücks robert hichens – the way of ambition henry james – a small boy and others annie fellows johnston – miss santa clause of the pullman mary johnston – hagar bernhard kellermann – der tunnel valery larbaud – a . o . barnabooth d . h . lawrence – sons and lovers gaston leroux – the secret of the night jack london the valley of the moon the abysmal brute marie belloc lowndes the end of her honeymoon the lodger arnold lunn – the harrovians compton mackenzie – sinister street , vol . 1 katherine mansfield – '' millie '' ( short story ) patricio mariano – ang tala sa panghulo ( the bright star at panghulo ) flora mayor – the third miss symons oscar micheaux – conquest : the story of a negro pioneer octave mirbeau – dingo lucy maud montgomery – the golden road mori ōgai ( 森 鷗外 ) – the wild geese ( 雁 , gan , serialization concludes december ) e . phillips oppenheim – the double life of mr . alfred burton baroness orczy – eldorado luigi pirandello – i vecchi e i giovani ( the old and the young , complete ) marcel proust – swann 's way ( du côté de chez swann , first part of à la recherche du temps perdu ) sax rohmer – the mystery of dr . fu-manchu saki – when william came ewald gerhard seeliger – peter voss , thief of millions gene stratton-porter – laddie booth tarkington – the flirt vincent cartwright vickers – the google book edgar wallace the fourth plague grey timothy the river of stars hugh walpole – fortitude mary augusta ward the coryston family the mating of lydia edith wharton – the custom of the country p . g . wodehouse – the little nugget leonard woolf – the village in the jungle francis brett young – undergrowth . children and young people . l . frank baum the patchwork girl of oz little wizard stories of oz aunt jane 's nieces on the ranch ( as edith van dyne ) ivana brlić-mažuranić – the brave adventures of lapitch ( čudnovate zgode šegrta hlapića ) gertrude minnie faulding – fairies ferenc móra – csilicsali csalavári csalavér ( nonsense title , about a wolf family ) e . nesbit – wet magic eleanor h . porter – pollyanna beatrix potter – the tale of pigling bland else ury – nesthäkchen and her dolls ( nesthäkchen und ihre puppen ) . drama . franz arnold and ernst bach – the spanish fly ( die spanische fliege ) jacinto benavente – the unloved woman ( la malquerida ) george a . birmingham – general john regan montague glass and charles klein – potash and perlmutter a . de herz păianjenul ( the spider ) bunicul ( grandfather ) stanley houghton the perfect cure trust the people victor ido – karinda adinda d . h . lawrence – the daughter-in-law ( first performed 1967 ) oskar luts – kapsapea ( the cabbage ) gregorio martínez sierra mamá ( mama ) sólo para mujeres ( for women only ) vladimir mayakovsky – vladimir mayakovsky ( « владимир маяковский » ) edward sheldon – romance carl sternheim – bürger schippel ( citizen schippel ) . poetry . delmira agustini – los cálices vacíos ( empty chalices ) guillaume apollinaire – alcools james elroy flecker – the golden journey to samarkand robert frost – a boy 's will osip mandelstam – hagia sophia siegfried sassoon – the daffodil murderer georg trakl – gedichte ( poems ) . non-fiction . guillaume apollinaire – the cubist painters , aesthetic meditations ( les peintres cubistes , méditations esthétiques ) miguel de unamuno – del sentimiento trágico de la vida ( the tragic sense of life ) sigmund freud – totem und tabu holbrook jackson – the eighteen nineties walter lippmann – a preface to politics luigi russolo – the art of noises ( l'arte dei rumori , futurist manifesto ) rosa luxemburg – die akkumulation des kapitals ( the accumulation of capital , 1951 ) alfred north whitehead and bertrand russell – principia mathematica ( completed ) basil williams – the life of william pitt , earl of chatham . births . january 23 – joan adeney easdale , english poet ( died 1998 ) january 29 – peter von zahn , german journalist and writer ( died 2001 ) february 2 – racey helps , english children 's writer and illustrator ( died 1970 ) february 27 – irwin shaw , american playwright , screenwriter and novelist ( died 1984 ) march 2 – godfried bomans , dutch writer ( died 1971 ) april 18 – muttathu varkey , malayalam novelist , short story writer , and poet ( died 1989 ) june 22 – sándor weöres , hungarian poet and author ( died 1989 ) june 26 – aimé césaire , martinique writer ( died 2008 ) july 6 – gwyn thomas , welsh novelist ( died 1981 ) july 21 – catherine storr , english children 's writer ( died 2001 ) august 11 – angus wilson , english novelist ( died 1991 ) august 28 – robertson davies , canadian novelist ( died 1995 ) october 19 – vasco pratolini , italian writer ( died 1991 ) november 7 – albert camus , french writer ( died 1960 ) november 10 – karl shapiro , american poet ( died 2000 ) december 26 – elizabeth david ( née gwynne ) , english cookery writer ( died 1992 ) december 27 – elizabeth smart , canadian poet and novelist ( died 1986 ) . deaths . january 21 – aluísio azevedo , brazilian novelist , playwright and short story writer ( born 1857 ) february 9 – oscar méténier , french novelist and dramatist ( born 1859 ) february 13 – charles major , american novelist ( born 1856 ) march 7 – pauline johnson , canadian poet ( born 1861 ) march 13 – thomas krag , norwegian novelist , dramatist and short story writer ( born 1868 ) april 4 – edward dowden , irish critic and poet ( born 1843 ) may 8 – charlotte louisa hawkins dempster , scottish novelist and essayist ( born 1835 ) june 2 – alfred austin , english poet and poet laureate ( born 1835 ) june 13 – camille lemonnier , belgian poet and journalist ( born 1844 ) july 8 – louis hémon , french novelist ( rail accident , born 1880 ) october 9 – d . iacobescu , romanian poet ( born 1893 ) october 19 – emily lawless , irish-born modernist novelist and poet ( born 1845 ) november 26 – frances julia wedgwood , english feminist novelist , biographer and critic ( born 1833 ) december 1 – juhan liiv , estonian poet and short story writer ( born 1864 ) december 5 – ferdinand dugué , french poet and playwright ( born 1816 ) december 11 – ioan kalinderu , romanian classical scholar , jurist and agriculturalist ( born 1840 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : rabindranath tagore newdigate prize : maurice roy ridley . references .