Romanization

methods . there are many consistent or standardized romanization systems . they can be classified by their characteristics . a particular system ’ s characteristics may make it better-suited for various , sometimes contradictory applications , including document retrieval , linguistic analysis , easy readability , faithful representation of pronunciation . source , or donor language – a system may be tailored to romanize text from a particular language , or a series of languages , or for any language in a particular writing system . a language-specific system typically preserves language features like pronunciation , while the general one may be better for cataloguing international texts . target , or receiver language – most systems are intended for an audience that speaks or reads a particular language . ( so-called international romanization systems for cyrillic text are based on central-european alphabets like the czech and croatian alphabet . ) simplicity – since the basic latin alphabet has a smaller number of letters than many other writing systems , digraphs , diacritics , or special characters must be used to represent them all in latin script . this affects the ease of creation , digital storage and transmission , reproduction , and reading of the romanized text . reversibility – whether or not the original can be restored from the converted text . some reversible systems allow for an irreversible simplified version . transliteration . if the romanization attempts to transliterate the original script , the guiding principle is a one-to-one mapping of characters in the source language into the target script , with less emphasis on how the result sounds when pronounced according to the reader 's language . for example , the nihon-shiki romanization of japanese allows the informed reader to reconstruct the original japanese kana syllables with 100 % accuracy , but requires additional knowledge for correct pronunciation . transcription . . phonemic . most romanizations are intended to enable the casual reader who is unfamiliar with the original script to pronounce the source language reasonably accurately . such romanizations follow the principle of phonemic orthography and attempt to render the significant sounds ( phonemes ) of the original as faithfully as possible in the target language . the popular hepburn romanization of japanese is an example of a transcriptive romanization designed for english speakers . phonetic . a phonetic conversion goes one step further and attempts to depict all phones in the source language , sacrificing legibility if necessary by using characters or conventions not found in the target script . in practice such a representation almost never tries to represent every possible allophone—especially those that occur naturally due to coarticulation effects—and instead limits itself to the most significant allophonic distinctions . the international phonetic alphabet is the most common system of phonetic transcription . trade-offs . for most language pairs , building a usable romanization involves trade-offs between the two extremes . pure transcriptions are generally not possible , as the source language usually contains sounds and distinctions not found in the target language , but which must be shown for the romanized form to be comprehensible . furthermore , due to diachronic and synchronic variance no written language represents any spoken language with perfect accuracy and the vocal interpretation of a script may vary by a great degree among languages . in modern times the chain of transcription is usually spoken foreign language , written foreign language , written native language , spoken ( read ) native language . reducing the number of those processes , i.e . removing one or both steps of writing , usually leads to more accurate oral articulations . in general , outside a limited audience of scholars , romanizations tend to lean more towards transcription . as an example , consider the japanese martial art 柔術 : the nihon-shiki romanization zyûzyutu may allow someone who knows japanese to reconstruct the kana syllables , but most native english speakers , or rather readers , would find it easier to guess the pronunciation from the hepburn version , jujutsu . romanization of specific writing systems . : the below listing may be incomplete , see also : category : romanization . arabic . the arabic alphabet is used to write arabic , persian , urdu and pashto as well as numerous other languages in the muslim world , particularly african and asian languages without alphabets of their own . romanization standards include the following : deutsche morgenländische gesellschaft ( 1936 ) : adopted by the international convention of orientalist scholars in rome . it is the basis for the very influential hans wehr dictionary . bs 4280 ( 1968 ) : developed by the british standards institution satts ( 1970s ) : a one-for-one substitution system , a legacy from the morse code era ungegn ( 1972 ) din 31635 ( 1982 ) : developed by the deutsches institut für normung ( german institute for standardization ) iso 233 ( 1984 ) . transliteration . qalam ( 1985 ) : a system that focuses upon preserving the spelling , rather than the pronunciation , and uses mixed case iso 233-2 ( 1993 ) : simplified transliteration . buckwalter transliteration ( 1990s ) : developed at xerox by tim buckwalter ; does n't require unusual diacritics ala-lc ( 1997 ) arabic chat alphabet . persian . . armenian . . georgian . . greek . there are romanization systems for both modern and ancient greek . ala-lc beta code greeklish iso 843 ( 1997 ) . hebrew . the hebrew alphabet is romanized using several standards : ansi z39.25 ( 1975 ) ungegn ( 1977 ) iso 259 ( 1984 ) : transliteration . iso 259-2 ( 1994 ) : simplified transliteration . iso/dis 259-3 : phonemic transcription . ala-lc . indic ( brahmic ) scripts . the brahmic family of abugidas is used for languages of the indian subcontinent and south-east asia . there is a long tradition in the west to study sanskrit and other indic texts in latin transliteration . various transliteration conventions have been used for indic scripts since the time of sir william jones . iso 15919 ( 2001 ) : a standard transliteration convention was codified in the iso 15919 standard . it uses diacritics to map the much larger set of brahmic consonants and vowels to the latin script . see also transliteration of indic scripts : how to use iso 15919 . the devanagari-specific portion is very similar to the academic standard , iast : '' international alphabet of sanskrit transliteration '' , and to the united states library of congress standard , ala-lc , although there are a few differences the national library at kolkata romanization , intended for the romanization of all indic scripts , is an extension of iast harvard-kyoto : uses upper and lower case and doubling of letters , to avoid the use of diacritics , and to restrict the range to 7-bit ascii . itrans : a transliteration scheme into 7-bit ascii created by avinash chopde that used to be prevalent on usenet . iscii ( 1988 ) . devanagari–nastaʿlīq ( hindustani ) . hindustani is an indo-aryan language with extreme digraphia and diglossia resulting from the hindi–urdu controversy starting in the 1800s . technically , hindustani itself is recognized by neither the language community nor any governments . two standardized registers , standard hindi and standard urdu , are recognized as official languages in india and pakistan . however , in practice the situation is , in pakistan : standard ( saaf or khaalis ) urdu is the '' high '' variety , whereas hindustani is the '' low '' variety used by the masses ( called urdu , written in nastaʿlīq script ) . in india , both standard ( shuddh ) hindi and standard ( saaf or khaalis ) urdu are the '' h '' varieties ( written in devanagari and nastaʿlīq respectively ) , whereas hindustani is the '' l '' variety used by the masses and written in either devanagari or nastaʿlīq ( and called 'hindi ' or 'urdu ' respectively ) . the digraphia renders any work in either script largely inaccessible to users of the other script , though otherwise hindustani is a perfectly mutually intelligible language , essentially meaning that any kind of text-based open source collaboration is impossible among devanagari and nastaʿlīq readers . initiated in 2011 , the hamari boli initiative is a full-scale open-source language planning initiative aimed at hindustani script , style , status & lexical reform and modernization . one of primary stated objectives of hamari boli is to relieve hindustani of the crippling devanagari–nastaʿlīq digraphia by way of romanization . the news international - dec 29 , 2011 -- '' hamari boli ( our language ) is perhaps one of the very first serious undertakings to explore , develop and encourage the growth of roman script in the use of urdu/hindi language . '' . chinese . romanization of the sinitic languages , particularly mandarin , has proved a very difficult problem , although the issue is further complicated by political considerations . because of this , many romanization tables contain chinese characters plus one or more romanizations or zhuyin . mandarin . ala-lc : used to be similar to wade–giles , but converted to hanyu pinyin in 2000 efeo . developed by école française d'extrême-orient in the 19th century , used mainly in france . latinxua sin wenz ( 1926 ) : omitted tone sounds . used mainly in the soviet union and xinjiang in the 1930s . predecessor of hanyu pinyin . lessing-othmer : used mainly in germany . postal romanization ( 1906 ) : early standard for international addresses wade–giles ( 1892 ) : transliteration . very popular from the 19th century until recently and continues to be used by some western academics . yale ( 1942 ) : created by the u.s . for battlefield communication and used in the influential yale textbooks . legge romanization : created by james legge , a scottish missionary . mainland china . hanyu pinyin ( 1958 ) : in mainland china , hanyu pinyin has been used officially to romanize mandarin for decades , primarily as a linguistic tool for teaching the standardized language . the system is also used in other chinese-speaking areas such as singapore and parts of taiwan , and has been adopted by much of the international community as a standard for writing chinese words and names in the latin script . the value of hanyu pinyin in education in china lies in the fact that china , like any other populated area with comparable area and population , has numerous distinct dialects , though there is just one common written language and one common standardized spoken form . ( these comments apply to romanization in general ) iso 7098 ( 1991 ) : based on hanyu pinyin . taiwan . gwoyeu romatzyh ( gr , 1928–1986 , in taiwan 1945–1986 ; taiwan used japanese romaji before 1945 ) , mandarin phonetic symbols ii ( mps ii , 1986–2002 ) , tongyong pinyin ( 2002–2008 ) , and hanyu pinyin ( since january 1 , 2009 ) . . singapore . . cantonese . barnett–chao guangdong ( 1960 ) hong kong government jyutping meyer–wempe sidney lau yale ( 1942 ) cantonese pinyin . min nan or hokkien . pe̍h-ōe-jī ( poj ) , once the de facto official script of the presbyterian church in taiwan ( since the late 19th century ) . technically this represented a largely phonemic transcription system , as min nan was not commonly written in chinese . see also comparison of hokkien writing systems . teochew . guangdong ( 1960 ) , for the distinct teochew variety . min dong . foochow romanized . min bei . kienning colloquial romanized . japanese . romanization ( or , more generally , roman letters ) is called '' rōmaji '' in japanese . the most common systems are : hepburn ( 1867 ) : phonetic transcription to anglo-american practices , used in geographical names nihon-shiki ( 1885 ) : transliteration . also adopted as ( iso 3602 strict ) in 1989 . kunrei-shiki ( 1937 ) : phonemic transcription . also adopted as ( iso 3602 ) . jsl ( 1987 ) : phonemic transcription . named after the book japanese : the spoken language by eleanor jorden . ala-lc : similar to modified hepburn wāpuro : ( '' word processor romanization '' ) transliteration . not strictly a system , but a collection of common practices that enables input of japanese text . korean . while romanization has taken various and at times seemingly unstructured forms , some sets of rules do exist : mccune–reischauer ( mr ; 1937 ? ) , the first transcription to gain some acceptance . a slightly changed version of mr was the official system for korean in south korea from 1984 to 2000 , and yet a different modification is still the official system in north korea . uses breves , apostrophes and diereses , the latter two indicating orthographic syllable boundaries in cases that would otherwise be ambiguous . what is called mr may in many cases be any of a number of systems that differ from each other and from the original mr mostly in whether word endings are separated from the stem by a space , a hyphen or & nbsp ; – according to mccune 's and reischauer 's system & nbsp ; – not at all ; and if a hyphen or space is used , whether sound change is reflected in a stem 's last and an ending 's first consonant letter ( e.g . pur-i vs . pul-i ) . although mostly irrelevant when transcribing uninflected words , these aberrations are so widespread that any mention of '' mccune-reischauer romanization '' may not necessarily refer to the original system as published in the 1930s . there is , for example , the ala-lc / u.s . library of congress system , based on mr but with some deviations . word division is addressed in detail , with a generous use of spaces to separate word endings from stems that is not seen in mr . syllables of given names are always separated with a hyphen , which is expressly never done by mr . sound changes are ignored more often than in mr . distinguishes between ‘ and ’ . several problems with mr led to the development of the newer systems : yale ( 1942 ) : this system has become the established standard romanization for korean among linguists . vowel length in old or dialectal pronunciation is indicated by a macron . in cases that would otherwise be ambiguous , orthographic syllable boundaries are indicated with a period . this system also indicates consonants that have disappeared from a word 's hangul orthography and standard pronunciation . revised romanization of korean ( rr ; 2000 ) : includes rules both for transcription and for transliteration . south korea now officially uses this system that was approved in 2000 . road signs and textbooks were required to follow these rules as soon as possible , at a cost estimated by the government to be at least us 20 million . all road signs , names of railway and subway stations on line maps and signs etc . have been changed . the change has been either ignored or grandfathered in some cases , notably the romanization of names and existing companies . rr is generally similar to mr , but uses no diacritics or apostrophes , and uses distinct letters for ㅌ/ㄷ ( t/d ) , ㅋ/ㄱ ( k/g ) , ㅊ/ㅈ ( ch/j ) and ㅍ/ㅂ ( p/b ) . in cases of ambiguity , orthographic syllable boundaries were intended to be indicated with a hyphen , but this is inconsistently applied in practice . iso/tr 11941 ( 1996 ) : this actually is two different standards under one name : one for north korea ( dprk ) and the other for south korea ( rok ) . the initial submission to the iso was based heavily on yale and was a joint effort between both states , but they could not agree on the final draft . lukoff romanization , developed 1945–47 for his spoken korean coursebooks . philippine languages . almost all languages of the philippines ( including tagalog , ilokano , the bicol languages , cebuano and other visayan languages , kapampangan , and the spanish-based creole chavacano ) use the filipino alphabet . when spain colonised the philippines in the late 16th century , the numerous languages of the philippines were written in various scripts , such as baybayin . these were initially promoted by the colonists but later replaced by spanish transcriptions , which are still evident in place names and surnames . letters such as c , ll , and ñ were considered hispanic additions and removed in the abakada , an attempt at a more indigenous alphabet devised by lope k . santos in 1940 . these were eventually superseded by the pilipino alphabet and by the 28-letter , modern filipino alphabet , which adds ñ and the native ng to the standard , 26-letter latin alphabet . while the spanish language itself uses a very phonemic spelling , the romanised spelling created for philippine languages is even more so . for example , the spanish caballo ( kaˈβa.ʎo , '' horse '' ) , the same word in tagalog is kabayo ( demonstrating yeismo in the pronunciation of the spanish '' ll '' digraph ) . thai . thai , spoken in thailand and some areas of laos , burma and china , is written with thai alphabet , probably descended from mixture of tai–laotian and old khmer , in the brahmic family . royal thai general system of transcription iso 11940 1998 transliteration iso 11940-2 2007 transcription ala-lc . cyrillic . in english language library catalogues , bibliographies , and most academic publications , the ala-lc romanization for russian is used worldwide . in linguistics , scientific transliteration is used for both cyrillic and glagolitic alphabets . this applies to old church slavonic , as well as modern slavic languages that use these alphabets . belarusian . bgn/pcgn romanization of belarusian , 1979 ( united states board on geographic names and permanent committee on geographical names for british official use ) scientific transliteration , or the international scholarly system for linguistics ala-lc romanization , 1997 ( american library association and library of congress ) : iso 9:1995 instruction on transliteration of belarusian geographical names with letters of latin script , 2000 . bulgarian . a system based on scientific transliteration and iso/r 9:1968 was considered official in bulgaria since the 1970s . since the late 1990s , bulgarian authorities have switched to the so-called streamlined system avoiding the use of diacritics and optimized for compatibility with english . this system became mandatory for public use with a law passed in 2009 . state gazette 19 , sofia , 13 march 2009 . ( in bulgarian ) where the old system uses , the new system uses . the new bulgarian system was endorsed for official use also by un in 2012 , and by bgn and pcgn in 2013 . . kyrgyz . macedonian . russian . there is no single universally accepted system of writing russian using the latin script—in fact there are a huge number of such systems : some are adjusted for a particular target language ( e.g . german or french ) , some are designed as a librarian 's transliteration , some are prescribed for russian travellers ' passports ; the transcription of some names is purely traditional . & nbsp ; all this has resulted in great reduplication of names . & nbsp ; e.g . the name of the russian composer tchaikovsky may also be written as tchaykovsky , tchajkovskij , tchaikowski , tschaikowski , czajkowski , čajkovskij , čajkovski , chajkovskij , çaykovski , chaykovsky , chaykovskiy , chaikovski , tshaikovski , tšaikovski , tsjajkovskij etc . systems include : bgn/pcgn ( 1947 ) : transliteration system ( united states board on geographic names & permanent committee on geographical names for british official use ) . gost 16876-71 ( 1971 ) : a now defunct soviet transliteration standard . replaced by gost 7.79 , which is an iso 9 equivalent . united nations romanization system for geographical names ( 1987 ) : based on gost 16876-71 . iso 9 ( 1995 ) : transliteration . from the international organization for standardization . ala-lc ( 1997 ) volapuk encoding ( 1990s ) : slang term ( it 's not really volapük ) for a writing method that 's not truly a transliteration , but used for similar goals ( see article ) . conventional english transliteration is based to bgn/pcgn , but does n't follow a particular standard . described in detail at romanization of russian . streamlined system basic and optimized romanization of russian . 2006–2016 . l . ivanov . streamlined romanization of russian cyrillic . contrastive linguistics . xlii ( 2017 ) no . 2 . pp . 66-73 . for the romanization of russian . comparative transliteration of russian in different languages ( western european , arabic , georgian , braille , morse ) . syriac . the latin script for syriac was developed in the 1930s , following the state policy for minority languages of the soviet union , with some material published . s.p . brock , '' three thousand years of aramaic literature '' , in aram,1:1 ( 1989 ) . ukrainian . the 2010 ukrainian national system has been adopted by the ungegn in 2012 and by the bgn/pcgn in 2020 . it is also very close to the modified ( simplified ) ala-lc system , which has remained unchanged since 1941 . ala-lc iso 9 ukrainian national transliteration ukrainian national and bgn/pcgn systems , at the un working group on romanization systems thomas t . pedersen 's comparison of five systems see also : ukrainian latin alphabet . overview and summary . the chart below shows the most common phonemic transcription romanization used for several different alphabets . while it is sufficient for many casual users , there are multiple alternatives used for each alphabet , and many exceptions . for details , consult each of the language sections above . ( hangul characters are broken down into jamo components . ) . see also . anglicisation cyrillization , expression of a language in cyrillic letters francization gairaigo latinisation of names spread of the latin script