Steven Norris

early life and career . norris attended the liverpool institute for boys , a grammar school , from 1956 to 1963 where he was head boy . he earned an open exhibition in social studies and graduated from worcester college , oxford , where he was president of the university law society . after graduating , he pursued a career in the engineering and motor industries and entered politics upon election to berkshire county council in 1977 , where he became deputy leader . parliamentary and ministerial career . in 13 years as member of parliament , norris was appointed parliamentary private secretary to william waldegrave , at the department of the environment ; to nicholas ridley at the department of trade and industry ; and to kenneth baker at the home office . he was then promoted to minister for transport in london by john major in 1992 , where he was responsible for the jubilee line extension , the largest extension of the london underground network to date . public transport roles . norris ’ expertise on public transport issues led him to roles as chairman of the national cycling strategy board , director general of the road haulage association and president of the motor cycle industry association , and a commissioner with the independent transport commission . he also served as patron of the cyclists charity , sustrans , and of the campaign for better transport ( uk ) trust . . equality issues . norris was a pioneer for equality for gays and lesbians before the law as a member of parliament and later as a mayoral candidate . in particular , norris took the step of writing to the conservative party chairman chris patten to suggest that the party include an equal age of consent in its next election manifesto . this change in the law was eventually achieved in 2001 under the blair government . additionally , norris registered the conservative parliamentary group for homosexual law reform with the party 's whips office and the 1922 committee . realising that the party would not make a manifesto commitment to age of consent equality , the group decided to lobby individual ministers and departments with an agenda for change . this included a review of the 1967 sexual offences act to allow for an equal age of consent , as well as allowing gays and lesbians to serve openly in the armed forces ; supporting a more liberal prosecution policy in scotland ; enforcement of existing home office advice against police entrapment and a more positive image for the conservative party on equality issues . norris also was one of a handful of prominent tories who lobbied against the discriminatory section 28 , ostensibly intended by its supporters to outlaw the teaching of homosexuality in schools , later was repealed by the blair government and renounced by the conservative party under david cameron . at the time of repeal , norris opposed then leader william hague ’ s support of the measure . london mayoral bids . 2000 . in september 1999 , norris contested jeffrey archer for the conservative party nomination for mayor of london . archer was initially selected as the candidate by party members , but was forced to withdraw later that year after it was revealed that he had committed perjury in a libel case . archer was subsequently convicted of the crime and imprisoned . norris was then selected as the conservative party candidate in a ballot of members in december of that year , going on to earn 42 % of the vote against duly-elected london mayor ken livingstone . 2004 . in november 2002 , norris formally announced his intention to run again for the london mayoralty . in february 2003 , he was again selected as the party ’ s candidate in a ballot of london party members . his platform included plans for after-hours london underground services and an approach to crime based on the ‘ broken windows ’ theory that had been successful under new york city mayor rudy giuliani . norris had met giuliani during the campaign , and proposed an agreement with giuliani partners to advise him as mayor , should norris be successful . 2008 . following speculation that he might run again for the mayoralty in 2008 , and the extension of the party 's deadline for nominations in the hope of attracting a heavyweight candidate , norris said in an interview that '' if i run , i 'll win '' , but ultimately chose not to apply . subsequently , boris johnson became the party 's candidate . business career . norris is a board member of a number of companies and a strategic advisor to several others in the fields of transport , infrastructure and property . he is one of property weeks property power 100 and is chairman of soho estates , which controls around 60 acres of london 's soho . he is also chairman of london resort company holdings , developers of the £3.5 billion entertainment resort project in kent . he is independent non-executive chairman of cambridgeshire county council 's arms-length property company , this land , and advises a number of private and quoted developers on major residential and commercial schemes . in the infrastructure sector , he is chair of the council of the national infrastructure planning association and chairman of aim listed driver group plc , world leaders in expert witness and dispute resolution in civil engineering . he advises on major brownfield developments across the whole of the uk . in the field of transportation , he was a member of the board of transport for london under mayor boris johnson . he is deputy chairman of bus manufacturer optare based in sherburn in elmet . he is a member of the board of directors of cubic corporation of san diego , california , defence and transportation technology specialists , developers of the london oyster card and similar systems worldwide . he is also president of its-uk , an association that is part of the worldwide family of intelligent transport technology public and private sector not-for-profit organisations that share ground-breaking innovations in transport technology . in 2003 , norris was appointed chairman of jarvis . jarvis appoints norris chairman rail issue 476 10 december 2003 page 88 . current voluntary roles . norris is a former chairman of the prince michael international road safety awards , currently a vice-president of both the royal national institute for the deaf , branded as action on hearing loss and the institute of advanced motorists a patron of the urology foundation and chairman of the surrey canal sports foundation . he is an eminent fellow of the royal institution of chartered surveyors , fellow of the chartered institute of logistics and transport , fellow of the chartered institute of highways and transportation , a companion of the institution of civil engineers and an honorary fellow of the association for project management . he holds an honorary doctorate of laws from the university of east london . personal life . norris married his first wife , peta veronica ( vicky ) cecil gibson in 1969 and has two sons from that marriage . he married emma courtney in 2000 with whom he has a son harry . references .