Experimental Aircraft Association

museum . located adjacent to eaa 's headquarters in oshkosh , wisconsin , the eaa aviation museum is an extensive collection of aircraft and aviation displays . the museum is home to eaa 's collection of more than 200 aircraft , of which more than 90 are on display inside the museum at any time . the museum 's pioneer airport is a re-creation of a vintage aerodrome , with more than 40 additional airplanes on display . from may through mid-october ( daily memorial day through labor day ) , flights are offered in vintage aircraft . programs and activities . technical counselor program . to help ensure that all amateur-built aircraft are well-constructed , safe aircraft , the eaa organizes a group of volunteers , known as technical counselors , who will visit the construction project to identify any areas of concern . technical counselors are eaa members who volunteer their time and who have met at least one of the following criteria : have built an experimental category aircraft have restored an antique/classic aircraft hold an a & p , ia , dar , der or aerospace engineer rating in the united states , an equivalent international rating or have the qualifications for those ratings . there is no charge for this on-site review . the program is strictly voluntary . the recommendations of the technical counselor are advisory only . the eaa recommends a minimum of three technical counselor visits over the course of construction . flight advisor program . the flight advisor program is designed to increase homebuilt aircraft safety by developing a corps of volunteers who have demonstrated expertise in specific areas of flying and making them available to eaa members who may be preparing to fly an unfamiliar aircraft . a flight advisor helps the pilot conduct a self-evaluation as well as evaluate the flying characteristics of the aircraft . the pilot then uses that evaluation to decide whether he or she is capable of flying that airplane . if not capable , the flight advisor explains where and how he or she can get the proper instruction , or alternatively find someone to make the initial flights . under the eaa flight advisor program , the advisor does not fly or decide whether or not the pilot is capable of flying the airplane to be tested . the advisor provides the pilot with the pros and cons as they relate to this specific combination of pilot and airplane . the pilot makes the final decision on how to proceed with the flight testing program . . eaa airventure oshkosh . each summer eaa presents the largest annual general aviation event in the world , eaa airventure oshkosh , also commonly known as the '' oshkosh airshow '' . during the event , the city 's airport , wittman regional airport , named after steve wittman , is the busiest airport in the world ( in terms of traffic movements ) . the week-long event annually attracts around 10,000-12,000 planes and a total attendance of more than 500,000 . the event also attracts more than 800 exhibitors , hosts nearly 1,000 forums , seminars and workshops , and welcomes more than 700 journalists each year . the annual fly-in was first held in 1953 at what is now timmerman field in milwaukee . in 1959 , the growing event moved to the rockford , illinois airport . attendance at the fly-in continued to grow until the rockford airport ( now chicago rockford international airport ) was too small to accommodate the crowds , and so it was moved to oshkosh in 1970 . a study conducted in 2008 by the university of wisconsin–oshkosh determined that the 500,000 annual fly-in attendance generates 110 million of tourist income for the three counties surrounding the airport . . young eagles . the eaa also sponsors the young eagles program , which was started in 1992 by tom poberezny and others , with the aim of giving one million children an airplane ride by 17 december 2003 , the centennial of flight ( see wright brothers and wright flyer ) . the program reached that goal , and has continued , with more than 2 million young people flown as of july 2016 and more introduced to and educated around the benefits of general aviation . the young eagles program has been overseen by a series of nationally famous chairmen : cliff robertson - founding chairman , film and stage actor ( 1992–1994 ) chuck yeager - usaf general and first man to fly faster than the speed of sound ( 1994–2004 ) harrison ford - film and stage actor ( 2004–2009 ) chesley sullenberger and jeffrey b . skiles - pilots of us airways flight 1549 ( 2009–2013 ) sean d . tucker - aerobatic pilot ( 2013–present ) jimmy graham - nfl tight end ( 2018–present ) . sun ' n fun airshow . the other major yearly airshow attended by eaa members and staff is sun ' n fun , held every april in lakeland , florida . sun ' n fun has been an independent organization from the eaa since its first show in 1975 , although the event has always involved significant eaa participation . the two organizations signed an agreement in january 1989 recognizing their independence . on 30 march 2005 sun ' n fun issued a press release affirming the independence of the two organizations but assuring the aviation public that they would continue to work together . as such sun ' n fun remains a show with participation from eaa chapters and a presence from the national eaa staff , but it is not an eaa event . . organizational structure . the organization is overseen by a chairman , a president , a ceo and a board of directors . paul poberezny assumed the duties of president and ceo at the 1953 founding . in 1989 he assumed the ( newly created ) position of chairman of the board , and his son tom poberezny became president and ceo . in march 2009 paul poberezny resigned , and the board voted to elevate tom poberezny to chairman of the board . at airventure 2010 , it was announced that rod hightower would succeed tom poberezny as president of the organization , effective september 2010 . hightower resigned on 22 october 2012 '' effective immediately '' , directly after a board of directors meeting during which former cessna chairman , president and ceo jack j . pelton was elected chairman . hightower indicated he was resigning to spend more time with his family and would not relocate from st . louis to oshkosh . pelton was named acting ceo and will oversee the hiring process for hightower 's permanent replacement . in response to questions about hightower 's resignation , mac mcclellan , eaa vice president of publications , stated that it was due to hightower failing to relocate himself from his home in st . louis to eaa headquarters in oshkosh , as the board had expected him to . mcclellan said , '' i know there 's all kinds of complaints , but that 's not it . the residency was the unsolvable requirement . the board sees the president/ceo living in the fox valley as essential to the mission . '' local chapters may be formed whenever ten or more eaa members reside in a given area . chapters are encouraged to meet monthly . the first chapter meeting occurred at flabob airport in california , with noted aircraft designer and builder ray stits presiding . eaa.org eaa chapters . aircraft . eaa biplane . see also . aircraft kit industry association aircraft owners and pilots association homebuilt aircraft tannkosh . references . external links . eaa airventure oshkosh eaa aviation museum eaa young eagles program