Coupling (British TV series)

production . conception . moffat had used the breakdown of his first marriage as inspiration for his 1990s sitcom joking apart . andre ptaszynski and steven moffat , joking apart , series 2 , episode 1 dvd audio commentary fool if you think it 's over , featurette , joking apart , series 1 dvd , dir . craig robins retaining this semiautobiographical trend , coupling was based on him meeting his wife , sue vertue , and on the issues that arise in new relationships . moffat met vertue at the edinburgh international television festival in 1996 . vertue had been working for tiger aspect , a production company run by peter bennett-jones . bennett-jones and his friend and former colleague andre ptaszynski , who had worked with moffat on the sitcoms joking apart and chalk , told moffat and vertue that each fancied the other . a relationship blossomed and they left their respective production companies to join hartswood films , run by beryl vertue , sue 's mother . after the chalk dust settled , featurette on chalk series 1 dvd , replaydvd.co.uk , prod . & dir . craig robins after production wrapped on chalk in 1997 , moffat announced to the cast that he was marrying vertue . chalk series 1 dvd audio commentary , replaydvd when she eventually asked him to write a sitcom for hartswood , he decided to base it around the evolution of their own relationship . drunk one evening , he went into her office , wrote the word '' coupling '' on a sheet of paper and told her to ask him about it later . the couple formed the basis for the main characters steve and susan . the four other characters are steve and susan 's best friends and last ex-relationships ( one of each for both steve and susan ) . the fourth episode , '' inferno '' , was written shortly after vertue had found a similar tape in the vcr , although moffat added the 'spanking ' element to the script as he '' did n't think the real tape was quite pervy enough . ' '' the show used the '' group genre '' , a type of programme using ensemble casts that was proving popular , with then-recent successes as friends , this life ( also starring davenport ) , and cold feet . moffat feels the group genre reflects young people 's modern mores more so than traditional sitcoms , saying , '' young people watch because it is the lifestyle which is just ahead of them and older people reminisce . coupling is about two people who get together and bring with them baggage from their past , friends , and ex-partners - people who would never meet under normal circumstances . it deals in the kind of trivia people talk about , important questions like when should a man take off his socks during foreplay ? '' moffat believes group shows would not have been popular with earlier generations of television audiences , stating : . writing . according to vertue , steven moffat wrote on the top floor of their family home . once he finished a script , she read it two floors away so he could not hear her laughing . the producer says that his first drafts were '' pretty much ready to shoot '' . '' coupling : from script to screen '' , credit : andrew kerr , bbc worldwide americas . series 4 dvd she did not give him many notes ; she would tick all of the places where she laughed , and then he revised the script accordingly . the humour of the show , according to moffat , is in the context . he says that there are '' no jokes per se '' and if they did put jokes in , they were normally taken out because they did not work . he found writing the show difficult at first because he was writing his own voice six times over , with none of the characteristics and inflections of the performers to inspire him . moffat used a range of styles and techniques , such as split screen and nonlinear ( arts ) s , that are unconventional in sitcoms . the first series episode '' the girl with two breasts '' , in which half of the episode is in hebrew , proved so popular that the producers tried to do something similar every series . moffat says that the simplicity of the setting encouraged an '' epic , ridiculous way of telling an ordinary story . '' the opening episode of series three , '' split '' , uses split screen to simultaneously depict what happens with steve and susan after separating . the series four opener , '' nine and a half minutes '' , depicts the same events in the bar from three different perspectives . . rehearsals . british sitcoms usually can not afford to occupy a studio facility for the entire run , meaning that they are unable to rehearse in the studio . rehearsals for coupling took place in a church hall off kensington high street . vertue , sue ; moffat , steven , coupling , '' naked '' , series 2 , episode 8 dvd audio commentary the actors received their scripts on friday mornings . following a read-through , moffat was generally forced to cut minutes worth of material to achieve the requisite length . director martin dennis designed and compiled the camera script on saturday afternoons . after a day off on sundays , the sets were erected for a producer 's run on mondays , and then a technical run on tuesdays . much of wednesdays was spent camera blocking , a process which regularly overran at the expense of a dress rehearsal . as the actors became familiar with the material , they would sometimes develop a joke . however , according to moffat , such elaboration could overcomplicate a joke for an audience coming to the material for the first time . moffat , steven ; bellman , gina , coupling , '' dressed '' , series 2 , episode 7 dvd audio commentary martin dennis , according to moffat , regularly told the actors , '' you know that funny thing you 're doing ? do n't do that '' . the director encouraged them to deliver their lines as well as they had in the original read-through . . recording . all of the location sequences for each series were filmed in london during the first week of each production block . as moffat was generally late delivering the final few scripts of each series , those episodes contained no location material . the exterior shots of the bar were filmed in clerkenwell in the first series . after a nearby thai restaurant complained that filming was disrupting their business , a street just off tottenham court road was used from series two . the house in which moffat and vertue lived at the time was used as the exterior for steve 's flat , with the surrounding area used for other sequences . material that was technically difficult was filmed the day before the recording with the live studio audience . a common example of this would be a dinner-table sequence , where some characters would be filmed against the fourth wall , rather than the often-used contrived method of cramming everyone together around the proscenium . readjusting the set and refilming against the fourth wall would have been too time-consuming . however , the absence of the studio audiences made it more difficult for the actors to judge the timing of the laughs . for instance , moffat says that this prevented gina bellman from '' milking '' a particular laugh in the episode '' dressed '' , an episode in which most of her scenes were prerecorded because she was wearing minimal clothing on set to provide the illusion of complete nudity . the prerecorded sequences were tightened in the editing process once the scenes had been played to the studio audience . episodes were mostly filmed in front of a live studio audience at teddington studios in london borough of richmond upon thames on wednesday evenings . sue vertue says that the live audience reinvigorated the company because no one had laughed at the material for a few days , as everyone knew it so well . a warm-up comedian updated the studio audiences about any important plot detail , introduced them to the performers , and provided entertainment while cameras and sets were being repositioned . rob rouse fulfilled this role for the fourth series . despite some critics ' comments , all of the laughter in coupling was from a genuine live studio audience . although artificial , canned laughter was not used , the laughter sometimes had to be tweaked during the editing process . for instance , the studio audience might laugh for longer than might be expected of the home audience . also , the audience 's laughter decreased if a scene was shot multiple times ; in these cases the laughter from an earlier take would be used . moffat felt uncomfortable and powerless during the studio recording . sitting in the gallery , he wrote the word 'help ' repeatedly on the back of his scripts . in an interview for the dvd release , he says he was aware that their most successful show received the least amount of laughter from the studio audience . conversely , studio audiences reacted emphatically to his previous studio sitcom , chalk , yet it received a poor critical reception upon transmission . martin dennis would start editing from the following monday afternoon . the episodes were then color grading and dubbed with sound effects and music . mari wilson performed the song '' perhaps , perhaps , perhaps '' , written by osvaldo farrés and joe davis , to accompany the opening and closing credits . simon brint composed and arranged the incidental music . the title sequence , as mark lawson described , consists of '' brightly coloured and suggestive shapes swirl around the screen : circles , curves , and angles tumble like limbs locked together in sex . as the names of the actors discreetly sweep across in black lettering , the bright shapes form the title : coupling . '' lawson calls the design '' elegant simplicity , showing how a clever choice of theme tune can evoke an atmosphere and set a pace to which images can be cut . '' the colour scheme was changed for the fourth series , although the basic design remained . characters . main characters . coupling is almost entirely based around the antics of the six main characters . the show was inspired by moffat 's relationship with producer sue vertue , to the extent that they gave their names to two of the characters . coupling features no other recurring characters that last beyond a few episodes . in the series , '' the women are mainly confident and sexually quite voracious , whilst the blokes are completely useless , riddled with self-doubt and awkwardness . '' steve taylor ( jack davenport ) is in the process of breaking off his relationship with jane as the series begins . the remainder of the series shows the development of a relationship with susan , from dating , proposal of marriage , and as the last series concludes , becoming father to her baby . no reference is made to steve 's job during the series , but in a dvd commentary , moffat mentions that steve is , like him , a writer . moffat had used the surname '' taylor '' for robert bathurst 's character in his earlier sitcom joking apart . according to the bbc 's website , steve '' tries to be the voice of reason while talking to his mates over a pint , but more often than not he stumbles into more complex and ridiculous situations than any of them . '' writer moffat says that steve can be just as erratic as jeff can be , and certainly in the first part of the series , he remonstrates with jeff for his madness . at the same time he tells patrick off for being ruthless with women , and yet the evidence shows that steve himself is a bit of a bastard . for example he asks susan out on a date while he 's having sex with jane . he is quite typical of having all the same lusts and appetites as patrick while also having the nervousness of jeff and the new character oliver . he forms a compromise of a politically correct weasel , which helps him to believe that he 's a decent chap . actually he 's really too frightened of susan to misbehave ! susan walker ( sarah alexander ) – best friend to sally , girlfriend/fiancée to steve and ex-girlfriend of patrick , susan is one of jeff 's co-workers . susan is usually very sensible and organised , a fact often resented by her friends sally and jane . susan can be very insecure and often takes this out on steve . when angry , she generally says '' apparently '' , a habit first noted in the first-series episode '' inferno '' and shown to be inherited from her mother in '' my dinner in hell '' . in the series-one episode '' size matters '' , susan is implied to view angus deayton in the same way that steve views mariella frostrup , even keeping two pictures of him hidden in her bedroom . steve and susan 's various arguments and differences of opinion make up a majority of the comic exchanges between them . susan is a successful career woman , speaks french fluently , and takes her work life very seriously . whilst susan 's job is never directly referred to , she works alongside jeff , an accountant , and she reveals she has a degree in economics . in series four , she has a baby boy with steve . jeff murdock ( richard coyle ) – best friend to steve , he is a co-worker to susan , whom he has dated once . jeff 's constant sexual frustration , ridiculous stories , and fantasies about women and sex make up a major part of the comedy . scholar jeffrey griffin observes , '' jeff is known for his bizarre theories , one or two of which he outlines in every episode . serving as the defining element of an episode , with the plot unfolding in some way that tests one of jeff ’ s theories . '' jeff is terrible at talking to women , often stumbling and unintentionally making up lie upon lie in an attempt to avoid looking stupid . these always backfire on him . from titbits he occasionally lets slip , his problems apparently can largely be traced back to his eccentric and domineering mother ( who appears in series two 's '' naked '' , played by anwen williams ) . jeff works as an accountant in an office with susan , and through him , steve and susan initially meet . coyle quit his role as jeff before the fourth series . however , his character returns in a dream sequence in steve 's imagination in the final episode , '' nine and a half months '' ; portrayed by samantha spiro , '' jeffina '' has undergone sex-reassignment surgery whilst living on the island of lesbos , in a failed attempt to see another woman naked again . jeff is also featured in the written epilogue published by moffat online for the show . sally harper ( kate isitt ) – best friend to susan ( and girlfriend to patrick by series four ) , sally is obsessed with her own appearance and constantly worries about the effects of aging and life in general on her looks . her worst fear seems to be of dying alone , but she seems totally inept at relationships due to her frequent paranoia , which tends to make her out as a very mean-spirited woman . sally runs her own beauty parlour and is a successful businesswoman , but of the entire group , she is the most insecure and resentful . a labour supporter , she finds reconciling this with her attraction to patrick , a conservative , to be difficult . patrick maitland ( ben miles ) – ex-boyfriend to susan ( and sally 's boyfriend by series four ) , patrick has a one-track mind : sex . this gives him a very narrow view of women , but he is great at courting them . frequent references are made to his rather large penis ; susan nicknames him '' donkey '' and '' tripod '' , sparking much of sally 's initial interest in him despite her objections to his political beliefs ( patrick is a conservative , which conflicts with sally 's leftish attitudes ) . these attitudes are overtly explored in '' size matters '' , series 1 , episode 2 patrick has a habit of saying things without thinking that give the impression that he is rather dense . two explanations for this given in the series are his own claim that he 'does n't have a subconscious ' and thus 'nothing is going on ' in his head and sally 's remark that there 's not enough blood in his body for 'both ends ' ( making reference to his abnormally large penis ) . he is very good at getting women to bed , and can not comprehend meeting a woman and not having sex with her . in the fourth series , he is revealed to generally leave in the middle of the night . in one episode , unknown to him , a woman from his past made a vibrator from a plaster cast of patrick 's erect penis and marketed as the junior patrick ; the box clearly has a 10-inch measurement on the side when seen later in the episode . patrick 's love of the ladies often backfires , and the series frequently features story lines about his possessive lovers and ex-lovers . patrick is a successful businessman and is very competitive with others in the same business , but he does have a vague sense of loyalty to his friends . he collects videos of nights with his girlfriends in his rather large '' cupboard of love . '' patrick proposes to sally in the last episode when she finds the engagement ring in the cupboard , but her answer is left unknown . jane christie ( gina bellman ) – ex-long-time partner of steve , jane is a histrionic who is very possessive , and despite breaking up with steve in the first episode , she never truly seems to let go . jane has a problem talking to men , often coming on much too strong and appearing desperate or rude to others in her pursuit of a man . her character also seems not to be too bright , perhaps even disturbed , and is known to be incredibly self-obsessed , as shown in a second-series episode when a 'subtext detector ' shows that the only thing she ever really means when talking is the word '' me '' . in the fourth series , everyone starts referring to her as being '' mad '' . jane claims to be bisexual , although she is never seen dating a woman . susan time and again expresses scepticism , so this claim may be a ploy to entice men . however , susan ( for her own reasons ) french kisses jane in the fourth series and jane seems to be overwhelmed , but enjoys it . however , her claim is also successfully challenged by oliver morris in the fourth series , where he points out that she is indeed not bisexual . jane works in a local radio station as a traffic reporter , and is popular mainly due to her flirtatious nature and sexually explicit reports . she was once briefly fired for telling all the drivers to close their eyes to centre themselves and changing the names of streets for her own amusement , among other things , but was rehired due to her popularity . oliver morris ( richard mylan ) is introduced in the fourth series and eventually becomes involved with jane . he runs a local science-fiction media store called '' hellmouths '' and has been out of a relationship for several months . oliver often has a very cynical outlook , but is prone to accidents , often making a fool of himself in the process . he is sometimes shown gearing himself up to meet women and have sex by thinking to himself , which the audience can hear . the geekiness of his job is also used for comic effect . oliver also seems to have inherited jeff 's inability to talk to women , however , unlike jeff he believes himself to be a ladies ' man , or in his thoughts ' words '' a woman-killer , i mean lady-killer . '' . oliver has a tendency to use the word 'craziness ' frequently in conversations , usually as an attempt to alleviate tension when he starts blabbering . richard mylan has said in interview that people took a long time to accept his character due to jeff 's popularity . . other characters . julia davis ( lou gish ) appears in five episodes spanning over series two and three . she first appears in '' naked '' , as the new head of department in the office where jeff and susan work . julia and jeff soon fall for each other due to their shared inability to hold a reasonable conversation with a member of the opposite sex . despite overcoming the inevitable troubles with each other , their relationship ends when julia 's ex , joe , a soldier , returns believing julia to still be his girlfriend . after finding julia chained to the bed in her room , dressed in bondage gear , joe attacks jeff . in the final episode of series three , jeff explains that julia and joe have left together to discover their feelings for each other , in bolton . tamsin ( olivia caffrey ) is oliver 's irish ex-girlfriend , who left him for unknown reasons around six months prior to the beginning of the fourth series , and has since become pregnant by another man , with whom she has now split . she befriends susan at an antenatal class and is also revealed to be one of patrick 's many ex-girlfriends . tamsin and oliver seem to have a sour relationship , as is shown over the three episodes in which she features . she refers to him as a cross between brother and sister . james ( lloyd owen ) appears in three episodes of series three . he hosts the religious programme at the radio station where jane works , and jane pretends to have an interest in religion to become his girlfriend . jane is devastated to find he does not believe in sex before marriage , and even more so to find that he had a fervent sex life before finding god , which included a night with susan . he leaves on a trip to germany at the end of ' '' the freckle , the key and the couple who were n't '' and returns in '' perhaps , perhaps , perhaps '' , just as jane is expressing her amazement that the many sexual encounters she has had while he was away have not made her pregnant ( '' i have shagged and shagged and shagged and all the little bastards missed ! '' ) . jill ( elizabeth marmur ) appears in an episode of series one and once again in series four . in the first series , jill is jane 's therapist whom jane constantly manages to manipulate . she is dragged to a dinner party with jane in an episode called '' inferno '' , where everyone assumes she is a lesbian . she witnesses one of steve 's monologues about loving naked bottoms when the subject of one of his videos , the legendary lesbian spank inferno , comes up . jill reappears in the fourth series as a pregnancy specialist . wilma lettings ( emilia fox ) wilma lettings appears in two consecutive episodes of series three ( '' faithless '' and '' unconditional sex '' ) as a woman working in the same office as jeff . in the first episode , jeff agrees to go out for a drink with her , but is unsure whether or not it is a date , as they are both in relationships , but her boyfriend is away in australia and he can not tell her who his girlfriend is , as julia does not want anyone in the office to know that they are dating . to further complicate matters , wilma was present at an incident in which jeff got his head trapped in a photocopier , and jeff does not know if she found it funny or horrifying . the second episode starts with jeff in the bar with wilma , using headphones to allow the others to instruct him on the subtext of the conversation and how to respond . however , this is unnecessary , as wilma quickly asked jeff if he fancies her , to which he is forced to say yes , as julia has taken the phone from steve and asks him if he loves her at the same moment . things quickly spiral out of control as jeff tells wilma that his girlfriend had recently died , on jane 's suggestion , to get out of 'the fork ' . the episode ends with wilma running out of jeff 's flat after seeing julia 's feet sticking out from under his duvet , when sleeping at his flat . episodes . four series of coupling were produced for the bbc . the first series of six episodes was broadcast on friday evenings from 12 may to 16 june 2000 . nine episodes were commissioned for the second series , which was broadcast on monday evenings in autumn 2001 . the third series , consisting of seven episodes , were broadcast a year later . the fourth series was first broadcast on bbc three in may and june 2004 , although the six episodes were repeated on bbc two a few months later . the bbc approached moffat about writing a fifth series , but other commitments made gathering the cast impossible . moffat began writing for doctor who when the show was revived in 2005 , becoming the show 's executive producer and lead writer for doctor whos fifth series in 2010 . however , to finalise coupling , moffat posted some short storyline '' conclusions '' about the eventual fate of the characters on the website outpost gallifrey . . the text of the '' conclusions '' post is reproduced on this blog post ( archived on 10 october 2008 ) . . reception . critical reception was generally positive . the guardians mark lawson applauded moffat 's writing , specifically assessing the episode '' the girl with two breasts '' as '' comic writing of astonishing originality and invention . '' the daily record called the show '' frank and funny . '' writing in the independent , mark thompson , then director of television at the bbc , mentioned moffat 's earlier sitcoms joking apart and chalk to suggest '' ambition in television is also about sharing the long road to originality and creative achievement . '' the guardian also comments , '' moffat . has long seemed to me one of the most original tv writers and it 's good that ratings-crazed television has persevered with him . his particular talent is for intricately plotted sexual farce . '' the times commented , '' steven moffat is turning out to be one of the boldest , most inventive , sitcom writers around . '' scholar james monaco comments that coupling is '' witty and elegantly structured . taking the seinfeld/friends model to new heights with intricately wrought plots built on the interactions of six young friends . replete with rich dialogue and bright timing it renewed the british comedy franchise . '' various journalists compared the show to the american sitcoms friends and seinfeld . melbourne 's the age commented that the show was '' as a 'highly original ' and 'unrestricted ' cross of friends and seinfeld '' , while the guardians mark lawson similarly said , '' british commissioners have long dreamed that some local comedy lab would clone friends or seinfield . moffat 's managed to cross them while creating a series which feels highly original . '' further comparisons were made to friends when nbc commissioned an american version of the show in 2003 , although some newspapers still pointed out that coupling '' owes much to seinfeld , with laugh-out-loud riffs on 'unflushable ' exes , escalating 'giggle loops ' during solemn moments of silence and 'porn buddies , ' who in the event of your sudden demise will remove all of the naughty pictures and videos from your flat before your parents arrive . '' new york 's daily news , which quotes moffat '' boozier , smokier , more shag-infested series '' than friends , also thought that '' some characters . have ties closer to seinfeld . jane , who , despite her beauty , is so abrasive she 's like a female newman . and richard coyle 's jeff is very much like kramer : he 's uncomfortable in a topless club , he explains , because he equates the women to 'porn that can see you ' . '' coupling was nominated for several awards , winning some of the accolades . it was awarded the silver rose for best uk sitcom at the rose d'or light entertainment festival in 2001 . it was nominated as '' best tv comedy '' in the 2001 british comedy awards , a category it won in 2003 . in 2004 , lighting cameraman martin kempton was nominated for a royal television society craft award for best lighting , photography and camera ( lighting for multicamera ) for his work on the fourth series . all four series were released in the uk , us , israel , canada , hungary , australia , new zealand , germany , sweden , portugal , benelux , kenya , turkey , and latin america . in india , selected episodes were telecast on comedy central and bbc , and dvds are available for sale online . remakes . in 2001 , the american network nbc commissioned an adaptation of the show , which was reported as a possible replacement for friends , which was coming to the end of its run . moffat and sue and beryl vertue served as executive producers alongside phoef sutton and ben silverman . unlike most adaptations , the nbc version would reuse moffat 's original scripts , although these were adapted by sutton , and were shortened to comply with the shorter running time ( nbc has multiple advertisement breaks compared to the original broadcaster , bbc two , which has none ) . other writers , such as danny zuker and paul corrigan , worked on episodes later in the series . the adaptation was attacked in the press before the first episode aired , because it was more sexually explicit than typical american television . the us version starred colin ferguson , jay harrington , christopher moynihan , lindsay price , rena sofer , and sonya walger ; gina bellman , who plays jane in the british series , made a cameo appearance in the first episode . the time slot was thursday night at 9:30 pm following will & grace , and the show premiered on 25 september 2003 . following a poor audience and critical reception , the series was pulled from the schedules after airing just four episodes . by that point , 10 of 13 episodes commissioned by the network had been filmed ; the remaining six remain unaired . moffat blamed the show 's failure on nbc 's intervention during the creative and production processes . a greek adaptation was broadcast on ant1 in 2007 and 2008 . . references . further reading . . external links . coupling at phill.co.uk comedy guide