Magellanic Clouds

history . the magellanic clouds have been known since ancient times by indigenous people from south america and africa , and from the first millennium in western asia . the first preserved mention of the large magellanic clouds is believed to be in petroglyphs and rock drawings found in chile . they may be the objects mentioned by the polymath ibn qutaybah ( d . 889 ce ) , in his book on al-anwā̵ ’ ( stations of the moon in pre-islamic arabian culture ) : '' وأسفل من سهيل قدما سهيل . وفى مجرى قدمى سهيل، من خلفهما كواكب زهر كبار، لا ترى بالعراق، يسميها أهل تهامة الأعبار and below canopus , there are the feet of canopus , and on their extension , behind them bright big stars , not seen in iraq , the people of tihama call them al-a ‘ bār . '' later al sufi , a professional astronomer , in 964 ce , in his book of fixed stars , mentioned the same quote , but with a different spelling . under argo navis , he quoted that '' unnamed others have claimed that beneath canopus there are two stars known as the 'feet of canopus ' , and beneath those there are bright white stars that are unseen in iraq nor najd , and that the inhabitants of tihama call them al-baqar cows , and ptolemy did not mention any of this so we al-sufi do not know if this is true or false . '' both ibn qutaybah and al-sufi were probably quoting from the former 's contemporary ( and compatriot ) and famed scientist abu hanifa dinawari 's mostly lost work on anwaa . abu hanifa was probably quoting earlier sources , which may be just travelers stories , and hence al-sufi 's comments about their veracity . in sri lanka , from ancient times , these clouds have been referred to as the maha mera paruwathaya meaning '' the great mountain '' , as they look like the peaks of a distant mountain range . in europe , the clouds were first reported by 16th century italian authors peter martyr d'anghiera and andrea corsali , both based on portuguese voyages . for peter martyr d'anghiera 's mention of the magellanic clouds , see : petrus martyr de anghiera ( 1574 ) de rebus oceanicis et orbe novo concerning the ocean and the new world ( cologne , ( germany ) : geruinum calenium ( gerwin calenius ) , 1574 ) , decade 3 , book 1 , p . 217 . ( in latin ) from p . 217 : '' assecuti sunt portugallenses alterius poli gradum quintum & quinquagesimum amplius , ubi punctum , circumeuntes quasdam nubeculas licet intueri , veluti in lactea via sparsos fulgores per universum coeli globum intra eius spatii latitudinem . '' ( the portuguese reached beyond the 55th degree of the other pole , where one may observe certain nebulae revolving around the point i.e . , the southern celestial pole , scattered in the milky way like luminous patches throughout the whole sphere of the sky , within the breadth of its extent . that is , nebulae appear in or beside the milky way throughout its entire length in the southern sky . ) humboldt , alexander von , with e.c . otte and b.h . paul , trans . , cosmos : a sketch of a physical description of the universe ( london , england : henry g . bohn , 1852 ) , vol . 4 , pp . 340–341 . for further details of – and other editions of – peter martyr d'anghiera 's book de orbe novo , see wikipedia 's article : decades of the new world from 1515 to 1517 , andrea corsali sailed to the east indies and china in a portuguese ship . in 1516 , andrea corsali sent a letter to giuliano de ' medici , duke of nemours , mentioning the magellanic clouds . this letter was translated into english by richard eden ( c.1520–1576 ) and published in 1555 . the relevant part of corsali 's letter ( translated by eden ) appears in : richard eden , with edward arber , ed . , the first three english books on america … ( birmingham , england : 1885 ) , '' of the pole antarike and the starres abowt the same … '' , p . 279 . corsali said that his ship had passed the cape of good hope ( '' the cape of bona speranza '' ) and was at 37 degrees south latitude when he observed the magellanic clouds : '' here we sawe a marueylous order of starres , so that in the parte of heauen contrary to owre northe pole , to know in what place and degree the south pole was , we tooke the day with the soonne , and obserued the nyght with the astrolabie , and sawe manifestly twoo clowdes of reasonable bygnesse mouynge abowt the place of the pole continually now rysynge and nowe faulynge , so keepynge theyr continuall course in circular mouying , with a starre euer in the myddest which is turned abowt with them abowte xi degrees from the pole . '' ( '' here we saw a marvelous arrangement of stars , so that in the part of heaven that is opposite our north celestial pole , in order to know in what place and degree of latitude the south celestial pole was , we measured our position during the day using the sun , and observed our position during the night using an astrolabe , and saw clearly two clouds of reasonable bigness revolving around the location of the southern celestial pole , continually now rising and now falling , thus maintaining their continual course of circular motion , with a star always in the middle between them , which revolves with them about 11 degrees from the south celestial pole . '' ) see also : kanas , nick , star maps : history , artistry , and cartography , 2nd ed . ( new york , new york : springer science + business media , 2012 ) , § 4.3.2.2 andreas corsali , p . 118 . subsequently , they were reported by antonio pigafetta , who accompanied the expedition of ferdinand magellan on its circumnavigation of the world in 1519–1522 . pigafetta et al . , with lord stanley of alderley , trans . , the first voyage round the world , by magellan ( london , england : hakluyt society , 1874 ) , p . 66 . from p . 66 : '' the antarctic pole is not so covered with stars as the arctic , for there are to be seen there many small stars congregated together , which are like to two clouds a little separated from one another , and a little dimmed , . '' however , naming the clouds after magellan did not become widespread until much later . in bayer 's uranometria they are designated as nubecula major and nubecula minor . bayer , j . , ( 1661 ) uranometria , pl . aaa ( 49 ) u.s . naval observatory ; retrieved on 2009-09-05 in the 1756 star map of the french astronomer lacaille , they are designated as le grand nuage and le petit nuage ( '' the large cloud '' and '' the small cloud '' ) . de lacaille , n . l . , ( 1756 ) planisphere contenant les constellations celestes , memoires academie royale des sciences pour 1752 . linda hall library ; retrieved on 2009-09-05 herschel in 1847 from cape observatory south africa spent 4 years writing a 400-page report detailing over a thousand of the many stars , nebulae and clusters which constitute the cloud which appeared to be a separate more distant group to the usual stars in the milky way , an early indication of separate galaxy . characteristics . image : large.mc.arp.750pix.jpg thumb the large magellanic cloud ( lmc ) . image : vista ’ s view of the small magellanic cloud.jpg thumb small magellanic cloud ( smc ) . the large magellanic cloud and its neighbour and relative , the small magellanic cloud , are conspicuous objects in the southern hemisphere , looking like separated pieces of the milky way to the naked eye . roughly 21° apart in the night sky , the true distance between them is roughly 75,000 light-years . until the discovery of the sagittarius dwarf elliptical galaxy in 1994 , they were the closest known galaxies to our own ( since 2003 , the canis major dwarf galaxy was discovered to be closer still , and is now considered the actual nearest neighbor ) . the lmc lies about 160,000 light years away , freedman , wendy l . ; madore , barry f . '' the hubble constant '' , annual review of astronomy and astrophysics , 2010 majaess , daniel j . ; turner , david g . ; lane , david j . ; henden , arne ; krajci , tom '' anchoring the universal distance scale via a wesenheit template '' , journal of the american association of variable star observers , 2010 while the smc is around 200,000 . the lmc is about twice the diameter of the smc ( 14,000 & nbsp ; ly and 7,000 & nbsp ; ly respectively ) . for comparison , the milky way is about 100,000 & nbsp ; ly across . the total mass of these two galaxies is uncertain . only a fraction of their gas seems to have coalesced into stars and they probably both have large dark matter halos . one recent estimate of the total mass of the lmc is about 1/10 that of the milky way . that would make the lmc rather a large galaxy in the current observable universe . since the sizes of relatively nearby galaxies are highly skewed , the average mass can be a misleading statistic . in terms of rank , the lmc appears to be the fourth most massive member of over 50 galaxies in the local group . suggesting that the magellanic cloud system is historically not a part of the milky way is evidence that the smc has been in orbit about the lmc for a very long time . the magellanic system seems most similar to the distinct ngc 3109 system , which is on the edge of the local group . astronomers have long assumed that the magellanic clouds have orbited the milky way at approximately their current distances , but evidence suggests that it is rare for them to come as close to the milky way as they are now . observation and theoretical evidence suggest that the magellanic clouds have both been greatly distorted by tidal interaction with the milky way as they travel close to it . the lmc maintains a very clear spiral structure in radio-telescope images of neutral hydrogen . streams of neutral hydrogen connect them to the milky way and to each other , and both resemble disrupted barred spiral galaxy . their gravity has affected the milky way as well , distorting the outer parts of the galactic disk . aside from their different structure and lower mass , they differ from our galaxy in two major ways . they are gas-rich ; a higher fraction of their mass is hydrogen and helium compared to the milky way . home.insightbb.com retrieved on 2007-05-31 they are also more metal-poor than the milky way ; the youngest stars in the lmc and smc have a metallicity of 0.5 and 0.25 times solar , respectively . aa.springer.de retrieved on 2007-05-31 both are noted for their nebulae and young stellar populations , but as in our own galaxy their stars range from the very young to the very old , indicating a long star formation history . chaisson and mcmillan the large magellanic cloud was the host galaxy to a supernova ( sn 1987a ) , the brightest observed in over four centuries . measurements with the hubble space telescope , announced in 2006 , suggest the magellanic clouds may be moving too fast to be long term companions of the milky way . if they are in orbit , that orbit takes at least 4 billion years . they are possibly on a first approach and we are witnessing the start of a galactic merger that may overlap with the milky way 's expected merger with the andromeda galaxy ( and perhaps the triangulum galaxy ) in the future . in 2019 , astronomers discovered the young star cluster price-whelan 1 using gaia data . the star cluster has a low metallicity and belongs to the leading arm of the magellanic clouds . the existence of this star cluster suggests that the leading arm of the magellanic clouds is 90,000 light-years away from the milky way—closer than previously thought . . mini magellanic cloud ( mmc ) . astrophysicists d . s . mathewson , v . l . ford and n . visvanathan proposed that the smc may in fact be split in two , with a smaller section of this galaxy behind the main part of the smc ( as seen from earth 's perspective ) , and separated by about 30,000 light years . they suggest the reason for this is due to a past interaction with the lmc splitting the smc , and that the two sections are still moving apart . they have dubbed this smaller remnant the mini magellanic cloud . the astronomical journal 122:220–231 july 2001 . see also . astronomical surveys of the magellanic clouds irregular galaxy magellanic stream magellanic bridge galaxies in fiction