Post-translational modification

ptms involving addition of functional groups . addition by an enzyme in vivo . . hydrophobic groups for membrane localization . myristoylation ( a type of acylation ) , attachment of myristate , a c 14 saturated acid palmitoylation ( a type of acylation ) , attachment of palmitate , a c 16 saturated acid isoprenylation or prenylation , the addition of an isoprenoid group ( e.g . farnesol and geranylgeraniol ) farnesylation geranylgeranylation glypiation , gpi anchor formation via an amide bond to c-terminal tail . cofactors for enhanced enzymatic activity . lipoylation ( a type of acylation ) , attachment of a lipoate ( c 8 ) functional group flavin moiety ( fmn or fad ) may be covalently attached heme c attachment via thioether bonds with cysteines phosphopantetheinylation , the addition of a 4'-phosphopantetheinyl moiety from coenzyme a , as in fatty acid , polyketide , non-ribosomal peptide and leucine biosynthesis retinylidene schiff base formation . modifications of translation factors . diphthamide formation ( on a histidine found in eef2 ) ethanolamine phosphoglycerol attachment ( on glutamate found in eef1 & alpha ; ) hypusine formation ( on conserved lysine of eif5a ( eukaryotic ) and aif5a ( archaeal ) ) beta-lysine addition on a conserved lysine of the elongation factor p ( efp ) in most bacteria . efp is a homolog to eif5a ( eukaryotic ) and aif5a ( archaeal ) ( see above ) . smaller chemical groups . acylation , e.g . o-acylation ( esters ) , n-acylation ( amides ) , s-acylation ( thioesters ) acetylation , the addition of an acetyl group , either at the n-terminus of the protein or at lysine residues . see also histone acetylation . the reverse is called deacetylation . formylation alkylation , the addition of an alkyl group , e.g . methyl , ethyl methylation the addition of a methyl group , usually at lysine or arginine residues . the reverse is called demethylation . amidation at c-terminus . formed by oxidative dissociation of a c-terminal gly residue . amide bond formation amino acid addition arginylation , a trna-mediation addition polyglutamylation , covalent linkage of glutamic acid residues to the n-terminus of tubulin and some other proteins . ( see tubulin polyglutamylase ) polyglycylation , covalent linkage of one to more than 40 glycine residues to the tubulin c-terminal tail butyrylation gamma-carboxylation dependent on vitamin k glycosylation , the addition of a glycosyl group to either arginine , asparagine , cysteine , hydroxylysine , serine , threonine , tyrosine , or tryptophan resulting in a glycoprotein . distinct from glycation , which is regarded as a nonenzymatic attachment of sugars . o-glcnac , addition of n-acetylglucosamine to serine or threonine residues in a β-glycosidic linkage polysialylation , addition of polysialic acid , psa , to ncam malonylation hydroxylation : addition of an oxygen atom to the side-chain of a pro or lys residue iodination : addition of an iodine atom to the aromatic ring of a tyrosine residue ( e.g . in thyroglobulin ) adp-ribosylation such as adp-ribosylation phosphate ester ( o-linked ) or phosphoramidate ( n-linked ) formation phosphorylation , the addition of a phosphate group , usually to serine , threonine , and tyrosine ( o-linked ) , or histidine ( n-linked ) adenylylation , the addition of an adenylyl moiety , usually to tyrosine ( o-linked ) , or histidine and lysine ( n-linked ) uridylylation , the addition of an uridylyl-group ( i.e . uridine monophosphate , ump ) , usually to tyrosine propionylation pyroglutamate formation s-glutathionylation s-nitrosylation s-sulfenylation ( aka s-sulphenylation ) , reversible covalent addition of one oxygen atom to the thiol group of a cysteine residue s-sulfinylation , normally irreversible covalent addition of two oxygen atoms to the thiol group of a cysteine residue s-sulfonylation , normally irreversible covalent addition of three oxygen atoms to the thiol group of a cysteine residue , resulting in the formation of a cysteic acid residue succinylation addition of a succinyl group to lysine sulfation , the addition of a sulfate group to a tyrosine . non-enzymatic additions in vivo . glycation , the addition of a sugar molecule to a protein without the controlling action of an enzyme . carbamylation the addition of isocyanic acid to a protein 's n-terminus or the side-chain of lys . carbonylation the addition of carbon monoxide to other organic/inorganic compounds . spontaneous isopeptide bond formation , as found in many surface proteins of gram-positive bacteria . . non-enzymatic additions in vitro . biotinylation : covalent attachment of a biotin moiety using a biotinylation reagent , typically for the purpose of labeling a protein . carbamylation : the addition of isocyanic acid to a protein 's n-terminus or the side-chain of lys or cys residues , typically resulting from exposure to urea solutions . oxidation : addition of one or more oxygen atoms to a susceptible side-chain , principally of met , trp , his or cys residues . formation of disulfide bonds between cys residues . pegylation : covalent attachment of polyethylene glycol ( peg ) using a pegylation reagent , typically to the n-terminus or the side-chains of lys residues . pegylation is used to improve the efficacy of protein pharmaceuticals . other proteins or peptides . isgylation , the covalent linkage to the isg15 protein ( interferon-stimulated gene 15 ) sumoylation , the covalent linkage to the sumo protein ( small ubiquitin-related modifier ) van g . wilson ( ed . ) ( 2004 ) . sumoylation : molecular biology and biochemistry . horizon bioscience . ubiquitination , the covalent linkage to the protein ubiquitin . neddylation , the covalent linkage to nedd pupylation , the covalent linkage to the prokaryotic ubiquitin-like protein . chemical modification of amino acids . citrullination , or deimination , the conversion of arginine to citrulline deamidation , the conversion of glutamine to glutamic acid or asparagine to aspartic acid eliminylation , the conversion to an alkene by beta-elimination of phosphothreonine and phosphoserine , or dehydration of threonine and serine . structural changes . disulfide bridges , the covalent linkage of two cysteine amino acids proteolytic cleavage , cleavage of a protein at a peptide bond isoaspartate formation , via the cyclisation of asparagine or aspartic acid amino-acid residues racemization of serine by protein-serine epimerase of alanine in dermorphin , a frog opioid peptide of methionine in deltorphin , also a frog opioid peptide protein splicing , self-catalytic removal of inteins analogous to mrna processing . statistics . common ptms by frequency . in 2011 , statistics of each post-translational modification experimentally and putatively detected have been compiled using proteome-wide information from the swiss-prot database . the 10 most common experimentally found modifications were as follows : . databases and tools . protein sequences contain sequence motifs that are recognized by modifying enzymes , and which can be documented or predicted in ptm databases . with the large number of different modifications being discovered , there is a need to document this sort of information in databases . ptm information can be collected through experimental means or predicted from high-quality , manually curated data . numerous databases have been created , often with a focus on certain taxonomic groups ( e.g . human proteins ) or other features . list of resources . phosphositeplus – a database of comprehensive information and tools for the study of mammalian protein post-translational modification proteomescout – a database of proteins and post-translational modifications experimentally human protein reference database – a database for different modifications and understand different proteins , their class , and function/process related to disease causing proteins prosite – a database of consensus patterns for many types of ptm ’ s including sites protein information resource ( pir ) – a database to acquire a collection of annotations and structures for ptms . dbptm – a database that shows different ptm 's and information regarding their chemical components/structures and a frequency for amino acid modified site uniprot has ptm information although that may be less comprehensive than in more specialized databases . tools . list of software for visualization of proteins and their ptms pymol – introduce a set of common ptm 's into protein models awesome – interactive tool to see the role of single nucleotide polymorphisms to ptm's chimera – interactive database to visualize molecules . case examples . cleavage and formation of disulfide bridges during the production of insulin ptm of histones as regulation of transcription : rna polymerase control by chromatin structure ptm of rna polymerase ii as regulation of transcription cleavage of polypeptide chains as crucial for lectin specificity . addiction . a major feature of addiction is its persistence . the addictive phenotype can be lifelong , with drug craving and relapse occurring even after decades of abstinence . post-translational modifications consisting of epigenetic alterations of histone protein tails in specific regions of the brain appear to be crucial to the molecular basis of addictions . once particular post-translational epigenetic modifications occur , they appear to be long lasting '' molecular scars '' that may account for the persistence of addictions . cigarette smokers ( about 21 % of the us population in 2013 ) substance abuse and mental health services administration , results from the 2013 national survey on drug use and health : summary of national findings , nsduh series h-48 , hhs publication no . ( sma ) 14-4863 . rockville , md : substance abuse and mental health services administration , 2014 ) are usually addicted to nicotine . after 7 days of nicotine treatment of mice , the post-translational modifications consisting of acetylation of both histone h3 and histone h4 was increased at the fosb promoter in the nucleus accumbens of the brain , causing a 61 % increase in fosb expression . this also increases expression of the splice variant delta fosb . in the nucleus accumbens of the brain , delta fosb functions as a '' sustained molecular switch '' and '' master control protein '' in the development of an addiction . similarly , after 15 days of nicotine treatment of rats , the post-translational modification consisting of 3-fold increased acetylation of histone h4 occurs at the promoter of the dopamine d1 receptor ( drd1 ) gene in the prefrontal cortex ( pfc ) of the rats . this caused increased dopamine release in the pfc reward system brain region , and such increased dopamine release is recognized as an important factor for addiction . about 7 % of the us population is addicted to alcohol . in rats exposed to alcohol for up to 5 days , there was an increase in the post-translational modification of histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation , h3k9ac , in the nociceptin promoter in the brain amygdala complex . this acetylation is an activating mark for pronociceptin . the nociceptin/nociceptin opioid receptor system is involved in the reinforcing or conditioning effects of alcohol . cocaine addiction occurs in about 0.5 % of the us population . repeated cocaine administration in mice induces post-translational modifications including hyperacetylation of histone h3 or histone h4 at 1,696 genes in one brain reward region the nucleus accumbens and deacetylation at 206 genes . at least 45 genes , shown in previous studies to be upregulated in the nucleus accumbens of mice after chronic cocaine exposure , were found to be associated with post-translational hyperacetylation of histone h3 or histone h4 . many of these individual genes are directly related to aspects of addiction associated with cocaine exposure . in 2013 , 22.7 million persons aged 12 or older in the united states needed treatment for an illicit drug or alcohol use problem ( 8.6 percent of persons aged 12 or older ) .