Birmingham and Fazeley Canal

history . the story of the birmingham and fazeley begins in 1770 , when the birmingham canal company was seen as having a monopoly . at the time , the coalfields at walsall did not have canal access , and a public meeting was held at lichfield on 18 august to discuss an independent link from walsall to fradley junction on the trent and mersey canal , passing through lichfield . opposition from local landowners resulted in the plan being shelved , but a further plan was proposed at a meeting held in warwick in august 1781 , for a canal to run from wednesbury through fazeley to atherstone , which was the end of the coventry canal at the time . the plans were changed somewhat in october , but shareholders in the birmingham canal saw it as a serious threat . two bills were put before parliament in 1782 , one for the birmingham and fazeley , and a rival one from the birmingham canal for a branch from wednesbury to walsall . both sides opposed the other 's proposal , and both bills were defeated . the promoters then opened negotiations with other canal companies , to ensure that when the canal was built , it would be part of a larger network . in 1782 , they obtained an agreement from the oxford canal company that they would complete the route to the river thames at oxford , one from the coventry canal that they would extend their canal from atherstone to fazeley , and agreed that they would complete the coventry canal 's route from fazeley as far as whittington , as the coventry canal company could not finance the whole route . the trent and mersey would finish that link by building the remainder of the route to fradley junction . a second bill was put before parliament , and at the same time , the birmingham canal presented a scheme for a canal from riders green to broadwaters , near walsall , with eight branches , and a second canal from newhall to fazeley . the birmingham and fazeley was authorised by an act of parliament obtained in 1784 . the new company and the birmingham canal merged soon afterwards , becoming the awkwardly named birmingham & birmingham & fazeley canal company . john smeaton was the engineer employed by the birmingham and fazeley , but work did not start immediately , as he was also responsible for the riders green to broadwaters line , which was completed first . the project did not go smoothly , as there were disputes between james bough , the superintendent of the canal company , and pinkertons , who were the civil engineering contractors employed to carry out the work . the issue concerned the cement that the pinkertons were using . work on the fazeley line began in april 1786 , with bough still acting as superintendent , and the pinkertons responsible for the construction of the section between minworth and fazeley . in late 1786 , george pinkerton found out that the levels , which had been surveyed by bough , were wrong . samuel bull , the engineer for the canal company , investigated and reported that pinkerton was right . the pinkertons started to work on the project from january 1787 , even though the contracts were not signed until may . bough made a series of allegations that pinkertons ' workmanship and the materials used were of poor quality . the company stopped paying pinkerton in late 1788 , as the costs were exceeding the original estimates , and the contract was taken away from them in february 1789 . there was then a financial dispute over money which had been paid to pinkerton as '' extras '' , but which the company then claimed were overpayments . some £2,750 was at issue , and the case rumbled on for a decade , until a court case in 1801 gave him only £436 of the claim . unhappy with the outcome , pinkerton justified his position , but his remarks about john houghton , the company clerk , were deemed to be libellous , for which he was fined and spent some time in prison . the canal was completed in august 1789 . the benefits of the co-operation with the other canal companies were that when all the links were completed in 1790 , it immediately generated a great deal of freight traffic . this created problems , as the flights of locks at aston and farmer 's bridge became congested , and this became worse when the warwick canal built a junction onto the digbeth branch . the problem was not solved until 1844 , when the birmingham and warwick junction canal to the south east and the tame valley canal to the north west were opened . the name of the birmingham & birmingham & fazeley canal company was changed to birmingham canal navigations in 1794 . route . the canal is now regarded as running from the bcn main line at old turn junction ( near the national indoor arena ) , birmingham to the coventry canal at fazeley junction , just outside tamworth . the length of this stretch is 15 miles ( 24 & nbsp ; km ) , and it includes 38 locks . from old turn junction , 13 locks drop the level of the canal by , after which there is a short flat stretch from st chads cathedral to aston junction . there is a one-mile ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) branch called the digbeth branch canal which runs from the junction to typhoo basin and contains 6 locks . a short cut runs from near the end of the branch to the grand union canal at bordesley junction . below the junction there are another 11 locks , which form the aston flight . holborn hill bridge carries the railway to aston station over the canal , just before the bottom lock of the flight is reached . at salford junction , the tame valley canal runs to the north west , and the grand union canal runs southwards , while the fazeley heads eastwards . two more locks continue the descent at minworth , and the character of the surroundings changes from an urban and industrial landscape to open countryside . there is a short tunnel at curdworth , after which fields and flooded gravel pits line the canal . at drayton bassett , an eccentric footbridge with gothic-style towers crosses the canal , close to drayton manor theme park , after which fazeley is reached , where the canal joins the coventry canal . the stretch which extends northwards beyond fazeley junction to whittington , near lichfield , was built by the birmingham and fazeley canal company , with the remainder of the route to fradley junction being built by the trent and mersey canal . both sections used the route authorised by the coventry canal 's act of parliament , but although the coventry canal subsequently bought back the northern section from the trent and mersey canal , the southern section remained in the ownership of the birmingham and fazeley canal . however , it is often regarded as being part of the coventry canal , with the canal and river trust quoting the length of that canal as being which includes the birmingham and fazeley section . historically the canal started at farmer 's bridge top lock ( the real farmer 's bridge junction ) , where it met the already existing birmingham canal newhall branch . that branch has now been built over , with only cambrian wharf surviving . the birmingham and fazeley canal forms part of the warwickshire ring . features . at common lock 10 , on the lower lock tail , an inscription can be found in the stonework . it reads : '' pax missa per orbem , pax quaeritur bello '' , which translates as '' peace is sent throughout the world , peace is sought through war '' . the inscription comes from two coins , the first part from the queen ann farthing , and the second part from the cromwell broad . . gallery . file : bt tower brum 025591.jpg part of the farmer 's bridge flight looking towards the bt tower file : canal under bt tower birmingham.jpg underneath brindley house , part of the bt tower complex file : farmers bridge lock 9.jpg farmer 's bridge lock 9 and extended pound , running through two arches of the newhall street bridge in central birmingham . there is a lock gate on either side of the road . file : drayton swivel bridge , birmingham and fazeley canal.jpg the drayton swing bridge file : fazeley junction from coventry canal bridge.jpg the termination of the authorised birmingham and fazeley canal under the watling street bridge at fazeley file : bcn oldturnjunction 2.jpg fingerpost at old turn junction , where the birmingham and fazeley canal meets bcn main line . see also . canals of the united kingdom transport in birmingham history of the british canal system waterscape . bibliography . . references . . external links .