Toba catastrophe theory

supervolcanic eruption . the youngest toba eruption occurred at the present location of lake toba in indonesia , about 75,000 ± 900 years bp according to potassium argon dating . . . this eruption was the last and largest of four eruptions of the lake toba caldera during the quaternary period , and is also recognized from its diagnostic horizon of ashfall , the youngest toba tuff . , p . 200 ; , p . 174 ; , pp . 1593–1594 ; , p . 913 ; . it had an estimated volcanic explosivity index of 8 ( the highest rating of any known eruption on earth ) ; it made a sizable contribution to the 100 × & nbsp ; 35 km caldera complex . , p . 1593 . dense-rock equivalent ( dre ) estimates of eruptive volume for the eruption vary between 2,000 km³ and 3,000 km³ ; the most common dre estimate is 2,800 km³ ( about of erupted magma , of which 800 km³ was deposited as ash fall . , p . 174 ; , p . 913 . the erupted mass was , at the very least , 12 times greater than that of the largest volcanic eruption in recent history , the 1815 eruption of mount tambora in indonesia , which caused the 1816 '' year without a summer '' in the northern hemisphere . , p . 114 ; , p . 837 . toba 's erupted mass deposited an ash layer of about thick over the whole of south asia . a blanket of volcanic ash was also deposited over the indian ocean , the arabian sea , and the south china sea . , p . 173 deep-sea cores retrieved from the south china sea have extended the known reach of the eruption , suggesting that the 2,800 km³ calculation of the erupted mass is a minimum value or even an underestimate . , p . 174 ; . pp . 1593–1596 . based on new methods ( crystal concentration and exponential ) , the lake toba caldera possibly erupted as much as 3,200 km³ of ignimbrite and co-ignimbrite . volcanic winter and global cooling computer models . geologist michael r . rampino and volcanologist stephen self argue that the eruption caused a '' brief , dramatic cooling or 'volcanic winter ' '' , which resulted in a drop of the global mean surface temperature by 3–5 & nbsp ; °c . , passim . evidence from greenland ice cores indicates a 1,000-year period of low δ18o and increased dust deposition immediately following the eruption . the eruption may have caused this 1,000-year period of cooler temperatures ( stadial ) , two centuries of which could be accounted for by the persistence of the toba stratospheric loading . , pp . 837–840 . rampino and self believe that global cooling was already underway at the time of the eruption , but that the process was slow ; the youngest toba tuff '' may have provided the extra 'kick ' that caused the climate system to switch from warm to cold states '' . , p . 52 ; , p . 277 . although clive oppenheimer rejects the hypothesis that the eruption triggered the last glaciation , seem to agree on that . he agrees that it may have been responsible for a millennium of cool climate prior to the 19th dansgaard–oeschger event . , p . 1606 . according to alan robock , who has also published nuclear winter papers , the toba eruption did not precipitate the last glacial period . however , assuming an emission of six billion tons of sulphur dioxide , his computer simulations concluded that a maximum global cooling of approximately 15 & nbsp ; °c occurred for three years after the eruption , and that this cooling would last for decades , devastating life . . despite these different estimates , scientists agree that a supervolcanic eruption of the scale at the lake toba caldera must have led to very extensive ash-fall layers and injection of noxious gases into the atmosphere , with worldwide effects on weather and climate . , p . 41 . in addition , the greenland ice core data display an abrupt climate change around this time , , p . 837 . but there is no consensus that the eruption directly generated the 1,000-year cold period seen in greenland or triggered the last glaciation . ( page ? ) . . physical data contradicting the winter hypothesis . in 2013 , archaeologists , led by christine lane , reported finding a microscopic layer of glassy volcanic ash in sediments of lake malawi , and definitively linked the ash to the 75,000-year-old eruption at the lake toba caldera , but found no change in fossil type close to the ash layer , something that would be expected following a severe volcanic winter . they concluded that the eruption did not significantly alter the climate of east africa , attracting criticism from richard roberts . lane explained , '' we examined smear slides at a 2-mm interval , corresponding to subdecadal resolution , and x-ray fluorescence scans run at 200-µm intervals correspond to subannual resolution . we observed no obvious change in sediment composition or fe/ti ratio , suggesting that no thermally driven overturn of the water column occurred following the toba supereruption . '' in 2015 , a new study on the climate of east africa supported lane 's conclusion , that there was '' no significant cooling associated with mount toba '' . . genetic bottleneck theory . genetic bottleneck in humans . the youngest toba eruption has been linked to a genetic bottleneck in human evolution about 70,000 years ago , which may have resulted in a severe reduction in the size of the total human population due to the effects of the eruption on the global climate . , passim ; , p . 27 ; , pp . 127–128 ; , pp . 78–80 ; , pp . 1955 . according to the genetic bottleneck theory , between 50,000 and 100,000 years ago , human populations sharply decreased to 3,000–10,000 surviving individuals . ; , pp . 71 , 80 . it is supported by some genetic evidence suggesting that today 's humans are descended from a very small population of between 1,000 and 10,000 breeding pairs that existed about 70,000 years ago . m.r rampino and s.self , nature 359 , 50 ( 1992 ) proponents of the genetic bottleneck theory ( including robock ) suggest that the youngest toba eruption resulted in a global ecological disaster , including destruction of vegetation along with severe drought in the tropical rainforest belt and in monsoonal regions . a 10-year volcanic winter triggered by the eruption could have largely destroyed the food sources of humans and caused a severe reduction in population sizes . , pp . 623–651 . other research has cast doubt on a link between the lake toba caldera and a genetic bottleneck . for example , ancient stone tools in southern india were found above and below a thick layer of ash from the youngest toba eruption and were very similar across these layers , suggesting that the dust clouds from the eruption did not wipe out this local population . additional archaeological evidence from southern and northern india also suggests a lack of evidence for effects of the eruption on local populations , leading the authors of the study to conclude , '' many forms of life survived the supereruption , contrary to other research which has suggested significant animal extinctions and genetic bottlenecks '' . see also however , evidence from pollen analysis has suggested prolonged deforestation in south asia , and some researchers have suggested that the toba eruption may have forced humans to adopt new adaptive strategies , which may have permitted them to replace neanderthals and '' other archaic human species '' . . additional caveats include difficulties in estimating the global and regional climatic impacts of the eruption and lack of conclusive evidence for the eruption preceding the bottleneck . , pp . 1605 , 1606 . furthermore , genetic analysis of alu sequences across the entire human genome has shown that the effective human population size was less than 26,000 at 1.2 million years ago ; possible explanations for the low population size of human ancestors may include repeated population bottlenecks or periodic replacement events from competing homo subspecies . if these results are accurate , then , even before the emergence of homo sapiens in africa , homo erectus population was unusually small when the species was spreading around the world . see , p.6 ; . . genetic bottlenecks in other mammals . some evidence points to genetic bottlenecks in other animals in the wake of the youngest toba eruption . the populations of the eastern african chimpanzee , bornean orangutan , central indian macaque , cheetah and tiger , all recovered from very small populations around 70,000–55,000 years ago . the separation of the nuclear gene pools of eastern and western lowland gorillas has been estimated to have occurred about 77,700 years ago . . migration after toba . the exact geographic distribution of anatomically modern human populations at the time of the eruption is not known , and surviving populations may have lived in africa and subsequently migrated to other parts of the world . analyses of mitochondrial dna have estimated that the major migration from africa occurred 60,000–70,000 years ago , consistent with dating of the youngest toba eruption to around 75,000 years ago . criticism . a 2018 study by chad yost and colleagues of cores from lake malawi dating to the period of the youngest toba eruption showed no evidence of a volcanic winter , and they argue that there was no effect on african humans . in the view of john hawks , the study confirms evidence from a variety of studies that the eruption did not have a major climatic effect or any effect on human numbers . . see also . . citations and notes .