River Liffey

name . ptolemy 's geography ( 2nd century ad ) described a river , perhaps the liffey , which he labelled οβοκα ( oboka ) . ultimately this led to the name of the river avoca . the liffey was previously named an ruirthech , meaning '' fast ( or strong ) runner '' . the word liphe ( or life ) referred originally to the name of the plain through which the river ran , but eventually came to refer to the river itself . byrne , f . j . 1973 . irish kings and high-kings . dublin . p.150 the word derives from the same root as welsh llif ( flow , stream ) , namely proto-indo-european lē̆i-4 . julius pokorny , indogermanisches etymologisches wörterbuch ( francke , 1959 ) , word 1136 was also known as the anna liffey , as indicated by the caption of an engraving published in 1831 possibly from an anglicisation of abhainn na life , the irish phrase that translates into english as '' river liffey '' . james joyce embodies the river as '' anna livia plurabelle '' in finnegans wake . course and system . the liffey rises in the liffey head bog between the mountains of kippure and tonduff in the northern section of the wicklow mountains , forming from many streamlets at sally gap . it flows for through counties wicklow , kildare and dublin before entering the irish sea at its mouth at the midpoint of dublin bay , on a line extending from the baily lighthouse to the muglin rocks . it crosses from county wicklow into county kildare at poulaphouca and from county kildare into county dublin at leixlip , with most of its length being in kildare . the drainage basin of the liffey is . the long term average flow rate of the river is . . tributaries . the liffey system includes dozens of smaller rivers and streams . early tributaries include the athdown brook , shankill river , ballylow brook , brittas river and woodend brook , as well as the substantial king 's river . downstream of poulaphouca are the lemonstown stream , kilcullen stream and pinkeen stream , followed by the painestown river ( with tributaries including the morell river ) , rye water ( with tributaries including the lyreen ) , and the griffeen river . within dublin are the various phoenix park streams on the left bank , interspersed with right bank tributaries such as the glenaulin stream and creosote stream . within the quays area tributaries include the river camac , possibly colman 's brook , the bradogue river , river poddle , stein river and the river dodder , some of which have numerous tributaries of their own . in earlier times , the river tolka was also arguably a tributary of the liffey or at least shared its mouth , but it now enters dublin bay distinctly , some distance to the north . dams , reservoirs and falls . there are dams for three esb hydroelectric power stations along the river , at poulaphouca , golden falls and leixlip . major reservoir facilities also exist at poulaphouca . the liffey does not feature natural lakes and has few islands . significant falls at poulaphouca and at golden falls were flooded by reservoir construction . there remain areas of rapids , including as the river approaches dublin city . settlements . towns along the river include ballymore eustace , athgarvan , kilcullen , newbridge , caragh , clane , celbridge , leixlip and lucan before the river reaches the city of dublin as it approaches its mouth . image : liffeyeast.jpg thumb 290px the ha'penny bridge . navigation and uses . the river liffey in dublin city has been used for many centuries for trade , from the viking beginnings of the city up to recent times . it is connected to the river shannon via the grand canal and the royal canal . water supply . around 60 % of the liffey 's flow is abstracted for drinking water and to supply industry . much of this makes its way back into the river after purification in wastewater treatment plants . despite a misconception that the guinness brewery is one such commercial user , the facility uses water piped from the wicklow mountains . . electricity generation . esb hydroelectric power stations exist along the river , at poulaphouca , golden falls and leixlip , in addition to a number of minor private installations . traffic . a well-known sight on the liffey up to the 1990s , the lady patricia and miranda guinness cargo ships were used to export guinness from the st . james 's gate brewery . as of the early 21st century , the only regular traffic on the river within the city is the liffey voyage water tour bus service , which runs guided tours along the river liffey through dublin city centre . departing from the boardwalk downstream of the ha'penny bridge , the spirit of the docklands was built by westers mekaniska in sweden as a 50-passenger water taxi . its variable ballast tanks ( not unlike a submarine ) and low air draught mean that at low tide it can float high , but at high tide it can ride low and still pass below the liffey 's bridges . downstream of the east-link bridge , the river is still mainly used for commercial and ferry traffic , with some recreational use also . high speed trips out the mouth of the liffey were also previously available from sea safari . . recreational use . thumb upstream from the city , at chapelizod , the river is used by private , university and garda rowing clubs . the liffey descent canoeing event , held each year since 1960 , covers a course from straffan to islandbridge . the normal tidal limit ( ntl ) of the river is islandbridge ( weir ) . the liffey swim takes place every year in late august or early september between watling bridge and the custom house . the islandbridge stretch of river accommodates a number of rowing clubs including trinity college , ucd , commercial , neptune , and the garda rowing club . the liffey is widely used for recreational activities – such as canoeing , rafting , fishing , swimming , significant facilities are at poulaphouca , kilcullen , newbridge , where a seven-acre liffey linear park has been developed , and other facilities are located further downriver at leixlip and other towns . crossings . history . the earliest stone bridge over the liffey of which there is solid evidence was the bridge of dublin ( on the site of the current fr . mathew bridge ) , built by the dominicans in 1428 , which survived well into the 18th century . this four-arch bridge included various buildings such as a chapel , bakehouse and possibly an inn and replaced an earlier wooden bridge ( dubhghalls bridge ) on the same site . island bridge ( a predecessor of the current bridge ) was added in 1577 . with the development of commercial dublin in the 17th century , four new bridges were added between 1670 and 1684 : barrack , or bloody bridge , ( the forerunner of the current rory o'more bridge ) , essex bridge ( grattan bridge ) , ormond bridge ( o'donovan rossa bridge ) and arran bridge . the oldest bridge still standing is mellows bridge , ( originally queens bridge ) constructed in 1764 on the site of arran bridge , which was destroyed by floods in 1763 . the first iron bridge was the ha'penny bridge built in 1816 . farmleigh bridge , also iron , was built around 1872 at the end of a tunnel and connected farmleigh to palmerstown . the millennium bridge was opened in december 1999 , and 21st century additions include seán o'casey bridge ( 2005 ) , samuel beckett bridge ( 2009 ) , and rosie hackett bridge ( 2014 ) . . present day . image : ship jeanie johnston at river liffey.jpg thumb left 200px ship jeanie johnston at river liffey . dividing the northside of dublin from the southside , the liffey is today spanned by numerous bridges , mostly open to vehicular traffic . these include the west-link on the m50 motorway , seán heuston bridge and o'connell bridge . there are 3 pedestrian bridges in the city : the millennium bridge , seán o'casey bridge and the ha'penny bridge . 21st century additions include the samuel beckett bridge ( 2009 ) and james joyce bridge ( 2003 ) , both designed by santiago calatrava . crossings further upriver include the liffey bridge at celbridge , '' the bridge at 16 '' ( a 19th-century pedestrian suspension bridge at what is now the k club ) , and the leinster aqueduct – which carries the grand canal over the liffey at caragh . art works along the river and its quays include the famine memorial statues ( near the ifsc ) and the world hunger stone . . quays . the song about seamus rafferty refers to the '' bowsies on the quay '' ; however , from the late 20th-century there was some renewed development on the quays , with the addition of linear parks and overhanging boardwalks . there are quays on the north and south banks of the liffey , extending from the weir at islandbridge to ringsend bridge over the river dodder , just before the east-link toll bridge . from west to east , the quays on the north bank are : : bridgewater , wolfe tone , sarsfield , ellis , arran , inns , ormond upper , ormond lower , bachelors walk , eden , custom house , and north wall . from west to east , the quays on the south bank are : : victoria , usher 's island , usher 's , merchants , wood , essex , wellington , crampton , aston , burgh , george 's , city , sir john rogerson 's , and great britain . incidents . in december 2000 , a bus éireann bus , crossing the liffey at butt bridge , collided with another bus and skidded into the liffey . there were some injuries , but no-one was killed . in july 2011 , a long-term homeless man rescued his pet rabbit after it had been thrown into the river . diving off o'connell bridge in front of hundreds of people , videos of the rescue circulated on the internet , and the man received an honour ( and job offer at an animal shelter ) for his actions . '' honour for homeless hero who rescued rabbit '' . evening herald . retrieved on 12 july 2011 . '' reward for river rabbit rescuer '' . the irish times . retrieved on 12 july 2011 . '' rabbit rescuer offered job at animal shelter '' . the irish emigrant . retrieved on 12 july 2011 . '' rabbit river rescue hero is offered animal care job '' . evening herald . retrieved on 12 july 2011 . the man who threw the rabbit into the river was arrested . '' award for river liffey rabbit rescuer '' . rté news . retrieved on 12 july 2011 . . annalistic references . in the annals of inisfallen for the year 808 , an entry reads : : ai808.2 a defeat inflicted by the laigin on áed oirdnide , at the river of liphe . popular culture references . thumb thumb from joyce to radiohead , the liffey is often referenced in literature and song : that is the first of a number of references to the liffey in the wake : insofar as the book has characters , the female protagonist of the novel , anna livia plurabelle , is herself an allegory of the river . image : dublin riverside composite 01.jpg thumb center 600px a view upstream from grattan bridge , towards the four courts ( the domed building ) , with essex quay and wood quay on the stream bed ( left of picture ) and upper ormond quay on the left bank ( right of picture ) . see also . hms liffey list of rivers in ireland rivers of ireland . references .