Discourse on the Method

organization . the book is divided into six parts , described in the author 's preface as : various considerations touching the sciences the principal rules of the method which the author has discovered certain of the rules of morals which he has deduced from this method the reasonings by which he establishes the existence of god and of the human soul the order of the physical questions which he has investigated , and , in particular , the explication of the motion of the heart and of some other difficulties pertaining to medicine , as also the difference between the soul of man and that of the brutes what the author believes to be required in order to greater advancement in the investigation of nature than has yet been made , with the reasons that have induced him to write . part i : various scientific considerations . descartes begins by allowing himself some wit : a similar observation can be found in hobbes : '' but this proveth rather that men are in that point equal , than unequal . for there is not ordinarily a greater sign of the equal distribution of anything than that every man is contented with his share , '' but also in montaigne , whose formulation indicates that it was a commonplace at the time : '' tis commonly said that the justest portion nature has given us of her favors is that of sense ; for there is no one who is not contented with his share . '' descartes continues with a warning : descartes describes his disappointment with his education : '' as soon as i had finished the entire course of study…i found myself involved in so many doubts and errors , that i was convinced i had advanced no farther…than the discovery at every turn of my own ignorance . '' he notes his special delight with mathematics , and contrasts its strong foundations to '' the disquisitions of the ancient moralists which are towering and magnificent palaces with no better foundation than sand and mud . '' . part ii : principal rules of the method . descartes was in germany , attracted thither by the wars in that country , and describes his intent by a '' building metaphor '' ( see also : neurath 's boat ) . he observes that buildings , cities or nations that have been planned by a single hand are more elegant and commodious than those that have grown organically . he resolves not to build on old foundations , or to lean upon principles which , he had taken on faith in his youth . descartes seeks to ascertain the true method by which to arrive at the knowledge of whatever lay within the compass of his powers ; he presents four precepts : . part iii : morals and maxims of conducting the method . descartes uses the analogy of rebuilding a house from secure foundations , and extends the analogy to the idea of needing a temporary abode while his own house is being rebuilt . the following three maxims were adopted by descartes so that he could effectively function in the '' real world '' while experimenting with his method of radical doubt . they formed a rudimentary belief system from which to act before he developed a new system based on the truths he discovered using his method : . part iv : proof of god and the soul . applying the method to itself , descartes challenges his own reasoning and reason itself . but descartes believes three things are not susceptible to doubt and the three support each other to form a stable foundation for the method . he can not doubt that something has to be there to do the doubting ( i think , therefore i am ) . the method of doubt can not doubt reason as it is based on reason itself . by reason there exists a god , and god is the guarantor that reason is not misguided . descartes supplies three different proofs for the existence of god , including what is now referred to as the ontological argument . part v : physics , the heart , and the soul of man and animals . here he describes how in other writings he discusses the idea of laws of nature , of the sun and stars , the idea of the moon being the cause of ebb and flow , on gravitation , and going on to discuss light and fire . describing his work on light , he states : his work on such physico-mechanical laws is , however , projected into a '' new world . '' a theoretical place god created descartes does this '' to express my judgment regarding & nbsp ; . his subjects with greater freedom , without being necessitated to adopt or refute the opinions of the learned '' . he goes on to say that he '' was not , however , disposed , from these circumstances , to conclude that this world had been created in the manner i described ; for it is much more likely that god made it at the first such as it was to be . '' despite this admission , it seems that descartes ' project for understanding the world was that of re-creating creation—a cosmological project which aimed , through descartes ' particular brand of experimental method , to show not merely the possibility of such a system , but to suggest that this way of looking at the world—one with ( as descartes saw it ) no assumptions about god or nature—provided the only basis upon which he could see knowledge progressing ( as he states in book ii ) . thus , in descartes ' work , we can see some of the fundamental assumptions of modern cosmology in evidence—the project of examining the historical construction of the universe through a set of quantitative laws describing interactions which would allow the ordered present to be constructed from a chaotic past . he goes on to the motion of the blood in the heart and arteries , endorsing the findings of '' a physician of england '' about the circulation of blood , referring to william harvey and his work de motu cordis in a marginal note . but then he disagrees strongly about the function of the heart as a pump , ascribing the motive power of the circulation to heat rather than muscular contraction . w . bruce fye : profiles in cardiology – rené descartes , clin . cardiol . 26 , 49–51 ( 2003 ) , pdf 58,2 kb . he describes that these motions seem to be totally independent of what we think , and concludes that our bodies are separate from our souls . he does not seem to distinguish between mind , spirit and soul , which are identified as our faculty for rational thinking . hence the term cogito ergo sum all three of these words ( particularly '' mind '' and '' soul '' ) can be identified by the single french term âme . part vi : prerequisites for advancing the investigation of nature . descartes begins by noting , without directly referring to it , the recent trial of galileo for heresy and the condemnation of heliocentrism ; he explains that for these reasons he has been slow to publish . '' three years have now elapsed since i finished the treatise containing all these matters ; and i was beginning to revise it , with the view to put it into the hands of a printer , when i learned that persons to whom i greatly defer , and whose authority over my actions is hardly less influential than is my own reason over my thoughts , had condemned a certain doctrine in physics , published a short time previously by another individual to which i will not say that i adhered , but only that , previously to their censure i had observed in it nothing which i could imagine to be prejudicial either to religion or to the state , and nothing therefore which would have prevented me from giving expression to it in writing , if reason had persuaded me of its truth ; and this led me to fear lest among my own doctrines likewise some one might be found in which i had departed from the truth , notwithstanding the great care i have always taken not to accord belief to new opinions of which i had not the most certain demonstrations , and not to give expression to aught that might tend to the hurt of any one . this has been sufficient to make me alter my purpose of publishing them ; for although the reasons by which i had been induced to take this resolution were very strong , yet my inclination , which has always been hostile to writing books , enabled me immediately to discover other considerations sufficient to excuse me for not undertaking the task . '' secure on these foundation stones , descartes shows the practical application of '' the method '' in mathematics and the science . influencing future science . skepticism had previously been discussed by philosophers such as sextus empiricus , al-ghazali , francisco sanches and michel de montaigne . descartes started his line of reasoning by doubting everything , so as to assess the world from a fresh perspective , clear of any preconceived notions or influences . this is summarized in the book 's first precept to '' never to accept anything for true which i did not clearly know to be such '' . this method of pro-foundational skepticism is considered to be the start of modern philosophy . descartes ' life and works by kurt smith , stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . retrieved 2017-11-20 descartes , rene by justin skirry ( nebraska-wesleyan university ) , the internet encyclopedia of philosophy , issn 2161-0002 . retrieved 2017-11-20 . quotations . '' the most widely shared thing in the world is good sense , for everyone thinks he is so well provided with it that even those who are the most difficult to satisfy in everything else do not usually desire to have more good sense than they have.… '' ( part i , at p . & nbsp ; 1 sq . ) '' i know how very liable we are to delusion in what relates to ourselves ; and also how much the judgments of our friends are to be suspected when given in our favor . '' ( part i , at p . & nbsp ; 3 ) '' … i believed that i had already given sufficient time to languages , and likewise to the reading of the writings of the ancients , to their histories and fables . for to hold converse with those of other ages and to travel , are almost the same thing . '' ( part i , at p . & nbsp ; 6 ) '' of philosophy i will say nothing , except that when i saw that it had been cultivated for so many ages by the most distinguished men ; and that yet there is not a single matter within its sphere which is still not in dispute and nothing , therefore , which is above doubt , i did not presume to anticipate that my success would be greater in it than that of others . '' ( part i , at p . & nbsp ; 8 ) '' … i entirely abandoned the study of letters , and resolved no longer to seek any other science than the knowledge of myself , or of the great book of the world.… '' ( part i , at p . & nbsp ; 9 ) '' the first was to include nothing in my judgments than what presented itself to my mind so clearly and distinctly that i had no occasion to doubt it . '' ( part ii , at p . & nbsp ; 18 ) '' … in what regards manners , everyone is so full of his own wisdom , that there might be as many reformers as heads.… '' ( part vi , at p . & nbsp ; 61 ) '' … and although my speculations greatly please myself , i believe that others have theirs , which perhaps please them still more . '' ( part vi , at p . & nbsp ; 61 ) . see also . mathesis universalis great conversation . references . . external links . ( édition victor cousin , paris 1824 ) discours de la méthode , par adam et tannery , paris 1902 . ( academic standard edition of the original text , 1637 ) , pdf , 80 pages , 362 kb . contains discourse on the method , slightly modified for easier reading free audiobook at librivox.org or at audioofclassics