Lock (water navigation)

pound lock . a pound lock is a type of lock that is used almost exclusively nowadays on canals and rivers . a pound lock has a chamber with gates at both ends that control the level of water in the pound . in contrast , an earlier design with a single gate was known as a flash lock . pound locks were first used in china during the song dynasty ( 960–1279 ad ) , having been pioneered by the song politician and naval engineer qiao weiyue in 984 . they replaced earlier double slipways that had caused trouble and are mentioned by the chinese polymath shen kuo ( 1031–1095 ) in his book dream pool essays ( published in 1088 ) , needham , volume 4 , part 3 , 351–52 . and fully described in the twenty-four histories song shi ( compiled in 1345 ) : needham , volume 4 , part 3 , 351 . the distance between the two locks was rather more than 50 paces , and the whole space was covered with a great roof like a shed . the gates were 'hanging gates ' ; when they were closed the water accumulated like a tide until the required level was reached , and then when the time came it was allowed to flow out . the water level could differ by or at each lock and in the grand canal the level was raised in this way by . in medieval europe a sort of pound lock was built in 1373 at vreeswijk , netherlands . needham , volume 4 , part 3 , 357 . this pound lock serviced many ships at once in a large basin . yet the first true pound lock was built in 1396 at damme near bruges , belgium . the italy bertola da novate ( c . 1410–1475 ) constructed 18 pound locks on the naviglio di bereguardo ( part of the milan canal system sponsored by francesco sforza ) between 1452 and 1458 . needham , volume 4 , part 3 , 358 . . use in river navigation . when a stretch of river is made navigable , a lock is sometimes required to bypass an obstruction such as a rapid , dam , or mill weir – because of the change in river level across the obstacle . in large scale river navigation improvements , weirs and locks are used together . a weir will increase the depth of a shallow stretch , and the required lock will either be built in a gap in the weir , or at the downstream end of an artificial cut which bypasses the weir and perhaps a shallow stretch of river below it . a river improved by these means is often called a waterway or river navigation ( see example calder and hebble navigation ) . sometimes a river is made entirely non-tidal by constructing a sea lock directly into the estuary . in more advanced river navigations , more locks are required . where a longer cut bypasses a circuitous stretch of river , the upstream end of the cut will often be protected by a floodgate . the longer the cut , the greater the difference in river level between start and end of the cut , so that a very long cut will need additional locks along its length . at this point , the cut is , in effect , a canal . use in canals . early completely artificial canals , across fairly flat countryside , would get round a small hill or depression by simply detouring ( contouring ) around it . as engineers became more ambitious in the types of country they felt they could overcome , locks became essential to effect the necessary changes in water level without detours that would be completely uneconomic both in building costs and journey time . later still , as construction techniques improved , engineers became more willing to cut directly through and across obstacles by constructing long tunnels , cuttings , aqueducts or embankments , or to construct even more technical devices such as inclined planes or boat lifts . however , locks continued to be built to supplement these solutions , and are an essential part of even the most modern navigable waterways . basic construction and operation . . : de : sparschleuse die funktionsweise einer sparschleuse for example , the hindenburg-lock ( in hanover , germany , built 1919–1928 ) has two lock chambers of 225 m length , each of which would use 42,000 m 3 of water for a full locking cycle . due to the use of 10 water saving basins , only 10,500 m 3 of water are used . a more recent example is the rhine–main–danube canal with 13 saving locks out of a total of 16 locks . on english canals , these reservoirs are called '' side ponds '' . the droitwich canal , reopened in 2011 , has a flight of three locks at hanbury which all have operational side ponds . side ponds were also installed on the grand union canal and the coventry canal , among others . they are now out of use , and in some cases have been filled in , because british waterways considered that it was too easy to misuse them and flood the surrounding area . on some flights of locks with short intermediate pounds , the pounds are extended sideways – in effect to provide a reservoir to ensure that the pound does not run dry ( in case , for instance , the lock below leaks more than the lock above ) . these extended intermediate pounds are sometimes confused with side ponds . alternatives . as well as the '' static '' approaches mentioned earlier ( various types of contouring , excavating , and spanning ) , there were many ingenious '' dynamic '' solutions , mostly variations on the boat lift or the inclined plane . these tend to be more expensive to install and operate , but offer faster transit and waste less water . inclined plane . an inclined plane consists of a cradle ( to hold a barge ) or caisson ( a box full of water in which a barge can float ) which moves on rails sideways up a slope from one waterway to the other . since the box is '' wet '' ( filled with water ) , archimedes ' principle ensures that the caisson always weighs the same , regardless of the size of boat being carried ( or even if it contains only water ) . this makes for easy counterbalancing by a fixed weight or by a second caisson . the motive power may be steam or hydraulic , or may come from overbalancing the top caisson with extra water from the upper waterway . there are no working waterway inclined planes in the uk at the moment , but the remains of a famous one can be seen at foxton in leicestershire on the leicester arm of the grand union canal . the plane enabled wide-beam boats to bypass the flight of ten narrow locks , but failure to make improvements at the other end of the arm and high running costs led to its early demise . nicholson guides , volume 3 , harper collins publishers , there are plans to restore it , and some funding has been obtained . . marine railway . a marine railway is similar to a canal inclined plane in that it moves boats up or down a slope on rails . however , the vessel is carried in a dry carrying frame , or cradle , rather than in a water-filled caisson . the principle is based on the patent slip , used for hauling vessels out of the water for maintenance . in operation , a boat is navigated into the carrying frame , which has been lowered into the water . the boat is secured to the cradle , possibly by raising slings under the hull using hydraulics , and the cradle is hauled out of the water and up the hill with a cable . at the top of the slope , the cradle is lowered into the upper waterway , and the boat released . as the boat is not floating , archimedes ' principle does not apply , so the weight lifted or lowered by the device varies – making counterbalancing ( by dead weights or a second boat carriage ) more difficult . in some locations , such as the big chute marine railway on the trent-severn waterway , in ontario , canada , a marine railway was installed as a temporary measure at the planned site of a flight of conventional locks . in this and several other cases , the locks were never built , and the marine railway continued to serve on a permanent basis . where there is a steep rise in the land a marine railway may be more effective than multiple locks , such as on the elbląg canal . boat lift . the falkirk wheel , the world 's first rotating boat lift , acts as the centrepiece of the restoration of the forth and clyde and union canals . the wheel replaced a flight of locks which formerly connected the canals and which were filled in in 1930 . it was the winning design in a competition to design a new lock . visitors can now take a boat trip on the wheel and be lifted over in a few minutes compared to the time it took when the original lock staircase operated . the victorian anderton boat lift , the world 's first vertical boat lift , linking the trent and mersey canal and the river weaver in cheshire , was reopened in 2002 . the world 's highest boat lift in strépy-thieu in belgium raises or lowers 1,350 tonnes boats by 73.15 metres . another derivative is the peterborough lift lock which is a boat lift located on the trent canal in the city of peterborough , ontario , canada and is lock 21 on the trent-severn waterway . its dual lifts are the highest hydraulic boat lifts in the world , rising . this was a considerable accomplishment when conventional locks usually only had a rise . each lift has a capacity of 1,300 tonnes . the basins are long , wide and deep . the vertical distance lifted is . the trent-severn has another similar lift lock at kirkfield , with basins of the same dimension , but which lifts over a smaller vertical distance . caisson lock . around 1800 the use of caisson locks was proposed by robert weldon for the somerset coal canal in england . in this underwater lift , the chamber was 80 & nbsp ; ft long and deep and contained a completely enclosed wooden box big enough to take a barge . this box moved up and down in the deep pool of water . apart from inevitable leakage , the water never left the chamber , and using the lock wasted no water . instead , the boat entered the box and was sealed in by the door closing behind it , and the box itself was moved up or down through the water . when the box was at the bottom of the chamber , it was under almost of water – at a pressure of three atmospheres , in total . one of these '' locks '' was built and demonstrated to the prince regent ( later george iv ) , but it had various engineering problems and the design was not put into use on the coal canal . . hydro-pneumatic canal lift . possibly inspired by weldon 's caisson lock , william congreve in 1813 patented a '' hydro-pneumatic double balance lock '' in which two adjacent locks containing pneumatic caissons could be raised and lowered in counterbalance by the movement of compressed air from one caisson to the other . in about 1817 the regents canal built one of these locks at the site of the present-day camden lock , north london . here the motivation was , again , water supply problems . the company insisted on various modifications to congreve 's design ; the resulting installation proved to be unsatisfactory , and was soon replaced by conventional locks . faulkner , alan ( 2005 ) : the regent 's canal : london 's hidden waterway . waterways world ltd . . shaft lock . looking superficially similar to the caisson lock is the shaft lock . shaft locks consist of a deep shaft with conventional upper gates . the lower gates are reached through a short tunnel . the gates only close off this approach tunnel so do not have to reach the full height of the lock . notable examples have been built at saint denis ( paris , france ) , horin ( near melnik , czech republic ) and anderten ( hannover germany ) . the shaft lock at minden has a fall of and has eight tanks linked in pairs to the lock chamber . as the lock is emptied water is run into each chamber in turn , for filling the water is released from the chambers thus saving the waste of a complete lockfull of water . an earlier attempt at a shaft lock had been made at trollhättan in sweden on the line of the present göta canal . the fall would have been , astonishing in 1749 . however the approach tunnel proved to be unusable in times of flood and the shaft lock was replaced by a 2-rise staircase in 1768 . hadfield ( 1986 ) p . 55 . . diagonal lock . this new concept in lock design has yet to be installed on any waterway . it is basically a shaft lock with a diagonal shaft . the proposal is for a long tube of reinforced concrete , of a size to accommodate the boats being lifted , to be built on the slope between the upper and lower levels . the bottom of the tube is sealed with a strong watertight door , but there is a single pair of conventional lock gates at the top , installed a boat 's length from the far wall of the tube . the change in level is achieved by filling the tube with water from the top pound , or by draining . the vessel floats on the surface of the water , with a guide float or pontoon , shaped to fit the tube , floating alongside to keep it clear of the walls . side ponds , piped from the main tube , are incorporated to save water . in replacing a traditional flight or staircase of locks , a considerable time saving is anticipated . it differs from the similar caisson lock design in that the boat does not have to be carried in a submerged chamber . the '' diagonal lock advisory group '' has identified several sites in britain where the new design could be installed , either on new waterways or canals under restoration . projects under consideration include the restoration of the lancaster canal to kendal and the proposed new branch of the grand union canal between bedford and milton keynes . a combined system – the three gorges dam . at the three gorges dam on the yangtze river ( chang jiang ) in china there are two stairsteps of five large ship locks ( each 300 m long and 35 m wide ) for ten-thousand-tonne ships . in addition to this there will be a boat lift ( a large elevator ) capable of moving a three-thousand-ton ship vertically in one motion . the locks and the boat lift provide a total lift of up to 113 metres . ship sizes named after locks . locks restrict the maximum size of ship able to navigate a waterway , and some key canals have given rise to the name of standard ship sizes , such as the panamax and the seawaymax . see also . canal pound canal safety gates sluice water slope control lock . references . external links . deepest canal locks in england interactive simulation of lock operation – this demonstration shows guillotine lock for clarity interactive lock game for students with single and double flight locks and lesson plans video footage of the unique drop lock at dalmuir on the forth & clyde canal