Minamoto clan

history . the first emperor to grant the surname minamoto to his children was emperor saga , who reportedly had 49 children , resulting in a significant financial burden on the imperial household . in order to alleviate some of the pressure of supporting his unusually many offspring , he made many of his sons and daughters nobles instead of royals . he chose the word minamoto ( meaning '' origin '' ) for their new surname in order to signify that the new clan shared the same origins as the royal family . afterwards , emperor seiwa , emperor murakami , emperor uda , and emperor daigo , among others , also gave their non-heir sons or daughters the name minamoto . these specific hereditary lines coming from different emperors developed into specific clans referred to by the emperor 's name followed by genji ( e.g . seiwa genji ) . according to some sources , the first to be given the name minamoto was minamoto no makoto , seventh son of emperor saga . frederic , louis ( 2002 ) . japan encyclopedia . cambridge , massachusetts : harvard university press . the most prominent of the several minamoto families , the seiwa genji , descended from minamoto no tsunemoto ( 897–961 ) , a grandson of emperor seiwa . tsunemoto went to the provinces and became the founder of a major warrior dynasty . minamoto no mitsunaka ( 912–997 ) formed an alliance with the fujiwara . thereafter the fujiwara frequently called upon the minamoto to restore order in the capital , heian-kyo ( modern kyoto ) . mitsunaka 's eldest son , minamoto no yorimitsu ( 948–1021 ) , became the protégé of fujiwara no michinaga ; another son , minamoto no yorinobu ( 968–1048 ) suppressed the rebellion of taira no tadatsune in 1032 . yorinobu 's son , minamoto no yoriyoshi ( 988–1075 ) , and grandson , minamoto no yoshiie ( 1039–1106 ) , pacified most of northeastern japan between 1051 and 1087 . the seiwa genji 's fortunes declined in the hōgen rebellion ( 1156 ) , when the taira executed much of the line , including minamoto no tameyoshi . during the heiji disturbance ( 1160 ) , the head of the seiwa genji , minamoto no yoshitomo , died in battle . taira no kiyomori seized power in kyoto by forging an alliance with the retired emperors go-shirakawa and toba and infiltrating the kuge . he sent minamoto no yoritomo ( 1147–1199 ) , the third son of minamoto no yoshimoto of the seiwa genji , into exile . in 1180 , during the genpei war , yoritomo mounted a full-scale rebellion against the taira rule , culminating in the destruction of the taira and the subjugation of eastern japan within five years . in 1192 he received the title shōgun and set up the first bakufu at kamakura . the later ashikaga ( founders of the ashikaga shogunate ) , nitta , and takeda clans claim descent from the seiwa genji . the protagonist of the classical japanese novel the tale of genji , hikaru genji , was bestowed the name minamoto for political reasons by his father the emperor and was delegated to civilian life and a career as an imperial officer . the genpei war is also the subject of the early japanese epic the tale of the heike ( heike monogatari ) . members of the minamoto clan ( genji clan ) . even within royalty there was a distinction between princes with the title ( '' having the ability to advance '' , i.e . , eligible to become the new emperor ) , who could ascend to the throne , and princes with the title ( '' great '' or '' major '' ) , who were not members of the line of imperial succession but nevertheless remained members of the royal class ( and therefore outranked members of minamoto clans ) . the bestowing of the minamoto name on a ( theretofore- ) prince or his descendants excluded them from the royal class altogether , thereby operating as a reduction in legal and social rank even for ō-princes not previously in the line of succession . many later clans were formed by members of the minamoto clan , and in many early cases , progenitors of these clans are known by either family name . there are also known monks of minamoto descent ; these are often noted in genealogies but did not carry the clan name ( in favor of a dharma name ) . there were 21 branches of the clan , each named after the emperor from whom it descended . some of these lineages were populous , but a few produced no descendants . saga genji . the saga genji are descendants of emperor saga . as saga had many children , many were bestowed the uji minamoto , declassing them from imperial succession . among his sons , makoto , tokiwa , and tōru took the position of minister of the left ( sadaijin ) ; they were among the most powerful in the imperial court in the early heian period . some of tōru 's descendants in particular settled the provinces and formed buke . clans such as the watanabe , matsuura , and kamachi descend from the saga genji . noted saga genji and descendants include : makoto , seventh son of the emperor hiromu , eighth son of the emperor hitoshi , grandson of hiromu tokiwa , son of the emperor okoru , first son of tokiwa sadamu , son of the emperor shitagō , great-grandson of sadamu hiroshi , son of the emperor tōru , son of the emperor anbō ( secular name minamoto no shitagō ) , great-grandson of tōru watanabe no tsuna ( his official name was minamoto no tsuna , who resided at watanabe in settsu province , and took the name of the place ) , great-great-grandson of tōru matsuura hisashi , great-grandson of tsuna koreshige , grandson of tōru mitsusue , great-great-grandson of koreshige tsutomu , son of the emperor hiraku , son of the emperor history records that at least three of emperor saga 's daughters were also made minamoto ( kiyohime , sadahime , and yoshihime ) , but few records concerning his daughters are known . ninmyō genji . they were descendants of emperor ninmyō . his sons masaru and hikaru were udaijin . among hikaru 's descendants was minamoto no atsushi , adoptive father of the saga genji 's watanabe no tsuna and father of the seiwa genji 's mitsunaka 's wife . montoku genji . these were descendants of emperor montoku . among them , yoshiari was a sadaijin , and among his descendants were the sakado clan who were hokumen no bushi . seiwa genji . these were descendants of emperor seiwa . the most numerous of them were those descended from tsunemoto , son of prince sadazumi . minamoto no yoshiie of the kawachi genji was a leader of a buke . his descendants set up the kamakura shogunate , making his a prestigious pedigree claimed by many buke , particularly for the direct descendants in the ashikaga clan ( that set up the ashikaga shogunate ) and the rival nitta clan . centuries later , tokugawa ieyasu would claim descent from the seiwa genji by way of the nitta clan . yōzei genji . these were descendants of emperor yōzei . while tsunemoto is termed the ancestor of the seiwa genji , there is evidence ( rediscovered in the late 19th century by hoshino hisashi ) suggesting that he was actually the grandson of yōzei rather than of seiwa . this theory is not widely accepted as fact , but as yōzei was deposed for reprehensible behavior , there would have been a compelling motive to claim descent from more auspicious origins if it were the case . kōkō genji . these were descendants of emperor kōkō . the great-grandson of his firstborn prince koretada , kōshō , was the ancestor of a line of busshi , from which various styles of buddhist sculpture emerged . kōshō 's grandson kakujo established the shichijō bussho workshop . uda genji . these were descendants of emperor uda . two sons of prince atsumi , masanobu and shigenobu became sadaijin . masanobu 's children in particular flourished , forming five dōjō houses as kuge , and as buke the sasaki clan of the ōmi genji , and the izumo genji . daigo genji . these were descendants of emperor daigo . his son takaakira became a sadaijin , but his downfall came during the anna incident . takaakira 's descendants include the okamoto and kawajiri clans . daigo 's grandson hiromasa was a reputed musician . murakami genji . these were descendants of emperor murakami . his grandson morofusa was an udaijin and had many descendants , among them several houses of dōjō kuge . until the ashikaga clan took it during the muromachi period , the title of genji no chōja always fell to one of morofusa 's progeny . reizei genji . these were descendants of emperor reizei . though they are included among the listing of 21 genji lineages , no concrete record of the names of his descendants made minamoto is known to survive . kazan genji . these were descendants of emperor kazan . they became the kuge shirakawa family , which headed the jingi-kan for centuries , responsible for the centralized aspects of shinto . sanjō genji . these were descendants of emperor sanjō 's son prince atsuakira . starting with one of them , michisue , the position of ōkimi-no-kami ( chief genealogist of the imperial family ) in the ministry of the imperial household was passed down hereditarily . go-sanjō genji . these were descendants of emperor go-sanjō 's son prince sukehito . sukehito 's son arihito was a sadaijin . minamoto no yoritomo 's vassal tashiro nobutsuna , who appears in the tale of the heike , was allegedly arihito 's grandson ( according to the genpei jōsuiki ) . go-shirakawa genji . this line consisted solely of emperor go-shirakawa son mochihito-ō ( takakura-no-miya ) . as part of the succession dispute that led to the opening hostilities of the genpei war , he was declassed ( renamed '' minamoto no mochimitsu '' ) and exiled . juntoku genji . these were descendants of emperor juntoku 's sons tadanari-ō and prince yoshimune . the latter 's grandson yoshinari rose to sadaijin with the help of ashikaga yoshimitsu . go-saga genji . this line consisted solely of emperor go-saga 's grandson prince koreyasu . koreyasu-ō was installed as a puppet shōgun ( the seventh of the kamakura shogunate ) at a young age , and was renamed '' minamoto no koreyasu '' a few years later . after he was deposed , he regained royal status , and became a monk soon after , thereby losing the minamoto name . go-fusakusa genji . these were descendants of emperor go-fukakusa 's son prince hisaaki ( the eighth shōgun of the kamakura shogunate ) . hisaaki 's sons prince morikuni ( the next shōgun ) and prince hisayoshi were made minamoto . hisayoshi 's adopted '' nephew '' ( actually nijō michihira 's son ) muneaki became a gon-dainagon ( acting dainagon ) . ōgimachi genji . these were non-royal descendants of emperor ōgimachi . at first they were buke , but they later became kuge , the hirohata family .