Leotard

use . leotards are used for a variety of purposes , including yoga , exercise , dance ( particularly for ballet and/or modern ) , as pajamas , for additional layered warmth under clothing , and for recreational and casual wear . they may form a part of children 's dressing up and play outfits and can also be worn as a top . leotards are commonly worn in figure skating , postwar modern dance , acrobatic rock ' n'roll , traditional ballet and gymnastics , especially by young children . practice leotards and those worn in podium training sessions are usually sleeveless . female competition garments for gymnastics and skating are almost always long-sleeved , while male competition leotards may be sleeved or sleeveless , the latter more common in gymnastics , the former in figure skating . leotards come in many styles — either with a full seated bottom or as a thong or t-front for maximum comfort and avoidance of panty line when worn under leggings or tights . many full-back leotards are cut high enough above the legs that they expose underwear . for this reason , underwear is often omitted , or special underwear , cut high on the waist , is worn . many dance studios forbid underwear . gymnastics judges can deduct points for visible underwear . for example , in the movie stick it , a competitor had her score reduced for a technicality of showing a bra strap . history . image : beyonce - the formation world tour , at wembley stadium in london , england.jpg right thumb 170px singer beyoncé wears a sparkly leotard with fishnet tights during her performance in london , july 2016 . the first known use of the name leotard came only in 1886 , many years after léotard 's death . léotard himself called the garment a maillot , which is a general french word for different types of tight-fitting shirts or sports shirts . in the early 20th century , leotards were mainly confined to circus and acrobatic shows , worn by the specialists who performed these acts . the 1920s and 1930s saw leotards influencing the style of swimsuits , with women 's one-piece swimsuits today still being similar in appearance to leotards . leotards are worn by professional dancers such as the showgirls of broadway . stage use of the leotard typically coordinates the garment with stockings or tights . in the 1950s , traditionally-styled leotards continued to be worn mainly by stage performers and circus actors , but leotards began to be used as simple and functional exercise garments , often in institutional settings like schools and in fitness training . these were almost always black and worn together with thick tights . between 1950 and 1970 , leotards remained as such in appearance until a style change in the 1970s , with more colorful leotards appearing on the scene , most often in ballet and exercise . during the 1970s and 1980s , leotards were extensively used as clothing for aerobic exercises , eventually displaced in the 1990s by lycra pants similar to those used in cycling uniforms and in the 2000s they were replaced completely by trousers and leggings ( tight clothing which cover the legs made of spandex and denim ) . it continues to be also worn by women cyclists and athletes in competitions . crossover to fashion activewear . by the late 1970s , leotards had become common both as exercise and street wear , popularized by the disco craze , and aerobics fashion craze of the time . these leotards were produced in a variety of nylon and spandex materials , as well as the more traditional cotton previously used for uni-colored leotards and tights . exercise videos by celebrities such as jane fonda also did much to popularize the garment . the dancewear company danskin flourished during this period , producing a wide variety of leotards for both dance and street wear . other companies , such as gilda marx , produced leotards during this time period then ceased production when they ceased to be in fashion . by the late 1980s , leotards for exercise wear had become little more than bikini bottoms with straps over the shoulders , generally worn with cropped shirts . from the mid 1980s to mid 90s , leotards usually cap sleeved style or sometime in colder weather a long sleeved turtleneck style both popularly worn as tops with jeans especially skinny jeans and high waisted ankle length mom jeans , under shortalls or with casual or dress pants as part of everyday wear . they were also worn with skirts outfits . by the mid 1990s , leotards had been almost completely replaced for exercise wear by the sports bra and shorts . leotards are a versatile garment that can either be dressed up or dressed down . the illustration of beyoncé shows a stage costume that has been heavily embellished with sequins and sparkles . among exercise garments , leotards may be seen along with other types of garments , such as t-shirts , crop tops and tights . gymnastics attire . women . for females , the standard gymnastic competition uniform is a leotard . traditionally , competition leotards have always had long sleeves ; however , half-length sleeved and sleeveless garments are now permitted under the code of points and have been worn by teams at the world gymnastics championships and other major events . practice leotards and those worn in podium training sessions are generally sleeveless . in the 1970s , leotards were typically made from polyester and related fabrics . since the 1980s , however , they have been made from spandex . since the 1990s , leotards have become more elaborate and have employed a variety of textiles , including velvet , velour , mesh , metallic fabrics , foils and iridescent '' hologram '' fabric . they can also be decorated with rhinestones , and metallic jewels that are heat-set onto the garments and will not fall or wash off . leotards can not be cut above hip height or be cut past the shoulder blades , back or front . any leotard that is somewhat see-through is also against the rules . usage of white tights is not standard . in rare instances , gymnasts and teams have been penalized with score deductions for their attire . men . thumb for competitions , male gymnasts wear two layers of clothing . the first , a singlet ( or comp shirt , short for competition shirt ) is a sleeveless leotard . for floor and vault , gymnasts wear a pair of very short shorts over the singlet . for their other events , they wear a pair of long pants , attached to the bottom of the feet with stirrups . unlike women 's uniforms , which generally employ metallic or iridescent fabrics , men 's uniforms are usually matte-colored and less ornate . singlets usually employ one or more of the national team colors , but there are no restrictions on design . shorts and pants are generally a solid color , usually white , blue , red or black . history . olympic gymnastics team leotards have dramatically changed from their first memorable designs . over time , the emphasis on what leotards are intended to do has changed . originally , the intent was to cover as much of a woman 's body as possible , while today , leotards must breathe , improve aerodynamics and seamlessly re-shape as female athletes bend , twist and contort their way through increasingly difficult routines . . men 's leotards . when jules léotard created the maillot , it was intended for men . this style of leotard can be seen in early 20th century photos of the circus 'strong man ' . men 's leotards evolved along with the women 's style , eventually resembling it , except that the men 's version had a slightly lower-cut leg opening and a lower-cut front . unlike their female counterparts , however , men 's leotards come in two styles — either with a full seated bottom or as a thong . the reason for this is apparent when worn with tights such as in ballet , where lines created by the garment underneath the tights would panty line . in such instances , a dance belt is also worn . leotards are commonly worn by male dancers ( particularly for ballet ) and gymnasts . leotard-like garments ( often of the '' biketard '' or singlet type ) are also often worn by men in sports such as rowing , wrestling , cycling and running , to maintain a tight fit and stop the upper part of the clothing running up . see also . bodystocking catsuit spandex fetishism underwear as outerwear . references . external links .