Platoon

etymology . according to merriam-webster , '' the term was first used in the 17th century to refer to a small body of musketeers who fired together in a volley alternately with another platoon . '' the word is from the 17th-century french peloton , from pelote meaning a small ball ( from the low latin '' pilotta '' from latin '' pila '' ) . the meaning was a group of soldiers firing a volley together , while a different platoon reloaded . this suggests an augmentative intention . since soldiers were often organized in two or three lines , each firing its volley together , this would have normally meant platoons organised so that half or a third of the company is firing at once . the platoon was originally a firing unit rather than an organization . the system is said to have been invented by gustavus adolphus of sweden in 1618 . p.250 curtis , thomas the london encyclopaedia : or , universal dictionary of science , art , literature , and practical mechanics . volume 9 t . tegg , 1829 in the french army in the 1670s , a battalion was divided into 18 platoons who were grouped into three '' firings '' with each platoon either firing or reloading at any given time during a fusillade . p.486 lynn , john a . giant of the grand siècle : the french army , 1610-1715 cambridge university press , 14/12/2006 the system was also used in the british , austrian , russian and dutch armies . p.404 nimwegen , olaf van the dutch army and the military revolutions , 1588-1688 boydell & brewer , 21/10/2010 . modern organization . on 1 october 1913 , under a scheme by general sir ivor maxse , the regular battalions of the british army were reorganised from the previous eight companies to a four-company structure , with each company having four platoons as separate units each commanded by a lieutenant with a platoon sergeant as his deputy . each platoon was divided into four sections , each commanded by a corporal . p.25 gudmundsson , bruce the british expeditionary force 1914-15 osprey publishing , 10/12/2005 because of a shortage of officers , a non-commissioned officer rank of platoon sergeant major was introduced from 1938 to 1940 for experienced non-commissioned officers who were given command of platoons . australia . in the australian army , an infantry platoon has thirty-six soldiers organized into three eight-man sections and a twelve-man maneuver support section , with a lieutenant as platoon commander and a sergeant as platoon sergeant , accompanied by a platoon signaller and sometimes a platoon medic ( full strength of forty men ) . a section comprises eight soldiers led by a corporal with a lance corporal as second in command . each section has two fireteams of four men , one led by the corporal and the other by the lance corporal . each fireteam ( also called a '' brick '' by australian soldiers ) has one soldier with an fn minimi and the other three armed with steyr aug assault rifles . one rifle per fireteam has an attached 40mm grenade launcher ; one of the grenadiers is the lance corporal . fireteam bravo has a hk417 7.62mm for the designated marksman role . more recently , the designated marksman of each australian fireteam has been issued the hk417 in afghanistan and possibly afterwards . the platoon may also have three fn mag general-purpose machine guns , one m2 browning heavy machine gun or a mk 19 grenade launcher at its disposal . united kingdom . in the british army , a rifle platoon from an infantry company consists of three sections of eight men , plus a signaller ( radio operator ) , a platoon sergeant ( a sergeant ) , the platoon commander ( either a second lieutenant or lieutenant ) and a mortar man operating a light mortar ( full strength of 27 men and one officer ) . this may not be the case for all british infantry units , since the 51mm mortars are not part of the toe post-afghanistan . under army 2020 , a platoon in the heavy protected mobility regiments consist of around 30 soldiers in four mastiff/fres uv vehicles . each section is commanded by a corporal ( lance sergeant in the foot guards ) , with a lance corporal as second-in-command and six riflemen divided into two four-man fireteams . support weapons platoons ( such as mortar or anti-tank platoons ) are generally larger and are commanded by a captain with a colour sergeant or warrant officer . bangladesh . in the bangladesh army , infantry regiments have platoons commanded by a warrant officer , assisted by a sergeant . the platoon strength is typically 32 soldiers . the platoon headquarter consists of 5 men ; the platoon commander , sergeant , a radio operator and 2 soldiers carrying a rocket launcher . the platoon hq commands 3 rifle section of 9 men each . a section led by a corporal , who 's assisted by a lance corporal . each section also has 2 light machine gunners . canada . in the canadian army , the infantry platoon commander is a second lieutenant , lieutenant or a junior captain assisted by a platoon warrant ( who holds the rank of warrant officer , but can be a sergeant ) . it is usually divided into three eight to ten person sections and a heavy weapons detachment which will deploy a gpmg , and a carl gustav rifle , depending on mission requirements . sections are commanded by a sergeant or master corporal with a master corporal or corporal in the second in command position ; two members of a section will carry c9 lmg 's and the remainder will carry colt canada c7 fitted with either optics or a grenade launcher . a section is broken into two assault groups , similar to the british and australian organization . three infantry platoons make up a typical infantry company , sometimes with a heavy weapons or support platoon in addition . specialist platoons , like reconnaissance , or '' recce '' platoons , that may be attached to a battalion may be led by a captain and assisted by a warrant officer . some very large specialist platoons will actually have a lieutenant as the second-in-command . in many corps , platoon-sized units are called troops instead . prior to 1940 , a platoon might be commanded by either a warrant officer or a lieutenant . an officer was referred to as '' platoon commander '' , while a warrant officer in the same position was called a platoon sergeant major . . colombia . within the colombian army , a training platoon ( in spanish pelotón ) is often commanded by a higher-ranking soldier known as a dragoneante , who is selected for his excellence in discipline and soldiering skills . however , a dragoneante is still a soldier and can be removed from his position if his commander sees fit . for combatant platoons ( platoons engaged in combat with guerrilla rebels ) , a corporal or sergeant would be the most likely commander . france . under the 1791 regulations a peloton in the french army was used in the equivalent manner to a company , with the first section led by the sous-lieutenant and the second section led by the lieutenant , a captain commanding the entire group . reglement concernant l'exercice et les manoeuvres de l'infanterie . du ler . aout 1791 in the french military , a peloton is a mainly a term designating an infantry unit . an escadron is a unit of battle tank in cavalry or armor , but in some mechanized infantry regiments ( groupe de chasseurs mécanisés ) , the tank platoon is also called peloton de char de combat . the peloton or escadron corresponds to the platoon , equivalent in size to an infantry section and commanded by a lieutenant or sergeant . it may also mean a body of officers in training to become noncommissioned officers , sous-officiers or officers ( peloton de caporal , peloton des sous-officiers ) . georgia . the georgian armed forces equivalent of the platoon is the ozeuli . translated , it means '' group of 20 '' but has no connection with the number . it has been transferred into modern usage from medieval army reforms of the georgian king david the builder . originally , it was meant to be a small detachment of 20 men to be led by a leader of corresponding rank . almost all smaller formations are based on the designations of those reforms , which originally suggested tactical flexibility by keeping the size of small units in round numbers ( 10 , 20 , 100 ) . battalions and brigades were not affected by that system . it is unknown whether that usage was abandoned in the 1820s or earlier , but in present days a georgian platoon still called '' ozeuili '' has a similar size to that of other armies . normally for infantry it has 32 men but can vary depending on the type of unit . germany . the german army equivalent of the platoon is the zug ( same word as for train , draught , move or streak ) , consisting of a zugtrupp ( '' platoon troop '' or platoon headquarters squad ) , of four to six men , and three squads ( gruppen ) of eight to eleven men each . an oberfeldwebel ( '' sergeant first class '' ) is in charge of the zugtrupp . the zugtrupp provides support for the platoon leader and acts as a reserve force ( such as two additional snipers or an anti-tank weapon crew ) . three züge make up a kompanie ( '' company '' ) . the first platoon , until 2013 , used to be commanded by an oberleutnant ( '' first lieutenant '' ) or a leutnant ( '' second lieutenant '' ) , nowadays it is usually a hauptmann ( '' captain '' ) , who is also the kompanies second-in-command . the second zug is led by an oberleutnant or a leutnant , the third zug is led by experienced ncos , usually a hauptfeldwebel ( '' master sergeant '' ) . in the first platoon , the platoon leader 's assistant is a hauptfeldwebel ; in the second and third platoons , the assistant is an oberfeldwebel . each squad is led by an oberfeldwebel , and its size corresponds to the typical passenger capacity of its squad vehicle ( either wheeled or armoured ) . another of these vehicles is used for the zugtrupp . sergeants of inferior rank act as assistant squad leaders in the other squads . a fallschirmjäger ( '' airborne infantry platoon '' ) has special operations responsibilities and has command positions one rank higher than corresponding positions in a standard infantry platoon . a captain ( hauptmann ) is the platoon leader , assisted by a first lieutenant and each squad has a second lieutenant or a master sergeant in charge , often supported by a long-service sergeant or skilled senior corporal . hungary . in the hungarian armed forces , a rifle platoon is commanded by either a second lieutenant or a first lieutenant , with a platoon sergeant ( with the rank of sergeant major ) , a platoon signaller , an armoured personnel carrier ( apc ) driver and an apc gunner composing the platoon headquarters . there is also in the hq 's to & e a designated marksman rifle—either an svd or a szép sniper rifle . the platoon is sub-divided into three squads , each with eight soldiers . each squad is commanded by a sergeant . his/her deputy has an rpg , there are also two soldiers with pkm machine guns , two with ak-63 assault rifles—one is an rpg grenadier , the other is the medic—the apc driver and the apc gunner . each squad and the platoon headquarters is equipped with an btr-80 armoured personnel carrier . in total , the platoon comprises 29 soldiers , of whom eight are vehicle crew . india . in the indian army , a platoon consists of three sections . platoons are commanded by junior commissioned officers ( jcos ) . sections are the smallest components in the indian army consisting of ten men and commanded by a havildar . . israel . the israel defense forces ( idf ) uses platoons ( hebrew : '' mahlakot '' , literally '' divisions '' ) as the basic unit composing the company and usually consists of 30 to 65 soldiers ( or 3–4 tanks in the armored corps ) . those soldiers are divided into 2–4 '' classes '' ( '' kitot '' ) or teams ( '' tzvatim '' ) , each composing of 6–21 soldiers . the platoon is the smallest military unit commanded by a commissioned officer—and all officers graduating from the idf 's officer 's academy receive a '' platoon commander '' pin , even if they are not intended to command a platoon . the platoon commander is usually the equivalent of first or second lieutenant and is assisted and advised by a platoon sergeant , acting as his replacement . in some elite units , such as maglan , egoz or duvdevan , the teams are usually smaller and commanded by officers , with the platoon commanded by a higher-ranking officer , while in special forces units like shayetet 13 and sayeret matkal all combatants are officers . new zealand . in the new zealand army , an infantry platoon is commanded by a 2nd lieutenant or a lieutenant , with a platoon sergeant , a platoon signaller and a medic ( where relevant ) composing the platoon headquarters . the platoon is sub-divided into three section of between 7-10 soldiers , each commanded by a corporal with a lance-corporal as the section second in command . each section can be sub-divided into two fire-teams , commanded by the section commander and second in command respectively , as well as normal two man scout , rifle and gun teams . there are three platoons in a rifle company , which is commanded by a major , and three rifle companies in an infantry battalion , which is commanded by a lieutenant-colonel . an infantry battalion contains an organic support company ( mortars , machine guns , etc . ) and a logistics company ( transport and stores ) . russia . a motorised rifle platoon in the soviet armed forces was mounted in either btr armoured personnel carriers or bmp infantry fighting vehicles , with the former being more numerous into the late 1980s . both were led by a platoon leader and assistant platoon leader and consisted of three 9-man rifle squads mounted in three vehicles . in both bmp and btr squads , the driver and vehicle gunner stayed with the vehicle when the rest of the squad dismounted , and one squad in the platoon would have one of their rifleman armed with an svd sniper rifle . there was either one empty seat in each btr or two empty seats in each bmp to accommodate the platoon leader and assistant platoon leader . us army , fm 100-2-3 the soviet army : troops , organization and equipment , 4-3 tank platoons prior to the late 1980s consisted of a platoon headquarters squad and three tank squads , each consisting of one t-64 , t-72 or t-80 tank for 12 personnel and 4 tanks total ; platoons that used the older t-54 , t-55 or t-62s added another crewmember for a total of 16 . however , tank units operating in eastern europe began to standardize their platoons to just two tank squads , for a total of 3 tanks and 9 personnel . us army , fm 100-2-3 the soviet army : troops , organization and equipment , paragraph 4-15 us army , fm 100-2-3 the soviet army : troops , organization and equipment , paragraph 4-108 . singapore . in the singapore army , a platoon is a lieutenant 's billet . however , in practice , a second lieutenant is usually appointed and then eventually promoted . a typical infantry platoon consists of three seven-man sections of riflemen and a machine gun team , both commanded by third sergeant , a platoon sergeant and a combat medic for a total of 27 soldiers . beginning in 1992 , the singapore armed forces has allowed warrant officers to be appointed as platoon commanders . south africa . in the south african army , a platoon usually consists of 27 soldiers and one officer organized into three sections 10 soldiers each plus an hq which contains 8 men . a lieutenant as platoon commander and a sergeant as platoon sergeant , accompanied by a signaller and a patmor group of two men . a section comprises 10 soldiers led by a corporal who 's assisted by a lance corporal as second in command . the corporal is in charge of all the soldiers except the light machine gun ( lmg ) group which is led by the lance corporal . the lmg group is armed with the ss77 while rest of the platoon is armed with vektor r4 , with rifle grenades if available . there 's also the grenade launcher within each section . sweden . in the swedish army , a platoon is organized in the following way , according to markstridsreglemente 4 pluton ( ground combat regulation 4 platoon ) : chefsgrupp ( leadership squad ) plutonschef—platoon leader . ställföreträdande plutonschef—deputy platoon leader . plutonsbefäl—platoon nco . signalist—radio operator . fordonsförare—vehicle driver . tolk—interpreter ( only present for deployments abroad ) . 3-4 skyttegrupp ( rifle squad ) gruppchef -- squad leader ställföreträdande gruppchef -- deputy squad leader . 2 soldater tillika kulspruteskyttar -- 2 machine-gunners . 2 soldater tillika pansarskotts-/granatgevärsskyttar/fordonsförare -- 2 riflemen armed with at4/carl gustav gunner and loader/vehicle driver . 1 soldat tillika skarpskytt -- 1 marksman . 1 soldat tillika stridssjukvårdare -- 1 combat medic . thailand . in the royal thai army , a platoon is commanded by either a lieutenant or second lieutenant , assisted by a platoon sergeant , usually of the rank of sergeant major . in infantry units , rifle platoons are generally made up of five squads . these are three 11-man rifle squads , one 8-man command squad ( consisting of platoon commander , sergeant , radio operator , 2 assistants and a 3-man weapons team ) and one 9-man machine gun squad . . united states . . historical background . from the 16th century until the late 17th century in what would become the united states , an infantry platoon was a '' half company '' commanded by a lieutenant , assisted by two sergeants and two corporals ( increased in 1861 to four corporals ) . the sergeants , assisted by the corporals , led the two sections ( half-platoons ) and the squads ( the terms were often used interchangeably until 1891 ) of the platoon . an additional senior sergeant serving as the '' platoon sergeant '' ( originally designated as '' assistant to platoon commander '' from 1917 until 1940 , and as '' platoon leader '' until 1943 , when officer platoon commanders were re-designated as '' platoon leaders '' ) was not authorized until 1943 . depending on the time period , the platoon could include from as few as 20 privates ( with two corporals , two sergeants , and a lieutenant ) to as many as 44 ( with four corporals , two sergeants , and a lieutenant ) with 10 to 22 privates per section . the corporals and the sergeant , prior to the increase to two corporals per section , led the two squads of the section . the squads were primarily a non-tactical sub-unit used mainly for drill ( marching practice , formations , ceremonies , etc . ) and '' house-keeping '' matters , such as interior guard duty , billeting , messing , fatigue details ( i.e . , working parties ) , etc . indeed , the sections , as well as the platoons , were primarily administrative sub-units of the company , since tactically the company seldom employed in other than as a massed formation . the standard procedure , once the company had marched into its position in the line of battle , was for the company to form facing the enemy as two ranks , by platoon , one behind the other . the commanding officer ( a captain ) and the one to three lieutenants , serving as platoon commanders ( not designated as platoon '' leaders '' until 1943 ) and the executive officer ( again depending on the time period , but not officially authorized until 1898 ) would direct the fighting , leading from the front in the attack and on the flanks in the defense . the executive officer , when assigned , or usually the junior lieutenant and the first sergeant were normally positioned behind the battle line so as to assist the company commander in overseeing the company and managing the rear ( company trains , including the wagoner and company supply wagon - under the supervision of the quartermaster sergeant , as well as casualties , enemy prisoners , non-combatants , deserters , etc . ) . while the officers managed the battle and the staff ncos ( first sergeant and quartermaster sergeant ) superintended logistics , the ncos ( sergeants and corporals ) served as first-line supervisors and leaders by exhibiting a soldierly example for their privates and encouraging them to maintain proper discipline and to fight effectively . in so doing , the sergeants acted as '' file closers '' , working the line by putting men forward to replace casualties in the front rank , exhorting men to fire , reload , move forward , etc . and , if need be , physically assisting or restraining men who refused to move forward or attempted to flee . the corporals physically led by example ( much like modern fire team leaders ) by taking their place in the line with their privates , fighting alongside them , and by demonstrating proper soldierly attributes . cavalry platoons had a similar organization to the infantry , but with fewer men ; platoons rarely exceeded around 33 men , including the lieutenant , sergeants and corporals . field artillery platoons , led by a lieutenant ( who rode his own horse ) , with two or three to a battery , normally consisted of two gun sections . each gun section was led by a sergeant ( who also rode his own horse ) and consisted of two half sections led by a corporal . one half section contained the gun and its implements , its limber ( including one ammunition chest ) and four to six horses ( depending on gun weight and available horses ) , and several members of the gun crew . the corporal and one or two privates rode on the horses pulling the limber , while a couple of privates rode on the ammunition chest lid seat . the other half section consisted of the caisson ( which carried two ammunition chests , tools , spare parts , baggage , and a spare wheel ) with its limber ( again with one ammunition chest ) , pulled by four to six horses , and two spare horses ( when available ) tethered to the rear of the caisson , and the remainder of the gun crew with the corporal and privates riding the horses or sitting on the several ammunition chests lid seats . in total , the field artillery platoon ( at full strength of men , horses , and equipment ) consisted of a lieutenant , two sergeants , four corporals , 24 privates , 31 horses , four limbers , two caissons , two field guns , two spare wheels , plus ammunition , implements , tools , spare parts , and baggage . by the end of world war i in 1918 , the rifle platoon had expanded to its largest size in u.s . army history into a unit of 59 soldiers . this platoon organization included one lieutenant , three sergeants , eight corporals , 15 privates first class , and 32 privates . the platoon was organized into a six-man platoon headquarters ( including the platoon commander , a sergeant as '' assistant to platoon commander '' , and four privates as '' runners '' or messengers ) and four sections . the sections were specialized by primary weapon and each contained a different number of men . the '' riflemen '' and '' automatic riflemen '' sections were each led by a sergeant and divided into two squads of eight and seven men each , respectively , including a corporal to lead each squad . the '' hand bombers '' ( i.e . , hand grenade throwers ) and '' rifle grenadiers '' sections had a total of twelve and nine men each , respectively , including two corporals each , but no sergeant . united states army . center of military history . organization of the american expeditionary forces , volume 1 , washington , dc , 1988 , p.347 . . army . in the united states army , rifle platoons are normally composed of 42 soldiers . they consist of three rifle squads , one weapons squad , and a six-man headquarters . the headquarters consists of a platoon leader ( pl ) -- usually a first lieutenant ( 1lt ) , a platoon sergeant ( psg ) -- usually a sergeant first class ( sfc , e-7 ) , a radio-telephone operator ( rto ) , a platoon forward observer ( fo ) , the fo 's rto , and the platoon medic . each squad is led by a sergeant , who is usually a staff sergeant ( ssg , e-6 ) . the rifle squads each consist of two fire teams and a squad leader , while the weapons squad consists of two medium machine gun teams , two close combat missile teams , and a squad leader . a typical infantry company consists of 3 rifle platoons and a 4th platoon known as a weapons platoon . the weapons platoon typically provides heavy weapons support to the company and includes mortar , anti-armor and heavy machine guns organically . marine corps . in the united states marine corps , infantry rifle platoons nominally ( per to & e ) consist of 43 marines and are led by a platoon leader , usually a second lieutenant ( o-1 ) , assisted by a platoon sergeant , a staff sergeant ( e-6 ) . the platoon headquarters also includes a platoon guide , a sergeant ( e-5 ) , who serves as the assistant platoon sergeant , and a messenger ( private or private first class ) . rifle platoons consist of three rifle squads of 13 men each , led by a sergeant ( e-5 ) . in the attack ( especially if part of the assault echelon ) or in a deliberate defense , rifle platoons are usually augmented with a two-man mortar forward observer team and are often reinforced with a seven-man machinegun squad and/or a four-man assault weapons squad from the infantry companies weapons platoon . an infantry rifle company ( 3 per infantry battalion ) has a weapons platoon . the infantry battalion consists of a headquarters and support company ( h & s ) , three rifle companies , and one weapons company . the weapons company is usually led by a first lieutenant ( o-2 ) and a gunnery sergeant ( e-7 ) because of the generally larger number of marines ( up to 69 in the 81mm mortar platoon ) in these platoons ( the heavy machine gun platoon being the exception with only 28 members ) and the more complex weapon systems employed . a rifle company weapons platoon has a 60mm mortar section of 13 marines with three m224 mortar squads , an assault section of 13 marines and six smaw rocket launchers divided into three squads of two teams each , and a medium machine gun section of 22 marines and six m240g general-purpose machine guns divided into three squads of two teams each . the infantry battalion weapons company consists of three heavy weapons platoons : 81mm mortar platoon ( referred to as “ 81s platoon or 81s ” ) , heavy machine gun platoon ( . 50cal hmg and 40mm agl ) , and anti armor platoon ( javelin missile and antitank tow missile launchers ) . each of these three platoons is divided into sections . three sections of two squads each in the heavy machine gun platoon , two sections of four squads each in the 81mm mortar platoon , one section of two squads with four teams each in the javelin missile section , and one section of four squads with two teams each in the antitank tow missile section . marine rifle or weapons platoons would also have from one to four navy hospital corpsman assigned along with the marines . platoons are also used in reconnaissance , light armored reconnaissance ( scout dismounts ) , combat engineer , law enforcement ( i.e . , military police ) , marine corps security force regiment companies . in armored vehicle units , platoons consist of sections containing two or three vehicles and their crews : tank and light armored reconnaissance platoons consist of two sections , each containing two tanks/light armored vehicles and crews assault amphibian vehicle ( aav ) platoons consist of four sections , each containing three aavs and crews ( per t/o 4652m . ) combat engineer assault breacher sections consist of two cev assault breacher vehicles and crews in low altitude air defense ( laad ) batteries , the firing platoons consist of three sections , each consisting of a section leader and five two-man stinger missile teams . in artillery batteries , the firing platoon consists of six artillery sections , each containing one gun with its crew and prime mover ( i.e . , a truck to tow the artillery piece and transport the gun crew and baggage ) . air force . the united states air force has a similarly sized and configured unit called a flight . a flight usually ranges from a dozen people to over a hundred , or typically four aircraft . the typical flight commander is a captain . the typical flight chief is a master sergeant . letter designations can be used , such as alpha flight , bravo flight , etc . see also . military organization platoon , a film . references . external links .