Charles William Eliot

crisis in american colleges . in the 1800s , american colleges , controlled by clergymen , continued to embrace classics that had little relevance to an industrializing nation . few offered courses in the sciences , modern languages , history , or political economy — and only a handful had graduate schools . as businessmen became increasingly reluctant to send their sons to schools whose curricula offered nothing useful — or to donate money for their support , some educational leaders began exploring ways of making higher education more attractive . some backed the establishment of specialized schools of science and technology , like harvard 's lawrence scientific school , yale 's sheffield scientific school , and the newly chartered massachusetts institute of technology , about to offer its first classes in 1865 . others proposed abandoning the classical curriculum , in favor of more vocational offerings . harvard was in the middle of this crisis . after three undistinguished short-term clerical presidencies in a ten-year period , the college was slowly fading out . boston 's business leaders , many of them harvard alumni , were pressing for change — though with no clear idea of the kinds of changes they wanted . on his return to the united states in 1865 , eliot accepted an appointment as professor of analytical chemistry at the newly founded massachusetts institute of technology . in that year , an important revolution occurred in the government of harvard university . the board of overseers had hitherto consisted of the governor , lieutenant-governor , president of the state senate , speaker of the house , secretary of the board of education , and president and treasurer of the university , together with thirty other persons , and these other persons were elected by joint ballot of the two houses of the state legislature . an opinion had long been gaining ground that it would be better for the community and the interests of learning , as well as for the university , if the power to elect the overseers were transferred from the legislature to the graduates of the college . this change was made in 1865 , and at the same time the governor and other state officers ceased to form part of the board . the effect of this change was to greatly strengthen the interest of the alumni in the management of the university , and thus to prepare the way for extensive and thorough reforms . shortly afterward dr . thomas hill resigned the presidency , and after a considerable interregnum eliot succeeded to that office in 1869 . . harvard presidency . early in 1869 , eliot had presented his ideas about reforming american higher education in a compelling two-part article , '' the new education , '' in the atlantic monthly , the nation 's leading journal of opinion . '' we are fighting a wilderness , physical and moral , '' eliot declared in setting forth his vision of the american university , '' for this fight we must be trained and armed . '' charles w . eliot , '' the new education , '' atlantic monthly , xxiii , feb . ( part ii in mar . ) 1869 . the articles resonated powerfully with the businessmen who controlled the harvard corporation . shortly after their appearance , merely 35 years old , he was elected as the youngest president in the history of the nation 's oldest university . eliot 's educational vision incorporated important elements of unitarian and emersonian ideas about character development , framed by a pragmatic understanding of the role of higher education in economic and political leadership . his concern in '' the new education '' was not merely curriculum , but the ultimate utility of education . a college education could enable a student to make intelligent choices , but should not attempt to provide specialized vocational or technical training . although his methods were pragmatic , eliot 's ultimate goal , like those of the secularized puritanism of the boston elite , was a spiritual one . the spiritual desideratum was not otherworldly . it was embedded in the material world and consisted of measurable progress of the human spirit towards mastery of human intelligence over nature — the '' moral and spiritual wilderness . '' while this mastery depended on each individual fully realizing his capacities , it was ultimately a collective achievement and the product of institutions which established the conditions both for individual and collective achievement . like the union victory in the civil war , triumph over the moral and physical wilderness and the establishment of mastery required a joining of industrial and cultural forces . while he proposed the reform of professional schools , the development of research faculties , and , in general , a huge broadening of the curriculum , his blueprint for undergraduate education in crucial ways preserved — and even enhanced — its traditional spiritual and character education functions . echoing emerson , he believed that every individual mind had '' its own peculiar constitution . '' the problem , both in terms of fully developing an individual 's capacities and in maximizing his social utility , was to present him with a course of study sufficiently representative so as '' to reveal to him , or at least to his teachers and parents , his capacities and tastes . '' an informed choice once made , the individual might pursue whatever specialized branch of knowledge he found congenial . but eliot 's goal went well beyond emersonian self-actualization for its own sake . framed by the higher purposes of a research university in the service of the nation , specialized expertise could be harnessed to public purposes . '' when the revelation of his own peculiar taste and capacity comes to a young man , let him reverently give it welcome , thank god , and take courage , '' eliot declared in his inaugural address . he further stated : on the subject of educational reform , he declared : under eliot 's leadership , harvard adopted an '' elective system '' which vastly expanded the range of courses offered and permitted undergraduates unrestricted choice in selecting their courses of study — with a view to enabling them to discover their '' natural bents '' and pursue them into specialized studies . a monumental expansion of harvard 's graduate and professional school and departments facilitated specialization , while at the same time making the university a center for advanced scientific and technological research . accompanying this was a shift in pedagogy from recitations and lectures towards classes that put students ' achievements to the test and , through a revised grading system , rigorously assessed individual performance . eliot 's reforms did not go without major criticism . his own kinsman samuel eliot morison in his tercentenary history of harvard made this devastating assessment : . opposition to football and other sports . during his tenure , eliot opposed football and tried unsuccessfully to abolish the game at harvard . in 1905 , the new york times reported that he called it '' a fight whose strategy and ethics are those of war '' , that violation of rules can not be prevented , that '' the weaker man is considered the legitimate prey of the stronger '' and that '' no sport is wholesome in which ungenerous or mean acts which easily escape detection contribute to victory . '' '' president eliot on football . '' the school journal , volume 70 , united education company , new york , chicago , and boston , february 18 , 1905 , p.188 . he also made public objections to baseball , basketball , and hockey . he was quoted as saying that rowing and tennis were the only clean sports . eliot once said : . attempted acquisition of mit . during his lengthy tenure as harvard 's leader , eliot initiated repeated attempts to acquire his former employer , the fledgling massachusetts institute of technology , and these efforts continued even after he stepped down from the presidency . the much younger college had considerable financial problems during its first five decades , and had been repeatedly rescued from insolvency by various benefactors , including george eastman , the founder of eastman kodak company . the faculty , students , and alumni of mit often vehemently opposed merger of their school under the harvard umbrella . in 1916 , mit succeeded in moving across the charles river from crowded back bay , boston to larger facilities on the southern riverfront of cambridge , but still faced the prospect of merger with harvard , maclaurin quoted : '' in future harvard agrees to carry out all its work in engineering and mining in the buildings of technology under the executive control of the president of technology , and , what is of the first importance , to commit all instruction and the laying down of all courses to the faculty of technology , after that faculty has been enlarged and strengthened by the addition to its existing members of men of eminence from harvard 's graduate school of applied science . '' which was to begin '' when the institute will occupy its splendid new buildings in cambridge . '' however , in 1917 , the massachusetts supreme judicial court rendered a decision that effectively cancelled plans for a merger , and mit eventually attained independent financial stability . during his life , eliot had been involved in at least five unsuccessful attempts to absorb mit into harvard . . personal life . on october 27 , 1858 , eliot married ellen derby peabody of salem massachusetts ( 1836–1869 ) in boston at kings chapel . ellen was the daughter of ephraim peabody ( 1807-1856 ) and mary jane derby ( 1807-1892 ) , great-great-granddaughter of elias hasket derby ( 1739-1799 ) . they had four sons , one of whom , charles eliot ( november 1 , 1859 – march 25 , 1897 ) became an important landscape architect , responsible for boston 's public park system . another son , samuel atkins eliot ii ( august 24 , 1862 – october 15 , 1950 ) became a unitarian minister who was the longest-serving president of the american unitarian association ( 1900–1927 ) and was the first president granted executive authority of that organization . the nobel prize-winning poet t.s . eliot was a cousin and attended harvard from 1906 through 1909 , completing his elective undergraduate courses in three instead of the normal four years , which were the last three years of charles ' presidency . after ellen derby peabody died at the age of 33 of tuberculosis , eliot married a second wife in 1877 , grace mellen hopkinson ( 1846–1924 ) . this second marriage did not produce any children . grace was a close relative of frances stone hopkinson , wife of samuel atkins eliot ii , charles 's son . eliot retired in 1909 , having served 40 years as president , the longest term in the university 's history , and was honored as harvard 's first president emeritus . he lived another 17 years , dying in northeast harbor , maine , in 1926 , and was interred in mount auburn cemetery in cambridge , massachusetts . legacy . under eliot , harvard became a worldwide university , accepting its students around america using standardized entrance examinations and hiring well-known scholars from home and abroad . eliot was an administrative reformer , reorganizing the university 's faculty into schools and departments and replacing recitations with lectures and seminars . during his forty-year presidency , the university vastly expanded its facilities , with laboratories , libraries , classrooms , and athletic facilities replacing simple colonial structures . eliot attracted the support of major donors from among the nation 's growing plutocracy , making it the wealthiest private university in the world . eliot 's leadership made harvard not only the pace-setter for other american schools , but a major figure in the reform of secondary school education . both the elite boarding schools , most of them founded during his presidency , and the public high schools shaped their curricula to meet harvard 's demanding standards . eliot was a key figure in the creation of standardized admissions examinations , as a founding member of the college entrance examination board . as leader of the nation 's wealthiest and best-known university , eliot was necessarily a celebrated figure whose opinions were sought on a wide variety of matters , from tax policy ( he offered the first coherent rationale for the charitable tax exemption ) to the intellectual welfare of the general public . president eliot edited the harvard classics , which together are colloquially known as his five foot shelf five foot shelf and which were intended at the time to suggest a foundation for informed discourse , '' a good substitute for a liberal education in youth to anyone who would read them with devotion , even if he could spare but fifteen minutes a day for reading . '' eliot was an articulate opponent of american imperialism , and he was opposed to the education of women . many talented african americans were educated at harvard during eliot 's tenure , including such notables as w . e . b . du bois ( class of 1890 ) . booker t . washington was awarded an honorary degree by harvard in 1896 . unlike his successor , a . lawrence lowell , eliot opposed efforts to limit the admission of jews and roman catholics . marsha graham synnott , the half-opened door : discrimination and admissions at harvard , yale , and princeton , 1900-1970 , westport , ct : greenwood press , 1979 . eliot , charles william , 1834-1926 . papers of charles william eliot . inventory general correspondence group 3 , 1921-1925 , bulk 1921-1923 , box 77 , harvard university library . at the same time , eliot was radically opposed to labor unions , fostering a campus climate where many harvard students served as strikebreakers ; he was called by some '' the greatest labor union hater in the country . '' stephen h . norwood , '' the student as strikebreaker : college youth and the crisis of masculinity in the early 20th century '' , journal of social history , winter 1994 . charles eliot was a fearless crusader not only for educational reform , but for many of the goals of the progressive movement—whose most prominent figurehead was theodore roosevelt ( class of 1880 ) and most eloquent spokesman was herbert croly ( class of 1889 ) . eliot was also involved in philanthropy . in 1908 he joined the general education board , in 1913 served on the international health board , and served as a trustee of the rockefeller foundation from 1914 to 1917 . helped found the institute for government research ( brookings institution ) and serving as trustee . acted as trustee of the carnegie endowment for international peace from its beginning in 1910 until 1919 . was an incorporator of the boston museum of fine arts in 1870 , and a trustee . between 1908 and 1925 he served as the chairman of the museum 's special advisory committee on education . served as vice president for the national committee for mental hygiene from 1913 till his death . accepted election to be the first president of the american social hygiene association . in 1902 became vice president of the national civil service reform league , and in 1908 president of the league . in celebration of president eliot 's 90 birthday , congratulations came in across the world and notably from two american presidents . woodrow wilson said of him , “ no man has ever made a deeper impression of the educational system of a country than president eliot has upon the educational system of america , ” while theodore roosevelt exclaimed , “ he is the only man in the world i envy . ” upon his death in 1926 , the new york times published a full-page interview that eliot had given as he neared the end of his life , including excerpts from his writings on education , religion , democracy , labor , '' woman '' , and americanism . . inscriptions composed by charles w . eliot . over one hundred inscriptions were composed by president eliot , placed on buildings ranging from schools , churches , public buildings , memorial tablets , numerous monuments , and to the library of congress . on these heights during the night of march 4 1776 , the american troops besieging boston built two redoubts , which made the harbor and town untenable by the british fleet and garrison . on march 17 the british fleet carrying 11000 effective men and 1000 refuges , dropped down to nantasket roads and thenceforth boston was free , a strong british force had been expelled from one of the united american colonies ( evacuation monument - dorchester heights monument , boston , massachusetts , 1902 ) to the men of boston who died for their country on land and sea in the war which kept the union whole , destroyed slavery and maintained the constitution . the grateful city has built this monument , that their example may speak to coming generations ( soldiers and sailors monument ( boston ) , boston common , massachusetts , 1877 ) . monuments and memorials . eliot house , one of the seven original residential houses for undergraduates at the college , was named in honor of eliot and opened in 1931 . charles w . eliot middle school in altadena , california and eliot elementary school in tulsa , oklahoma were named in his honor . in 1940 the united states postal service issued a stamp in eliot 's honor as part of their famous americans issue . asteroid ( 5202 ) 1983 xx is named in his honor . eliot mountain was named in honor of the lifelong academic who summered on mount desert island , maine , and was a key figure in the creation of acadia national park . . honors and degrees . 1857 fellow american academy of arts and sciences 1869 ll.d . williams college ; ll.d . princeton university 1870 ll.d . yale university 1871 member american philosophical society 1873 member massachusetts historical society 1879 honorary member american library association american library association . honorary membership . 1902 ll.d . johns hopkins university 1903 officer legion of honor ( france ) 1904 corresponding member academy moral and political science , institute of france 1908 grand officer order of the crown of italy 1909 imperial order of the rising sun , 1st class ; royal order of merit of the prussian crown , 1st class ; fellow royal society of literature ( england ) ; ll.d . tulane university ; ll.d . university of missouri ; ll.d . dartmouth college ; ll.d . harvard university ; md . ( hon . ) harvard university 1911 ph.d . ( hon . ) university of breslau 1914 corresponding fellow of the british academy ; ll.d . brown university 1915 gold medal / american academy of arts and letters 1919 order of the crown of belgium 1923 grand cordon of the order of st . sava , serbia ; ll.d . boston university ; civic forum medal of honor , new york 1924 roosevelt medal for distinguished service ; commander of the legion of honor ( france ) ; ll.d . university of the state of new york . see also . history of the massachusetts institute of technology lawrence scientific school . notes .