Optical communication

visual forms . visual techniques such as smoke signals , beacon , hydraulic telegraphs , ship flags and semaphore lines were the earliest forms of optical communication . chapter 2 : semaphore signalling communications : an international history of the formative years r . w . burns , 2004 telegraph vol 10 , encyclopædia britannica , 6th edition , 1824 pp . 645-651 hydraulic telegraph semaphores date back to the 4th century bce greece . distress flares are still used by mariners in emergencies , while lighthouses and navigation lights are used to communicate navigation hazards . the heliograph uses a mirror to reflect sunlight to a distant observer . harris , j.d . wire at war - signals communication in the south african war 1899–1902 . retrieved on 1 june 2008 . note a discussion on the heliograph use during the boer war . when a signaler tilts the mirror to reflect sunlight , the distant observer sees flashes of light that can be used to transmit a prearranged signaling code . navy ships often use signal lamps and morse code in a similar way . aviator often use visual approach slope indicator ( vasi ) projected light systems to land safely , especially at night . military aircraft landing on an aircraft carrier use a similar system to land correctly on a carrier deck . the coloured light system communicates the aircraft 's height relative to a standard landing glideslope . as well , airport control towers still use aldis lamps to transmit instructions to aircraft whose radios have failed . semaphore line . a semaphore line , also called a 'semaphore line ' , 'optical telegraph ' , 'shutter telegraph chain ' , 'chappe telegraph ' , or 'napoleonic semaphore ' , is a system used for conveying information by means of visual signals , using towers with pivoting arms or shutters , also known as blades or paddles . information is encoded by the position of the mechanical elements ; it is read when the shutter is in a fixed position . telegraph , volume 17 of the edinburgh encyclopaedia , pp . 664-667 , 1832 david brewster , ed . semaphore lines were a precursor of the electrical telegraph . they were far faster than post riders for conveying a message over long distances , but far more expensive and less private than the electrical telegraph lines which would later replace them . the maximum distance that a pair of semaphore telegraph stations can bridge is limited by geography , weather and the availability of light ; thus , in practical use , most optical telegraphs used lines of relay stations to bridge longer distances . each relay station would also require its complement of skilled operator-observers to convey messages back and forth across the line . the modern design of semaphores was first foreseen by the british polymath robert hooke , who first gave a vivid and comprehensive outline of visual telegraphy in a 1684 submission to the royal society . his proposal ( which was motivated by military concerns following the battle of vienna the preceding year ) was not put into practice during his lifetime . calvert , j.b . the origin of the railway semaphore , columbia university , institute for learning technologies , 2000 . the first operational optical semaphore line arrived in 1792 , created by the french engineer claude chappe and his brothers , who succeeded in covering france with a network of 556 stations stretching a total distance of . it was used for military and national communications until the 1850s . many national services adopted signaling systems different from the chappe system . for example , uk and sweden adopted systems of shuttered panels ( in contradiction to the chappe brothers ' contention that angled rods are more visible ) . in spain , the engineer agustín de betancourt developed his own system which was adopted by that state . this system was considered by many experts in europe better than chappe 's , even in france . these systems were popular in the late 18th to early 19th century but could not compete with the electrical telegraph , and went completely out of service by 1880 . . semaphore signal flags . flag semaphore are the system for conveying information at a distance by means of visual signals with hand-held flags , rods , disks , paddles , or occasionally bare or gloved hands . information is encoded by the position of the flags , objects or arms ; it is read when they are in a fixed position . semaphores were adopted and widely used ( with hand-held flags replacing the mechanical arms of semaphore line ) in the maritime world in the 19th century . they are still used during underway replenishment and are acceptable for emergency communication in daylight or , using lighted wands instead of flags , at night . the newer flag semaphore system uses two short poles with square flags , which a signaler holds in different positions to convey letters of the alphabet and numbers . the transmitter holds one pole in each hand , and extends each arm in one of eight possible directions . except for in the rest position , the flags can not overlap . the flags are colored differently based on whether the signals are sent by sea or by land . at sea , the flags are colored red and yellow ( the oscar flags ) , while on land , they are white and blue ( the papa flags ) . flags are not required , they just make the characters more obvious . signal lamps . signal lamps ( such as aldis lamps ) , are visual signaling devices for optical communication ( typically using morse code ) . modern signal lamps are a focused lamp which can produce a pulse of light . in large versions this pulse is achieved by opening and closing shutters mounted in front of the lamp , either via a manually operated pressure switch or , in later versions , automatically . with hand held lamps , a concave mirror is tilted by a trigger to focus the light into pulses . the lamps are usually equipped with some form of optical sight , and are most commonly deployed on naval vessels and also used in airport control towers with coded aviation light signals . aviation light signals are used in the case of a nordo , an aircraft not equipped with a radio , or in the case of a hearing-impaired pilot . air traffic controllers have long used signal light guns to direct such aircraft . the light gun 's lamp has a focused bright beam capable of emitting three different colors : red , white and green . these colors may be flashing or steady , and provide different instructions to aircraft in flight or on the ground ( for example , '' cleared to land '' or '' cleared for takeoff '' ) . pilots can acknowledge the instructions by wiggling their plane 's wings , moving their ailerons if they are on the ground , or by flashing their landing or navigation lights during night time . only 12 simple standardized instructions are directed at aircraft using signal light guns as the system is not utilized with morse code . heliograph . image : australian heliograph in egyptian desert 1940.png thumb right upright heliograph : australians using a heliograph in north africa ( 1940 ) . a heliograph helios , meaning '' sun '' , and graphein , meaning '' write '' ) is a wireless solar telegraph that signals by flashes of sunlight ( generally using morse code ) reflected by a mirror . the flashes are produced by momentarily pivoting the mirror , or by interrupting the beam with a shutter . the heliograph was a simple but effective instrument for instantaneous optical communication over long distances during the late 19th and early 20th century . its main uses were in military , surveys and forest protection work . they were standard issue in the british and australian armies until the 1960s , and were used by the pakistani army as late as 1975 . . electronic forms . in the present day a variety of electronic systems optically transmit and receive information carried by pulses of light . fiber-optic communication cables are now employed to send the great majority of the electronic data and long distance telephone calls that are not conveyed by either radio , terrestrial microwave or satellite . free-space optical communications are also used every day in various applications . optical fiber . optical fiber is the most common type of channel for optical communications . the transmitters in optical fiber links are generally light-emitting diodes ( leds ) or laser diodes . infrared light , rather than visible light is used more commonly , because optical fibers transmit infrared wavelengths with less attenuation and dispersion . the signal encoding is typically simple intensity modulation , although historically optical phase and frequency modulation have been demonstrated in the lab . the need for periodic signal regeneration was largely superseded by the introduction of the erbium-doped fiber amplifier , which extended link distances at significantly lower cost . photophone . the photophone ( originally given an alternate name , radiophone ) is a communication device which allowed for the transmission of speech on a beam of light . it was invented jointly by alexander graham bell and his assistant charles sumner tainter on february 19 , 1880 , at bell 's 1325 ' l ' street laboratory in washington , d.c . bruce 1990 , pg . 336 jones , newell . first 'radio ' built by san diego resident partner of inventor of telephone : keeps notebook of experiences with bell , san diego evening tribune , july 31 , 1937 . retrieved from the university of san diego history department website , november 26 , 2009 . both were later to become full associates in the volta laboratory association , created and financed by bell . on june 21 , 1880 , bell 's assistant transmitted a wireless voice telephone message of considerable distance , from the roof of the franklin school to the window of bell 's laboratory , some 213 meters ( about 700 & nbsp ; ft ) away . bruce 1990 , pg . 338 carson 2007 , pg . 76-78 groth , mike . photophones revisted , 'amateur radio ' magazine , wireless institute of australia , melbourne , april 1987 pp . 12–17 and may 1987 pp . 13–17 . mims 1982 , p . 11 . bell believed the photophone was his most important invention . of the 18 patents granted in bell 's name alone , and the 12 he shared with his collaborators , four were for the photophone , which bell referred to as his 'greatest achievement , telling a reporter shortly before his death that the photophone was '' the greatest invention i have ever made , greater than the telephone '' . mims 1982 , p . 14 . the photophone was a precursor to the fiber-optic communication systems which achieved popular worldwide usage starting in the 1980s . morgan , tim j . '' the fiber optic backbone '' , university of north texas , 2011 . miller , stewart e . '' lightwaves and telecommunication '' , american scientist , sigma xi , the scientific research society , january–february 1984 , vol . 72 , no . 1 , pp . 66-71 , issue stable url . gallardo , arturo ; forrest mims . fiber-optic communication began 130 years ago , san antonio express-news , june 21 , 2010 . accessed january 1 , 2013 . the master patent for the photophone apparatus for signalling and communicating , called photophone ) , was issued in december 1880 , many decades before its principles came to have practical applications . free-space optical communication . free-space optics ( fso ) systems are employed for 'last mile ' telecommunications and can function over distances of several kilometers as long as there is a clear line of sight between the source and the destination , and the optical receiver can reliably decode the transmitted information . other free-space systems can provide high-data-rate , long-range links using small , low-mass , low-power-consumption subsystems which make them suitable for communications in space . various planned satellite constellation intended to provide global broadband coverage take advantage of these benefits and employ laser communication for inter-satellite links between the several hundred to thousand satellites effectively creating a space-based optical mesh network . more generally , transmission of unguided optical signals is known as optical wireless communications ( owc ) . examples include medium-range visible light communication and short-distance irda , using infrared leds . see also . fiber tapping interconnect bottleneck jun-ichi nishizawa an inventor of optical communication . modulating retro-reflector oecc ( optoelectronics and communications conference ) optical interconnect opto-isolator parallel optical interface