Axle

terminology . on cars and trucks , several senses of the word axle occur in casual usage , referring to the shaft itself , its housing , or simply any transverse pair of wheels . strictly speaking , a shaft which rotates with the wheel , being either bolted or splined in fixed relation to it , is called an axle or axle shaft . however , in looser usage , an entire assembly including the surrounding axle housing ( typically a casting ) is also called an axle . an even broader ( somewhat figurative ) sense of the word refers to every pair of parallel wheels on opposite sides of a vehicle , regardless of their mechanical connection to each other and to the vehicle frame or body . thus , transverse pairs of wheels in an independent suspension may be called an axle in some contexts . this very loose definition of '' axle '' is often used in assessing toll roads or excise taxes , and is taken as a rough proxy for the overall weight-bearing capacity of a vehicle , and its potential for causing wear or damage to roadway surfaces . vehicle axles . axles are an integral component of most practical wheeled vehicles . in a live-axle suspension system , the axles serve to transmit driving torque to the wheel , as well as to maintain the position of the wheels relative to each other and to the vehicle body . the axles in this system must also bear the weight of the vehicle plus any cargo . a non-driving axle , such as the front beam axle in heavy duty trucks and some two-wheel drive light trucks and vans , will have no shaft , and serves only as a suspension and steering component . conversely , many front-wheel drive cars have a solid rear beam axle . in other types of suspension systems , the axles serve only to transmit driving torque to the wheels ; the position and angle of the wheel hubs is an independent function of the suspension system . this is typical of the independent suspensions found on most newer cars and suvs , and on the front of many light trucks . these systems still have differentials , but will not have attached axle housing tubes . they may be attached to the vehicle frame or body , or integral in a transaxle . the axle shafts ( usually constant-velocity type ) then transmit driving torque to the wheels . like a full floating axle system , the drive shafts in a front-wheel drive independent suspension system do not support any vehicle weight . structural features and design . a straight axle is a single rigid shaft connecting a wheel on the left side of the vehicle to a wheel on the right side . the axis of rotation fixed by the axle is common to both wheels . such a design can keep the wheel positions steady under heavy stress , and can therefore support heavy loads . straight axles are used on trains ( that is , locomotives and railway wagons ) , for the rear axles of commercial trucks , and on heavy duty off-road vehicles . the axle can optionally be protected and further reinforced by enclosing the length of the axle in a housing . in split-axle designs , the wheel on each side is attached to a separate shaft . modern passenger cars have split drive axles . in some designs , this allows independent suspension of the left and right wheels , and therefore a smoother ride . even when the suspension is not independent , split axles permit the use of a differential , allowing the left and right drive wheels to be driven at different speeds as the automobile turns , improving traction and extending tire life . a tandem axle is a group of two or more axles situated close together . truck designs use such a configuration to provide a greater weight capacity than a single axle . semi trailers usually have a tandem axle at the rear . axles are typically made from sae grade 41xx steel or sae grade 10xx steel . sae grade 41xx steel is commonly known as '' chrome-molybdenum steel '' ( or '' chrome-moly '' ) while sae grade 10xx steel is known as '' carbon steel '' . the primary differences between the two are that chrome-moly steel is significantly more resistant to bending or breaking , and is very difficult to weld with tools normally found outside a professional welding shop . . drive axle . an axle that is driven by the engine or prime mover is called a drive axle . modern front-wheel drive cars typically combine the transmission ( gearbox and differential ) and front axle into a single unit called a transaxle . the drive axle is a split axle with a differential and universal joints between the two half axles . each half axle connects to the wheel by use of a constant velocity ( cv ) joint which allows the wheel assembly to move freely vertically as well as to pivot when making turns . in rear-wheel drive cars and trucks , the engine turns a driveshaft ( also called a propellor shaft or tailshaft ) which transmits rotational force to a drive axle at the rear of the vehicle . the drive axle may be a live axle , but modern rear wheel drive automobiles generally use a split axle with a differential . in this case , one half-axle or half-shaft connects the differential with the left rear wheel , a second half-shaft does the same with the right rear wheel ; thus the two half-axles and the differential constitute the rear axle . front drive axle is providing the force to drive the truck . in fact , only one wheel of that axle is actually moving the truck and trailer down the road . some simple vehicle designs , such as leisure go-karts , may have a single driven wheel where the drive axle is a split axle with only one of the two shafts driven by the engine , or else have both wheels connected to one shaft without a differential ( kart racing ) . however , other go-karts have two rear drive wheels too . dead axle ( lazy axle ) . a dead axle , also called a lazy axle , is not part of the drivetrain , but is instead free-rotating . the rear axle of a front-wheel drive car is usually a dead axle . many trucks and trailers use dead axles for strictly load-bearing purposes . a dead axle located immediately in front of a drive axle is called a pusher axle . a tag axle is a dead axle situated behind a drive axle . dead axles are also found on semi trailers , farm equipment , and certain heavy construction machinery serving the same function . on some vehicles ( such as motorcoaches ) , the tag axle may be steerable . in some designs the wheels on a lazy axle only come into contact with ground when the load is significant , thus saving unnecessary tire wear . lift axle . some dump trucks and trailers may be configured with a lift axle ( also known as an airlift axle or drop axle ) , which may be mechanically raised or lowered . the axle is lowered to increase the weight capacity , or to distribute the weight of the cargo over more wheels , for example to cross a weight restricted bridge . when not needed , the axle is lifted off the ground to save wear on the tires and axle , and to increase traction in the remaining wheels . lifting an axle also alleviates lateral scrubbing of the additional axle in very tight turns , allowing the vehicle to turn more readily . in some situations removal of pressure from the additional axle is necessary for the vehicle to complete a turn at all . several manufacturers offer computer-controlled airlift , so that the dead axles are automatically lowered when the main axle reaches its weight limit . the dead axles can still be lifted by the press of a button if needed , for better maneuverability . lift axles were in use in the early 1940s . initially , the axle was lifted by a mechanical device . soon hydraulics replaced the mechanical lift system . one of the early manufacturers was zetterbergs , located in östervåla , sweden . their brand was zeta-lyften . the liftable tandem drive axle was invented in 1957 by the finnish truck manufacturer vanajan autotehdas , a company sharing history with sisu auto . full-floating vs semi-floating . a full-floating axle carries the vehicle 's weight on the axle casing , not the halfshafts ; they serve only to transmit torque from the differential to the wheels . they '' float '' inside an assembly that carries the vehicle 's weight . thus the only stress it must endure is torque ( not lateral bending force ) . full-floating axle shafts are retained by a flange bolted to the hub , while the hub and bearings are retained on the spindle by a large nut . in contrast , a semi-floating design carries the weight of the vehicle on the axle shaft itself ; there is a single bearing at the end of the axle housing that carries the load from the axle and that the axle rotates through . the full-floating design is typically used in most 3/4- and 1-ton light trucks , medium duty trucks and heavy-duty trucks , as well as most agricultural applications , such as large tractors and self-propelled agricultural machinery . there are a few exceptions , such as many land-rover vehicles and in american stock car racing since the early 1960s . the overall assembly can carry more weight than a semi-floating or non-floating axle assembly , because the hubs have two bearings riding on a fixed spindle . a full-floating axle can be identified by a protruding hub to which the axle shaft flange is bolted . the semi-floating axle setup is commonly used on half-ton and lighter 4x4 trucks in the rear . this setup allows the axle shaft to be the means of propulsion , and also support the weight of the vehicle . the main difference between the full- and semi-floating axle setups is the number of bearings . the semi-floating axle features only one bearing , while the full-floating assembly has bearings in both the inside and outside of the wheel hub . the other difference is about the axle removal . to remove the semi-floating axle , one has to remove a wheel first ; if such axle breaks , the wheel is most likely to come off the vehicle . the semi-floating design is found under most 1/2-ton and lighter trucks and suvs and rear-wheel-drive passenger cars , usually being smaller or less expensive models . a benefit of a full-floating axle is that even if an axle shaft ( used to transmit torque or power ) breaks , the wheel will not come off , preventing serious accidents .