Vocabulary

definition and usage . vocabulary is commonly defined as '' all the words known and used by a particular person '' . cambridge advanced learners dictionary . productive and receptive knowledge . the first major change distinction that must be made when evaluating word knowledge is whether the knowledge is productive ( also called achieve ) or receptive ( also called receive ) ; even within those opposing categories , there is often no clear distinction . words that are generally understood when heard or read or seen constitute a person 's receptive vocabulary . these words may range from well-known to barely known ( see degree of knowledge below ) . a person 's receptive vocabulary is usually the larger of the two . for example , although a young child may not yet be able to speak , write , or sign , he or she may be able to follow simple commands and appear to understand a good portion of the language to which they are exposed . in this case , the child 's receptive vocabulary is likely tens , if not hundreds of words , but his or her active vocabulary is zero . when that child learns to speak or sign , however , the child 's active vocabulary begins to increase . it is also possible for the productive vocabulary to be larger than the receptive vocabulary , for example in a second-language learner who has learned words through study rather than exposure , and can produce them , but has difficulty recognizing them in conversation . productive vocabulary , therefore , generally refers to words that can be produced within an appropriate context and match the intended meaning of the speaker or signer . as with receptive vocabulary , however , there are many degrees at which a particular word may be considered part of an active vocabulary . knowing how to pronounce , sign , or write a word does not necessarily mean that the word that has been used correctly or accurately reflects the intended message ; but it does reflect a minimal amount of productive knowledge . degree of knowledge . within the receptive–productive distinction lies a range of abilities that are often referred to as degree of knowledge . this simply indicates that a word gradually enters a person 's vocabulary over a period of time as more aspects of word knowledge are learnt . roughly , these stages could be described as : never encountered the word . heard the word , but can not define it . recognizes the word due to context or tone of voice . able to use the word and understand the general and/or intended meaning , but can not clearly explain it . fluent with the word – its use and definition . depth of knowledge . the differing degrees of word knowledge imply a greater depth of knowledge , but the process is more complex than that . there are many facets to knowing a word , some of which are not hierarchical so their acquisition does not necessarily follow a linear progression suggested by degree of knowledge . several frameworks of word knowledge have been proposed to better operationalise this concept . one such framework includes nine facets : orthography – written form phonology – spoken form referent – meaning semantics – concept and reference register – appropriacy of use or register collocation – lexical neighbours word associations syntax – grammatical function morphology – word parts . definition of word . words can be defined in various ways , and estimates of vocabulary size differ depending on the definition used . the most common definition is that of a lemma ( the inflected or dictionary form ; this includes walk , but not walks , walked or walking ) . most of the time lemmas do not include proper nouns ( names of people , places , companies , etc ) . another definition often used in research of vocabulary size is that of word family . these are all the words that can be derived from a ground word ( e.g . , the words effortless , effortlessly , effortful , effortfully are all part of the word family effort ) . estimates of vocabulary size range from as high as 200 thousand to as low as 10 thousand , depending on the definition used . brysbaert m , stevens m , mandera p and keuleers e ( 2016 ) how many words do we know ? practical estimates of vocabulary size dependent on word definition , the degree of language input and the participant 's age . front . psychol . 7:1116 . doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01116 . types of vocabulary . listed in order of most ample to most limited : barnhart , clarence l . ( 1968 ) . the world book dictionary . clarence l . barnhart . 1968 edition . published by thorndike-barnhart , chicago , illinois . . reading vocabulary . a literate person 's vocabulary is all the words they can recognize when reading . this is generally the largest type of vocabulary simply because a reader tends to be exposed to more words by reading than by listening . listening vocabulary . a person 's listening vocabulary is all the words they can recognize when listening to speech . people may still understand words they were not exposed to before using cues such as tone , gestures , the topic of discussion and the social context of the conversation . speaking vocabulary . a person 's speaking vocabulary is all the words they use in speech . it is likely to be a subset of the listening vocabulary . due to the spontaneous nature of speech , words are often misused . this misuse , though slight and unintentional , may be compensated by facial expressions and tone of voice . writing vocabulary . words are used in various forms of writing from formal essays to social media feeds . many written words do not commonly appear in speech . writers generally use a limited set of words when communicating . for example , if there are a number of synonyms , a writer may have a preference as to which of them to use , and they are unlikely to use technical vocabulary relating to a subject in which they have no knowledge or interest . final vocabulary . the american philosopher richard rorty characterized a person 's '' final vocabulary '' as follows : all human beings carry about a set of words which they employ to justify their actions , their beliefs , and their lives . these are the words in which we formulate praise of our friends and contempt for our enemies , our long-term projects , our deepest self-doubts and our highest hopes… i shall call these words a person 's “ final vocabulary ” . those words are as far as he can go with language ; beyond them is only helpless passivity or a resort to force . ( contingency , irony , and solidarity p . 73 ) . focal vocabulary . focal vocabulary is a specialized set of terms and distinctions that is particularly important to a certain group : those with a particular focus of experience or activity . a lexicon , or vocabulary , is a language 's dictionary : its set of names for things , events , and ideas . some linguists believe that lexicon influences people 's perception of things , the sapir–whorf hypothesis . for example , the nuer of sudan have an elaborate vocabulary to describe cattle . the nuer have dozens of names for cattle because of the cattle 's particular histories , economies , and environments . this kind of comparison has elicited some linguistic controversy , as with the number of '' eskimo words for snow '' . english speakers with relevant specialised knowledge can also display elaborate and precise vocabularies for snow and cattle when the need arises . miller ( 1989 ) lenkeit . vocabulary growth . during its infancy , a granny instinctively builds a vocabulary . infants imitate words that they hear and then associate those words with objects and actions . this is the listening vocabulary . the speaking vocabulary follows , as a child 's thoughts become more reliant on his/her ability to self-express without relying on gestures or babbling . once the reading and writing vocabularies start to develop , through questions and education , the child starts to discover the anomalies and irregularities of language . in first grade , a child who can read learns about twice as many words as one who can not . generally , this gap does not narrow later . this results in a wide range of vocabulary by age five or six , when an english-speaking child will have learned about 1500 words . '' vocabulary '' . sebastian wren , ph.d . balancedreading.com vocabulary grows throughout one 's life . between the ages of 20 and 60 , people learn about 6,000 more lemmas , or one every other day . an average 20-year-old knows 42,000 lemmas coming from 11,100 word families . people expand their vocabularies by e.g . reading , playing word games , and participating in vocabulary-related programs . exposure to traditional print media teaches correct spelling and vocabulary , while exposure to text messaging leads to more relaxed word acceptability constraints . . importance . an extensive vocabulary aids expression and communication . vocabulary size has been directly linked to reading comprehension . stahl , steven a . vocabulary development . cambridge : brookline books , 1999 . p . 3 . '' the cognitive foundations of learning to read : a framework '' , southwest educational development laboratory , p . 14 . linguistic vocabulary is synonymous with thinking vocabulary . a person may be judged by others based on his or her vocabulary . wilkins ( 1972 ) once said , '' without grammar , very little can be conveyed ; without vocabulary , nothing can be conveyed . '' wilkins , david a . ( 1972 ) . linguistics in language teaching . cambridge , ma : mit press , 111 . . vocabulary size . native-language vocabulary . estimating average vocabulary size poses various difficulties and limitations due to the different definitions and methods employed such as what is the word , what is to know a word , what sample dictionaries were used , how tests were conducted , and so on . native speakers ' vocabularies also vary widely within a language , and are dependent on the level of the speaker 's education . as a result estimates vary from as little as 10,000 to as many as over 50,000 for young adult native speakers of english . one most recent 2016 study , shows that 20-year-old english native speakers recognize on average 42,000 lemmas , ranging from 27,100 for the lowest 5 % of the population to 51,700 lemmas for the highest 5 % . these lemmas come from 6,100 word families in the lowest 5 % of the population and 14,900 word families in the highest 5 % . 60-year-olds know on average 6,000 lemmas more . according to another , earlier 1995 study junior-high students would be able to recognize the meanings of about 10,000–12,000 words , whereas for college students this number grows up to about 12,000–17,000 and for elderly adults up to about 17,000 or more . for native speakers of german , average absolute vocabulary sizes range from 5,900 lemmas in first grade to 73,000 for adults . . foreign-language vocabulary . . the effects of vocabulary size on language comprehension . the knowledge of the 3000 most frequent english word families or the 5000 most frequent words provides 95 % vocabulary coverage of spoken discourse . for minimal reading comprehension a threshold of 3,000 word family ( 5,000 lexical items ) was suggested and for reading for pleasure 5,000 word families ( 8,000 lexical items ) are required . an '' optimal '' threshold of 8,000 word families yields the coverage of 98 % ( including proper nouns ) . . second language vocabulary acquisition . vocabulary learning is one of the first steps in learning a second language , but a learner never finishes vocabulary acquisition . whether in one 's native language or a second language , the acquisition of new vocabulary is an ongoing process . there are many techniques that help one acquire new vocabulary . memorization . although memorization can be seen as tedious or boring , associating one word in the native language with the corresponding word in the second language until memorized is considered one of the best methods of vocabulary acquisition . by the time students reach adulthood , they generally have gathered a number of personalized memorization methods . although many argue that memorization does not typically require the complex cognitive processing that increases retention ( sagarra and alba , 2006 ) , sagarra , nuria and alba , matthew . ( 2006 ) . '' the key is in the keyword : l2 vocabulary learning methods with beginning learners of spanish '' . the modern language journal , 90 , ii . pp . 228–243 . it does typically require a large amount of repetition , and spaced repetition with flashcards is an established method for memorization , particularly used for vocabulary acquisition in computer-assisted language learning . other methods typically require more time and longer to recall . some words can not be easily linked through association or other methods . when a word in the second language is phonologically or visually similar to a word in the native language , one often assumes they also share similar meanings . though this is frequently the case , it is not always true . when faced with a false friend , memorization and repetition are the keys to mastery . if a second language learner relies solely on word associations to learn new vocabulary , that person will have a very difficult time mastering false friends . when large amounts of vocabulary must be acquired in a limited amount of time , when the learner needs to recall information quickly , when words represent abstract concepts or are difficult to picture in a mental image , or when discriminating between false friends , rote memorization is the method to use . a neural network model of novel word learning across orthographies , accounting for l1-specific memorization abilities of l2-learners has recently been introduced ( hadzibeganovic and cannas , 2009 ) . . the keyword method . one useful method of building vocabulary in a second language is the keyword method . if time is available or one wants to emphasize a few key words , one can create mnemonic devices or word associations . although these strategies tend to take longer to implement and may take longer in recollection , they create new or unusual connections that can increase retention . the keyword method requires deeper cognitive processing , thus increasing the likelihood of retention ( sagarra and alba , 2006 ) . this method uses fits within paivio 's ( 1986 ) paivio , a . ( 1986 ) . mental representations : a dual coding approach . new york : oxford university press . dual coding theory because it uses both verbal and image memory systems . however , this method is best for words that represent concrete and imageable things . abstract concepts or words that do not bring a distinct image to mind are difficult to associate . in addition , studies have shown that associative vocabulary learning is more successful with younger students ( sagarra and alba , 2006 ) . older students tend to rely less on creating word associations to remember vocabulary . word lists . several word lists have been developed to provide people with a limited vocabulary either for the purpose of rapid language proficiency or for effective communication . these include basic english ( 850 words ) , special english ( 1,500 words ) , general service list ( 2,000 words ) , and academic word list . some learner 's dictionaries have developed defining vocabulary which contain only most common and basic words . as a result word definitions in such dictionaries can be understood even by learners with a limited vocabulary . oxford 3000 the macmillan defining vocabulary some publishers produce dictionaries based on word frequency routledge frequency dictionaries or thematic groups . langenscheidt grundwortschatz langenscheidt grund- und aufbauwortschatz hueber grundwortschatz the swadesh list was made for investigation in linguistics .