Bishōnen

origin . the prefix bi ( 美 ) more often than not refers to feminine beauty , and bijin , literally '' beautiful person '' , is usually , though not always , used to refer to beautiful women . means '' beautiful middle-aged man '' . biseinen is to be distinguished from bishōnen as is used to describe men who are of age , including those who have entered or completed tertiary education . the term shōnen is used to describe boys of middle and high school age . last , bishota can be used to refer to a beautiful , pre-pubescent male child or a childlike male . outside japan , bishōnen is the most well-known of the three terms , and has become a generic term for all beautiful boys and young men . the aesthetic of the bishōnen began as an ideal of a young lover , originally embodied in the , or adolescent boy , and was influenced by the effeminate male actors who played female characters in kabuki . the term arose in the meiji era , in part to replace the by then obsolete erotic meaning of the older term wakashū , whose general meaning of '' adolescent boy '' had by this point been supplanted by the new term shōnen . the bishōnen was conceived of as '' aesthetically different from both women and men . both the antithesis and the antecedent of adult masculinity '' . the bishōnen is typically slender , with clear skin , stylish hair , and distinctly feminine facial features ( such as high cheekbones ) , but simultaneously retains a male body . this androgynous appearance is akin to the depiction of angels in western renaissance art , with similar social roots for this aesthetic . minamoto no yoshitsune and amakusa shirō have been identified as historical bishōnen . drazen , patrick ( october 2002 ) . ' '' a very pure thing '' : gay and pseudo-gay themes ' in anime explosion ! the what , why & wow of japanese animation berkeley , california : stone bridge press pp.91-94 . ian buruma notes that yoshitsune was considered by contemporaries to be not physically prepossessing , but that his legend later grew and due to this , he became depicted with good looks . abe no seimei was depicted according to the standards of a heian-era middle-aged man , but since 1989 he has been depicted as a modern-style bishōnen . kyokutei bakin wrote many works with nanshoku undertones featuring bishōnen characters , and in 1848 he used the term bishōnen in the title of a work about the younger wakashu partner in the nanshoku relationship . the bishōnen aesthetic is continued today in anime and manga , especially shōjo and yaoi . usage . some non-japanese , especially american , anime and manga fans use the term to refer to any handsome male character regardless of age , or any homosexual character . beauty up : exploring contemporary japanese body aesthetics . laura miller . university of california press , 2006 . in the original japanese , however , bishōnen applies only to boys under 18 . for those older , the word is used . in the place of bishōnen , some fans prefer to use the slightly more sexually neutral or the anglicized slang term '' bishie '' ( also spelled '' bishi '' ) , but these terms remain less common . the term binanshi was popular in the 1980s . bishōnen is occasionally used to describe some androgynous female characters , such as takarazuka actors , lady oscar in the rose of versailles , or any women with traits stereotypical to bishōnen . scottish pop singer momus notably used the term in his song '' bishonen '' from the tender pervert album ( released on creation records ) . almost 8 minutes long , the song is an epic tale of a young boy raised to die young by an eccentric stepfather . popular culture . the enduring preference for bishōnen males can clearly be seen in japan and throughout parts of east asia to this day . in particular , japan 's largest male talent agency , johnny & associates entertainment company , specializes only in producing male tarento . accepted into johnny & associates in their early teens , these boys , collectively known as 'johnnys ' , are trained and promoted to become the next leading singing-acting-commercially successful hit sensations . almost all can be classified as bishōnen , exhibiting the same physically feminine features combined with a sometimes deliberately ambivalent sexuality or at the very least , a lack of any hint of a relationship to maintain their popular availability . current bishōnen examples from the same agency include tomohisa yamashita of j-pop group news , jin akanishi and kazuya kamenashi of kat-tun , takuya kimura of smap , ryosuke yamada and kei inoo of hey ! say ! jump and jun matsumoto of arashi , all of whom are phenomenally successful throughout east asia by appealing to both younger and older women and whose widely praised , gender-incongruous physical beauty is often deliberately manipulated in terms of role-playing and , most commonly , fanservice . art . besides being a character type , bishōnen is also a distinct art style not usually forgotten in books about drawing manga . in art , bishōnen are usually drawn delicately , with long limbs , silky or flowing hair , and slender eyes with long eyelashes that can sometimes extend beyond the face . the character 's '' sex appeal '' is highlighted through introducing the character by using an '' eroticized '' full page spread . wood , andrea . ( spring 2006 ) . '' straight '' women , queer texts : boy-love manga and the rise of a global counterpublic . wsq : women 's studies quarterly , 34 ( 1/2 ) , pp . 394-414 . characters with '' bulging muscles '' are rarely considered bishōnen , as they are too masculine . it is said that björn andrésen 's appearance as tadzio in the film death in venice inspired many japanese anime artists , such as keiko takemiya , who became known for their depictions of young , effeminate men . bishōnen characters are fairly common in manga and anime . many of the male characters show subtle signs of the bishōnen style , such as slender eyes or a feminine face . some manga are completely drawn in the bishōnen style , such as saint seiya . bishōnen manga are generally shōjo manga ( girls ' comics ) or yaoi ( girls ' comics focused on homosexual relationships between beautiful boys ) , however shōnen manga ( boy 's comics ) may use casts of bishōnen characters for crossover appeal to female readers . mainstream shounen and seinen fare also often uses such characters as rivals for a traditional masculine protagonist , with some degree of comic relief , or for the blander everyman , whether as the embodiment of his insecurities in a grittier realism , or as a more lighthearted constant reminder of his less than advantageous social status and the constraints thereof . comics for younger boys tend to use arrogant bishōnen in the role of the recurring minor rivals readers love to hate , though their effeminate good looks there will often appear older , bigger , stronger , and thus in fact more masculine than the commonly shorter and less mature protagonists . bishōnen and bishōjo . bishōjo ( 'beautiful girl ' ) is often mistakenly considered a parallel of bishōnen , because of the similar construction of the terms . there are major differences between the two aesthetics . the bishōjo aesthetic is aimed at a male audience , and is typically centered on young girls , drawn in a cute , pretty style ; bishōnen is aimed at a female audience , centered on teenage boys , and drawn elegantly . another common mistake is assuming that the female characters in bishōnen manga and anime are bishōjo . in truth , female characters in bishōnen manga are very different from those in bishōjo ; bishōjo females are usually more petite and drawn in a style that is cute rather than beautiful , whereas bishōnen females exhibit the long limbs and elegance of the bishōnen themselves . . critical attention . several cultural anthropologists and authors have raised the multifaceted aspect of what bishōnen represents and what it is interpreted as , mostly to fit a particular external viewpoint . ian buruma noted that although western comics for girls also included '' impossibly beautiful men '' who are clearly masculine and always get the girl in the end , the bishōnen are '' more ambivalent '' and sometimes get each other . for sandra buckley , bishōnen narratives champion '' the imagined potentialities of alternative gender differentiations '' buckley , sandra ( 1991 ) '' 'penguin in bondage ' : a graphic tale of japanese comic books '' , pp . 163-196 , in technoculture . c . penley and a . ross , eds . minneapolis : university of minnesota james welker describes the bishōnen as being '' queer '' , as the bishōnen is an androgynous aesthete with a feminine soul '' who lives and loves outside of the heteropatriarchal world '' . jonathan d . mackintosh believes that the bishōnen is a '' traditional representation of youth '' , being '' interstitial '' between both childhood and adulthood and between being male and being female , regardless of the sexual issues . ishida hitoshi makes the case that the image of the bishōnen is more about a grounding in sexuality than a transcendence of it , drawing on the idea of the image as being a refuge for alternative methods of looking at sexual natures , and sexual realities , at least since the 1960s , rather than the elegiac aesthetics of usages in an earlier era . the process of divergence between 'men who love men ' and 'feminised men ' in postwar japanese media . ishida hitoshi and murakami takanori . intersections : gender , history and culture in the asian context . issue 12 january 2006 . representations of men in manga by and for men show '' an idealized man being ultramasculine and phallic '' , bishōnen are conversely drawn to '' emphasize their beauty and sensuality '' , and female artists have been said to react against the ultramasculine representation by showing androgynous and '' aesthetically beautiful '' men . ian buruma , writing in 1984 , considered the '' bishonen in distress '' to be a recurring motif in popular manga . the bishōnen in distress is always rescued by an older , protective , mentor . this scenario has an '' unmistakably homoerotic '' atmosphere . he also notes that bishōnen must either grow up , or die beautifully . he considers the '' worship '' of the bishōnen to be the same as that of the sakura , and notes that '' death is the only pure and thus fitting end to the perfection of youth . '' . see also . shōnen bijinga bishōjo dandy himbo kkonminam ephebos metrosexual yaoi ikemen . notes .