Moon Landrieu

early life and career . landrieu was born in uptown new orleans . he went to jesuit high school . landrieu won a baseball scholarship at loyola university new orleans , where he received a bachelor of arts in business administration in 1952 and a law degree in 1954 . as an undergraduate , he was elected student body president at loyola . after a three-year stint in the united states army , landrieu opened a law practice and taught accounting at loyola . in the late 1950s , landrieu became involved in the youth wing of mayor delesseps morrison 's crescent city democratic organization . running on morrison 's ticket , landrieu was elected by the 12th ward of new orleans to the louisiana house of representatives in 1960 to succeed j . marshall brown . there he voted against the '' hate bills '' of the segregationists , which the legislature passed in the effort to thwart the desegregation of public facilities and public schools . in 1962 , landrieu ran for new orleans city council and lost but , in 1966 , he was elected councilman-at-large . in 1969 , he led a successful push for a city ordinance outlawing segregation based on race or religion in public accommodations , an issue that had been addressed nationally in the civil rights act of 1964 . as councilman , landrieu also voted to remove the confederate flag from the council chambers and voted to establish a biracial human relations committee . he succeeded with both votes . landrieu as mayor . landrieu was elected mayor of new orleans in the election of 1970 to succeed fellow democrat victor schiro . his opponent in the democratic primary runoff was louisiana lieutenant governor jimmy fitzmorris . landrieu won by assembling a coalition comprising 90 percent of black voters and 39 percent of whites . perennial candidate addison roswell thompson , the operator of a taxicab stand and a member of the ku klux klan , also ran again for mayor in the democratic primary , but polled negligible support . in the general election , landrieu defeated ben c . toledano . in that contest , landrieu received 99 percent support from black voters . on may 3 , 1970 , the day before he took his oath of office as mayor , landrieu received a death threat by telephone , but authorities quickly caught the culprit . '' moon landrieu 's life threatened '' , minden press-herald , may 4 , 1970 , p . 1 during his tenure as mayor , landrieu oversaw desegregation of city government and public facilities as well as encouraging integration within business and professional organizations . before landrieu was elected , there were no high-ranking black employees or officials in city hall ; he worked actively to change this by appointing african americans to top positions , including chief administrative officer , the number two position in the executive branch of city government . when landrieu took office in 1970 , african americans made up 19 percent of city employees ; by 1978 , this number had risen to 43 percent . morial retains racial mix inherited from landrieu , the times-picayune , may 6 , 1980 . he also appointed reverend a.l . davis to fill a temporary vacancy on the city council ; davis was the city 's first black city councilor . landrieu also employed an african american assistant : robert h . tucker , jr . eckstein ( 2015 ) , p . 136 . landrieu obtained federal funds for the revitalization of new orleans ' poor neighborhoods , and he promoted the involvement of minority-owned businesses in the city 's economic life . like his predecessor , landrieu presided over continued suburb growth in the algiers and new orleans east districts , with algiers essentially built-out , having exited its greenfield land stage , by the end of his administration . landrieu was also involved in the planning and construction of the louisiana superdome , the piazza d'italia , and other projects designed to improve the economy of new orleans . he advocated the creation of the downtown development district to revitalize the new orleans cbd , and worked to promote the city 's tourism industry . his tourism-related projects included the moon walk , a riverfront promenade facing the french quarter , the louisiana superdome , as well as renovations of the french market and jackson square . by the midpoint of schiro 's mayoral administration , an accelerating number of building demolitions were approved and other projects were also being contemplated , such as the elevated claiborne expressway and riverfront expressway segments of i-10 . landrieu authorized the 1972 new orleans housing and neighborhood preservation study . most of that study 's recommendations were enacted by landrieu , including the 1976 establishment of the historic district landmarks commission ( '' hdlc '' ) , which extended design review and demolition controls for the first time to parts of new orleans outside the french quarter . '' wholesale demolition is a discredited approach '' , the times-picayune , february 6 , 2010 . in this period , congress passed federal tax incentives favoring the rehabilitation of historic buildings . combined with the founding of hdlc , new orleans had hundreds of historic tax credit-subsidized redevelopment projects in the ensuing decades , representing hundreds of millions of dollars of new investment . during 1975 & ndash ; 1976 , landrieu served as president of the united states conference of mayors . he was reelected in 1974 and served until april 1978 . after leaving office , he was succeeded by dutch morial , the city 's first black mayor . landrieu was the last white elected mayor of new orleans until his son mitch was elected in 2010 . after city hall . after leaving office in 1978 , landrieu served as secretary of the united states department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . landrieu served as judge of the louisiana 4th circuit court of appeals from 1992 until his retirement in 2000 . he is the father of former u.s . senator mary landrieu and former new orleans mayor mitch landrieu . in 2004 , landrieu was inducted in the louisiana political museum and hall of fame in winnfield . his daughter mary was inducted into the organization three years later . winnfield , la - old l & a depot , la political museum landrieu 's personal papers are archived at loyola university new orleans and the new orleans public library . . see also . timeline of new orleans , 1960s–1970s . references . bibliography . baker , liva . the second battle of new orleans : the hundred year struggle to integrate the schools . harper collins , 1996 . hirsch , arnold and joseph logsdon . creole new orleans : race and americanization . lsu press , 1992 . perez , dawn watts . '' moon landrieu : reflections of change . '' uno masters thesis , 1996 . external links . oral history interview with moon landrieu from oral histories of the american south new orleans public library mayor moon landrieu photograph collection