Archangel

description . michael and gabriel are recognized as archangels in judaism , islam , and by most christians . some protestants consider michael to be the only archangel . raphael—mentioned in the deuterocanonical book of tobit—is also recognized as a chief angel in the catholic and orthodox churches . gabriel , michael , and raphael are venerated in the catholic church with a feast on september 29 ( between 1921 and 1969 , march 24 for gabriel and october 24 for raphael ) , and in the eastern orthodox church on november 8 ( if the julian calendar is used , this corresponds to november 21 in the gregorian ) . the named archangels in islam are jibrael , mikael , israfil , and azrael . jewish literature , such as the book of enoch , also mentions metatron as an archangel , called the '' highest of the angels '' , though the acceptance of this angel is not canonical in all branches of the faith . some branches of the faiths mentioned have identified a group of seven archangels , but the named angels vary , depending on the source . gabriel , michael , and raphael are always mentioned ; the other archangels vary , but most commonly include uriel , who is mentioned in 2 esdras . in zoroastrianism , sacred texts allude to the six great amesha spenta ( literally '' bounteous/holy immortals '' ) of ahura mazda . in zoroastrianism . an increasing number of experts in anthropology , theology and philosophy , believe that zoroastrianism contains the earliest distillation of prehistoric belief in angels . mary boyce , a history of zoroastrianism volume one : the early period , e . j . brill , leiden 1975 the amesha spentas ( avestan : aməša spəṇta , meaning '' immortal holiness '' ) of zoroastrianism are likened to archangels . they individually inhabit immortal bodies that operate in the physical world to protect , guide , and inspire humanity and the spirit world . the avesta explains the origin and nature of archangels or amesha spentas . to maintain equilibrium , ahura mazda engaged in the first act of creation , distinguishing his holy spirit spenta mainyu , the archangel of righteousness . ahura mazda also distinguished from himself six more amesha spentas , who , along with spenta mainyu , aided in the creation of the physical universe . then he oversaw the development of sixteen lands , each imbued with a unique cultural catalyst calculated to encourage the formation of distinct human populations . the amesha spentas were charged with protecting these holy lands and through their emanation , also believed to align each respective population in service to god . zend avesta fargard xxii ( page 199 ) mary boyce , a history of zoroastrianism volume one : the early period , e . j . brill , leiden 1975 . ( 1989 edition the amesha spentas as attributes of god are : spenta mainyu ( phl . spenamino ) : lit . '' bountiful spirit '' asha vahishta ( phl . ardwahisht ) : lit . '' highest truth '' vohu mano ( phl . vohuman ) : lit . '' righteous mind '' khshathra vairya ( phl . shahrewar ) : lit . '' desirable dominion '' spenta armaiti ( phl . spandarmad ) : lit . '' holy devotion '' haurvatat ( phl . hordad ) : lit . '' perfection or health '' ameretat ( phl . amurdad ) : lit . '' immortality '' . in judaism . the hebrew bible uses the term מלאכי אלוהים ( malakhi elohim ; angels of god ) , the hebrew word for angel is '' malach , '' which means messenger , for the angels מלאכי יי ( malakhi adonai ; angels of the lord ) are god 's messengers to perform various missions - e.g . 'angel of death ' ; death , angel of '' the '' destroying angel '' ( '' mal'ak ha-mashḥit '' ) '' jewish encyclopedia בני אלוהים ( b'nei elohim ; sons of god ) and הקדושים ( ha-q'doshim ; the holy ones ) to refer to beings traditionally interpreted as angelic messengers . other terms are used in later texts , such as העליונים ( ha-elyonim , the upper ones , or the supreme ones ) . references to angels are uncommon in jewish literature except in later works such as the book of daniel , though they are mentioned briefly in the stories of jacob ( who according to one interpretation wrestled with an angel ) and lot ( who was warned by angels of the impending destruction of the cities of sodom and gomorrah ) . daniel is the first biblical figure to refer to individual angels by name . it is therefore widely speculated that jewish interest in angels developed during the babylonian captivity . '' judaism : the postexilic period '' , international encyclopedia of the social sciences according to rabbi simeon ben lakish of tiberias ( 230–270 ce ) , specific names for the angels were brought back by the jews from babylon . there are no explicit references to archangels in the canonical texts of the hebrew bible . in rabbinic judaism , certain angels came to take on a particular significance and developed unique personalities and roles . though these archangels were believed to have ranked amongst the heavenly host , no systematic hierarchy ever developed . metatron is considered one of the highest of the angels in merkabah and kabbalah mysticism and often serves as a scribe . he is briefly mentioned in the talmud , sanhedrin 38b and avodah zarah 3b . and figures prominently in merkavah mystical texts . michael , who serves as a warrior and advocate for israel , is looked upon particularly fondly . gabriel is mentioned in the book of daniel and briefly in the talmud , cf . sanhedrin 95b as well as many merkavah mystical texts . the earliest references to archangels are in the literature of the intertestamental periods ( e.g . , 4 esdras 4:36 ) . in the kabbalah there are ten archangels , each assigned to one sephira : metatron , raziel ( other times jophiel ) , tzaphqiel , tzadkiel , khamael , raphael , haniel , michael , gabriel , and sandalphon . chapter 20 of the book of enoch mentions seven holy angels who watch , that often are considered the seven archangels : michael , raphael , gabriel , uriel , sariel , raguel , and remiel . metzger & coogan ( 1993 ) oxford companion to the bible , oxford university press , p . 54 , the life of adam and eve lists the archangels as well : michael , gabriel , uriel , raphael and joel . medieval jewish philosopher maimonides made a jewish angelic hierarchy . in christianity . the new testament makes over a hundred references to angels , but uses the word '' archangel '' only twice , at ( '' for the lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trump of god : and the dead in christ shall rise first '' , kjv ) and ( '' yet michael the archangel , when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of moses , durst not bring against him a railing accusation , but said , the lord rebuke thee '' , kjv ) . catholic . in catholicism , three are mentioned by name : gabriel michael raphael these three are commemorated together liturgically on sept . 29 . formerly each had his own feast ( see individual articles ) . the latter of these identifies himself in tobit 12:15 ( nab ) thus : '' i am raphael , one of the seven angels who stand and serve before the glory of the lord . '' the fourth book of esdras , which mentions the angel uriel ( and also the '' archangel '' jeremiel ) , was popular in the west and was frequently quoted by church fathers , especially ambrose , but was never considered part of the catholic biblical canon . the catholic church gives no official recognition to the names given in some apocryphal sources , such as raguel , sariel and remiel ( in the book of enoch ) or izidkiel , hanael , and kepharel ( in other such sources ) . . eastern orthodox . image : archangels.jpg right thumbnail angelic council , orthodox icon of the seven archangels , left to right : jegudiel , gabriel , selaphiel , michael , uriel , raphael , barachiel . beneath the mandorla of christ-immanuel are representations of cherubim ( blue ) and seraphim ( red ) . eastern orthodox tradition mentions '' thousands of archangels '' ; anaphora , divine liturgy of st . john chrysostom however , only seven archangels are venerated by name . the world of the angels holy transfiguration russian orthodox church , baltimore md uriel is included , and the other three are most often named selaphiel , jegudiel , and barachiel ( an eighth , jeremiel , is sometimes included as archangel ) . nicholai velimirovic , november 8 prologue from ochrid the orthodox church celebrates the synaxis of the archangel michael and the other bodiless powers on november 8 of the eastern orthodox liturgical calendar ( for those churches which follow the julian calendar , november 8 falls on november 21 of the modern gregorian calendar ) . other feast days of the archangels include the synaxis of the archangel gabriel on march 26 ( april 8 ) , and the miracle of the archangel michael at colossae on september 6 ( september 19 ) . in addition , every monday throughout the year is dedicated to the angels , with special mention being made in the church hymns of michael and gabriel . in orthodox iconography , each angel has a symbolic representation : michael in the hebrew language means '' who is like god ? '' or '' who is equal to god ? '' michael has been depicted from earliest christian times as a commander , who holds in his right hand a spear with which he attacks lucifer , and in his left hand a green palm branch . at the top of the spear , there is a linen ribbon with a red cross . the archangel michael is especially considered to be the guardian of the orthodox faith and a fighter against heresies . gabriel means '' god is my strength '' or '' might of god '' . he is the herald of the mysteries of god , especially the incarnation of god and all other mysteries related to it . he is depicted as follows : in his right hand , he holds a lantern with a lighted taper inside , and in his left hand , a mirror of green jasper . the mirror signifies the wisdom of god as a hidden mystery . raphael means '' it is god who heals '' or '' god heals '' . raphael is depicted leading tobit ( who is carrying a fish caught in the tigris ) with his right hand and holding a physician 's alabaster jar in his left hand . uriel means '' god is my light '' , or '' light of god '' ( ii esdras 4:1 , 5:20 ) . he is depicted holding a sword in his right hand , and a flame in his left . sealtiel means '' intercessor of god '' . he is depicted with his face and eyes lowered , holding his hands on his bosom in prayer . jegudiel means '' glorifier of god '' . he is depicted bearing a golden wreath in his right hand and a triple-thonged whip in his left hand . barachiel means '' blessed by god '' . he is depicted holding a white rose in his hand against his breast . jerahmeel means '' god 's exaltation '' . he is venerated as an inspirer and awakener of exalted thoughts that raise a person toward god . as an eighth , he is sometimes included as an archangel . coptic orthodox . in addition to michael , gabriel and raphael , the coptic orthodox church recognises four more archangels by name : suriel means '' prince of god '' zedekiel means '' grace of god '' sarathiel ( unknown ) ananiel means '' rain of god '' . ethiopian orthodox . the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church venerates the four archangels michael , gabriel , raphael , and uriel , as well as : phanuel , meaning '' face of god '' raguel , meaning '' friend of god '' ramuel or ramiel , meaning '' thunder of god '' in the canon of the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church , 1 enoch describes saraqael as one of the angels who watch over '' the spirits that sin in the spirit '' ( enoch 20:7–8 ) . protestant . the protestant bible provides names for three angels : '' michael the archangel '' , the angel gabriel , who is called '' the man gabriel '' in daniel 9:21 and third '' abaddon '' / '' apollyon '' in revelation 9:11 . within protestantism , the anglican and methodist tradition recognizes four angels as archangels : michael ( archangel ) , raphael ( archangel ) , gabriel , and uriel . but a depiction of seven archangels in stained-glass windows can be found in some anglican churches . in this case , in addition to the aforementioned angels , camael , jophiel and zadkiel are also depicted . they are commemorated on 29 & nbsp ; september , “ michaelmas ” , in the church calendar . the evangelist billy graham wrote that in sacred scripture , there is only one individual explicitly described as an archangel—michael—in jude 1:9 . billy graham ( 1995 ) . angels . thomas nelson . p . pt31 . graham ( 1995 ) p . pt32 seventh-day adventists hold that the titles '' michael '' and '' archangel '' are in reference to jesus . however , in the adventist view , they only signify his role as the chief of angels and make no reference to the nature of jesus , who is fully divine . adventists credit nonconformist minister matthew henry as supporting this view . file : seven archangels ( st michael 's , brighton ) . jpg seven archangels depicted in the stained-glass window at st michael 's church , brighton ; from left : michael , gabriel , uriel , camael ( camael ) , raphael , jophiel , and zadkiel file : henry ossawa tanner - the annunciation.jpg the annunciation by henry ossawa tanner . restorationist . jehovah 's witnesses , citing a reference to '' an archangel 's voice '' at 1 thessalonians 4:16 , also believe that '' michael '' is another name for jesus in heaven . they believe jesus is an archangel in the true sense of the word—the highest spiritual creature . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) interprets the term '' archangel '' as meaning '' chief angel '' , michael is the only individual so designated in the standard works . kjv ( lds ) it is believed that he is the head of all of the angels . lds church doctrine also states that the archangel michael was the first man , adam . ; . though no other being is identified as an '' archangel '' , joseph smith taught that the angel gabriel was known in mortality as noah . and the angel raphael is a being of significant standing , even though he has never been identified with any mortal prophet . . in islam . in islam , the mentioned archangels is considered an archangel by satanists and many non-satanists , but most non-satanists consider him evil and fallen from god 's grace . cultural references . in art , archangels are sometimes depicted with larger wings . some of the more commonly represented archangels are gabriel , michael , raphael , and uriel . angels in art on humanitiesweb in the lesser ritual of the pentagram , the invocation includes the words '' before me raphael ; behind me gabriel ; on my right hand michael ; on my left hand auriel uriel . '' '' on the lesser banishing ritual of the pentagram '' from the internet book of shadows at sacred-texts.com . see also . angels in art angel of the lord archdemon bene elohim fallen angel kami olympian spirits saint michael in the catholic church seven archangels sopo archangels , colombian baroque paintings yazata . references .