Charles Waterton

family and religion . waterton was of a roman catholic landed gentry family descended from reiner de waterton . the watertons had remained catholic after the english reformation and consequently the vast majority of their estates were confiscated . j w walker obe fsa . the burghs of cambridgeshire and yorkshire and the watertons of lincolnshire and yorkshire . ( 1931 ) the yorkshire archæological journal xxx 314–419 . charles waterton himself was a devout and ascetic catholic , and maintained strong links with the vatican . early life . '' squire '' waterton was born at walton hall , wakefield , yorkshire to thomas waterton and anne bedingfield . he was educated at stonyhurst college in lancashire where his interest in exploration and wildlife were already evident . on one occasion waterton was caught by the school 's jesuit superior scaling the towers at the front of the building ; almost at the top , the superior ordered him to come down the way he had gone up . hewitson , stonyhurst college , present and past waterton records in his autobiography that while he was at the school , '' by a mutual understanding , i was considered rat-catcher to the establishment , and also fox-taker , foumart-killer , and cross-bow charger at the time when the young rooks were fledged . i followed up my calling with great success . the vermin disappeared by the dozen ; the books were moderately well-thumbed ; and according to my notion of things , all went on perfectly right . '' catholic encyclopedia : charles waterton . south america . in 1804 he travelled to british guiana to take charge of his uncle 's estates near georgetown . in 1812 he started to explore the hinterland of the colony , making four journeys between then and 1824 , and reaching brazil walking barefoot in the rainy season . he described his discoveries in his book waterton 's wanderings in south america , which inspired british schoolboys such as charles darwin and alfred russel wallace . his explorations laid to rest the persistent myth of raleigh 's lake parime by suggesting that the seasonal flooding of the rupununi savannah had been misidentified as a lake . waterton was a skilled taxidermist and preserved many of the animals he encountered on his expeditions . he employed a unique method of taxidermy , soaking the specimens in what he called '' sublimate of mercury '' . unlike many preserved ( '' stuffed '' ) animals , his specimens are hollow and lifelike . he also displayed his anarchic sense of humour in some of his taxidermy : one tableau he created ( now lost ) consisted of reptiles dressed as famous english protestants and entitled '' the english reformation zoologically demonstrated '' . another specimen was the bottom of a howler monkey which he turned into an almost human face and simply labelled '' the nondescript '' . this specimen is still on display at the wakefield museum , along with other items from waterton 's collection . while he was in british guiana waterton taught his skills to one of his uncle 's slaves , john edmonstone . edmonstone , by then freed and practising taxidermy in edinburgh , in turn taught the teenage darwin . waterton is credited with bringing the anaesthetic agent curare wourali to europe . in london , with fellows of the royal society , he immobilised several animals , including a cat and a she-ass , with his wourali curare , and then revived the she-ass with a bellows . ( hence ) the ass was named wouralia and lived for years at walton hall . walton hall . in the 1820s waterton returned to walton hall and built a nine-foot-high wall around three miles ( 5 & nbsp ; km ) of the estate , turning it into the world 's first wildfowl and nature reserve , making him one of the world 's first environmentalists . he also invented the nest box . the waterton collection , on display at stonyhurst college until 1966 , is now in the wakefield museum . waterton owned a dog who was prominent in the foundation of the modern english mastiff and may be traced back to in the pedigrees of all living dogs of this breed . the history of the mastiff , m.b . wynn , 1885 . william loxley . on 11 may 1829 , at the age of 47 , waterton married 17-year-old anne edmonstone , the granddaughter of an arawak indian . his wife died shortly after giving birth to their son , edmund , when she was only 18 . after her death he slept on the floor with a block of wood for a pillow , '' as self-inflicted penance for her soul ! '' biography of explorer charles waterton . trivia-library.com waterton was an early opponent of pollution . he fought a long-running court case against the owners of a soap works that had been set up near his estate in 1839 , and sent out poisonous chemicals that severely damaged the trees in the park and polluted the lake . he was eventually successful in having the soap works moved . waterton died after fracturing his ribs and injuring his liver in a fall on his estate . his coffin was taken from the hall by barge to his chosen resting place , near the spot where the accident happened , in a funeral cortege led by the bishop of beverley , and followed at the lakeside by many local people . the grave was between two oak trees , which are no longer there . alleged eccentricities . a range of stories have been handed down about charles waterton , few of which are verifiable . the following are at least documented : he '' liked to dress as a scarecrow and sit in trees . '' he pretended to be his own butler and then tickled his guests with a coal brush . edginton , 1996 . p.2 he climbed tall trees to replace nestling heron chicks which had fallen from their nests in a storm . edginton , 1996 . p.2 he pretended to be a dog and would then bite the legs of his guests as they came into his house . edginton , 1996 . p.2 whenever he was ill he cupped himself heavily '' to cure anything and everything , from backache to malaria '' . edginton , 1996 . p.2 . although edginton calls this '' cupping his own blood '' , cupping did not break the skin , while blood-letting did , so it is unclear which is intended . in the chapter titled , '' squire waterton , '' harley relates his conversation with waterton that describes waterton 's philosophy and practice of bleeding himself . . legacy . waterton is chiefly remembered for his association with curare , and for his writings on natural history and conservation . david attenborough has described him as “ one of the first people anywhere to recognise , not only that the natural world was of great importance , but that it needed protection as humanity made more and more demands on it ” . sir david attenborough will open city centre ’ s new museum . wakefield express . 23 february 2013 waterton 's house , walton hall , which may be approached only by a pedestrian bridge to its own island , is now the main building of a hotel . there is a golf course in the vicinity and various public footpaths , some leading to a nature reserve . waterton lakes in alberta , canada , now a national park , was named after him by thomas blakiston in 1858 . a wakefield road and school in wakefield , yorkshire , are also named after him . footnotes .