Na+/K+-ATPase

function . the na⁺/k⁺-atpase helps maintain resting potential , affects transport , and regulates cellular volume . it also functions as a signal transducer/integrator to regulate the mapk pathway , reactive oxygen species ( ros ) , as well as intracellular calcium . in fact , all cells expend a large fraction of the atp they produce ( typically 30 % and up to 70 % in nerve cells ) to maintain their required cytosolic na and k concentrations . for neurons , the na⁺/k⁺-atpase can be responsible for up to 3/4 of the cell 's energy expenditure . in many types of tissue , atp consumption by the na⁺/k⁺-atpases have been related to glycolysis . this was first discovered in red blood cells ( schrier , 1966 ) , but has later been evidenced in renal cells , smooth muscles surrounding the blood vessels , and cardiac purkinje cells . recently , glycolysis has also been shown to be of particular importance for na⁺/k⁺-atpases in skeletal muscles , where inhibition of glycogen breakdown ( a substrate for glycolysis ) leads to reduced na⁺/k⁺-atpase activity and lower force production . . resting potential . in order to maintain the cell membrane potential , cells keep a low concentration of sodium ions and high levels of potassium ions within the cell ( intracellular ) . the sodium–potassium pump mechanism moves 3 sodium ions out and moves 2 potassium ions in , thus , in total , removing one positive charge carrier from the intracellular space ( please see mechanism for details ) . in addition , there is a short-circuit channel ( i.e . a highly k-permeable ion channel ) for potassium in the membrane , thus the voltage across the plasma membrane is close to the nernst potential of potassium . reversal potential . even if both k⁺ and na⁺ ions have the same charge , they can still have very different equilibrium potentials for both outside and/or inside concentrations . the sodium-potassium pump moves toward an equilibrium state with the relative concentrations of na⁺ and k⁺ for both inside and outside of cell . for instance , the concentration of k⁺ in cytosol is 100mm , whereas the concentration of na⁺ is 10mm . on the other hand , in extracellular space , the concentration of k⁺ is 5mm , whereas the concentration of na⁺ is 150mm . transport . export of sodium from the cell provides the driving force for several secondary active transporters membrane transport proteins , which import glucose , amino acids , and other nutrients into the cell by use of the sodium gradient . another important task of the na⁺-k⁺ pump is to provide a na⁺ gradient that is used by certain carrier processes . in the gut , for example , sodium is transported out of the reabsorbing cell on the blood ( interstitial fluid ) side via the na⁺-k⁺ pump , whereas , on the reabsorbing ( lumenal ) side , the na⁺-glucose symporter uses the created na⁺ gradient as a source of energy to import both na⁺ and glucose , which is far more efficient than simple diffusion . similar processes are located in the renal tubular system . controlling cell volume . failure of the na⁺-k⁺ pumps can result in swelling of the cell . a cell 's osmolarity is the sum of the concentrations of the various ion species and many proteins and other organic compounds inside the cell . when this is higher than the osmolarity outside of the cell , water flows into the cell through osmosis . this can cause the cell to swell up and lyse . the na⁺-k⁺ pump helps to maintain the right concentrations of ions . furthermore , when the cell begins to swell , this automatically activates the na⁺-k⁺ pump because it changes the internal concentrations of na⁺-k⁺ to which the pump is sensitive . . functioning as signal transducer . within the last decade , many independent labs have demonstrated that , in addition to the classical ion transporting , this membrane protein can also relay extracellular ouabain-binding signalling into the cell through regulation of protein tyrosine phosphorylation . for example in ramnanan cj . 2006 , the study investigates the function of na+/k+atpase in foot muscle and hepatopancreas in land snail o.lactea comparing the active and estivating states . they concluded that reversible phosphorylation can control the same means of coordinating atp use by this ion pump with the rates of the atp generation by catabolic pathways in estivating o . lactea.the downstream signals through ouabain-triggered protein phosphorylation events include activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase ( mapk ) signal cascades , mitochondrial reactive oxygen species ( ros ) production , as well as activation of phospholipase c ( plc ) and inositol triphosphate ( ip3 ) receptor ( ip3r ) in different intracellular compartments . protein-protein interactions play a very important role in na⁺-k⁺ pump-mediated signal transduction . for example , na⁺-k⁺ pump interacts directly with src , a non-receptor tyrosine kinase , to form a signaling receptor complex . src kinase is inhibited by na⁺-k⁺ pump , while , upon ouabain binding , the src kinase domain will be released and then activated . based on this scenario , naktide , a peptide src inhibitor derived from na⁺-k⁺ pump , was developed as a functional ouabain–na⁺-k⁺ pump-mediated signal transduction . na⁺-k⁺ pump also interacts with ankyrin , ip3r , pi3k , plc-gamma and cofilin . . controlling neuron activity states . the na⁺-k⁺ pump has been shown to control and set the intrinsic activity mode of cerebellar purkinje neurons , olfactory bulb mitral cells and probably other neuron types . this suggests that the pump might not simply be a homeostatic , '' housekeeping '' molecule for ionic gradients , but could be a computation element in the cerebellum and the brain . indeed , a mutation in the na⁺-k⁺ pump causes rapid onset dystonia-parkinsonism , which has symptoms to indicate that it is a pathology of cerebellar computation . furthermore , an ouabain block of na⁺-k⁺ pumps in the cerebellum of a live mouse results in it displaying ataxia and dystonia . alcohol inhibits sodium–potassium pumps in the cerebellum and this is likely how it corrupts cerebellar computation and body coordination . the distribution of the na⁺-k⁺ pump on myelinated axons , in human brain , was demonstrated to be along the internodal axolemma , and not within the nodal axolemma as previously thought . . mechanism . thumb looking at the process starting from the interior of the cell . the pump has a higher affinity for na⁺ ions than k⁺ ions , thus after binding atp , binds 3 intracellular na⁺ ions . atp is hydrolyzed , leading to phosphorylation of the pump at a highly conserved aspartate residue and subsequent release of adp . this process leads to a conformational change in the pump . the conformational change exposes the na⁺ ions to the outside . the phosphorylated form of the pump has a low affinity for na⁺ ions , so they are released ; by contrast it has high affinity for the k⁺ ions . the pump binds 2 extracellular k⁺ ions . this causes the dephosphorylation of the pump , reverting it to its previous conformational state , thus releasing the k⁺ ions into the cell . the unphosphorylated form of the pump has a higher affinity for na⁺ ions . atp binds , and the process starts again . regulation . endogenous . the na⁺/k⁺-atpase is upregulated by camp . thus , substances causing an increase in camp upregulate the na⁺/k⁺-atpase . these include the ligands of the g s -coupled gpcrs . in contrast , substances causing a decrease in camp downregulate the na⁺/k⁺-atpase . these include the ligands of the g i -coupled gpcrs . note : early studies indicated the opposite effect , but these were later found to be inaccurate due to additional complicating factors . the na⁺/k⁺-atpase is endogenously negatively regulated by the inositol pyrophosphate 5-insp7 , an intracellular signaling molecule generated by ihpk1 , which relieves an autoinhibitory domain of pi3k p85α to drive endocytosis and degradation . the na⁺/k⁺-atpase is also regulated by reversible phosphorylation . research has shown that in estivating animals , the na⁺/k⁺-atpase is in the phosphorylated and low activity form . dephosphorylation of na⁺/k⁺-atpase can recover it to the high activity form . . exogenous . the na⁺/k⁺-atpase can be pharmacologically modified by administrating drugs exogenously . its expression can also be modified through hormones such as triiodothyronine , a thyroid hormone . for instance , na⁺/k⁺-atpase found in the membrane of heart cells is an important target of cardiac glycosides ( for example digoxin and ouabain ) , inotrope drugs used to improve heart performance by increasing its force of contraction . muscle contraction is dependent on a 100- to 10,000-times-higher-than-resting intracellular ca²⁺ concentration , which is caused by ca²⁺ release from the muscle cells ' sarcoplasmic reticulum . immediately after muscle contraction , intracellular ca²⁺ is quickly returned to its normal concentration by a carrier enzyme in the plasma membrane , and a calcium pump in sarcoplasmic reticulum , causing the muscle to relax . according to the blaustein-hypothesis , this carrier enzyme ( na⁺/ca²⁺ exchanger , ncx ) uses the na gradient generated by the na⁺-k⁺ pump to remove ca²⁺ from the intracellular space , hence slowing down the na⁺-k⁺ pump results in a permanently elevated ca²⁺ level in the muscle , which may be the mechanism of the long-term inotropic effect of cardiac glycosides such as digoxin . the problem with this hypothesis is that at pharmacological concentrations of digitalis , less than 5 % of na/k-atpase molecules—specifically the α2 isoform in heart and arterial smooth muscle ( k d 32 nm ) -- are inhibited , not enough to affect the intracellular concentration of na⁺ . however , apart from the population of na/k-atpase in the plasma membrane—responsible for ion transport -- , there is another population in the caveolae which acts as digitalis receptor and stimulates the egf receptor . . pharmacologic regulation . in certain conditions such as in the case of cardiac disease , the na⁺/k⁺-atpase may need to be inhibited via pharmacological means . a commonly used inhibitor used in the treatment of cardiac disease would be digoxin which essentially binds '' to the extracellular part of enzyme i.e . that binds potassium , when it is in a phosphorylated state , to transfer potassium inside the cell '' after this essential binding occurs , a dephosphorylation of the alpha subunit occurs which reduces the effect of cardiac disease . it is via the inhibiting of the na+/k+-atpase that sodium levels will begin to increase within the cell which ultimately increases the concentration of intracellular calcium via the sodium-calcium exchanger . this increased presence of calcium is what allows for the force of contraction to be increased . in the case of patients where the heart is not pumping hard enough to provide what is needed for the body this approach allows for the temporary overcoming of this . discovery . na⁺/k⁺-atpase was discovered by jens christian skou in 1957 while working as assistant professor at the department of physiology , university of aarhus , denmark . he published his work that year . in 1997 , he received one-half of the nobel prize in chemistry '' for the first discovery of an ion-transporting enzyme , na⁺ , k⁺-atpase . '' . genes . alpha : atp1a1 , atp1a2 , atp1a3 , atp1a4 . 1 predominates in kidney . 2 is also known as '' alpha ( + ) '' beta : atp1b1 , , atp1b3 , . in insects . mutagenesis studies conducted by susanne dobler have identified the conserved m3-m4 hairpin and m5-m6 hairpins . at position 312 , insects in the asclepias and apocynum species differed from mammalian na , k-atpase through the change of glutamic acid to aspartic acid . thus , the insects were found to have a higher degree of conservation in the c-terminal of the ouabain binding pocket . dobler et al . found 87 % amino acid identity among insect sequences , which shows a high level of molecular convergence among four orders of insect herbivores . thus , some substitutions provide resistance to cardenolides as an adaptation even across phylogenetic branches . . additional images . file : scheme sodium-potassium pump-en.svg mechanism of the sodium–potassium exchange pump .