1954 in music

specific locations . 1954 in british music 1954 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1954 in country music 1954 in jazz . events . january 14 – first documented use of the abbreviated term '' rock ' n ' roll '' to promote alan freed 's rock ' n ' roll jubillee , held at st . nicholas arena in new york , new york . previously the genre term was just called '' rock and roll '' february 1 – johnny '' guitar '' watson records '' space guitar '' pioneering reverb and feedback techniques on guitar march 12 – arnold schoenberg 's opera moses und aron has its first performance in hamburg ( it is given a staged première on june 6 in zurich ) . anon . '' arnold schoenberg : moses und aaron '' . metropolitan opera international radio broadcast information center ( archived copy from 14 april 2012 , accessed 20 april 2013 ) . march 15 – the chords record '' sh-boom '' for atlantic records ' cat subsidiary . march 25 – at the 26th academy awards , frank sinatra wins the academy award for best supporting actor for his role in from here to eternity , resuscitating his singing career in the process . at the same ceremony , bing crosby is nominated for best actor for his role in the country girl . 1 recording for the austrian radio . the symphony received its two first concert performances in 1955 under alois melichar in graz and jan koetsier in munich . . compositions . arnold bax – autumn legend for cor anglais and strings luciano berio – nones for orchestra boris blacher – viola concerto pierre boulez – le marteau sans maître havergal brian – symphony no . 10 carlos chávez – symphony no . 3 george crumb – string quartet mario davidovsky – concertino for percussion and strings george enescu – chamber symphony in e major , op . 33 ross lee finney – piano trio no . 2 gerald finzi – cello concerto andré fleury – messe pour la fête de tous les saints armstrong gibbs – dale and fell , suite for strings howard hanson – sinfonia sacra ( symphony no . 5 ) andrew imbrie – violin concerto alemdar karamanov – symphony no . 1 wojciech kilar – the bird for voice and piano sonata for horn and piano ernst krenek symphony '' pallas athene '' , op . 137 violin concerto no . 2 , op . 140 györgy ligeti – string quartet no . 1 ( ligeti ) witold lutoslawski concerto for orchestra dance preludes , for clarinet and piano bohuslav martinů – sonata for piano , h . 350 darius milhaud – west point suite walter piston – symphony no . 5 edmund rubbra – symphony no . 6 john serry sr . & nbsp ; – allegro – m . joseph haydn , arranged for accordion quartet the golden wedding – m . jean gabriel-marie , arranged for accordion quartet tango of love – arranged for accordion quartet roger sessions – idyll of theocritus robert simpson – string quartet no . 3 karlheinz stockhausen – studie ii igor stravinsky – in memoriam dylan thomas virgil thomson – concerto for flute , strings , harp and percussion ernst toch – string quartet no . 13 henri tomasi – horn concerto eduard tubin – symphony no . 6 edgard varèse – déserts ralph vaughan williams – tuba concerto heitor villa-lobos – string quartet no . 15 stefan wolpe symphony for 24 instruments piece for oboe , cello , percussion and piano , '' oboe quartet '' . opera . jack beeson – hello , out there benjamin britten – the turn of the screw valentino bucchi – il contrabasso ( maggio musicale fiorentino , 20 june ) aaron copland – the tender land paul hindemith – neues vom tage , revised version of 1929 opera bohuslav martinů – mirandolina jerome moross – the golden apple william walton – troilus and cressida . jazz . musical theater . after the ball ( music , lyrics and book : noël coward ) london production opened at the globe theatre on june 10 and ran for 188 performances the boy friend broadway production opened at the royale theatre on september 30 and ran for 485 performances by the beautiful sea ( music : arthur schwartz lyrics : dorothy fields ) broadway production opened at the majestic theatre on april 8 and transferred to the imperial theatre on october 2 for a total run of 268 performances . starring shirley booth can-can london production opened at the coliseum on october 14 and ran for 394 performances the duenna ( music : julian slade lyrics & book : dorothy reynolds ) london production opened at the westminster theatre on july 28 and ran for 134 performances fanny broadway production opened at the majestic theatre on november 4 and transferred to the belasco theatre on december 4 , 1956 , for a total run of 888 performances the girl in pink tights broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre on march 5 and ran for 115 performances the golden apple broadway production opened at the alvin theatre on april 20 and ran for 125 performances happy holiday ( music : george posford lyrics & book : eric maschwitz and arnold ridley ) london production opened at the palace theatre on december 22 and ran for 31 performances house of flowers broadway production opened at the alvin theatre on december 30 and ran for 165 performances on your toes broadway revival opened at the 46th street theatre on october 11 and ran for 64 performances the pajama game ( richard adler and jerry ross ) — broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on may 13 and transferred to the shubert theatre on november 24 , 1956 , for a total run of 1063 performances pal joey ( music : richard rodgers lyrics : lorenz hart book : john o'hara ) london production opened at princes theatre on august 4 and ran for 245 performances peter pan broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on october 20 and ran for 152 performances salad days ( music : julian slade lyrics & book : dorothy reynolds and julian slade ) london production opened at the vaudeville theatre on august 5 and ran for 2283 performances you 'll be lucky london revue opened at the adelphi theatre on february 25 . starring sally barnes and lauri lupino lane . zuleika — premiere in cambridge , england . musical films . athena , starring jane powell , debbie reynolds , edmund purdom and vic damone brigadoon carmen jones casanova 's big night starring bob hope chandraharam , starring n.t . rama rao deep in my heart , starring josé ferrer french cancan , starring jean gabin and maría félix the french line , starring jane russell living it up , starring dean martin , jerry lewis and janet leigh lucky me , starring doris day , robert cummings and phil silvers mayurpankh , directed by and starring kishore sahu new faces red garters , starring rosemary clooney , jack carson and guy mitchell rhapsody , starring elizabeth taylor river of no return , starring marilyn monroe rose marie , starring ann blyth and howard keel seven brides for seven brothers , starring jane powell , howard keel and julie newmar . a star is born the student prince , starring ann blyth and edmund purdom with mario lanza dubbing for purdom . there 's no business like show business top banana ( film ) , starring phil silvers white christmas , starring bing crosby , danny kaye , rosemary clooney and vera ellen . musical television . babes in toyland lady in the dark ( starring ann sothern ) . births . january–april . january 1 – richard edson , american drummer january 2 – glenn goins , american r & b/funk guitarist and singer ( parliament-funkadelic ) ( d . 1978 ) january 4 – eugene chadbourne , american guitarist and songwriter january 7 – josé maría vitier , cuban pianist and composer january 16 – cheryl bentyne , vocalist ( the manhattan transfer ) january 19 – katey sagal , american singer-songwriter and actress january 25 – richard finch , funk composer ( k.c . and the sunshine band ) january 29 – richard manitoba , singer february 1 – chuck dukowski , american singer-songwriter and bass player ( black flag , würm , black face and october faction ) february 10 – carita holmström , pianist , singer and songwriter february 18 – john travolta , actor , singer and dancer february 19 – jimmy pursey , vocalist ( sham 69 ) february 20 – jon brant , bass guitar player ( cheap trick ) february 27 – joann falletta , orchestral conductor neal schon , rock musician ( journey ) santana march 10 – tina charles , disco singer march 15 – jon king , post-punk singer-songwriter ( gang of four ) march 16 – nancy wilson , rock singer-songwriter ( heart ) march 27 – wally stocker , rock guitarist ( the babys ) march 31 – tony brock , rock drummer ( the babys ) april 1 – knut værnes , norwegian guitarist april 2 – susumu hirasawa , singer-songwriter , guitarist and keyboardist ( p-model ) april 4 – michel camilo , pianist april 5 – peter case , singer-songwriter and guitarist , april 13 – jimmy destri , rock keyboard player and songwriter ( blondie ) april 17 – michael sembello , singer , instrumentalist and songwriter april 28 – michael daugherty , composer . may–december . may 1 – ray parker , jr . , guitarist , songwriter and record producer may 2 – angela bofill , singer songwriter elliot goldenthal , composer may 10 – barrington pheloung , screen composer ( d . 2019 ) may 11 – judith weir , composer , master of the queens music may 18 – reinhold heil , composer may 20 – jimmie henderson ( black oak arkansas ) may 21 – marc ribot , session guitarist and composer may 31 – vicki sue robinson , us disco singer ( d . 2000 ) june 3 – dan hill , singer-songwriter june 8 – greg ginn , punk guitarist ( black flag ) june 13 – robert donaldson ( bo donaldson & the heywoods ) june 15 – terri gibbs , country singer june 20 – michael anthony ( van halen ) july 7 – pam bricker , american singer and guitarist ( d . 2005 ) ron jones , composer july 10 – neil tennant , british singer-songwriter and record producer ( pet shop boys ) july 18 – tobias picker , american composer ricky skaggs , american singer-songwriter , mandolin player and producer ( new south ) august 11 – joe jackson , singer , songwriter and composer august 17 – eric johnson , guitarist , songwriter and record producer august 25 – elvis costello , singer-songwriter september 14 – barry cowsill , drummer ( d . 2005 ) september 17 – joël-françois durand , french composer september 21 – phil taylor , english heavy metal drummer ( motörhead ) ( d . 2015 ) september 28 – george lynch , heavy metal guitarist ( dokken ) september 30 – basia , singer october 3 – stevie ray vaughan , guitarist , singer and songwriter ( d . 1990 ) october 3 – dawayne bailey , guitarist , singer and songwriter ( alias bob seger-chicago ) october 9 – james fearnley ( the pogues ) october 10 – susan frykberg , electroacoustic composer and sound artist david lee roth ( van halen ) october 12 – michael roe , guitarist , lead singer of the 77s november 3 – adam ant , singer november 4 – chris difford , singer , songwriter and record producer ( squeeze ) november 9 – dennis stratton ( iron maiden ) november 10 – mario cipollina ( huey lewis and the news ) november 14 – anson funderburgh , american guitarist and bandleader yanni , pianist , keyboardist and composer november 15 – randy thomas , american singer-songwriter , guitarist and producer ( sweet comfort band and allies ) november 16 – donald runnicles , conductor november 18 – john parr , singer november 23 – bruce hornsby , pianist , singer and songwriter ( grateful dead ) december 11 – jermaine jackson , singer ( the jackson 5 ) december 25 – robin campbell ( ub40 ) annie lennox , singer date unknown – gérard buquet , tubist , conductor and composer . deaths . january 9 – eugen coca , violinist and composer , 60 january 11 – oscar straus ( composer ) , viennese operetta composer , 83 march 3 – noel gay , english songwriter , 55 march 11 – frankie newton , american trumpeter , 48 march 19 – walter braunfels , pianist and composer , 71 march 27 – carl t . fischer , composer and jazz pianist , 41 april 5 – claude delvincourt , pianist and composer , 66 april 8 – edwin grasse , violinist and composer , 69 april 9 – philip greeley clapp , pianist and composer , 65 april 11 – paul specht , violinist and bandleader , 59 april 14 – lil green , blues singer , 34 ( pneumonia ) april 17 – torsten ralf , operatic tenor , 53 may 1 – arthur johnston , songwriter , 56 may 19 – charles ives , composer , 79 may 20 – linda lee thomas , socialite and wife of cole porter , 70 may 31 – pedro elías gutiérrez , musician and composer , 84 june 17 – danny cedrone , session guitarist ( soloist on '' rock around the clock '' ) , 33 ( fell downstairs ) july 7 – idabelle smith firestone , american composer and songwriter , 79 july 16 – lucien muratore , operatic tenor and actor , 77 august 8 – phil ohman , film composer and pianist , 57 august 13 – demetrius constantine dounis , violin teacher august 17 – billy murray , singer , 77 august 24 – fred rose , songwriter , music publisher , 56 october 24 – pepito arriola , pianist , 57 october 27 – franco alfano , composer and pianist , 79 november 11 – j . rosamond johnson , composer and singer november 29 – dink johnson , jazz musician , 56 november 30 – wilhelm furtwängler , conductor and composer , 68 december 14 papa celestin , jazz musician , 70 sergei protopopov , russian composer and music theorist , 61 december 25 johnny ace , american rhythm and blues singer , 25 ( shooting accident ) rosario scalero , violinist , teacher and composer , 84 date unknown – per reidarson , composer and music critic . references .