Tunnel

terminology . a tunnel is relatively long and narrow ; the length is often much greater than twice the diameter , although similar shorter excavations can be constructed , such as cross passages between tunnels . the definition of what constitutes a tunnel can vary widely from source to source . for example , the definition of a road tunnel in the united kingdom is defined as '' a subsurface highway structure enclosed for a length of or more . '' in the united states , the nfpa definition of a tunnel is '' an underground structure with a design length greater than and a diameter greater than . '' in the uk , a pedestrian , cycle or animal tunnel beneath a road or railway is called a subway , while an underground railway system is differently named in different cities , the '' underground '' or the '' tube '' in london , the '' subway '' in glasgow , and the '' metro '' in newcastle . the place where a road , railway , canal or watercourse passes under a footpath , cycleway , or another road or railway is most commonly called a bridge or , if passing under a canal , an aqueduct . where it is important to stress that it is passing underneath , it may be called an underpass , though the official term when passing under a railway is an underbridge . a longer underpass containing a road , canal or railway is normally called a '' tunnel '' , whether or not it passes under another item of infrastructure . an underpass of any length under a river is also usually called a '' tunnel '' , whatever mode of transport it is for . in the us , the term '' subway '' means an underground rapid transit system , and the term pedestrian underpass is used for a passage beneath a barrier . rail station platforms may be connected by pedestrian tunnels or footbridges . history . much of the early technology of tunneling evolved from mining and military engineering . the etymology of the terms '' mining '' ( for mineral extraction or for siege attacks ) , '' military engineering '' , and '' civil engineering '' reveals these deep historic connections . antiquity and early middle ages . predecessors of modern tunnels were adits to transport water for irrigation or drinking , and sewerage . the first qanats are known from before 2000 b.c . the tunnel of eupalinos is a tunnel aqueduct long running through mount kastro in samos , greece , built in the 6th century bc to serve as an aqueduct . it is the second known tunnel to have been excavated from both ends , after the siloam tunnel in the neighbourhood of silwan in eastern jerusalem . in ethiopia , the siqurto foot tunnel , hand-hewn in the middle ages , crosses a mountain ridge . geotechnical investigation and design . a major tunnel project must start with a comprehensive investigation of ground conditions by collecting samples from boreholes and by other geophysical techniques . an informed choice can then be made of machinery and methods for excavation and ground support , which will reduce the risk of encountering unforeseen ground conditions . in planning the route , the horizontal and vertical alignments can be selected to make use of the best ground and water conditions . it is common practice to locate a tunnel deeper than otherwise would be required , in order to excavate through solid rock or other material that is easier to support during construction . conventional desk and preliminary site studies may yield insufficient information to assess such factors as the blocky nature of rocks , the exact location of fault zones , or the stand-up times of softer ground . this may be a particular concern in large-diameter tunnels . to give more information , a pilot tunnel ( or '' drift tunnel '' ) may be driven ahead of the main excavation . this smaller tunnel is less likely to collapse catastrophically should unexpected conditions be met , and it can be incorporated into the final tunnel or used as a backup or emergency escape passage . alternatively , horizontal boreholes may sometimes be drilled ahead of the advancing tunnel face . other key geotechnical factors : stand-up time is the amount of time a newly excavated cavity can support itself without any added structures . knowing this parameter allows the engineers to determine how far an excavation can proceed before support is needed , which in turn affects the speed , efficiency , and cost of construction . generally , certain configurations of rock and clay will have the greatest stand-up time , while sand and fine soils will have a much lower stand-up time . groundwater control is very important in tunnel construction . water leaking into a tunnel or vertical shaft will greatly decrease stand-up time , causing the excavation to become unstable and risking collapse . the most common way to control groundwater is to install dewatering pipes into the ground and to simply pump the water out . powers , p.j . ( 2007 ) . construction dewatering and groundwater control . hoboken , nj : john wiley & sons inc . a very effective but expensive technology is ground freezing , using pipes which are inserted into the ground surrounding the excavation , which are then cooled with special refrigerant fluids . this freezes the ground around each pipe until the whole space is surrounded with frozen soil , keeping water out until a permanent structure can be built . tunnel cross-sectional shape is also very important in determining stand-up time . if a tunnel excavation is wider than it is high , it will have a harder time supporting itself , decreasing its stand-up time . a square or rectangular excavation is more difficult to make self-supporting , because of a concentration of stress at the corners . . choice of tunnels versus bridges . for water crossings , a tunnel is generally more costly to construct than a bridge . however , navigational considerations may limit the use of high bridges or drawbridge spans intersecting with shipping channels , necessitating a tunnel . bridges usually require a larger footprint on each shore than tunnels . in areas with expensive real estate , such as manhattan and urban hong kong , this is a strong factor in favor of a tunnel . boston 's big dig project replaced elevated roadways with a tunnel system to increase traffic capacity , hide traffic , reclaim land , redecorate , and reunite the city with the waterfront . the 1934 queensway tunnel under the river mersey at liverpool was chosen over a massively high bridge for defense reasons ; it was feared that aircraft could destroy a bridge in times of war . maintenance costs of a massive bridge to allow the world 's largest ships to navigate under were considered higher than for a tunnel . similar conclusions were reached for the 1971 kingsway tunnel under the mersey . in hampton roads , virginia , tunnels were chosen over bridges for strategic considerations ; in the event of damage , bridges might prevent us navy vessels from leaving naval station norfolk . water-crossing tunnels built instead of bridges include the holland tunnel and lincoln tunnel between new jersey and manhattan in new york city ; the queens-midtown tunnel between manhattan and the borough of queens on long island ; the detroit-windsor tunnel between michigan and ontario ; and the elizabeth river tunnels between norfolk and portsmouth , virginia ; the 1934 river mersey road queensway tunnel ; the western scheldt tunnel , zeeland , netherlands ; and the north shore connector tunnel in pittsburgh , pennsylvania . other reasons for choosing a tunnel instead of a bridge include avoiding difficulties with tides , weather , and shipping during construction ( as in the channel tunnel ) , aesthetic reasons ( preserving the above-ground view , landscape , and scenery ) , and also for weight capacity reasons ( it may be more feasible to build a tunnel than a sufficiently strong bridge ) . some water crossings are a mixture of bridges and tunnels , such as the oresund bridge and the chesapeake bay bridge-tunnel in virginia . there are particular hazards with tunnels , especially from vehicle fires when combustion gases can asphyxiate users , as happened at the gotthard road tunnel in switzerland in 2001 . one of the worst railway disasters ever , the balvano train disaster , was caused by a train stalling in the armi tunnel in italy in 1944 , killing 426 passengers . designers try to reduce these risks by installing emergency ventilation systems or isolated emergency escape tunnels parallel to the main passage . project planning and cost estimates . government funds are often required for the creation of tunnels . when a tunnel is being planned or constructed , economics and politics play a large factor in the decision making process . civil engineers usually use project management techniques for developing a major structure . understanding the amount of time the project requires , and the amount of labor and materials needed is a crucial part of project planning . the project duration must be identified using a work breakdown structure ( wbs ) and critical path method ( cpm ) . also , the land needed for excavation and construction staging , and the proper machinery must be selected . large infrastructure projects require millions or even billions of dollars , involving long-term financing , usually through issuance of bonds . the costs and benefits for an infrastructure such as a tunnel must be identified . political disputes can occur , as in 2005 when the us house of representatives approved a 100 million federal grant to build a tunnel under new york harbor . however , the port authority of new york and new jersey was not aware of this bill and had not asked for a grant for such a project . increased taxes to finance a large project may cause opposition . . construction . tunnels are dug in types of materials varying from soft clay to hard rock . the method of tunnel construction depends on such factors as the ground conditions , the groundwater conditions , the length and diameter of the tunnel drive , the depth of the tunnel , the logistics of supporting the tunnel excavation , the final use and the shape of the tunnel and appropriate risk management . there are three basic types of tunnel construction in common use . cut-and-cover tunnels are constructed in a shallow trench and then covered over . bored tunnels are constructed in situ , without removing the ground above . finally , a tube can be sunk into a body of water , which is called an immersed tunnel . cut-and-cover . cut-and-cover is a simple method of construction for shallow tunnels where a trench is excavated and roofed over with an overhead support system strong enough to carry the load of what is to be built above the tunnel . two basic forms of cut-and-cover tunneling are available : bottom-up method : a trench is excavated , with ground support as necessary , and the tunnel is constructed in it . the tunnel may be of in situ concrete , precast concrete , precast arches , or corrugated steel arches ; in early days brickwork was used . the trench is then carefully back-filled and the surface is reinstated . top-down method : side support walls and capping beams are constructed from ground level by such methods as slurry walling or contiguous bored piling . only a shallow excavation is needed to construct the tunnel roof using precast beams or in situ concrete sitting on the walls . the surface is then reinstated except for access openings . this allows early reinstatement of roadways , services , and other surface features . excavation then takes place under the permanent tunnel roof , and the base slab is constructed . shallow tunnels are often of the cut-and-cover type ( if under water , of the immersed-tube type ) , while deep tunnels are excavated , often using a tunnelling shield . for intermediate levels , both methods are possible . large cut-and-cover boxes are often used for underground metro stations , such as canary wharf tube station in london . this construction form generally has two levels , which allows economical arrangements for ticket hall , station platforms , passenger access and emergency egress , ventilation and smoke control , staff rooms , and equipment rooms . the interior of canary wharf station has been likened to an underground cathedral , owing to the sheer size of the excavation . this contrasts with many traditional stations on london underground , where bored tunnels were used for stations and passenger access . nevertheless , the original parts of the london underground network , the metropolitan and district railways , were constructed using cut-and-cover . these lines pre-dated electric traction and the proximity to the surface was useful to ventilate the inevitable smoke and steam . a major disadvantage of cut-and-cover is the widespread disruption generated at the surface level during construction . this , and the availability of electric traction , brought about london underground 's switch to bored tunnels at a deeper level towards the end of the 19th century . boring machines . tunnel boring machines ( tbms ) and associated back-up systems are used to highly automate the entire tunnelling process , reducing tunnelling costs . in certain predominantly urban applications , tunnel boring is viewed as a quick and cost-effective alternative to laying surface rails and roads . expensive eminent domain of buildings and land , with potentially lengthy planning inquiries , is eliminated . disadvantages of tbms arise from their usually large size – the difficulty of transporting the large tbm to the site of tunnel construction , or ( alternatively ) the high cost of assembling the tbm on-site , often within the confines of the tunnel being constructed . there are a variety of tbm designs that can operate in a variety of conditions , from hard rock to soft water-bearing ground . some types of tbms , the bentonite slurry , and earth-pressure balance machines have pressurized compartments at the front end , allowing them to be used in difficult conditions below the water table . this pressurizes the ground ahead of the tbm cutter head to balance the water pressure . the operators work in normal air pressure behind the pressurized compartment , but may occasionally have to enter that compartment to renew or repair the cutters . this requires special precautions , such as local ground treatment or halting the tbm at a position free from water . despite these difficulties , tbms are now preferred over the older method of tunnelling in compressed air , with an airlock/decompression chamber some way back from the tbm , which required operators to work in high pressure and go through decompression procedures at the end of their shifts , much like deep-sea divers . in february 2010 , aker wirth delivered a tbm to switzerland , for the expansion of the linth–limmern power stations located south of linthal in the canton of glarus . the borehole has a diameter of . the four tbms used for excavating the gotthard base tunnel , in switzerland , had a diameter of about . a larger tbm was built to bore the green heart tunnel ( dutch : tunnel groene hart ) as part of the hsl-zuid in the netherlands , with a diameter of . this in turn was superseded by the madrid m30 ringroad , spain , and the chong ming tunnels in shanghai , china . all of these machines were built at least partly by herrenknecht . , the world 's largest tbm was '' big bertha '' , a diameter machine built by hitachi zosen corporation , which dug the alaskan way viaduct replacement tunnel in seattle , washington ( us ) . . clay-kicking . clay-kicking is a specialized method developed in the united kingdom of digging tunnels in strong clay-based soil structures . unlike previous manual methods of using mattocks which relied on the soil structure to be hard , clay-kicking was relatively silent and hence did not harm soft clay-based structures . the clay-kicker lies on a plank at a 45-degree angle away from the working face and inserts a tool with a cup-like rounded end with the feet . turning the tool manually , the kicker extracts a section of soil , which is then placed on the waste extract . used in victorian civil engineering , the method found favor in the renewal of britain 's ancient sewerage systems , by not having to remove all property or infrastructure to create a small tunnel system . during the first world war , the system was used by royal engineer tunnelling companies to put mines beneath the german empire lines . the method was virtually silent and so not susceptible to listening methods of detection . . shafts . a temporary access shaft is sometimes necessary during the excavation of a tunnel . they are usually circular and go straight down until they reach the level at which the tunnel is going to be built . a shaft normally has concrete walls and is usually built to be permanent . once the access shafts are complete , tbms are lowered to the bottom and excavation can start . shafts are the main entrance in and out of the tunnel until the project is completed . if a tunnel is going to be long , multiple shafts at various locations may be bored so that entrance to the tunnel is closer to the unexcavated area . united states army corps of engineers . ( 1978 ) . tunnels and shafts in rock . washington , dc : department of the army . once construction is complete , construction access shafts are often used as ventilation shafts , and may also be used as emergency exits . sprayed concrete techniques . the new austrian tunnelling method ( natm ) —also referred to as the sequential excavation method ( sem ) —was developed in the 1960s . the main idea of this method is to use the geological stress of the surrounding rock mass to stabilize the tunnel , by allowing a measured relaxation and stress reassignment into the surrounding rock to prevent full loads becoming imposed on the supports . based on geotechnical measurements , an optimal cross section is computed . the excavation is protected by a layer of sprayed concrete , commonly referred to as shotcrete . other support measures can include steel arches , rock bolts , and mesh . technological developments in sprayed concrete technology have resulted in steel and polypropylene fibers being added to the concrete mix to improve lining strength . this creates a natural load-bearing ring , which minimizes the rock 's deformation . by special monitoring the natm method is flexible , even at surprising changes of the geomechanics rock consistency during the tunneling work . the measured rock properties lead to appropriate tools for tunnel strengthening . . pipe jacking . in pipe jacking , hydraulic jacks are used to push specially made pipes through the ground behind a tbm or shield . this method is commonly used to create tunnels under existing structures , such as roads or railways . tunnels constructed by pipe jacking are normally small diameter bores with a maximum size of around . box jacking . box jacking is similar to pipe jacking , but instead of jacking tubes , a box-shaped tunnel is used . jacked boxes can be a much larger span than a pipe jack , with the span of some box jacks in excess of . a cutting head is normally used at the front of the box being jacked , and spoil removal is normally by excavator from within the box . recent developments of the jacked arch and jacked deck have enabled longer and larger structures to be installed to close accuracy . the 126m long 20m clear span underpass below the high-speed rail lines at cliffsend in kent , uk is an example of this technique . underwater tunnels . there are also several approaches to underwater tunnels , the two most common being bored tunnels or immersed tubes , examples are bjørvika tunnel and marmaray . submerged floating tunnels are a novel approach under consideration ; however , no such tunnels have been constructed to date . temporary way . during construction of a tunnel it is often convenient to install a temporary railway , particularly to remove spoil tip , often narrow gauge so that it can be double track to allow the operation of empty and loaded trains at the same time . the temporary way is replaced by the permanent way at completion , thus explaining the term '' perway '' . enlargement . the vehicles or traffic using a tunnel can outgrow it , requiring replacement or enlargement : the original single line gib tunnel near mittagong was replaced with a double-track tunnel , with the original tunnel used for growing mushrooms . in 1906 the fourth alpine tunnel opened , the simplon tunnel , between switzerland and italy . it is long , and was the longest tunnel in the world until 1982 . it was also the deepest tunnel in the world , with a maximum rock overlay of approximately . the 1927 holland tunnel was the first underwater tunnel designed for automobiles . the construction required a novel ventilation system . in 1945 the delaware aqueduct tunnel was completed , supplying water to new york city in the us . at it is the longest tunnel in the world . in 1988 the long seikan tunnel in japan was completed under the tsugaru strait , linking the islands of honshu and hokkaido . it was longest railway tunnel in the world at that time . longest . the thirlmere aqueduct in north west england , united kingdom is sometimes considered the longest tunnel , of any type , in the world at , though the aqueduct 's tunnel section is not continuous . the dahuofang water tunnel in china , opened in 2009 , is the third longest water tunnel in the world at length . the gotthard base tunnel in switzerland , opened in 2016 , is the longest and deepest railway tunnel in the world at length and maximum depth below the gotthard massif . it provides a nrla between the north and south of europe under the swiss alps , at a maximum elevation of . the seikan tunnel in japan connects the main island of honshu with the northern island of hokkaido by rail . it is long , of which are crossing the tsugaru strait undersea . the channel tunnel crosses the english channel between france and the united kingdom . it has a total length of , of which are the world 's longest undersea tunnel section . the lötschberg base tunnel in switzerland was the longest land rail tunnel , with a length of , from its inauguration in 2007 until the completion of the gotthard base tunnel in 2016 . the lærdal tunnel in norway from lærdal to aurland is the world 's longest road tunnel , intended for cars and similar vehicles , at . the zhongnanshan tunnel in people 's republic of china opened in january 2007 is the world 's second longest highway tunnel and the longest mountain road tunnel in asia , at . the longest canal tunnel is the rove tunnel in france , over long . notable . williamson 's tunnels in liverpool , from 1804 and completed around 1840 by a wealthy eccentric , are probably the largest underground folly in the world . the tunnels were built with no functional purpose . the chicago tunnel company is the largest urban street tunnel network , comprising of tunnels beneath the majority of downtown chicago streets . it operated between 1906 and 1956 as a freight network , connecting building basements and railway stations . following a 1992 flood the network was sealed , although some parts still carry utility and communications infrastructure . moffat tunnel , opened in 1928 in colorado , straddles the continental divide . the tunnel is long and at above sea level is the highest active railroad tunnel in the us ( the tennessee pass line , currently inactive , and alpine tunnel are higher ) . the pennsylvania turnpike opened in 1940 with seven tunnels , most of which were bored as part of the stillborn south pennsylvania railroad and giving the highway the nickname '' tunnel highway '' . four of the tunnels ( allegheny mountain , tuscarora mountain , kittatinny mountain , and blue mountain ) remain in active use , while the other three ( laurel hill , rays hill , and sideling hill ) were bypassed in the 1960s ; the latter two tunnels are on a bypassed section of the turnpike now commonly known as the abandoned pennsylvania turnpike . the essingeleden was opened in 1966 , in stockholm , sweden , and the elbe tunnel ( 1975 ) opened in 1975 in hamburg , germany . both tunnels handle around 150,000 vehicles a day , making them two of the most trafficked tunnels in the world . the honningsvåg tunnel long ) opened in 1999 on european route e69 in norway as the world 's northernmost road tunnel , except for mines ( which exist on svalbard ) . the central artery road tunnel in boston , massachusetts , is a part of the larger big dig completed around 2007 , and carries approximately 200,000 vehicles/day under the city along interstate 93 , us route 1 , and massachusetts route 3 , which share a concurrency through the tunnels . the big dig replaced boston 's old badly deteriorated i-93 elevated highway . the stormwater management and road tunnel or smart tunnel , is a combined storm drainage and road structure opened in 2007 in kuala lumpur , malaysia . the tunnel is the longest stormwater drainage tunnel in south east asia and second longest in asia . the facility can be operated as a simultaneous traffic and stormwater passage , or dedicated exclusively to stormwater when necessary . the eiksund tunnel on national road rv 653 in norway is the world 's deepest subsea road tunnel , measuring long , with deepest point at below the sea level , opened in february 2008 . gerrards cross tunnel , in england , opened in 2010 , is notable in that it converted an existing railway cutting into a tunnel to create ground to build a supermarket over the tunnel . the railway in the cutting was first opened around 1906 , stretching over 104 years to complete a railway tunnel . the tunnel was built using the cover method with craned in prefabricated forms in order to keep the busy railway operating . a branch of the tesco supermarket chain occupies the newly created ground above the railway tunnel , with an adjacent existing railway station at the end of the tunnel . during construction , a portion of the tunnel collapsed when soil cover was added . the prefabricated forms were covered with a layer of reinforced concrete after the collapse . the fenghuoshan tunnel , completed in 2005 on the qinghai-tibet railway is the world 's highest railway tunnel , about above sea level and long . the la linea tunnel in colombia , 2016 , is the longest , , mountain tunnel in south america . it crosses beneath a mountain at above sea level with six traffic lanes , and it has a parallel emergency tunnel . the tunnel is subject to serious groundwater pressure . the tunnel will link bogotá and its urban area with the coffee-growing region , and with the main port on the colombian pacific coast . the tunnel and reservoir plan is a network of of drainage tunnels designed to reduce flooding in the chicago area . started in the mid-1970s , the project is due to be completed in 2029 . new york city water tunnel no . 3 , started in 1970 , has an expected completion date of 2020 , and will measure more than . . mining . the use of tunnels for mining is called drift mining . military use . some tunnels are not for transport at all but rather , are fortifications , for example mittelwerk and cheyenne mountain complex . excavation techniques , as well as the construction of underground bunkers and other habitable areas , are often associated with tunnel warfare , or civilian responses to threat of attack . another use for tunnels was for the storage of chemical weapons author lifts lid on chemical wartime history – local news – news – general – blue mountains gazette . secret tunnels . secret passage have given entrance to or escape from an area , such as the cu chi tunnels or the gaza strip smuggling tunnels which connect it to egypt . although the underground railroad network used to transport escaped slaves was '' underground '' mostly in the sense of secrecy , hidden tunnels were occasionally used . secret tunnels were also used during the cold war , under the berlin wall and elsewhere , to smuggle refugees , and for espionage . smugglers use secret tunnels to transport or store contraband , such as illegal drugs and weapons . elaborately engineered tunnels built to smuggle drugs across the mexico-us border were estimated to require up to 9 months to complete , and an expenditure of up to 1 million . some of these tunnels were equipped with lighting , ventilation , telephones , drainage pumps , hydraulic elevators , and in at least one instance , an electrified rail transport system . secret tunnels have also been used by thieves to break into bank vaults and retail stores after hours . several tunnels have been discovered by the border security forces across the line of control along the india-pakistan border , mainly to allow terrorists access to the indian territory of jammu and kashmir . the actual usage of erdstall tunnels is unknown but theories connect it to a rebirth ritual . natural tunnels . lava tubes are emptied lava conduits , formed during volcanic eruptions by flowing and cooling lava . natural tunnel state park ( virginia , us ) features an natural tunnel , really a limestone cave , that has been used as a railroad tunnel since 1890 . punarjani guha in kerala , india . hindus believe that crawling through the tunnel ( which they believe was created by a hindu god ) from one end to the other will wash away all of one ’ s sins and thus allow one to attain rebirth . only men are permitted to crawl through the tunnel . torghatten , a norwegian island with a hat-shaped silhouette , has a natural tunnel in the middle of the hat , letting light come through . the long , high , and wide tunnel is said to be the hole made by an arrow of the angry troll hestmannen , the hill being the hat of the troll-king of sømna trying to save the beautiful lekamøya . the tunnel is thought actually to be the work of ice . the sun shines through the tunnel during two few minutes long periods every year . the hobby photograph has waited three years for this rare shot of the sun shining through torghatten mount small '' snow tunnels '' , called burrows , are created by voles , chipmunks and other rodents for protection and access to food sources . major accidents . clayton tunnel rail crash ( 1861 ) – confusion about block signals welwyn tunnel rail crash ( 1866 ) – train failed in tunnel , guard did not protect train . balvano train disaster ( 1944 ) caldecott tunnel fire ( 1982 ) – major motor vehicle tunnel crash and fire . channel tunnel fire ( 1996 ) mont blanc tunnel fire ( 1999 ) princess diana 's death – car crash in pont d'alma tunnel , paris , which killed princess diana .