Alphonse de Lamartine

biography . early years . lamartine was born in mâcon , burgundy , on 21 october 1790 . his family were members of the french provincial nobility , and he spent his youth at the family estate . lamartine is famous for his partly autobiographical poem , '' le lac '' ( '' the lake '' ) , which describes in retrospect the fervent love shared by a couple from the point of view of the bereaved man . lamartine was masterly in his use of french poetic forms . raised a devout catholic , lamartine became a pantheism , writing jocelyn and la chute d'un ange . he wrote histoire des girondins in 1847 in praise of the girondists . lamartine made his entrance into the field of poetry with a masterpiece , les méditations poétiques ( 1820 ) , and awoke to find himself famous . he was made a chevalier of the legion of honour in 1825 . he worked for the french embassy in italy from 1825 to 1828 . in 1829 , he was elected a member of the académie française . he was elected a deputy in 1833 . in 1835 he published the '' voyage en orient '' , a brilliant and bold account of the journey he had just made , in royal luxury , to the countries of the orient , and in the course of which he had lost his only daughter . from then on he confined himself to prose . political career . around 1830 , lamartine 's opinions shifted in the direction of liberalism . when elected in 1833 to the national assembly , he quickly founded his own '' social party '' with some influence from saint-simonian ideas and established himself as a prominent critic of the july monarchy , becoming more and more of a republican in the monarchy 's last years . he was briefly in charge of the government during the turbulence of 1848 . he was minister of foreign affairs from 24 february 1848 to 11 may 1848 . due to his great age , jacques-charles dupont de l'eure , chairman of the provisional government , effectively delegated many of his duties to lamartine . he was then a member of the executive commission , the political body which served as france 's joint head of state . lamartine was instrumental in the founding of the second republic of france , having met with republican deputies and journalists in the hôtel de ville to agree on the makeup of its provisional government . lamartine himself was chosen to declare the republic in traditional form in the balcony of the hôtel de ville , and ensured the continuation of the tricouleur as the flag of the nation . on 25 february 1848 lamartine said about the tricolored flag : '' i spoke as a citizen earlier , well ! now listen to me , your foreign minister . if i remove the tricolor , know it , you will remove half the external force of france ! because europe knows the flag of his defeats and of our victories in the flag of the republic and of the empire . by seeing the red flag , they 'll see the flag of a party ! this is the flag of france , it is the flag of our victorious armies , it is the flag of our triumphs that must be addressed before europe . france and the tricolor is the same thought , the same prestige , even terror , if necessary , for our enemies ! consider how much blood you would have to make for another flag fame ! citizens , for me , the red flag , i am not adopting it , and i 'll tell you why i 'm against with all the strength of my patriotism . it 's that the tricolor has toured the world with the republic and the empire with your freedoms and your glory , and the red flag was that around the champ-de-mars , dragged into the people 's blood . '' alphonse de lamartine , trois mois au pouvoir , paris , michel lévy , 1848 . during his term as a politician in the second republic , he led efforts that culminated in the abolition of slavery and the death penalty , as well as the enshrinement of the right to work and the short-lived national workshop programs . a political idealist who supported democracy and pacifism , his moderate stance on most issues caused many of his followers to desert him . he was an unsuccessful candidate in the 1848 french presidential election , receiving fewer than 19,000 votes . he subsequently retired from politics and dedicated himself to literature . final years and legacy . left he published volumes on the most varied subjects ( history , criticism , personal confidences , literary conversations ) especially during the empire , when , having retired to private life and having become the prey of his creditors , he condemned himself to what he calls '' literary hard-labor to exist and pay his debts '' . lamartine ended his life in poverty , publishing monthly installments of the cours familier de littérature to support himself . he died in paris in 1869 . nobel prize winner frédéric mistral 's fame was in part due to the praise of alphonse de lamartine in the fortieth edition of his periodical cours familier de littérature , following the publication of mistral 's long poem mirèio . mistral is the most revered writer in modern occitan literature . lamartine is considered to be the first french romantic poet ( though charles-julien lioult de chênedollé was working on similar innovations at the same time ) , and was acknowledged by paul verlaine and the symbolists as an important influence . other interests . image : full view of lamartine 's house - plovdiv , bulgaria.jpg thumb left lamartine 's house in plovdiv , bulgaria alphonse de lamartine was also an orientalist with a particular interest in lebanon and the middle east . he travelled to lebanon , syria and the holy land in 1832–33 . during that trip , while he and his wife , the painter and sculptor elisa de lamartine , were in beirut , on 7 december 1832 , their only remaining child , julia , died at ten years of age . during his trip to lebanon he had met prince bashir shihab ii and prince simon karam , who were enthusiasts of poetry . a valley in lebanon is still called the valley of lamartine as a commemoration of that visit , and the cedrus libani forest still harbors the '' lamartine cedar '' , which is said to be the cedar under which lamartine had sat 200 years ago . lamartine was so influenced by his trip that he staged his 1838 epic poem la chute d'un ange ( the fall of an angel ) in lebanon . raised by his mother to respect animal life , he found the eating of meat repugnant , saying 'one does not have one heart for man and one for animals . one has a heart or one does not ' . his writings in la chute d ’ un ange ( 1838 ) and les confidences ( 1849 ) would be taken up by supporters of vegetarianism in the twentieth century . religious belief . on the spirit of the times . image : jean-léon gérôme-portrait of a lady-1849.jpg 200px thumb upright portrait of elisa de lamartine , by jean-léon gérôme ( 1849 ) thanks to the increase of general reason , to the light of philosophy , to the inspiration of christianity , to the progress of the idea of justice , of charity , and of fraternity , in laws , manners , and religion , society in america . institution , has broken down all these barriers , all these denominations of caste , all these injurious distinctions among men . society is composed only of various conditions , professions , functions , and ways of life , among those who form what we call a nation ; of proprietors of the soil , and proprietors of houses ; of investments , of handicrafts , of merchants , of manufacturers , of formers ; of day-laborers becoming fanners , manufacturers , merchants , or possessors of houses or capital , in their turn ; of the rich , of those in easy circumstances , of the poor , of workmen with their hands , workmen with their minds ; of day-laborers , of those in need , of a small number of men enjoying considerable acquired or inherited wealth , of others of a smaller fortune painfully increased and improved , of others with property only sufficient for their needs ; there are some , finally , without any personal possession but their hands , and gleaning for themselves and for their families , in the workshop , or the field , and at the threshold of the homes of others on the earth , the asylum , the wages , the bread , the instruction , the tools , the daily pay , all those means of existence which they have neither inherited , saved , nor acquired . these last are what have been improperly called the people . : — atheism among the people , by alphonse de lamartine ( 1850 ) , pp . 19–20 . on catholic priests . alphonse de lamartine as quoted in '' a priest '' by robert nash ( 1943 ) on catholic priests : there is a man in every parish , having no family , but belonging to a family that is worldwide ; who is called in as a witness and adviser in all the important affairs of human life . no one comes into the world or goes out of it without his ministrations . he takes the child from its mother ’ s arms , and parts with him only at the grave . he blesses and consecrates the cradle , the bridal chamber , the bed of death , and the bier . he is one whom innocent children instinctively venerate and reverence , and to whom men of venerable age come to seek for wisdom , and call him father ; at whose feet men fall down and lay bare the innermost thoughts of their souls , and weep their most sacred tears . he is one whose mission is to console the afflicted , and soften the pains of body and soul ; to whose door come alike the rich and the poor . he belongs to no social class , because he belongs equally to all . he is one , in fine , who knows all , has a right to speak unreservedly , and whose speech , inspired from on high , falls on the minds and hearts of all with the authority of one who is divinely sent , and with the constraining power of one who has an unclouded faith . . on muhammad . in his book histoire de la turquie ( 1854 ) , alphonse de lamartine writes : if greatness of purpose , smallness of means , and astounding results are the three criteria of human genius , who could dare to compare any great man in modern history with muhammad ? the most famous men created arms , laws and empires only . they founded , if anything at all , no more than material powers , which often crumbled away before their eyes . this man moved not only armies , legislation , empires , peoples and dynasties , but millions of men in one-third of the then-inhabited world ; and more than that he moved the altars , the gods , the religions , the ideas , the beliefs and souls . his forbearance in victory , his ambition which was entirely devoted to one idea and in no manner striving for an empire , his endless prayers , his mystic conversations with god , his death and his triumph after death – all these attest not to an imposture , but to a firm conviction , which gave him the power to restore a dogma . this dogma was two-fold : the unity of god and the immateriality of god ; the former telling what god is , the latter telling what god is not ; the one overthrowing false gods with the sword , the other starting an idea with the words . philosopher , orator , apostle , legislator , warrior , conqueror of ideas , restorer of rational beliefs , of a cult without images ; the founder of twenty terrestrial empires and of one spiritual empire , that is muhammad . as regards all standards by which human greatness may be measured , we may well ask , is there any man greater than he . . bibliography . saül ( 1818 ) méditations poétiques ( 1820 ) nouvelles méditations ( 1823 ) harmonies poétiques et religieuses ( 1830 ) sur la politique rationnelle ( 1831 ) voyage en orient ( 1835 ) jocelyn ( 1836 ) la chute d'un ange ( 1838 ) recueillements poétiques ( 1839 ) histoire des girondins ( 1847 ) histoire de la révolution ( 1849 ) histoire de la russie ( 1849 ) raphaël ( 1849 ) confidences ( 1849 ) geneviève , histoire d'une servante ( 1851 ) graziella ( 1852 ) les visions ( 1853 ) histoire de la turquie ( 1854 ) cours familier de littérature ( 1856 ) . see also . french demonstration of 15 may 1848 lamartine place historic district in manhattan , new york city lamartine , wisconsin . references . further reading . wright , gordon . '' a poet in politics : lamartine and the revolution of 1848 '' history today ( sep 1958 ) 8 9 pp 616-627 . external links . le lac in english at poems found in translation . le lac another english translation of le lac . more english translations at www.brindin.com . history of vegetarianism : alphonse de lamartine article on lamartine from bertrin , g . ( 1910 ) in the catholic encyclopedia . new york : robert appleton company .