Pasty

history . despite the modern pasty 's strong association with cornwall , its exact origins are unclear . the english word '' pasty '' derives from medieval french ( o.fr . paste from v.lat pasta ) for a pie , filled with venison , salmon or other meat , vegetables or cheese , baked without a dish . pasties have been mentioned in cookbooks throughout the ages . for example , the earliest version of le viandier ( old french ) has been dated to around 1300 and contains several pasty recipes . in 1393 , le menagier contains recipes for pasté with venison , veal , beef , or mutton . other early references to pasties include a 13th-century charter that was granted by henry iii ( 1207–1272 ) to the town of great yarmouth . the town is bound to send to the sheriffs of norwich every year one hundred herrings , baked in twenty four pasties , which the sheriffs are to deliver to the lord of the manor of east carlton who is then to convey them to the king . around the same time , 13th-century chronicler matthew paris wrote of the monks of st albans abbey '' according to their custom , lived upon pasties of flesh-meat '' . a total of 5,500 venison pasties were served at the installation feast of george neville , archbishop of york and chancellor of england in 1465 . the earliest reference for a pasty in devon can be found in plymouth city records of 1509/10 , which describe '' itm for the cooke is labor to make the pasties 10d . '' they were even eaten by royalty , as a letter from a baker to henry viii 's third wife , jane seymour ( 1508–1537 ) confirms : '' . hope this pasty reaches you in better condition than the last one . '' in his diaries written in the mid-17th century , samuel pepys makes several references to his consumption of pasties , for instance '' dined at sir w . pen 's . on a damned venison pasty , that stunk like a devil . '' , but after this period the use of the word outside devon and cornwall declined . in contrast to its earlier place amongst the wealthy , during the 17th and 18th centuries , the pasty became popular with working people in cornwall , where tin miners and others adopted it due to its unique shape , forming a complete meal that could be carried easily and eaten without cutlery . in a mine , the pasty 's dense , folded pastry could stay warm for several hours , and if it did get cold , it could easily be warmed on a shovel over a candle . side-crimped pasties gave rise to the suggestion that the miner might have eaten the pasty holding the thick edge of pastry , which was later discarded , thereby ensuring that his dirty fingers ( possibly including traces of arsenic ) did not touch food or his mouth . however , many old photographs show that pasties were wrapped in bags made of paper or muslin and were eaten from end to end ; according to the earliest cornish recipe book , published in 1929 , this is '' the true cornish way '' to eat a pasty . another theory suggests that pasties were marked at one end with an initial and then eaten from the other end so that if not finished in one go , they could easily be reclaimed by their owners . . cornish pasty . the pasty is regarded as the national dish of cornwall , robert a . georges and michael owen jones , folkloristics : an introduction , indiana university press , 1995 , pp . 127–128 j . w . lambert , cornwall , harmondsworth : penguin books , 1945 , p . 38 the west briton , commercial pasty companies are failing our cornish national dish , 23 september 2010 and an early reference is from a new zealand newspaper : they are also popular in south africa , new zealand and ulster . pasties were modified with different spices and fillings in jamaica , giving rise to the jamaican patty . similar dishes are found in many countries such as empanadas in spanish speaking countries , coulibiac in eastern europe , tourtière in canada and shaobing in china . culture . literature . pasties have been mentioned in multiple literary works since the 12th century matter of britain erec and enide , written by chrétien de troyes , in which they are eaten by characters from the area now known as cornwall . there is a mention in havelok the dane , another romance written at the end of the thirteenth century ; ( line 645 ) in the 14th century robin hood tales ; in chaucer 's the canterbury tales ; and in three plays by william shakespeare . in the merry wives of windsor act 1 scene 1 , page says wife , bid these gentlemen welcome . come , we have a hot venison pasty to dinner : come gentlemen , i hope we shall drink down all unkindness . in all 's well that ends well , act iv scene iii , parrolles states : i will confess to what i know without constraint : if ye pinch me like a pasty , i can say no more . in titus andronicus , titus bakes chiron and demetrius 's bodies into a pasty , and forces their mother to eat them . pasties appear in many novels , used to draw parallels or represent cornwall . in american gods by neil gaiman , main character shadow discovers pasties at mabel 's restaurant in the fictional town of lakeside . the food is mentioned as being popularised in america by cornishmen , as a parallel to how gods are '' brought over '' to america in the rest of the story . another literature reference takes place in the cat who . series by lilian jackson braun . pasties are referred to as a cultural part of the north country , and jim qwilleran often eats at the nasty pasty , a popular restaurant in fictional moose county , famous for its tradition of being a mining settlement . reference to pasties is made in brian jacques ' popular redwall series of novels , where it is a staple favourite on the menu to the mice and hares of redwall abbey . pasties also appear in the poldark series of historical novels of cornwall , by winston graham , as well as the bbc television series adapted from these works . superstitions , rhymes and chants . in the tin mines of devon and cornwall , pasties were associated with '' knockers '' , spirits said to create a knocking sound that was either supposed to indicate the location of rich veins of ore , or to warn of an impending tunnel collapse . to encourage the good will of the knockers , miners would leave a small part of the pasty within the mine for them to eat . sailors and fisherman would likewise discard a crust to appease the spirits of dead mariners , though fishermen believed that it was bad luck to take a pasty aboard ship . a cornish proverb , recounted in 1861 , emphasised the great variety of ingredients that were used in pasties by saying that the devil would not come into cornwall for fear of ending up as a filling in one . a west country schoolboy playground-rhyme current in the 1940s concerning the pasty went : in 1959 the english singer-songwriter cyril tawney wrote a nostalgic song called '' the oggie man '' . the song tells of the pasty-seller with his characteristic vendor 's call who was always outside plymouth 's hmnb devonport gates late at night when the sailors were returning , and his replacement by hot dog sellers after world war ii . the word '' oggy '' in the internationally popular chant '' oggy oggy oggy '' is thought to stem from cornish dialect '' hoggan '' , deriving from '' hogen '' the cornish word for pasty . when the pasties were ready for eating , the bal maidens at the mines would supposedly shout down the shaft '' oggy oggy oggy '' and the miners would reply '' oi oi oi '' . . giant pasties . as the national dish of cornwall , several oversized versions of the pasty have been created in the county . for example , a giant pasty is paraded from polruan to fowey through the streets during regatta week . similarly , a giant pasty is paraded around the ground of the cornish pirates rugby team on st piran 's day before it is passed over the goal posts . the world 's largest cornish pasty was made in august 2010 , measuring and weighing . it used of beef , of swede , of potatoes and of onions . gallery . file : pasty ingredients.jpg an uncooked pasty prior to crimping file : pasty-with-afters-2.jpg a two course pasty file : cornish pasties in the oven.jpg pasties in the oven file : mexico city pastie.jpg a mexican '' paste '' file : giant pasty.jpg cornish pirates players display a giant pasty file : cornish pasties in a shop window , market jew street , penzance - geograph.org.uk - 863195.jpg pasty varieties ( penzance ) file : australian pasties.jpg pasty varieties ( australia ) . see also . list of pastries list of pies , tarts and flans list of potato dishes bedfordshire clanger - similar pastry dish from bedfordshire which has one savoury filled end and one sweet filled end bridie – scottish equivalent calzone – an italian turnover or folded pizza chicken patty cholera ( food ) - a swiss savoury pastry similar to a cheese pasty chiburekki – national dish of crimean tatars , also popular in the balkans , caucasus , and central asia coventry godcakes – originated in the city of coventry , england empanada – similar dish from iberia ( galicia ) and latin america fleischkuekle – german-russian meat pie hot pockets – well-known american microwavable convenience brand international pasty festival – held annually in mexico jamaican patty – jamaican equivalent karelian pasty – similar open-faced dish in karelia kibinai - similar pasties ( though smaller ) in lithuania knish – an eastern european and jewish snack natchitoches meat pie - louisiana meat pie panzerotti – smaller version of a calzone paste – mexican dish based on pasty pirozhki – russian equivalent samosa – similar dish from south asia world pasty championships – held annually in cornwall . references . further reading . the cornish pasty by stephen hall , agre books , nettlecombe , uk , 2001 the pasty book by hettie merrick , tor mark , redruth , uk , 1995 pasties by lindsey bareham , mabecron books , plymouth , uk , 2008 english food by jane grigson ( revised by sophie grigson ) , penguin books , london , 1993 , . external links . the cornish pasty association – the trade association of the cornish pasty industry the compleat pastypaedia – a web pasty resource