Herman Kahn

background . kahn was born in bayonne , new jersey , the son of yetta ( née koslowsky ) and abraham kahn , a tailor . google books his parents were jewish immigrants from eastern europe . he was raised in the bronx , then in los angeles following his parents ' divorce . raised jewish , he later became an atheist . . cold war theories . kahn 's major contributions were the several strategies he developed during the cold war to contemplate '' the unthinkable '' namely , nuclear warfareby using applications of game theory . kahn is often cited ( with pierre wack ) as a father of scenario planning . schwartz , peter , the art of the long view : planning for the future in an uncertain world , new york : currency doubleday , 1991 , p . 7 kahn argued for deterrence and believed that if the soviet union believed that the united states had a second strike capability then it would offer greater deterrence , which he wrote in his paper titled '' the nature and feasibility of war and deterrence '' . the bases of his work were systems theory and game theory as applied to economics and military strategy . kahn argued that for deterrence to succeed , the soviet union had to be convinced that the united states had second strike capability in order to leave the politburo in no doubt that even a perfectly coordinated massive attack would guarantee a measure of retaliation that would leave them devastated as well : . hudson institute . in 1961 , kahn , max singer and oscar ruebhausen founded the hudson institute , a think tank initially located in croton-on-hudson , new york , where kahn was living at the time . he recruited sociologist daniel bell , political philosopher raymond aron and novelist ralph ellison ( author of the 1952 classic invisible man ) . the year 2000 . in 1967 , herman kahn and anthony j . wiener published the year 2000 : a framework for speculation on the next thirty-three years , which included contributions from staff members of the hudson institute and an introduction by daniel bell . table xviii in the document '' the year 2000 '' , herman kahn , anthony j . wiener , macmillan , 1961 , pp . 51–55 . contains a list called '' one hundred technical innovations very likely in the last third of the twentieth century '' . the first ten predictions were : multiple applications of lasers . extreme high-strength structural materials . new or improved superperformance fabrics . new or improved materials for equipment and appliances . new airborne vehicles ( ground-effect vehicle , giant or supersonic jets , vtol , stol ) . extensive commercial applications of shaped charge explosives . more reliable and longer-range weather forecasting . extensive and/or intensive expansion of tropical agriculture and forestry . new sources of power for fixed installations . new sources of power for ground transportation . later years . in kahn 's view , capitalism and technology held nearly boundless potential for progress , while the colonization of space lay in the near , not the distant , future . '' the next 200 years '' , herman kahn , morrow , 1976 . kahn 's 1976 book the next 200 years , written with william brown and leon martel , presented an optimistic scenario of economic conditions in the year 2176 . he also wrote a number of books extrapolating the future of the american , japanese and australian economies and several works on systems theory , including the well-received 1957 monograph techniques of system analysis . during the mid-1970s , when south korea 's gdp per capita was one of the lowest in the world , kahn predicted that the country would become one of the top 10 most powerful countries in the world by the year 2000 . in his last year , 1983 , kahn wrote approvingly of ronald reagan 's political agenda in the coming boom : economic , political , and social and bluntly derided jonathan schell 's claims about the long-term effects of nuclear war . on july 7 that year , he died of a stroke , aged 61 . . personal life . herman kahn was the son of abraham kahn and yetta kahn . his wife was rosalie '' jane '' kahn . he and jane had two children , david and debbie . . cultural influence . along with john von neumann , edward teller and wernher von braun , kahn was , reportedly , an inspiration for the character '' dr . strangelove '' in dr . strangelove by stanley kubrick released in 1964 . it was also said that kubrick immersed himself in kahn 's book on thermonuclear war . in the film , dr . strangelove refers to a report on the doomsday machine by the '' bland corporation '' . kahn gave kubrick the idea for the '' doomsday device '' , a device which would immediately cause the destruction of the entire planet in the event of a nuclear attack . both the name and the concept of the weapon are drawn from the text of on thermonuclear war . '' fat man – herman kahn and the nuclear age '' , louis menand , the new yorker , june 27 , 2005 louis menand observes , '' in kahn ’ s book , the doomsday machine is an example of the sort of deterrent that appeals to the military mind but that is dangerously destabilizing . since nations are not suicidal , its only use is to threaten . '' in the politics of ecstasy , leary , timothy ( 1980 ) . the politics of ecstasy . ronin publishing ; 4th edition . berkeley , california . timothy leary suggests that kahn had taken lsd . publications . outside physics and statistics , works written by kahn include : 1960 . on thermonuclear war . princeton university press . 1962 . thinking about the unthinkable . horizon press . 1965 on escalation : metaphors and scenarios . praeger . 1967 . the year 2000 : a framework for speculation on the next thirty-three years . macmillan . with anthony wiener . 1968 can we win in viet nam ? . praeger . kahn with four other authors : gastil , raymond d . ; pfaff , william ; stillman , edmund ; armbruster , frank e . 1970 . the emerging japanese superstate : challenge and response . prentice hall . 1971 . the japanese challenge : the success and failure of economic success . morrow ; andre deutsch . 1972 . things to come : thinking about the seventies and eighties . macmillan . with b . bruce-briggs . 1973 . herman kahnsciousness : the megaton ideas of the one-man think tank . new american library . selected and edited by jerome agel . 1974 . the future of the corporation . mason & lipscomb . 1976 . the next 200 years : a scenario for america and the world . morrow . 1979 . world economic development : 1979 and beyond . william morrow ; croom helm . with hollender , jeffrey , and hollender , john a . 1981 . will she be right ? the future of australia . university of queensland press . with thomas pepper . 1983 . the coming boom : economic , political , and social . simon & schuster ; hutchinson . 1984 thinking about the unthinkable in the 1980s . new york : simon and schuster . the nature and feasibility of war , deterrence , and arms control ( central nuclear war monograph series ) , ( hudson institute ) a slightly optimistic world context for 1975–2000 ( hudson institute ) social limits to growth : '' creeping stagnation '' vs . '' natural and inevitable '' ( hps paper ) a new kind of class struggle in the united states ? ( corporate environment program . research memorandum ) works published by the rand corporation involving kahn : the nature and feasibility of war and deterrence , rand corporation paper p-1888-rc , 1960 some specific suggestions for achieving early non-military defense capabilities and initiating long-range programs , rand corporation research memorandum rm-2206-rc , 1958 ( team led by herman kahn ) report on a study of non-military defense , rand corporation report r-322-rc , 1958 herman kahn and irwin mann , war gaming , rand corporation paper p-1167 , 1957 herman kahn and irwin mann , ten common pitfalls , rand research memorandum rm-1937-pr , 1957 herman kahn , stochastic ( monte carlo ) attenuation analysis , santa , monica , calif . , rand corp . , 1949