Antiochus I Theos of Commagene

family , ancestry and early life . antiochus i was the son of king mithridates i callinicus and queen laodice vii thea of commagene . antiochus was half iranian , a distant member of the orontid dynasty ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and half greek . antiochus ' father mithridates was the son of king sames ii theosebes dikaios of commagene and an unidentified woman . mithridates was possibly related to the kings of parthia and , in the light of archaeological discoveries at mount nemrut , claimed descent from orontes and also claimed darius i of persia as an ancestor , thanks to orontes ' marriage to rhodogune , daughter of artaxerxes ii , who was a descendant of king darius i . more certain are his dynastic connections to the diadochi . antiochus ’ mother , laodice vii thea , was a greek princess of the seleucid empire . laodice 's father was the seleucid king antiochus viii grypus , while her mother was a ptolemaic princess and later seleucid queen tryphaena ( see cleopatra vi of egypt ) . thus , antiochus was a direct descendant of seleucus i nicator of the seleucid empire , ptolemy i soter of egypt , antigonus i monophthalmus of macedonia and asia , lysimachus of thrace and the macedonian regent , antipater . these five men , the diadochi 'successors ' , had served as generals under alexander the great . antiochus ’ parents had married as part of a peace alliance between their kingdoms . little is known of his early life and education , aside from its philhellenic aspect ; however , it seems that when his father died in 70 & nbsp ; bc , antiochus succeeded his father as king . antiochus married isias , daughter of ariobarzanes i of cappadocia and his wife athenais philostorgos i . they had five children : mithridates ii of commagene , succeeded antiochus as king of commagene after his death in 31 & nbsp ; bc laodice , who married orodes ii of parthia antiochus ii of commagene antiochis of commagene athenais , who married artavasdes i of media atropatene . reign . commagene was a minor kingdom located in the highlands of northern syria ; to the north , it bordered cappadocia , while it bordered osroene to the south . it was initially a vassal state of the seleucids , where it was considerably hellenized . in the 1st-century bc , however , iranian culture experienced a resurgence , intentionally supported by commagene in order to highlights its ancient ancestry and refute seleucid , parthian and roman claims over the area . under antiochus , his kingdom experienced hardships during the roman war with pontus and armenia . armenia at first managed to extend its influence over commagene , but antiochus was ultimately forced to side with the romans when the commander pompey declared war against him . antiochus claims in his inscription on mount nemrut that he was a '' friend of the romans '' ( philoromaios ) , but was seen with some mistrust by a few of the informants of roman politician cicero . his iranian lineage made him lean toward the parthian realm . he enjoyed good relations with the king of media atropatene , darius , who seemingly helped him against pompey . antiochus made an alliance with the parthian monarch orodes ii , which was cemented with orodes ' marriage to antiochus ' daughter , laodice . however , in 51 bc antiochus provided cicero with intelligence of the movements of a parthian force led by prince pacorus i . ultimately antiochus chose the parthians over the romans . in 38 bc , pacorus was defeated and killed by the romans ; the remnants of his army fled to commagene , where they took refuge . the roman general publius ventidius bassus marched towards commagene to punish antiochus for his desertion . he laid siege to the capital samosata , where antiochus resided . antiochus attempted to reach a compromise by offering 1,000 talents as reimbursement and a renewed alliance with the romans . the roman commander-in-chief mark antony declined the offer and had ventidius ' dismissed , with himself taking over the siege . he was , however , unable to capture the capital , and instead resorted to accept antiochus ' new offer of 300 talents . the life of antiochus becomes obsecure after this ; according to cassius dio , he was killed by the parthian king phraates iv , in . mount nemrut . antiochus is famous for building the impressive religious sanctuary of mount nemrut . when antiochus reigned as king he was creating a royal cult for himself and preparing to be worshipped after his death . antiochus was inspired to create his own cult in the greek form of the religion zoroastrianism . antiochus left many greek inscriptions revealing many aspects of his religion and explaining his purpose of action . in one inscription , antiochus directed that his tomb should be built in a high and holy place , remote from people and close to the gods , among whom he would be numbered . antiochus wanted his body to be preserved for eternity . the gods he worshipped were a syncretism of greek and iranian gods , such as heracles-artagnes-ares , zeus-oromasdes , and apollo-mithras-helios-hermes . the monumental effigies at the site show both persian and greek iconographic influences : persian influences can be seen in the clothes , headgear and the colossal size of the images , while the depiction of their physical features derives from greek artistic style . antiochus practised astrology of a very esoteric kind , and laid the basis for a calendrical reform , by linking the commagenian year , which till then had been based on the movements of the moon , to the sothic ( star of sirius ) cycle used by the egyptians as the basis of their calendar . this would suggest that antiochus was knowledgeable about , if not fully initiated into hermeticism . antiochus ’ tomb complex was constructed in a way that religious festivities could occur there . every month there were two feast-days for antiochus : his birthday , which was celebrated on the 16th of each month , and his coronation , which was celebrated on the 10th of each month . he allocated funds for these events from properties legally bound to the site . he also appointed families of priests and hierodules to conduct the rituals , and their descendants were intended to continue the ritual service in perpetuity . the priests wore traditional persian robes and adorned the images of the gods and antiochus ' ancestors with gold crowns . the priests offered incense , herbs , and other unspecified '' splendid sacrifices '' on altars set before each image . all the citizens and military were invited to the banquets in honor of the illustrious deceased . during the feasts , grudging attitudes were forbidden and antiochus decreed that the people should enjoy themselves , eat and drink wine , and listen to the sacred music performed by the temple musicians . antiochus ’ tomb was forgotten for centuries , until 1883 when archaeologists from germany excavated it . according to the inscriptions found , antiochus appears to have been a pious person and had a generous spirit . the ruins of the royal palace have been found in another city of the kingdom , arsameia . this palace is known as eski kale or 'old castle ' . in arsameia , antiochus has left many inscriptions in greek of his public works program and how he glorified the city.citation needed . ancestry . references . sources . campbell-scott , roger . '' nimrud dagh – a sacred mountain in anatolia '' , in vanished civilizations : the hidden secrets of lost cities and forgotten peoples , pp . & nbsp ; 194–197 . reader 's digest services p/l , hong kong , 1988 .