José Sarney

early life . born in pinheiro , maranhão , as josé ribamar ferreira de araújo costa , he was the son of sarney de araújo costa , a wealthy land-owner and sugarcane producer , and kiola ferreira . his family can trace its presence in brazil to the 1680s , with origins in viseu in portugal . in 1965 he legally adopted the name josé sarney de araújo costa , usually shortened to josé sarney , for electoral purposes , since he was known as '' zé do sarney '' , as in '' josé , son of sarney '' . personal life . married to marly ( née macieira ) , his children are congressman josé sarney filho , governor roseana sarney , and the businessman fernando sarney . political career . sarney started his political career as a federal deputy in 1955 . he was a member of the centre-right national democratic union ( união democrática nacional—udn ) , aligned with the progressive wing of the party . he strongly supported so-called '' revolution of 1964 '' , a military coup that overthrew leftist president joão goulart in 1964 . after the military coup , sarney followed most of the udn into the national renewal alliance ( arena ) , the political party of the military government . he was elected governor of the state of maranhão in 1966 , serving until 1971 . he was then elected to the brazilian senate and became arena 's president . despite his support for the government 's heavy-handed measures against dissent , sarney had never been quite accepted by the military establishment , which tried to block his career . in 1979 arena reorganized as the democratic social party ( pds ) , and sarney remained the party 's president . in 1984 , the junta was under pressure due to popular protests to reinstate direct elections for president ( diretas já movement ) . pds was divided but launched paulo maluf as its candidate for the presidency in indirect elections . sarney disagreed with this decision and left pds to form the democrats ( brazil ) , which then allied with the pmdb . as part of the deal , sarney became tancredo neves ' running mate on the opposition ticket . neves won the election of 15 january 1985 , but became gravely ill the night before his inauguration . sarney assumed office as vice-president and acting president until neves died on 21 april , and he formally became the first civilian president in 21 years . his succession raised some question because as neves could not attend the inauguration ceremony on 15 march , several politicians contended at the time that sarney should not have been inaugurated as vice-president and allowed to become acting president . they believed that sarney had been elected vice-president only by virtue of the election of his running mate as president . each member of the electoral college cast one vote , for president , and the choice of president carried with it the automatic selection of the ticket 's running mate as vice-president , sarney could take office only as vice-president together with neves , they said . they argued that in the event of the head of the presidential ticket not being able to assume office , the presidential powers and duties should pass to the speaker of the chamber of deputies , ulysses guimarães . there was some partisanship in this line of thought since both neves and guimarães were members of the same party , and sarney was not ; he had been a supporter of the military , and only recently had joined the coalition to defeat the military 's candidate in the electoral college . the challenge to sarney 's inauguration was short-lived , however , because in the early hours of inauguration day , guimarães himself stated that he believed that sarney had the right to be inaugurated even without neves , as the role of the vice-president was precisely that of replacing the president when needed . sarney and the president of argentina , raúl alfonsín , started the process of creating a common market between the two nations in 1985 . as first steps , they agreed to subsidize regional trade with a special currency for the purpose ( the gaucho ) . the agreement led to the formation of the mercosur in 1991 . he also oversaw constitutional amendments that purged the remaining vestiges of authoritarianism from the 1967/1969 constitution . he faced many problems : enormous foreign debt , rampant inflation and corruption as well as the transition to democracy . sarney launched an economic plan to stabilize the economy , called '' plano cruzado '' , successful at first . but the inflation became got worse than ever after a year . a new , fully democratic constitution was promulgated in 1988 , and in the following year , 1989 brazilian presidential election were held . sarney was barred from running for president in his own right in that election . in brazil , when a vice president serves part of a president 's term —including when the president is abroad— it counts as a full term . at the time , the constitution barred a president from immediate reelection . he supported fernando henrique cardoso as presidential candidate in 1994 and 1998 and luiz inácio lula da silva in 2002 . he returned to the senate after his presidency , this time representing amapá , and served as president of the senate from 1995 to 1997 , 2003 to 2005 , 2009 to 2011 , and 2011 to 2013 . presidentes do senado federal - nova república 22 january 2013 he retired in 2015 , having served in elected office for all but a few months since of his life since 1955 . when he retired , he was the longest-serving member of the brazilian congress . sérgio machado , former president of transpetro , said in his plea agreement within the operation car wash that josé sarney received r 18.5 million of the bribe money from a petrobras subsidiary , in the pmdb account during the period in which he directed the company ( 2003-2015 ) . . writing . as a writer , his best known work is the poetry book os marimbondos de fogo ( '' the fire wasps '' ) . sarney was elected to a chair in the brazilian academy of letters in 1980 . gallery . image : mário soares e josé sarney 1988.jpg president sarney with portuguese president mário soares , 1988 image : vladimir putin , presidente da russia e senador josé sarney , arquivo antonio carlos rosset filho.jpg senator sarney with russian president vladimir putin in november 2004 image:20 años del mercosur-iguazu-sarney-lula-kirchner-alfonsín-bielsa- 30-nov-05-presidencia-govar-2.jpg from left : presidents luiz inácio lula da silva and sarney with presidents néstor kirchner and raúl alfonsín of argentina , 2005 image : fhc , collor e sarney.jpg from right : presidents sarney , fernando collor de mello and fernando henrique cardoso , 2008 image : josé sarney em entrevista ao senado ( cortada ) . jpg sarney during an interview in february 2015 . references . external links . . see also . list of presidents of brazil history of brazil ( 1964-present )