Edith Wharton

biography . early life . edith wharton was born edith newbold jones on january 24 , 1862 to george frederic jones and lucretia stevens rhinelander at their brownstone at 14 west twenty-third street in new york city . to her friends and family she was known as '' pussy jones . '' she had two older brothers , frederic rhinelander , 16 years older , and henry edward , 12 years older . she was baptized april 20 , 1862 , easter sunday , at grace church . wharton 's paternal family , the joneses , were a very wealthy and socially prominent family having made their money in real estate . the saying '' keeping up with the joneses '' is said to refer to her father 's family . she was related to the rensselaers , the most prestigious of the old patroon families , who had received land grants from the former dutch government of new york and new jersey . her father 's first cousin was caroline schermerhorn astor . she had a lifelong friendship with her niece , the landscape architect beatrix farrand of reef point in bar harbor , maine . fort stevens in new york was named for wharton 's maternal great-grandfather , ebenezer stevens , a revolutionary war hero and general . wharton was born during the civil war ; however , in describing her family life wharton does not mention the war except that their travels to europe after the war were due to the depreciation of american currency . from 1866 to 1872 , the jones family visited france , italy , germany , and spain . during her travels , the young edith became fluent in french , german , and italian . at the age of nine , she suffered from typhoid fever , which nearly killed her , while the family was at a spa in the black forest . after the family returned to the united states in 1872 , they spent their winters in new york city and their summers in newport , rhode island . while in europe , she was educated by tutors and governesses . she rejected the standards of fashion and etiquette that were expected of young girls at the time , which were intended to allow women to marry well and to be put on display at balls and parties . she considered these fashions superficial and oppressive . edith wanted more education than she received , so she read from her father 's library and from the libraries of her father 's friends . her mother forbade her to read novels until she was married , and edith obeyed this command . early writing . wharton wrote and told stories from an early age . when her family moved to europe and she was just four or five she started what she called '' making up . '' she invented stories for her family and walked with an open book , turning the pages as if reading while improvising a story . wharton began writing poetry and fiction as a young girl , and attempted to write her first novel at age eleven . her mother 's criticism quashed her ambition and she turned to poetry . at age 15 , her first published work appeared , a translation of a german poem '' was die steine erzählen '' ( '' what the stones tell '' ) by heinrich karl brugsch , for which she was paid 50 . her family did not want her name to appear in print since writing was not considered a proper occupation for a society woman of her time . consequently , the poem was published under the name of a friend 's father , e . a . washburn , a cousin of ralph waldo emerson who supported women 's education . in 1877 , at the age of 15 , she secretly wrote a 30,000 word novella fast and loose . in 1878 her father arranged for a collection of two dozen original poems and five translations , verses , to be privately published . wharton published a poem under a pseudonym in the new york world in 1879 . in 1880 she had five poems published anonymously in the atlantic monthly , an important literary magazine . despite these early successes , she was not encouraged by her family or her social circle , and though she continued to write , she did not publish anything more until her poem '' the last giustiniani '' was published in scribner 's magazine in october 1889 . member of society and debutante . between 1880 and 1890 wharton put her writing aside to participate in the social rituals of the new york upper classes . wharton keenly observed the social changes happening around her which appeared later in her writing . wharton officially came out as a debutante to society in 1879 . wharton was allowed to bare her shoulders and wear her hair up for the first time at a december dance given by a society matron , anna morton . wharton began a courtship with henry leyden stevens , the son of a wealthy businessman . henry 's father was paran stevens , a hotelier and real estate investor from rural new hampshire . his sister minnie stevens paget married arthur paget ( british army officer ) . wharton 's family did not approve of stevens . in the middle of wharton 's debutante season , the jones family returned to europe in 1881 for wharton 's father 's health . wharton 's father , george frederic jones , died in cannes in 1882 of a stroke . stevens was with the wharton family in europe during this time . wharton and her mother returned to the united states and wharton continued her courtship with stevens , announcing their engagement in august 1882 . the month the two were to marry , the engagement abruptly ended . wharton 's mother , lucretia stevens rhinelander , moved back to paris in 1883 and lived there until her death in 1901 . 1880s . wharton married in 1885 and began to build upon three interests—american houses , writing , and italy . on april 29 , 1885 , new york , new york , marriage index 1866 & ndash ; 1937 at age 23 , wharton married edward ( teddy ) robbins wharton , who was 12 years her senior , at the trinity chapel complex . u.s . , newspaper extractions from the northeast , 1704–1930 from a well-established boston family , he was a sportsman and a gentleman of the same social class and shared her love of travel . the whartons set up house at pencraig cottage in newport . they then bought and moved to land 's end on the other side of newport in 1893 for 80,000 . wharton decorated land 's end with the help of designer ogden codman . the whartons purchased their new york home , 884 park avenue , in 1897 . they traveled abroad from february to june between 1886 and 1897–mostly to italy , but also to paris and england . from the late 1880s until 1902 , teddy wharton suffered from acute depression , and the couple ceased their extensive travel . at that time his depression manifested as a more serious disorder , after which they lived almost exclusively at their estate the mount . during those same years , wharton herself was said to suffer from bouts of depression and health issues with asthma . in 1908 her husband 's mental state was determined to be incurable . in the same year , she began an affair with morton fullerton , a journalist for the times , in whom she found an intellectual partner . she divorced edward wharton in 1913 after 28 years of marriage . around the same time , edith was beset with harsh criticisms leveled by the naturalist writers . in addition to novels , wharton wrote at least 85 short stories . she was also a garden designer , an interior designer , and a taste-maker of her time . she wrote several design books , including her first major published work , the decoration of houses ( 1897 ) , co-authored by ogden codman . another of her '' home and garden '' books is the generously illustrated italian villas and their gardens of 1904 . travels and life abroad . she eventually crossed the atlantic 60 times . wright , sarah bird , editor ( 1995 ) . edith wharton abroad : selected travel writings , 1888–1920 , p . xvii–xviii . new york , st . martin 's griffin . in europe , her primary destinations were italy , france , and england . she also went to morocco in north africa . she wrote many books about her travels , including italian backgrounds and a motor-flight through france . her husband edward wharton shared her love of travel and for many years they spent at least four months of each year abroad , mainly in italy . their friend egerton winthrop accompanied them on many journeys in italy . wright , sarah bird , editor ( 1995 ) . edith wharton abroad : selected travel writings , 1888–1920 , p.3 . new york , st . martin 's griffin . in 1888 , the whartons and their friend james van alen took a cruise through the aegean islands . wharton was 26 . the trip cost the whartons 10,000 and lasted four months . she kept a travel journal during this trip that was thought to be lost but was later published as the cruise of the vanadis , now considered her earliest known travel writing . wright , sarah bird , editor ( 1995 ) . edith wharton abroad : selected travel writings , 1888–1920 , p.17 . new york , st . martin 's griffin in 1897 , edith wharton purchased land 's end in newport , rhode island , from robert livingston beeckman , a former u.s . open tennis championship runner-up who became governor of rhode island . at the time , wharton described the main house as '' incurably ugly . '' wharton agreed to pay 80,000 for the property , and spent thousands more to alter the home 's facade , decorate the interior , and landscape the grounds . in 1902 , wharton designed the mount , her estate in lenox , massachusetts , which survives today as an example of her design principles . edith wharton wrote several of her novels there , including the house of mirth ( 1905 ) , the first of many chronicles of life in old new york . at the mount , she entertained the cream of american literary society , including her close friend , novelist henry james , who described the estate as '' a delicate french chateau mirrored in a massachusetts pond '' . although she spent many months traveling in europe nearly every year with her friend , egerton winthrop ( john winthrop 's descendant ) , the mount was her primary residence until 1911 . when living there and while traveling abroad , wharton was usually driven to appointments by her longtime chauffeur and friend charles cook , a native of nearby south lee , massachusetts . when her marriage deteriorated , she decided to move permanently to france , living first at 53 rue de varenne , paris , in an apartment that belonged to george washington vanderbilt ii . wharton was preparing to vacation for the summer when world war i broke out . though many fled paris , she moved back to her paris apartment on the rue de varenne and for four years was a tireless and ardent supporter of the french war effort . dwight , eleanor ( 1994 ) . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , p.183 . new york : harry n . abrams . one of the first causes she undertook in august 1914 was the opening of a workroom for unemployed women ; here they were fed and paid one franc a day . what began with 30 women soon doubled to 60 , and their sewing business began to thrive . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , p.183-184 . new york : harry n . abrams . when the germans invaded belgium in the fall of 1914 and paris was flooded with belgian refugees , she helped to set up the american hostels for refugees , which managed to get them shelter , meals , and clothes , and eventually created an employment agency to help them find work . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , p.188-189 . new york : harry n . abrams . she collected more than 100,000 on their behalf . wolff , cynthia griffin ( 1995 ) a feast of words : the triumph of edith wharton , second edition , p.253 . reading , massachusetts : addison-wesley . in early 1915 she organized the children of flanders rescue committee , which gave shelter to nearly 900 belgian refugees who had fled when their homes were bombed by the germans . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , p.190 . new york : harry n . abrams . aided by her influential connections in the french government , she and her long-time friend walter berry ( then president of the american chamber of commerce in paris ) , were among the few foreigners in france allowed to travel to the front lines during world war i . she and berry made five journeys between february and august 1915 , which wharton described in a series of articles that were first published in scribner 's magazine and later as fighting france : from dunkerque to belfort , which became an american bestseller . edith wharton p . & nbsp ; 486 . new york : alfred a . knopf . travelling by car , wharton and berry drove through the war zone , viewing one decimated french village after another . she visited the trenches , and was within earshot of artillery fire . she wrote , '' we woke to a noise of guns closer and more incessant & nbsp ; . and when we went out into the streets it seemed as if , overnight , a new army had sprung out of the ground '' . '' in argonne '' , chapter 2 of fighting france : from dunkerque to belfort , published in edith wharton abroad : selected travel writings , 1888–1920 , p . 150 . new york : st . martin 's griffin . throughout the war she worked tirelessly in charitable efforts for refugees , the injured , the unemployed , and the displaced . she was a '' heroic worker on behalf of her adopted country '' . on april 18 , 1916 , the president of france appointed her chevalier of the legion of honour , the country 's highest award , in recognition of her dedication to the war effort . wolff , cynthia griffin ( 1995 ) a feast of words : the triumph of edith wharton , second edition , p.253 . reading , massachusetts : addison-wesley . her relief work included setting up workrooms for unemployed french women , organizing concerts to provide work for musicians , raising tens of thousands of dollars for the war effort , and opening tuberculosis hospitals . in 1915 wharton edited the book of the homeless , which included essays , art , poetry , and musical scores by many major contemporary european and american artists , including henry james , joseph conrad , william dean howells , anna de noailles , jean cocteau , and walter gay , among others . wharton proposed the book to her publisher , scribner 's . she handled all of the business arrangements , lined up contributors , and translated the french entries into english . theodore roosevelt wrote a two-page introduction in which he praised wharton 's effort and urged americans to support the war . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , pp.202–203 . new york : harry n . abrams . she also kept up her own work during the war , continuing to write novels , short stories , and poems , as well as reporting for the new york times and keeping up her enormous correspondence . wharton urged americans to support the war effort and encouraged america to enter the war . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , p.201 . new york : harry n . abrams . she wrote the popular romantic novel summer in 1916 , the war novella , the marne , in 1918 , and a son at the front in 1919 , ( though it was not published until 1923 ) . when the war ended , she watched the victory parade from the champs elysees ' balcony of a friend 's apartment . after four years of intense effort , she decided to leave paris in favor of the peace and quiet of the countryside . wharton settled ten miles north of paris in saint-brice-sous-forêt , buying an 18th-century house on seven acres of land which she called pavillon colombe . she lived there in summer and autumn for the rest of her life . she spent winters and springs on the french riviera at sainte claire du vieux chateau in hyères . edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography , p.210 . new york : harry n . abrams . wharton was a committed supporter of french imperialism , describing herself as a '' rabid imperialist '' , and the war solidified her political views . after the war , she traveled to morocco as the guest of resident general hubert lyautey and wrote a book , titled in morocco , about her experiences . wharton 's writing on her moroccan travels is full of praise for the french administration and for lyautey and his wife in particular . during the post-war years , she divided her time between hyères and provence , where she finished the age of innocence in 1920 . she returned to the united states only once after the war to receive an honorary doctorate from yale university in 1923 . later years . the age of innocence ( 1920 ) won the 1921 pulitzer prize for literature , making wharton the first woman to win the award . the three fiction judges – literary critic stuart sherman , literature professor robert morss lovett , and novelist hamlin garland – voted to give the prize to sinclair lewis for his satire main street , but columbia university 's advisory board , led by conservative university president nicholas murray butler , overturned their decision and awarded the prize to the age of innocence . '' reader 's almanac : a controversial pulitzer prize brings edith wharton and sinclair lewis together . '' reader 's almanac : a controversial pulitzer prize brings edith wharton and sinclair lewis together . library of america , 28 june 2011 . web . 11 mar . 2015 . she was also nominated for the nobel prize in literature in 1927 , 1928 , and 1930 . wharton was friend and confidante to many gifted intellectuals of her time : henry james , sinclair lewis , jean cocteau , and andré gide were all her guests at one time or another . theodore roosevelt , bernard berenson , and kenneth clark were valued friends as well . particularly notable was her meeting with f . scott fitzgerald , described by the editors of her letters as '' one of the better known failed encounters in the american literary annals '' . she spoke fluent french , italian , and german , and many of her books were published in both french and english . in 1934 wharton 's autobiography a backward glance was published . in the view of judith e . funston , writing on edith wharton in american national biography , what is most notable about a backward glance , however , is what it does not tell : her criticism of lucretia jones her mother , her difficulties with teddy , and her affair with morton fullerton , which did not come to light until her papers , deposited in yale 's beinecke rare book and manuscript library , were opened in 1968 . judith e . funston , '' edith wharton '' , in american national biography ; new york : oxford university press , 1999 ; vol . 23 , pp . 111–112 . . death . on june 1 , 1937 , wharton was at the french country home of ogden codman , where she was at work on a revised edition of the decoration of houses , when she suffered a heart attack and collapsed . edith wharton later died of a stroke on august 11 , 1937 at le pavillon colombe , her 18th-century house on rue de montmorency in saint-brice-sous-forêt . she died at 5:30 & nbsp ; p.m . , but her death was not known in paris . at her bedside was her friend , mrs . royall tyler . '' edith wharton , 75 , is dead in france . '' www.nytimes.com . the new york times , 13 aug . 1937 . web . 11 mar . 2015 . wharton was buried in the american protestant section of the cimetière des gonards in versailles , '' with all the honors owed a war hero and a chevalier of the legion of honor.a group of some one hundred friends sang a verse of the hymn ' o paradise ' . '' . writing . career . despite not publishing her first novel until she was forty , wharton became an extraordinarily productive writer . in addition to her 15 novels , seven novellas , and eighty-five short stories , she published poetry , books on design , travel , literary and cultural criticism , and a memoir . in 1873 , wharton wrote a short story and gave it to her mother to read . her mother criticized the story , so wharton decided to write only poetry . while she constantly sought her mother 's approval and love , it was rare that she received either . from the start , the relationship with her mother was a troubled one . , armitage , robert . '' edith wharton , a writing life : childhood . '' edith wharton , a writing life : childhood . new york public library , 6 may 2013 . web . 11 mar . 2015 . before she was 15 , she wrote fast and loose ( 1877 ) . in her youth , she wrote about society . her central themes came from her experiences with her parents . she was very critical of her work and wrote public reviews criticizing it . she also wrote about her own experiences with life . '' intense love ’ s utterance '' is a poem written about henry stevens . in 1889 , she sent out three poems for publication . they were sent to scribner 's , harper ’ s and century . edward l . burlingame published '' the last giustiniani '' for scribner ’ s . it was not until wharton was 29 that her first short story was published . '' mrs . manstey 's view '' had very little success , and it took her more than a year to publish another story . she completed '' the fullness of life '' following her annual european trip with teddy . burlingame was critical of this story but wharton did not want to make edits to it . this story , along with many others , speaks about her marriage . she sent bunner sisters to scribner 's in 1892 . burlingame wrote back that it was too long for scribner 's to publish . this story is believed to be based on an experience she had as a child . it did not see publication until 1916 and is included in the collection called xingu . after a visit with her friend , paul bourget , she wrote '' the good may come '' and '' the lamp of psyche '' . '' the lamp of psyche '' was a comedy story with verbal wit and sorrow . after '' something exquisite '' was rejected by burlingame , she lost confidence in herself . she started '' travel writing '' in 1894 . in 1901 , wharton wrote a two-act play called man of genius . this play was about an english man who was having an affair with his secretary . the play was rehearsed but was never produced . another 1901 play , the shadow of a doubt , which also came close to being staged but fell through , was thought to be lost , until it was discovered in 2017 . its world premiere was a radio adaptation broadcast on bbc radio 3 in 2018 . drama on 3 the shadow of a doubt . bbc radio 3 she collaborated with marie tempest to write another play , but the two only completed four acts before marie decided she was no longer interested in costume plays . one of her earliest literary endeavors ( 1902 ) was the translation of the play , es lebe das leben ( '' the joy of living '' ) , by hermann sudermann . the joy of living was criticized for its title because the heroine swallows poison at the end , and was a short-lived broadway production . it was , however , a successful book . many of wharton 's novels are characterized by subtle use of dramatic irony . having grown up in upper-class , late-19th-century society , wharton became one of its most astute critics , in such works as the house of mirth and the age of innocence . themes in writings . versions of her mother , lucretia jones , often appeared in wharton 's fiction . biographer hermione lee described it as '' one of the most lethal acts of revenge ever taken by a writing daughter . '' in her memoir , a backward glance , wharton describes her mother as indolent , spendthrift , censorious , disapproving , superficial , icy , dry and ironic . wharton 's writings often dealt with themes such as “ …social and individual fulfillment , repressed sexuality , and the manners of old families and the new elite . '' . maureen howard , editor of edith wharton : collected stories , notes several recurring themes in wharton 's short stories , including confinement and attempts at freedom , the morality of the author , critiques of intellectual pretension , and the “ unmasking ” of the truth . wharton 's writing also explored themes of “ social mores and social reform ” as they relate to the “ extremes and anxieties of the gilded age ” . a key recurring theme in wharton 's writing is the relationship between the house as a physical space and its relationship to its inhabitant 's characteristics and emotions . maureen howard argues “ . edith wharton conceived of houses , dwelling places , in extended imagery of shelter and dispossession . houses – their confinement and their theatrical possibilities…they are never mere settings . ” . influences . american children 's stories containing slang were forbidden in wharton 's childhood home . this included such popular authors as mark twain , bret harte or '' uncle remus . '' she was allowed to read louisa may alcott but wharton preferred lewis carroll 's alice in wonderland and charles kingsley 's water babies . wharton 's mother forbade her from reading many novels and wharton said she '' read everything else but novels until the day of my marriage . '' instead wharton read the classics , philosophy , history , and poetry in her father 's library including daniel defoe , john milton , thomas carlyle , alphonse de lamartine , victor hugo , jean racine , thomas moore , lord byron , william wordsworth , john ruskin , and washington irving . biographer hermione lee describes wharton as having read herself '' out of old new york '' and her influences included herbert spencer , charles darwin , friedrich nietzsche , t . h . huxley , george romanes , james frazer , and thorstein veblen . these influenced her ethnography style of novelization . wharton developed a passion for walt whitman . works . source : . novels . the valley of decision , 1902 the house of mirth , 1905 the fruit of the tree , 1907 the reef , 1912 the custom of the country , 1913 summer , 1917 the marne , 1918 the age of innocence , 1920 ( pulitzer prize winner ) the glimpses of the moon , 1922 a son at the front , 1923 the mother 's recompense , 1925 twilight sleep , 1927 the children , 1928 hudson river bracketed , 1929 the gods arrive , 1932 the buccaneers , 1938 ( unfinished ) . novellas and novelette . the touchstone , 1900 sanctuary , 1903 madame de treymes , 1907 ethan frome , 1911 bunner sisters , 1916 old new york , 1924 1 . false dawn ; 2 . the old maid ; 3 . the spark ; 4 . new year 's day fast and loose : a novelette , 1938 ( written in 1876–1877 ) . poetry . verses , 1878 artemis to actaeon and other verse , 1909 twelve poems , 1926 . short story collections . the greater inclination , 1899 , includes souls belated . crucial instances , 1901 the descent of man and other stories , 1904 the other two , 1904 the hermit and the wild woman and other stories , 1908 tales of men and ghosts , 1910 xingu and other stories , 1916 here and beyond , 1926 certain people , 1930 human nature , 1933 the world over , 1936 ghosts , 1937 roman fever and other stories , 1964 madame de treymes and others : four novelettes , 1970 the ghost stories of edith wharton , 1973 the collected stories of edith wharton , 1998 ( carroll & graf publishers ; paperback , 640 pages ) the new york stories of edith wharton , 2007 . non-fiction . the decoration of houses , 1897 italian villas and their gardens , 1904 italian backgrounds , 1905 a motor-flight through france , 1908 ( travel ) fighting france : from dunkerque to belfort , 1915 ( war ) french ways and their meaning , 1919 in morocco , 1920 ( travel ) the writing of fiction , 1925 ( essays on writing ) a backward glance , 1934 ( autobiography ) edith wharton : the uncollected critical writings , edited by frederick wegener , 1996 edith wharton abroad : selected travel writings , 1888–1920 , 1995 , edited by sarah bird wright . as editor . the book of the homeless , 1916 . adaptations . source : . film . the house of mirth , a 1918 silent film adaptation ( 6 reels ) ( of the 1905 novel ) directed by french film director albert capellani , starring katherine harris barrymore as lily bart . it is considered to be a lost film . the glimpses of the moon , a 1923 silent film adaptation ( 7 reels ) ( of the 1922 novel ) directed for paramount studios by allan dwan , starring bebe daniels , david powell , nita naldi and maurice costello . it is considered to be a lost film . the age of innocence , a 1924 silent film adaptation ( 7 reels ) ( of the 1920 novel ) directed for warner brothers by wesley ruggles , starring beverly bayne and elliott dexter . it is considered to be a lost film . the marriage playground , a 1929 talking film adaptation ( 70 minutes ) ( of the 1928 novel the children ) directed for paramount studios by lothar mendes , starring rising star fredric march in leading role ( as martin boyne ) , mary brian ( as judith wheater ) , and kay francis ( as lady wrench ) . the age of innocence , a 1934 film adaptation ( 9 reels / circa 80–90 minutes ) ( of the 1920 novel ) directed for rko studios by philip moeller , starring irene dunne and john boles . strange wives , a 1934 film adaptation ( 8 reels / 75 minutes ) ( of the 1934 short story bread upon the waters ) directed for universal by richard thorpe , starring roger pryor ( as jimmy king ) , june clayworth ( as nadja ) , and esther ralston ( as olga ) . it is considered to be a lost film . the old maid , a 1939 film adaptation ( 95 minutes ) ( of the 1924 short novella ) directed by edmund goulding starring bette davis . a 1944 film version of the 1911 novel ethan frome starring joan crawford was proposed , but never came to fruition . joan crawford move to warner bros . the children ( 115 minutes ) directed by tony palmer and released in 1990 , starring ben kingsley and kim novak . ethan frome ( 99 minutes ) directed by john madden and released in 1993 , starring liam neeson and patricia arquette . the age of innocence ( 138 minutes ) directed by martin scorsese and released in 1993 , starring daniel day-lewis , winona ryder and michelle pfeiffer . the reef ( 88 minutes ) directed by robert allan ackerman and released in 1999 . the house of mirth ( 140 minutes ) directed by terence davies and released in 2000 , starring gillian anderson as lily bart . television . ethan frome , a 1960 ( cbs ) tv us adaptation , directed by alex segal , starring sterling hayden as ethan frome , julie harris as mattie silver and clarice blackburn as zenobia frome . first wharton adaptation on television . looking back , a 1981 tv us loose adaptation of two biographies of edith wharton : a backward glance , wharton 's own 1934 autobiography & edith wharton , a 1975 biography by r.w.b . lewis ( 1976 bancroft prize-winner ) . the house of mirth , a 1981 tv us adaptation , directed by adrian hall , starring william atherton , geraldine chaplin and barbara blossom the buccaneers , a 1995 bbc mini-series , starring carla gugino and greg wise . theater . the house of mirth was adapted as a play in 1906 by edith wharton and clyde fitch the age of innocence was adapted as a play in 1928 . katharine cornell played the role of ellen olenska . in popular culture . edith wharton was honored on a u.s . postage stamp issued on september & nbsp ; 5 , 1980 . in the young indiana jones chronicles , edith wharton ( clare higgins ) travels across north africa with indiana jones in chapter 16 , tales of innocence . edith wharton is mentioned in the hbo television series entourage in the third season 's 13th episode : vince is handed a screenplay for wharton 's the glimpses of the moon by amanda , his new agent , for a film to be directed by sam mendes . in the same episode , period films of wharton 's work are lampooned by agent ari gold , who says that all her stories are '' about a guy who likes a girl , but he ca n't have sex with her for five years , because those were the times ! '' carla gugino , who plays amanda , was the protagonist of the bbc-pbs adaptation of the buccaneers ( 1995 ) , one of her early jobs . '' edith wharton 's journey '' is a radio adaptation , for the npr series radio tales , of the short story '' a journey '' from edith wharton 's collection the greater inclination . the american singer and songwriter suzanne vega paid homage to edith wharton in her song '' edith wharton 's figurines '' on her studio album beauty & crime . references . citations . . bibliography . vita-finzi , penelope . ( 1990 ) '' edith wharton and the art of fiction . '' london : continuum international publishing . further reading . armbruster , elif s . ( 2011 ) '' domestic biographies : stowe , howells , james , and wharton at home . '' new york : peter lang shari benstock ( 1994 ) no gifts from chance : a biography of edith wharton . new york : charles scribner 's sons . philippe collas and eric villedary , edith wharton 's french riviera ( 2002 ) paris , new york : flammarion/rizzoli drizou , myrto , ed . critical insights : edith wharton ( 2018 ) salem press . dwight , eleanor . ( 1994 ) edith wharton : an extraordinary life , an illustrated biography new york : harry n . abrams . hutchinson , hazel ( 2015 ) . the war that used up words : american writers and the first world war . new haven , ct : yale university press . lee , hermione ( 2007 ) edith wharton . london : chatto & windus ; new york : knopf . r . w . b . lewis ( 1975 ) edith wharton : a biography new york : harper & row montgomery , maureen e . ( 1998 ) displaying women : spectacles of leisure in edith wharton 's new york new york : routledge . novellas and other writings ( cynthia griffin wolff , ed . ) ( the library of america , 1990 ) , which contains her autobiography , a backward glance . the letters of edith wharton ( r . w . b . lewis and nancy lewis , eds . ) , particularly the editorial introductions to the chronological sections , especially for 1902–07 , 1911–14 , 1919–27 , and 1928–37 , and the editorial footnotes to the letter to f . scott fitzgerald ( 8 june 1925 ) twilight sleep ( r . f . godfrey , ed . ) wolff , cynthia griffin ( 1977 ) a feast of words : the triumph of edith wharton oxford . wolff , cynthia griffin ( 1995 ) a feast of words : the triumph of edith wharton , second edition . reading , massachusetts : addison-wesley . external links . edith wharton society the mount : estate and gardens designed by edith wharton '' writings of edith wharton '' from c-span 's american writers : a journey through history anna catherine bahlmann papers relating to edith wharton . yale collection of american literature , beinecke rare book and manuscript library . archival materials . edith wharton collection . yale collection of american literature , beinecke rare book and manuscript library . the edith wharton papers at the lilly library , indiana university finding aid to iola s . haverstick collection of edith wharton materials at columbia university . rare book & manuscript library . online editions .