English poetry

the earliest english poetry . the earliest known english poem is a hymn on the creation ; bede attributes this to cædmon ( fl . 658 & ndash ; 680 ) , who was , according to legend , an illiterate herdsman who produced extemporaneous poetry at a monastery at whitby . bede , historia ecclesiastica gentis anglorum . this is generally taken as marking the beginning of old english poetry . much of the poetry of the period is difficult to date , or even to arrange chronologically ; for example , estimates for the date of the great epic beowulf range from ad 608 right through to ad 1000 , and there has never been anything even approaching a consensus . see , for example , beowulf : a dual-language edition , doubleday , new york , ny , 1977 ; newton , s . , 1993 . the origins of beowulf and the pre-viking kingdom of east anglia . cambridge . it is possible to identify certain key moments , however . dream of the rood was written before circa ad 700 , when excerpts were carved in runes on the ruthwell cross . brendan cassidy ( ed . ) , the ruthwell cross , princeton university press ( 1992 ) . some poems on historical events , such as battle of brunanburh ( 937 ) and the battle of maldon ( 991 ) , appear to have been composed shortly after the events in question , and can be dated reasonably precisely in consequence . by and large , however , anglo-saxon poetry is categorised by the manuscripts in which it survives , rather than its date of composition . the most important manuscripts are the four great poetical codices of the late 10th and early 11th centuries , known as the cædmon manuscript , the vercelli book , the exeter book , and the nowell codex . while the poetry that has survived is limited in volume , it is wide in breadth . beowulf is the only heroic epic to have survived in its entirety , but fragments of others such as waldere and the finnesburg fragment show that it was not unique in its time . other genres include much religious verse , from devotional works to biblical paraphrase ; elegies such as the wanderer , the seafarer , and the ruin ( often taken to be a description of the ruins of bath ) ; and numerous proverbs , riddles , and charms . with one notable exception ( rhyming poem ) , anglo-saxon poetry depends on alliterative verse for its structure and any rhyme included is merely ornamental . the anglo-norman period and the later middle ages . with the norman conquest of england , beginning in 1111 the anglo-saxon language rapidly diminished as a written literary language . the new aristocracy spoke predominantly norman , and this became the standard language of courts , parliament , and polite society . as the invaders integrated , their language and literature mingled with that of the natives : the oïl dialect of the upper classes became anglo-norman , and anglo-saxon underwent a gradual transition into middle english . while anglo-norman or latin was preferred for high culture , english literature by no means died out , and a number of important works illustrate the development of the language . around the turn of the 13th century , layamon wrote his brut , based on wace 's 12th century anglo-norman epic of the same name ; layamon 's language is recognisably middle english , though his prosody shows a strong anglo-saxon influence remaining . other transitional works were preserved as popular entertainment , including a variety of romances and lyrics . with time , the english language regained prestige , and in 1362 it replaced french and latin in parliament and courts of law . it was with the 14th century that major works of english literature began once again to appear ; these include the so-called pearl poet 's pearl , patience , cleanness , and sir gawain and the green knight ; langland 's political and religious allegory piers plowman ; gower 's confessio amantis ; and the works of chaucer , the most highly regarded english poet of the middle ages , who was seen by his contemporaries as a successor to the great tradition of virgil and dante . the reputation of chaucer 's successors in the 15th century has suffered in comparison with him , though lydgate and skelton are widely studied . a group of scottish writers arose who were formerly believed to be influenced by chaucer . the rise of scottish poetry began with the writing of the kingis quair by james i of scotland . the main poets of this scottish group were robert henryson , william dunbar and gavin douglas . henryson and douglas introduced a note of almost savage satire , which may have owed something to the gaelic bards , while douglas ' eneados , a translation into middle scots of virgil 's aeneid , was the first complete translation of any major work of classical antiquity into an anglic languages . the renaissance in england . the renaissance was slow in coming to england , with the generally accepted start date being around 1509 . it is also generally accepted that the english renaissance extended until the restoration in 1660 . however , a number of factors had prepared the way for the introduction of the new learning long before this start date . a number of medieval poets had , as already noted , shown an interest in the ideas of aristotle and the writings of european renaissance precursors such as dante . the introduction of movable-block printing by caxton in 1474 provided the means for the more rapid dissemination of new or recently rediscovered writers and thinkers . caxton also printed the works of chaucer and gower and these books helped establish the idea of a native poetic tradition that was linked to its european counterparts . in addition , the writings of english humanists like thomas more and thomas elyot helped bring the ideas and attitudes associated with the new learning to an english audience . three other factors in the establishment of the english renaissance were the reformation , counter reformation , and the opening of the era of english naval power and overseas exploration and expansion . the establishment of the church of england in 1535 accelerated the process of questioning the catholic world-view that had previously dominated intellectual and artistic life . at the same time , long-distance sea voyages helped provide the stimulus and information that underpinned a new understanding of the nature of the universe which resulted in the theories of nicolaus copernicus and johannes kepler . early renaissance poetry . with a small number of exceptions , the early years of the 16th century are not particularly notable . the douglas aeneid was completed in 1513 and john skelton wrote poems that were transitional between the late medieval and renaissance styles . the new king , henry viii , was something of a poet himself . thomas wyatt ( 1503–42 ) , one of the earliest english renaissance poets . he was responsible for many innovations in english poetry , and alongside henry howard , earl of surrey ( 1516/1517–47 ) introduced the sonnet from italy into england in the early 16th century . wyatt 's professed object was to experiment with the english tongue , to civilise it , to raise its powers to those of its neighbours . much of his literary output consists of translations and imitations of sonnets by the italian poet petrarch , but he also wrote sonnets of his own . wyatt took subject matter from petrarch 's sonnets , but his rhyme schemes make a significant departure . petrarch 's sonnets consist of an '' octave '' , rhyming abba abba , followed , after a turn ( volta ) in the sense , by a sestet with various rhyme schemes ; however his poems never ended in a rhyming couplet . wyatt employs the petrarchan octave , but his most common sestet scheme is cddc ee . this marks the beginnings of the english sonnet with 3 quatrains and a closing couplet . the norton anthology of english literature : sixteenth/early seventeenth century , volume b , 2012 , p . 647 . the elizabethans . elizabethan literature refers to bodies of work produced during the reign of queen elizabeth i ( 1558–1603 ) . in poetry is characterized by a number of frequently overlapping developments . the introduction and adaptation of themes , models and verse forms from other european traditions and classical literature , the elizabethan song tradition , the emergence of a courtly poetry often centred around the figure of the monarch and the growth of a verse-based drama are among the most important of these developments . elizabethan song . a wide range of elizabethan poets wrote songs , including nicholas grimald , thomas nashe and robert southwell . there are also a large number of extant anonymous songs from the period . perhaps the greatest of all the songwriters was thomas campion . campion is also notable because of his experiments with metres based on counting syllables rather than stresses . these quantitative metres were based on classical models and should be viewed as part of the wider renaissance revival of greek and roman artistic methods . the songs were generally printed either in miscellanies or anthologies such as richard tottel 's 1557 songs and sonnets or in songbooks that included printed music to enable performance . these performances formed an integral part of both public and private entertainment . by the end of the 16th century , a new generation of composers , including john dowland , william byrd , orlando gibbons , thomas weelkes and thomas morley were helping to bring the art of elizabethan song to an extremely high musical level . elizabethan poems and plays were often written in iambic meters , based on a metrical foot of two syllables , one unstressed and one stressed . however , much metrical experimentation took place during the period , and many of the songs , in particular , departed widely from the iambic norm . courtly poetry . with the consolidation of elizabeth 's power , a genuine court sympathetic to poetry and the arts in general emerged . this encouraged the emergence of a poetry aimed at , and often set in , an idealised version of the courtly world . among the best known examples of this are edmund spenser 's the faerie queene , which is effectively an extended hymn of praise to the queen , and philip sidney 's arcadia . this courtly trend can also be seen in spenser 's shepheardes calender . this poem marks the introduction into an english context of the classical pastoral , a mode of poetry that assumes an aristocratic audience with a certain kind of attitude to the land and peasants . the explorations of love found in the sonnets of william shakespeare and the poetry of walter raleigh and others also implies a courtly audience . classicism . virgil 's aeneid , thomas campion 's metrical experiments , and spenser 's shepheardes calender and plays like shakespeare 's antony and cleopatra are all examples of the influence of classicism on elizabethan poetry . it remained common for poets of the period to write on themes from classical mythology ; shakespeare 's venus and adonis and the christopher marlowe/george chapman hero and leander are examples of this kind of work . translations of classical poetry also became more widespread , with the versions of ovid 's metamorphoses by arthur golding ( 1565 & ndash ; 67 ) and george sandys ( 1626 ) , and chapman 's translations of homer 's iliad ( 1611 ) and odyssey ( c.1615 ) , among the outstanding examples . jacobean and caroline poetry : 1603–1660 . english renaissance poetry after the elizabethan poetry can be seen as belonging to one of three strains ; the metaphysical poets , the cavalier poets and the school of spenser . however , the boundaries between these three groups are not always clear and an individual poet could write in more than one manner . shakespeare also popularized the english sonnet , which made significant changes to petrarch 's model . a collection of 154 sonnets by shakespeare , dealing with themes such as the passage of time , love , beauty , and mortality , were first published in a 1609 quarto . john milton ( 1608–74 ) is considered one of the greatest english poets , and wrote at a time of religious flux and political upheaval . he is generally seen as the last major poet of the english renaissance , though his most renowned epic poems were written in the restoration period , including paradise lost ( 1667 ) . among the important poems milton wrote during this period are l'allegro , 1631 ; il penseroso , 1634 ; comus ( a masque ) , 1638 ; and lycidas ( 1638 ) . the metaphysical poets . the early 17th century saw the emergence of this group of poets who wrote in a witty , complicated style . the most famous of the metaphysicals is probably john donne . others include george herbert , thomas traherne , henry vaughan , andrew marvell , and richard crashaw . john milton in his comus falls into this group . the metaphysical poets went out of favour in the 18th century but began to be read again in the victorian era . donne 's reputation was finally fully restored by the approbation of t . s . eliot in the early 20th century . influenced by continental baroque , and taking as his subject matter both christian mysticism and eroticism , donne 's metaphysical poetry uses unconventional or '' unpoetic '' figures , such as a compass or a mosquito , to reach surprise effects . for example , in '' valediction : forbidding mourning '' , one of donne 's songs and sonnets , the points of a compass represent two lovers , the woman who is home , waiting , being the centre , the farther point being her lover sailing away from her . but the larger the distance , the more the hands of the compass lean to each other : separation makes love grow fonder . the paradox or the oxymoron is a constant in this poetry whose fears and anxieties also speak of a world of spiritual certainties shaken by the modern discoveries of geography and science , one that is no longer the centre of the universe . the cavalier poets . another important group of poets at this time were the cavalier poets . the cavalier poets wrote in a lighter , more elegant and artificial style than the metaphysical poets . they were an important group of writers , who came from the classes that supported king charles i during the wars of the three kingdoms ( 1639–51 ) . ( king charles reigned from 1625 and was executed 1649 ) . leading members of the group include ben jonson , richard lovelace , robert herrick , edmund waller , thomas carew , sir john suckling , and john denham . the cavalier poets can be seen as the forerunners of the major poets of the augustan era , who admired them greatly . they '' were not a formal group , but all were influenced '' by ben jonson . the oxford companion to english literature , ed . margaret drabble , p . 181 . most of the cavalier poets were courtiers , with notable exceptions . for example , robert herrick was not a courtier , but his style marks him as a cavalier poet . cavalier works make use of allegory and classical allusions , and are influence by latin authors horace , cicero , and ovid . . the restoration and 18th century . john milton 's paradise lost ( 1667 ) , a story of fallen pride , was the first major poem to appear in england after the restoration . the court of charles ii had , in its years in france , learned a worldliness and sophistication that marked it as distinctively different from the monarchies that preceded the republic . even if charles had wanted to reassert the divine right of kingship , the protestantism and taste for power of the intervening years would have rendered it impossible . one of the greatest english poets , john milton ( 1608–1674 ) , wrote during this period of religious and political instability . he is generally seen as the last major poet of the english renaissance , though his major epic poems were written in the restoration period . some of milton 's important poems , were written before the restoration ( see above ) . his later major works include paradise regained , 1671 , and samson agonistes , 1671 . milton 's works reflect deep personal convictions , a passion for freedom and self-determination , and the urgent issues and political turbulence of his day . writing in english , latin , and italian , he achieved international renown within his lifetime , and his celebrated areopagitica ( 1644 ) , written in condemnation of pre-publication censorship , is among history 's most influential and impassioned defences of free speech and freedom of the press . william hayley 's 1796 biography called him the '' greatest english author '' , mccalman 2001 , p . 605 . and he remains generally regarded '' as one of the preeminent writers in the english language '' . '' milton , john – introduction '' , contemporary literary criticism . . satire . the world of fashion and scepticism that emerged encouraged the art of satire . all the major poets of the period , samuel butler , john dryden , alexander pope and samuel johnson , and the irish poet jonathan swift , wrote satirical verse . their satire was often written in defence of public order and the established church and government . however , writers such as pope used their gift for satire to create scathing works responding to their detractors or to criticise what they saw as social atrocities perpetrated by the government . pope 's the dunciad is a satirical slaying of two of his literary adversaries ( lewis theobald , and colley cibber in a later version ) , expressing the view that british society was falling apart morally , culturally , and intellectually . 18th-century classicism . the 18th century is sometimes called the augustan age , and contemporary admiration for the classical world extended to the poetry of the time . not only did the poets aim for a polished high style in emulation of the roman ideal , they also translated and imitated greek and latin verse resulting in measured rationalised elegant verse . dryden translated all the known works of virgil , and pope produced versions of the two homeric epics . horace and juvenal were also widely translated and imitated , horace most famously by john wilmot , earl of rochester and juvenal by samuel johnson 's the vanity of human wishes . women poets in the 18th century . a number of women poets of note emerged during the period of the restoration , including aphra behn , margaret cavendish , mary chudleigh , anne finch , anne killigrew , and katherine philips . nevertheless , print publication by women poets was still relatively scarce when compared to that of men , though manuscript evidence indicates that many more women poets were practising than was previously thought . disapproval of feminine '' forwardness '' , however , kept many out of print in the early part of the period , and even as the century progressed women authors still felt the need to justify their incursions into the public sphere by claiming economic necessity or the pressure of friends . women writers were increasingly active in all genres throughout the 18th century , and by the 1790s women 's poetry was flourishing . notable poets later in the period include anna laetitia barbauld , joanna baillie , susanna blamire , felicia hemans , mary leapor , lady mary wortley montagu , hannah more , and mary robinson . in the past decades there has been substantial scholarly and critical work done on women poets of the long 18th century : first , to reclaim them and make them available in contemporary editions in print or online , and second , to assess them and position them within a literary tradition . the late 18th century . towards the end of the 18th century , poetry began to move away from the strict augustan ideals and a new emphasis on the sentiment and feelings of the poet was established . this trend can perhaps be most clearly seen in the handling of nature , with a move away from poems about formal gardens and landscapes by urban poets and towards poems about nature as lived in . the leading exponents of this new trend include thomas gray , george crabbe , christopher smart and robert burns as well as the irish poet oliver goldsmith . these poets can be seen as paving the way for the romantic movement . the romantic movement . see also : romantic literature in english ; english romantic sonnets the last quarter of the 18th century was a time of social and political turbulence , with american revolution , france , ireland and elsewhere . in great britain , movement for social change and a more inclusive sharing of power was also growing . this was the backdrop against which the romantic movement in english poetry emerged . the main poets of this movement were william blake , william wordsworth , samuel taylor coleridge , percy bysshe shelley , lord byron , and john keats . the birth of english romanticism is often dated to the publication in 1798 of wordsworth and coleridge 's lyrical ballads . however , blake had been publishing since the early 1780s . much of the focus on blake only came about during the last century when northrop frye discussed his work in his book anatomy of criticism . shelley is most famous for such classic anthology verse works as ozymandias , and long visionary poems which include prometheus unbound . shelley 's groundbreaking poem the masque of anarchy calls for nonviolence in protest and political action . it is perhaps the first modern statement of the principle of civil disobedience . mahatma gandhi 's passive resistance was influenced and inspired by shelley 's verse , and would often quote the poem to vast audiences . thomas weber , '' gandhi as disciple and mentor , '' cambridge university press , 2004 , pp . 28–29 . in poetry , the romantic movement emphasised the creative expression of the individual and the need to find and formulate new forms of expression . the romantics , with the partial exception of byron , rejected the poetic ideals of the 18th century , and each of them returned to milton for inspiration , though each drew something different from milton . they also put a good deal of stress on their own originality . 's study revision and romantic authorship ( 1996 ) . additionally , the romantic movement marked a shift in the use of language . attempting to express the '' language of the common man '' , wordsworth and his fellow romantic poets focused on employing poetic language for a wider audience , countering the mimetic , tightly constrained neo-classic poems ( although it 's important to note that the poet wrote first and foremost for his/her own creative , expression ) . in shelley 's '' defense of poetry '' , he contends that poets are the '' creators of language '' and that the poet 's job is to refresh language for their society . the romantics were not the only poets of note at this time . in the work of john clare the late augustan voice is blended with a peasant 's first-hand knowledge to produce arguably some of the finest nature poetry in the english language . another contemporary poet who does not fit into the romantic group was walter savage landor . landor was a classicist whose poetry forms a link between the augustans and robert browning , who much admired it . victorian poetry . the victorian era was a period of great political , social and economic change . the empire recovered from the loss of the thirteen colonies and entered a period of rapid expansion . this expansion , combined with increasing industrialisation and mechanisation , led to a prolonged period of economic growth . the reform act 1832 was the beginning of a process that would eventually lead to universal suffrage . the major victorian poets were john clare , alfred tennyson , robert browning , elizabeth barrett browning , matthew arnold , christina rossetti , dante gabriel rossetti , robert louis stevenson , oscar wilde , william butler yeats , rudyard kipling , thomas hardy , and gerard manley hopkins , though hopkins was not published until 1918 . john clare came to be known for his celebratory representations of the english countryside and his lamentation of its disruption . his biographer jonathan bate states that clare was '' the greatest labouring-class poet that england has ever produced . no one has ever written more powerfully of nature , of a rural childhood , and of the alienated and unstable self '' . tennyson was , to some degree , the spenser of the new age and his idylls of the kings can be read as a victorian version of the faerie queen , that is as a poem that sets out to provide a mythic foundation to the idea of empire . the brownings spent much of their time out of england and explored european models and matter in much of their poetry . robert browning 's great innovation was the dramatic poetry , which he used to its full extent in his long novel in verse , the ring and the book . elizabeth barrett browning is perhaps best remembered for sonnets from the portuguese but her long poem aurora leigh is one of the classics of 19th century feminist literature . matthew arnold was much influenced by wordsworth , though his poem dover beach is often considered a precursor of the modernist revolution . hopkins wrote in relative obscurity and his work was not published until after his death . his unusual style ( involving what he called '' sprung rhythm '' and heavy reliance on rhyme and alliteration ) had a considerable influence on many of the poets of the 1940s . pre-raphaelites . the pre-raphaelite brotherhood was a mid-19th century arts movement dedicated to the reform of what they considered the sloppy mannerism painting of the day . although primarily concerned with the visual arts , a member of the inner circle , dante gabriel rossetti was a poet of some ability , whilst his sister christina rossetti is generally considered a greater poet , whose contribution to victorian poetry is of a standard equal to that of elizabeth barrett browning . the rossettis ' poetry shares many of the concerns of the pre-raphaelite movement : an interest in medieval models , an almost obsessive attention to visual detail and an occasional tendency to lapse into whimsy . dante rossetti worked with , and had some influence on , the leading arts and crafts painter and poet william morris . morris shared the pre-raphaelite interest in the poetry of the european middle ages , to the point of producing some illuminated manuscript volumes of his work . 1890s : fin-de-siècle . towards the end of the century , english poets began to take an interest in french symbolism and victorian poetry entered a decadent fin de siècle phase . two groups of poets emerged , the yellow book poets who adhered to the tenets of aestheticism , including algernon charles swinburne , oscar wilde and arthur symons and the rhymers ' club group that included ernest dowson , lionel johnson and william butler yeats . comic verse . comic verse abounded in the victorian era . magazines such as punch and fun magazine teemed with humorous invention spielmann , m . h . the history of '' punch '' , from project gutenberg and were aimed at a well-educated readership . vann , j . don . '' comic periodicals '' , victorian periodicals & victorian society ( aldershot : scholar press , 1994 ) the most famous collection of victorian comic verse is the bab ballads . stedman , jane w . ( 1996 ) . w . s . gilbert , a classic victorian & his theatre , pp . 26–29 . oxford university press . . the 20th century . the first three decades . the victorian era continued into the early years of the 20th century and two figures emerged as the leading representative of the poetry of the old era to act as a bridge into the new . these were yeats and thomas hardy . yeats , although not a modernist , was to learn a lot from the new poetic movements that sprang up around him and adapted his writing to the new circumstances . hardy was , in terms of technique at least , a more traditional figure and was to be a reference point for various anti-modernist reactions , especially from the 1950s onwards . a . e . housman ( 1859 – 1936 ) was poet who was born in the victorian era and who first published in the 1890s , but who only really became known in the 20th century . housman is best known for his cycle of poems a shropshire lad ( 1896 ) . this collection was turned down by several publishers so that housman published it himself , and the work only became popular when '' the advent of war , first in the boer war and then in world war i , gave the book widespread appeal due to its nostalgic depiction of brave english soldiers '' . poetry.org the poems ' wistful evocation of doomed youth in the english countryside , in spare language and distinctive imagery , appealed strongly to late victorian and edwardian taste , and the fact that several early 20th-century composers set it to music helped its popularity . housman published a further highly successful collection last poems in 1922 while a third volume , more poems , was published posthumously in 1936 . . the georgian poets and world war i . the georgian poets were the first major grouping of the post-victorian era . their work appeared in a series of five anthologies called georgian poetry which were published by harold monro and edited by edward marsh . the poets featured included edmund blunden , rupert brooke , robert graves , d . h . lawrence , walter de la mare and siegfried sassoon . their poetry represented something of a reaction to the decadence of the 1890s and tended towards the sentimental . brooke and sassoon were to go on to win reputations as war poets and lawrence quickly distanced himself from the group and was associated with the modernist movement . graves distanced himself from the group as well and wrote poetry in accordance with a belief in a prehistoric muse he described as the white goddess . other notable poets who wrote about the war include isaac rosenberg , edward thomas , wilfred owen , may cannan and , from the home front , thomas hardy and rudyard kipling . kipling is the author of the famous inspirational poem if— , which is an evocation of victorian stoicism , as a traditional british virtue . although many of these poets wrote socially-aware criticism of the war , most remained technically conservative and traditionalist . modernism . among the foremost avant-garde writers were the american-born poets gertrude stein , t . s . eliot , h.d . and ezra pound , each of whom spent an important part of their writing lives in england , france and italy . pound 's involvement with the imagists marked the beginning of a revolution in the way poetry was written . english poets involved with this group included d . h . lawrence , richard aldington , t . e . hulme , f . s . flint , ford madox ford , allen upward and john cournos . eliot , particularly after the publication of the waste land , became a major figure and influence on other english poets . in addition to these poets , other english modernists began to emerge . these included the london-welsh poet and painter david jones , whose first book , in parenthesis , was one of the very few experimental poems to come out of world war i , the scot hugh macdiarmid , mina loy and basil bunting . the thirties . the poets who began to emerge in the 1930s had two things in common ; they had all been born too late to have any real experience of the pre-world war i world and they grew up in a period of social , economic and political turmoil . perhaps as a consequence of these facts , themes of community , social ( in ) justice and war seem to dominate the poetry of the decade . the poetic space of the decade was dominated by four poets ; w . h . auden , stephen spender , cecil day-lewis and louis macneice , although the last of these belongs at least as much to the history of irish poetry . these poets were all , in their early days at least , politically active on the left . although they admired eliot , they also represented a move away from the technical innovations of their modernist predecessors . a number of other , less enduring , poets also worked in the same vein . one of these was michael roberts , whose new country anthology both introduced the group to a wider audience and gave them their name . the 1930s also saw the emergence of a home-grown english surrealist poetry whose main exponents were david gascoyne , hugh sykes davies , george barker , and philip o'connor . these poets turned to french models rather than either the new country poets or english-language modernism , and their works were a proof of the importance of later english experimental poets as it broadened the scope of the english avant-garde tradition . john betjeman and stevie smith , who were two other significant poets of this period , who stood outside all schools and groups . betjeman was a quietly ironic poet of middle england , with a command of a wide range of verse techniques . smith was an entirely unclassifiable one-off voice . the forties . the 1940s opened with the united kingdom at war and a new generation of war poets emerged in response . these included keith douglas , alun lewis , henry reed and f . t . prince . as with the poets of the first world war , the work of these writers can be seen as something of an interlude in the history of 20th century poetry . technically , many of these war poets owed something to the 1930s poets , but their work grew out of the particular circumstances in which they found themselves living and fighting . the main movement in post-war 1940s poetry was the new romantic group that included dylan thomas , george barker , w . s . graham , kathleen raine , henry treece and j . f . hendry . these writers saw themselves as in revolt against the classicism of the new country poets . they turned to such models as gerard manley hopkins , arthur rimbaud and hart crane and the word play of james joyce . thomas , in particular , helped anglo-welsh poetry to emerge as a recognisable force . other significant poets to emerge in the 1940s include lawrence durrell , bernard spencer , roy fuller , norman nicholson , vernon watkins , r . s . thomas and norman maccaig . these last four poets represent a trend towards regionalism and poets writing about their native areas ; watkins and thomas in wales , nicholson in cumberland and maccaig in scotland . the fifties . the 1950s were dominated by three groups of poets , the movement , the group , and poets clarified by the term extremist art , which was first used by the poet a . alvarez to describe the work of the american poet sylvia plath . the movement poets as a group came to public notice in robert conquest 's 1955 anthology new lines . the core of the group consisted of philip larkin , elizabeth jennings , d . j . enright , kingsley amis , thom gunn and donald davie . they were identified with a hostility to modernism and internationalism , and looked to hardy as a model . however , both davie and gunn later moved away from this position . as befits their name , the group were much more formally a group of poets , meeting for weekly discussions under the chairmanship of philip hobsbaum and edward lucie-smith . other group poets included martin bell , peter porter , peter redgrove , george macbeth and david wevill . hobsbaum spent some time teaching in belfast , where he was a formative influence on the emerging northern ireland poets including seamus heaney . other poets associated with extremist art included plath 's one-time husband ted hughes , francis berry and jon silkin . these poets are sometimes compared with the expressionism german school . a number of young poets working in what might be termed a modernist vein also started publishing during this decade . these included charles tomlinson , gael turnbull , roy fisher and bob cobbing . these poets can now be seen as forerunners of some of the major developments during the following two decades . the 1960s and 1970s . in the early part of the 1960s , the centre of gravity of mainstream poetry moved to northern ireland , with the emergence of seamus heaney , tom paulin , paul muldoon and others . in england , the most cohesive groupings can , in retrospect , be seen to cluster around what might loosely be called the modernist tradition and draw on american as well as indigenous models . the british poetry revival was a wide-reaching collection of groupings and subgroupings that embraces performance , sound and concrete poetry as well as the legacy of pound , jones , macdiarmid , loy and bunting , the objectivist poets , the beats and the black mountain poets , among others . leading poets associated with this movement include j . h . prynne , eric mottram , tom raworth , denise riley and lee harwood . the liverpool poets were adrian henri , brian patten and roger mcgough . their work was a self-conscious attempt at creating an english equivalent to the beats . many of their poems were written in protest against the established social order and , particularly , the threat of nuclear war . although not actually a mersey beat poet , adrian mitchell is often associated with the group in critical discussion . contemporary poet steve turner has also been compared with them . english poetry now . some consider the late geoffrey hill to have been the finest english poet of recent years . william logan , '' stouthearted men '' , the new criterion , june 2004 . the last three decades of the 20th century saw a number of short-lived poetic groupings , including the martians , along with a general trend towards what has been termed 'poeclectics ' , '' making voices : identity , poeclectics and the contemporary british poet '' , new writing , the international journal for the practice and theory of creative writing ; volume 3 ( 1 ) ; pp 66–77 . namely an intensification within individual poets ' oeuvres of '' all kinds of style , subject , voice , register and form '' . there has also been a growth in interest in women 's writing , and in poetry from england 's minorities , especially the west indian community . performance poetry including poetry slam continues to be active . some poets who emerged in this period include carol ann duffy , andrew motion , craig raine , wendy cope , james fenton , blake morrison , liz lochhead , george szirtes , linton kwesi johnson , benjamin zephaniah . mark ford is an example of a poet influenced by new york school . helen vendler compared him with john ashbery . there has been recent activity focused on poets in bloodaxe books ' the new poetry , including simon armitage , kathleen jamie , glyn maxwell , selima hill , maggie hannan , michael hofmann and peter reading . the new generation movement flowered in the 1990s and early 2000s , producing poets such as don paterson , julia copus , john stammers , jacob polley , david morley and alice oswald . a new generation of innovative poets has also sprung up in the wake of the revival grouping , notably caroline bergvall , tony lopez , allen fisher and denise riley . don paterson , '' the dark art of poetry '' : t.s . eliot lecture , 9 november 2004 : '' geniune talents such as , say , tony lopez and denise riley , working recognisably within the english and european lyric traditions , are drowned by the chorus of articulate but fundamentally talentless poet-commentators '' . important independent and experimental poetry pamphlet publishers include barque , flarestack , knives , forks and spoons press , penned in the margins , heaventree ( founded in 2002 but no longer publishing ) and perdika press . throughout this period , and to the present , independent poetry presses such as enitharmon have continued to promote original work from ( among others ) dannie abse , martyn crucefix and jane duran . see also . notes . references . ; print hamilton , ian . the oxford companion to twentieth-century poetry in english ; online a time-line of english poetry . external links . poets perform their own work eighteenth-century poetry archive