Japanese folktales

overview . a representative sampling of japanese folklore would definitely include the quintessential momotarō ( peach boy ) , and perhaps other folktales listed among the so-called : , p.198 . quote : '' ごだいおとぎぱなし（五大御伽話）。五大昔話ともいう。桃太郎、猿蟹合戦、舌切雀、花咲爺、かちかち山の五話 '' the battle between the crab and the monkey , shita-kiri suzume ( tongue-cut sparrow ) , hanasaka jiisan ( flower-blooming old man ) , and kachi-kachi yama . these stories just named are considered genuine folktales , having been so characterized by folklorist kunio yanagita . , p.253 , says calling them otogibanashi ( see below ) is a misnomer , since they are mukashi banashi ( yanagita 's preferred term for folktales orally transmitted ) during the edo period these tales had been adapted by professional writers and woodblock-printed in a form a called kusazōshi ( cf . chapbooks ) , but a number of local variant versions of the tales have been collected in the field as well . as stated above , non-genuine folktales are those already committed to writing long ago , the earliest being the tale of princess kaguya ( or the tale of the bamboo cutter ) , an example of the monogatari type of romance dated to as early as the 10th century , though extant manuscripts are much later . the text mentions , for example , the flame-proof '' ( or salamander ) 's fur robe '' ( perhaps familiar to watchers of the anime inuyasha as the vestment of the title character ) , which attests to a considerable degree of book-knowledge and learning by its author . other examples of pseudo-folktales composed in the middle ages are the uji shūi monogatari ( 13th century ) that includes kobutori jisan & mdash ; the old man with the hump on his cheek & mdash ; and straw millionaire . this and the konjaku monogatarishū ( 12th century ) contain a number of a type of tales called setsuwa , a generic term for narratives of various nature , anything from moralizing to comical . both works are divided into parts containing tales from india , tales from china , and tales from japan . in the konjaku monogatarishū can be seen the early developments of the kintarō legend , familiar in folktale-type form . the japanese word used to correspond to '' folktale '' has undergone development over the years . from the edo period , the term used was , i.e . , tales told by the otogii-shū , professional storytellers hired to entertain the daimyō lord at the bedside . that term remained in currency through the meiji era ( late 19th century ) , when imported terms such as minwa began to be used . in the taishō era the word dōwa ( lit . '' children 's story '' , a loan translation for fairy tales or märchen ) was used . later yanagita popularized the use of mukashi-banashi '' tales of long ago '' , as mentioned before . some japanese ghost stories or kaidan , such as the story of the yuki-onna ( '' snow woman '' ) , might be considered examples of folktales , but even though some overlaps may exist , they are usually treated as another genre . the familiar forms of stories are embellished works of literature by gesaku writers , or retooled for the kabuki theater performance , in the case of the bakeneko or monstrous cat . the famous collection kwaidan by lafcadio hearn also consists of original retellings . yanagita published a collection , '' ( 1910 ) , which featured a number of fantastical yōkai creatures such as zashiki-warashi and kappa . in the middle years of the 20th century storytellers would often travel from town to town telling these stories with special paper illustrations called kamishibai . list of japanese folktales . below is a list of well-known japanese folktales : . animals in folklore . tongue-cut sparrow : a washer woman cut off the tongue of a sparrow that was pecking at her rice starch . the sparrow had been fed regularly by the washer woman 's neighbors , so when the sparrow did n't come , they went in the woods to search for it . they found it , and after a feast and some dancing ( which the sparrow prepared ) , the neighbors were given the choice between two boxes ; one large and one small . the neighbors picked the small box , and it was filled with riches . the washer woman saw these riches and heard where they came from , so she went to the sparrow . she too was entertained and given the choice between two boxes . the washer woman picked the largest box and instead of gaining riches , she was devoured by devils . japanese mythology : library of the world 's myths and legends , by juliet piggott mandarin ducks : a man kills a drake mandarin duck for food . that night he had a dream that a woman was accusing him of murdering her husband , and then told him to return to the lake . the man does this , and a female mandarin walks up to him and tears its chest open . tanuki and rabbit : a man catches a tanuki and tells his wife to cook it in a stew . the tanuki begs the wife not to cook him and promises to help with the cooking if he is spared . the wife agrees and unties him . the tanuki then transforms into her and kills her , then cooks her in a stew . disguised as the man 's wife , the tanuki feeds him his wife . once he is done , the tanuki transforms back to his original form and teases the man for eating his wife . a rabbit that was friends with the family was furious , so he had the tanuki carry sticks and , while he was n't looking , set these sticks on fire . then the rabbit treated the burn with hot pepper paste . finally , the rabbit convinced the tanuki to build a boat of clay , and the rabbit followed in a sturdy boat . the clay boat began to sink , so the tanuki tried to escape , but then the rabbit hit him in the head with an oar , knocking him out and making him drown . badger and fox cub : a badger , vixen , and the vixen 's cub lived in a forest that was running out of food , so they came up with the plan of one of them pretending to be dead , the other disguising as a merchant , and the “ merchant ” selling the “ dead ” animal to a human . then they would have money to buy food . the vixen pretended to be dead while the badger was the merchant . while the transaction was happening however , the badger told the human that the vixen was n't actually dead , so the human killed her . this infuriated the cub , so he proposed a competition . they would both disguise as humans and go into the village at different times . whoever guessed what “ human ” was the other first , wins . the cub walked towards the village first , but he hid behind a tree . the badger went into the village , and accused the governor of being the fox , so the bodyguards of the governor beheaded him . . theorized influences . the folklore of japan has been influenced by foreign literature as well as the kind of spirit worship prevalent all throughout prehistoric asia . the monkey stories of japanese folklore have been influenced both by the sanskrit epic ramayana and the chinese classic journey to the west . on the road to baghdad or traveling biculturalism : theorizing a bicultural approach to . by gonul pultar , ed . , gönül pultar . published 2005 . new academia publishing , llc . page 193 the stories mentioned in the buddhist jataka tales appear in a modified form throughout the japanese collection of popular stories . the hindu world by sushil mittal . published 2004 . routledge . pp93 discovering the arts of japan : a historical overview by tsuneko s . sadao , stephanie wada . published 2003 . kodansha international . pp41 some stories of ancient india were influential in shaping japanese stories by providing them with materials . indian materials were greatly modified and adapted in such a way as would appeal to the sensibilities of common people of japan in general , transmitted through china and korea . miraculous stories from the japanese buddhist tradition : the nihon ryōiki of the monk kyōkai by kyōkai . published 1997 . routledge . the sanskrit epics by john l brockington . published 1998 . brill academic publishers . pp514 . see also . gesaku tale of the gallant jiraiya kaidan banchō sarayashiki , the ghost story of okiku and the nine plates . yotsuya kaidan , the ghost story of oiwa . yukionna , the snow woman . legends , related to hagoromo ( play ) kiyohime legend ; passionate for a priest , she turned into a dragon . tamamo-no-mae , a vixen-type yōkai monster , masquerading as a woman . tokoyo , a girl who reclaimed the honour of her samurai father . ushiwakamaru , about yoshitsune 's youth and training with the tengu of kurama . mythology luck of the sea and luck of the mountains setsuwa urban legends . references . further sources . brauns , david . japanische märchen und sagen . leipzig : verlag von wilhelm friedrich . 1885 . dorson , richard m . journal of the american oriental society 95 , no . 3 ( 1975 ) : 512-14 . accessed july 1 , 2020 . , article under , by keigo seki ( : ja : 関敬吾 ) james , grace ; goble , warwick , iii . green willow and other japanese fairy tales . london : macmillan and co . 1910 . mayer , fanny hagin . '' recent collections of japanese folk tales . '' the journal of asian studies 31 , no . 4 ( 1972 ) : 911-14 . accessed july 1 , 2020 . mayer , fanny hagin . '' religious concepts in the japanese folk tale . '' japanese journal of religious studies 1 , no . 1 ( 1974 ) : 73-101 . accessed july 1 , 2020 . mulhern , chieko irie and mayer , fanny hagin . “ ancient tales in modern japan : an anthology of japanese folk tales ” ( 1986 ) . rasch , carsten : tales of old japan fairy tale - folklore - ghost stories - mythology : introduction in the japanese literature of the genre of fairy tales - folklore - ghost stories and mythology , hamburg . 2015 . seki , keigo . '' types of japanese folktales . '' asian folklore studies 25 ( 1966 ) : 1-220 .