Hamilton Hume

background . he was born on 19 june 1797 in seven hills , near parramatta , a settlement close to ( and now a suburb of ) sydney . hume was the eldest son of andrew hamilton hume and his wife elizabeth , née kennedy . andrew hume got the appointment of commissary general for new south wales , and came out to the colony in 1797 . there were few opportunities for education in australia during the first ten years of the nineteenth century , and hamilton hume received most of his education from his mother . . exploratory career . early exploration . when he was only 17 years of age , hume began exploring the country beyond sydney with his younger brother john and an aboriginal boy as far to the south-west as berrima , and soon developed into a good bushman . in 1817 , hume went on a journey with james meehan , the deputy surveyor-general , and charles throsby during which lake bathurst and the goulburn plains were sighted . subsequently , in 1818 , he went with john oxley and meehan to jervis bay . in 1822 , he journeyed with alexander berry down the south coast of new south wales . he travelled as far south as the clyde river , and inland nearly as far as braidwood . berry came to settle in the shoalhaven , and in june 1822 he left hume and a party of convicts to cut a 209-yard canal between the shoalhaven river and the crookhaven river to allow passage of boats into the shoalhaven . this canal was australia 's first navigable canal , and the work was completed in 12 days . the canal today forms the main water flow of the shoalhaven river . . hume and hovell expedition . in 1824 , hume was seen by governor brisbane with reference to an expedition to spencer gulf . brisbane was also in touch about this time with william hovell on the same subject , but it is not quite clear which of the men was the first to be approached . in any event , the hoped-for government funding of the expedition was not forthcoming , so that eventually the two men decided to make the journey at their own expense , except for some packsaddles , arms , clothes and blankets , which were provided from government stores . hume , in a letter dated 24 january 1825 , ( immediately after the return of the explorers ) , practically claimed to have been the leader of the party . he refers to '' the expedition your excellency was pleased to entrust to my care '' . but brisbane did not accept this view of it , as in a letter to the secretary , wilmot horton , dated 24 march 1825 he mentions the '' discovery of new and valuable country . by two young men messrs hovell and hume . they were directed by me to try and reach spencer 's gulf '' . it may also be pointed out that in the letter to brisbane of 28 july 1824 , hovell signed first . these facts are of interest in view of the controversy which broke out many years later . each of the explorers brought three assigned servants with him and between them they had five bullocks , three horses and two carts . nearly the whole of the journey was through heavy mountain country , and there were several rivers to be crossed . the courage , resource and bushmanship of hume were important factors in surmounting their many difficulties , and after a journey of 11 weeks they came to corio bay near the present site of geelong . here , possibly through faulty instruments , hovell made a mistake of one degree longitude in his observation , and they believed that they were on the shore of western port . the return journey for some time was made on a course more to the west , the country was more level , and they were back at their starting point less than five weeks later . their provisions were finished just before the end of the journey , and the whole party was very near exhaustion . hume and hovell each received grants of of land , an inadequate reward for discoveries of great importance made by an expedition which , practically speaking , paid its own expenses . this expedition discovered the overland route between sydney and port phillip , on whose shores melbourne now stands . exploration of the darling river . in november 1828 , hume journeyed with charles sturt into western new south wales , where they found the darling river , the murray river 's longest tributary . hume was able to communicate with some aborigines they met early in their journey who consented to act as guides , and later , when the aborigines left them , sturt speaks with appreciation of hume 's ability in tracking their animals which had strayed . being a drought year , it was a constant struggle to find water , and only good bushmanship saved the party . sturt would have liked hume to go with him on his second expedition , which started at the end of 1829 , but he had a harvest to get in and was unable to make arrangements . hume had finished his work as an explorer , and spent his remaining days as a successful pastoralist . thumb . controversy with hovell . in december 1853 , an imperfect report of a speech hovell had made at geelong was the cause of a great deal of public ill-feeling between the two men . hume had always regarded himself as the real leader of their joint expedition , and his indignation lost all bounds at the thought of hovell minimising his share in the work . fuller reports of the speech show that this was not the case , but the vehemency of hume and his friends at the time led to the work of hovell being underrated for a long period . hume published in 1855 a brief statement of facts in connection with an overland expedition from lake george to port phillip in 1824 , which went into three editions . hovell published two pamphlets reply to '' a brief statement of facts in connection with an overland expedition from lake george to port phillip in 1824 '' , and an answer to the preface to the second edition of mr hamilton hume 's '' a brief statement of facts '' , ( for a balanced discussion of the merits of the case see paper by professor sir ernest scott in journal and proceedings of the royal australian historical society , vol . vii ) . hume was an excellent explorer and a first-rate bushman who was courageous and resourceful , whose work was not adequately appreciated or rewarded by the governments of the time . in addition to his other talents , hume acquired a substantial knowledge of some of the local aboriginal people , was always able to avoid conflicts with them , and appears to have learnt something of their speech . he has an established and well-deserved reputation as a great australian explorer . later life . hume married elizabeth dight on 8 november 1825 at st philip 's church in sydney . she survived him but had no children . hume served as a magistrate in yass until his death at his residence , cooma cottage in yass on 19 april 1873 . a double seater buggy once owned by hume and used by him in yass is in the national museum of australia collection in canberra . double seater buggy once owned by the explorer hamilton hume , national museum of australia . honours . hume is commemorated by the hume highway , the principal road between sydney and melbourne . hume and hovell were also commemorated by having their portraits printed on the australian one-pound banknote between 1953 and 1966 . hume dam and the impounded reservoir , lake hume , were named in his honour in 1996 . the canberra suburb of hume was named after him , as was the federal electoral division of hume . the city of hume , an outer metropolitan council in melbourne formed in 1994 , is named in his honour . in 1976 a postage stamp bearing the portraits of hume and hovell was issued by australia post . the hume and hovell track , a trail between yass and albury , also bears their joint names . see also . hume and hovell expedition . notes . the story of john byrne , freeman 's journal thursday 11 june 1908 , p.32 . references . . external links . cooma cottage , yass – hume 's home from 1839 national museum of australia hume 's double-seater buggy .