Backyard cricket

overview . whilst loosely based upon the game of cricket , many aspects are improvised : the playing ground , actual cricket where the stadium is a well-defined entity with proper boundaries , things are a bit different here in the gully . there is no specified playing area in gully cricket . period . you need to improvise , adapt and overcome . anything in the proximity can act as a boundary . different objects from house doors to your neighbour ’ s old scooter can be assigned a different number of runs based on the difficulty of hitting those objects . unlike cricket stadiums where they have a limitless sky to their benefit , here in gully taking the aerial route may not be a viable option due to the presence of terraces and balconies . the ball ’ s return is next to impossible if it goes to these kinds of places . '' the rules , the teams , and the equipment . quite often there are no teams at all ; the players take turns at batting and there is often no emphasis on actually scoring runs . equipment and field : the bat can be anything , as long as it can hit the ball and can be suitably held in the hands . however , usage of a bat is necessary . a ball is the other essential item . tennis balls are often used due to the fact that they are less likely to inflict injuries than a cricket ball . they are also much cheaper and more readily available than a leather cricket ball and are easier to hit due to their slower air-speed and relative lightness . tennis balls also bounce more than normal cricket balls , especially at low speeds . often a tennis ball will be heavily taped on one side to give the ball extra 'swing ' . this is known as a 'swing ball'—swing balls may be made with : gaffer tape , electrical tape , plumbing tape or any other kind of tape available . a completely taped tennis ball is very popular for street cricket in pakistan as the electric tape makes the ball heavier and less bouncy as compared to a normal tennis ball but it is still relatively harmless as compared to a real cricket ball . the pitch can be any stretch of ground that is reasonably flat . the wicket may be any convenient object – a chair , a cardboard box , a set of long twigs or sticks , a rubbish bin , tree or a drawing on the wall . often , the wicket is by no means close to the official size , but it is used anyway . a wicket at the non-striker 's end is generally a single stump if proper stumps are available and in the absence of larger objects may be just a hat or a shoe . its main purpose is to mark the bowler 's crease , but can be instrumental when there are two batters and one may be run out . games with relatively few players typically forgo the teams and innings format of professional cricket , opting instead for a batsmen-vs-everyone format . garden/backyard cricket in south africa and australia is considered by many to be the pinnacle event of social and sporting excellence in the summer period . many games are paired with a barbecue which often has a carnival atmosphere . it is historically very popular on australia day . several closely related variants of cricket exist in south america , known as bete-ombro , taco , bets , or plaquita . rules . gully cricket rules are often fixed by the players playing it . below listed are the most common rules . backyard cricket allows for rules to be changed , and the rules being played by will depend on the context and physical environment of the game . however a list of the typical rules which are used most of the time are as follows : no ducks – a batsman can not be given out without scoring – they always get another go until they 've scored 1+ runs . first/trial ball rule : ( a stricter alternative to no ducks ) a batter can not be given out on the first ball they face ( known as trial ball in the subcontinent ) . this and the no golden ducks rule are commonly applied to those with little cricketing skill . equipment and field wicket material – if stumps are unavailable or unsuitable then any other material object may be used , with garbage bins being common , and some people also use stickers or paint lines on to restrict the '' stump area '' of the object to a more realistic size . pitch – the pitch should be between 11 and 33 yards ( 10 to 30 metres ) , with limiting factors such as backyard size often dictating the length . ways of getting out one hand , one bounce – if the batsman has hit the ball into the ground , but it has only bounced once , they can still be given out caught , but only if the fielder catches the ball with one hand ; even if the hand hits the ground ( keeping in mind dust on back of palm ) the player is out . 1 ) pitch-catch is considered out if you catch the ball in one hand . when the fielding team member catches the ball after one bounce , but in one hand , the player who hit the ball is out ! '' one hand , one bounce , one beer – an alternate to the one hand , one bounce rule where the fielder must also be in possession of a beverage ( traditionally a beer ) in order to enact the rule and get the batsman out . however , spilling a significant proportion of the beverage may be deemed enough to nullify the catch . no lbw – as many backyard cricket games are without umpires , or self-umpired , or played with juniors , teams may agree to not use the relatively difficult lbw rule . another alternative is '' auto-lbw '' , by which the batsman is always deemed to be out in almost any possible lbw scenario ; it also has the effects of discouraging purely defensive batting , and typically increases the rotation of batsmen . three hits on the body can get the batter out in gully cricket , '' a batsman is out if he touches the ball with his body three times in total or two times in a row . '' wicket ( sport ) and bete-ombro . '' se o rebatedor do lado oposto do lançador encostar na bolinha com o pé ( ou outra parte do corpo ) conta '' uma na lancha '' . se os rebatedores marcarem '' 3 na lancha '' eles perdem os tacos . '' six and out – if you hit it over the fence you 're out and you have to get the ball . the 6 runs are awarded to the batsman to reflect the great shot that they have hit . this rule is especially popular in small backyards ( where the rule may be applied to any ball that lands over the fence – not just 6 's ) , and encourages the batsman to exercise control and restraint by aiming for 4 's instead of 6 's . six-and-out is also often extended to include nearby fragile objects such as windows and cars which are declared out-of-bounds ; if a ball hits an out-of-bounds object on the full it is deemed six-and-out , even if no damage is evident . auto wickie — ( also known as electric wickie/keeper ) if playing in front of a garage door or similar , the structure takes on the role of wicket keeper . any balls making contact with the auto wickie without bouncing , or '' on the full '' , is considered out . catches ( i.e . from snicks ) also apply . retire at x – all batsmen must retire ( end their turn ) once they reach a certain pre-declared number of runs ( such as 20 , 50 or 100 ) . this prevents anyone '' hogging the bat '' , and helps ensure everyone gets a chance to bat . lost ball – if a lost ball can not be found , and if there is no replacement ball , the match ends effective immediately . if losing the ball was the result of hitting a six-and-out the batsman is declared the loser . other scenarios may result in the match deemed a no contest , or the highest-scoring batsman declared the winner . running to score runs hit and run — ( also known as tip and run ) like in baseball , if the batsman 's bat makes contact with the ball they must run . no running between wickets – players may agree that batsmen do n't run between the wickets , a rule often applied on hot summer days . as a result , batsmen typically can not be run out , but can still be stumped if found out of their crease . in order to score they must hit 4 's ( or 6 's if allowed ) . rules for fielders : dogs – dogs are considered fielders , and they effectively switch side with each innings to constantly remain on the fielding side . if a dog catches the ball ( the one-bounce rule is also often allowed ) , or if the dog ( or any other pet ) is hit by the ball on-the-full , the batsman is declared out . it is the responsibility of the fielding team to chase dogs when required , but ultimately it is the responsibility of the bowler to clean the ball of any slobber . 'current ' rule : reminiscent to the baseball force out with a fielder standing on a base , to effect a runout , a fielder can put his foot on the wicket while holding the ball . in case of stones being used as stumps , the 'current ' rule will come into effect . i ) the 'current ' rule : in order to effect a run out , the bowler/fielder can put one foot on the stumps when the ball is thrown to him . if the batsman is outside his crease when the bowler/fielder collects the ball while standing on the stumps , he will be declared run out . '' extra player – if both teams have even number of player 's and there is one extra person , he is considered jack player . jack is part of both teams . common player , aka , kacha limbu and joker . this one plays for both sides . this card is pulled out when there are n't enough players around . '' jack is required field in both innings , but he is not allowed bowl . however , he is allowed to bat on both side of the team . he is allowed to bat at any order , but depending on two captain agreement he can be restricted to bat last , which is after all team player gets out . toss – the coin toss plays important role in international games , but toss also plays important role in backyard cricket . if one side of the captain shares dodger nature , he may say you get to pick your player first and i will bat first . if the game is not played individually , a person who owns bat and ball and claim to bat and ball first , because he is the boss for owning bat and ball . bats are usually tossed ( see bat flip cricket , calls are made for the hill/rooftop or flat side . any other objects can also be used like a snack wrapper . beach cricket . play on an actual beach can be achieved either by using the flat strip of hard-packed sand along the surf line as the pitch , or by only '' bowling '' gentle full tosses to avoid the problem of the ball not bouncing off loose sand . if there are no true stumps available a bin , deckchair , boogie board or cool box may be used . in beach cricket the creases and the boundary are normally drawn in the sand in a line which extends well past the side of the agreed pitch to prevent them becoming obliterated in the first over . the batsmen will frequently redraw the line . sometimes , play is shifted along the beach to a new pitch as the packed sand of the original pitch is turned up , thus reducing the standard of or even completely disabling bowling . the tide plays a big part in the standard of the pitch in beach cricket . during low tide , the pitch tends to be on the semi-wet sand , and is deemed superior than cricket played in high tide ( when the pitch is on dryer , looser sand ) . in particularly long matches , the play will shift up and down the beach depending on the tide . south american variants . in brazil , the game of bete-ombro , also known as taco or bets , is played with two teams of two players . it is generally played using plastic bottles as wickets , and the fielding team 's players alternate between wicket-keeping and bowling , based on which player has the ball . the batters must cross their bats together while running , and a batter can be stumped or run out if they do n't ground their bat within their '' crease '' ( which is a circle on the ground in front of the stumps ) . in the dominican republican , the game of '' la plaquita '' is similar . in suriname , '' bat-en-bal '' is likely derived from cricket . only one end of the pitch has a set of stumps . . see also . gilli-danda lawn game stickball tape ball cricket wiffleball french cricket . references . external links . cricket on board hms gibraltar circa 1900 . further reading . backyard cricket serious business for some with pitches popping up across melbourne each summer herald sun get active : backyard cricket herald sun chris lynn believes backyard cricket helped him earn call-up to australia 's t20 side the courier-mail roger caillois ' man , play and games ( university of illinois press , 2001 , . )