Ostrołęka

history . founding . the city 's name refers to a sand-mud plain located on the left side of the narew river which regularly flooded in the springtime throughout the centuries . a small fort was built on an island in the 11th or 12th century , currently located just one kilometer west of the modern city center . the fort was one of few sparsely built fortifications along the narew river at the time . a village developed surrounding the fort over time , and is associated today as the initial settlement of ostrołęka . despite the lack of an exact date for ostrołęka 's founding , it was first mentioned as a town in the province act of 1373 by duke siemowit iii of masovia , and therefore , the year 1373 has become the most commonly associated date of the acquisition of town rights . . the 15th and 16th centuries . by the beginning of the 15th century , ostrołęka grew into an important economic center in the duchy of masovia for trade with the neighboring teutonic order . wood , amber , and honey were the most commonly traded items . in 1526 , the duchy was incorporated into the polish kingdom . this resulted in an economic boom , most commonly associated to today as ostrołęka 's golden age . at this time , queen bona sforza founded a folwark in pomian – a neighboring settlement at the time , which currently finds itself situated well within the modern city 's borders . the golden age lasted for approximately 40 years , whose conclusion is marked by three major catastrophes which struck in 1564 and 1571 . in 1564 , an epidemic seriously depopulated the town and surrounding regions . the same year , a fire tore through the town burning most of it down to the ground . in 1571 , before the town had time to recuperate from the two previous catastrophes , another epidemic struck , further depopulating the region , officially marking the end of the town 's golden age . within 20 years , however , the town was rebuilt , including with the construction of ostrołęka 's first school . by the late 1590s , the town became the center of a big administrative district , approximately 1,980.5 & nbsp ; km 2 in size . it was a polish royal city , administratively located in the masovian voivodeship in the greater poland province of the polish crown . the 17th and 18th centuries . despite quickly recuperating in the early 17th century , the city passed through a period of impoverishment and stagnation in the middle and late 17th century . on 25 july 1656 , in the midsts of the deluge , the town was laid waste by swedish forces after having resisted them . in 1665 , bernardine monks settled in the town after a monastery was founded by tomasz gocłowski . the st . anthony 's church , ostrołęka was built in a late-baroque style . despite being inhabited by only 400 people in 1676 , the town was still considered to be the most populous of towns in the łomża region . in the following century , the town was destroyed numerous times by swedish , russian , and saxon armies . as a result , further economic development was hindered and the town remained in a state of stagnation for several decades . in the second half of the 18th century the city 's economy revived and local merchants renewed trade with the major cities of gdańsk , warsaw and königsberg . during the kościuszko uprising , the national cavalry was stationed in ostrołęka . with the aim of aiding the kościuszko uprising , the first brigade , led by antoni madaliński , started to march towards kraków on 12 march 1794 . prussian troops reacted quickly by heading as far south as the narew river , and reached the town 's northern outskirts on the right bank of the narew river , yet had never marched directly into , nor fully occupied , the town . the uprising had failed and as a consequence of the third partition of poland two years later , ostrołęka found itself within prussia 's borders for ten years . at the turn of the century , the first german and jewish families began to settle in the town and surrounding areas . the warsaw duchy . from the end of 1806 through june 1807 , ostrołęka was occupied by french troops . on 16 february 1807 occurred the battle of ostrołęka ( 1807 ) . taking place on the banks of the narew outside of ostrołęka where the french , under the general nicolas charles oudinot , prevailed . due to this success of the french army , ostrołęka appears on the arc de triomphe in paris . in may 1807 the first map of ostrołęka was made ( now located in bibliothéque du génie in paris ) . from 1807 to 1815 the city was part of the short-lived polish duchy of warsaw . . congress poland . as part of a comprehensive plan of industrializing poland , an extensive settlement for linen and cotton craftsmen was built on the right bank of narew in 1826 . the number of craftsmen increased and workers were trained in new crafts . the town also built two bridges , one permanent . the new route connecting warsaw and st . petersburg ran through ostrołęka . although the town 's citizens were eager and proud to take part in the november uprising , they worried that their city , as in every previous war , would be destroyed . however they did not expect that the heaviest fighting would take place on near ostrołęka . according to the plans , the polish army was supposed to attack russian infantry corps of the tsar 's guard , which made camp between augustów and ostrołęka . on may 18 , ostrołęka was claimed by general henryk dembiński . but general jan zygmunt skrzynecki did n't make a use of his temporary superiority and he could n't make up his mind if to attack the russians situated near łomża . as a result , łomża was destroyed . on 26 may 1831 , occurred the battle of ostrołęka ( 1831 ) . as a cannonade was heard , jan zygmunt skrzynecki could n't believe that hans karl von diebitsch ( a russian general ) had already reached the suburbs of the city . he ordered the fourth infantry regiment to defend the city . the main defending forces fortified themselves in the bernadine monastery . unfortunately the russians had brought cannons with them , quickly overpowering the polish and forcing their surrender . von diebitsch took over the city center , but the battle continued on the right side of the narew . skrzynecki and his troops valiantly defended the bridge wanting to hold back the russian forces from crossing over to the other side of the river . lieutenant-colonel józef bem and his fourth battery were called in to help defend the bridge . bem was able to hold back the russians , but the battle is often referred to as a polish defeat . the defeat began the end of the uprising . as a result of the battle , 6000 polish soldiers died including many kurpie . bem , for his bravery , was nominated as commander-in-chief of artillery and was honoured with a virtue militari cross . the battle was the greatest and the most bloodiest in the november uprising . 1831-1918 . after the polish-russian war , ostrołęka became one of the most destroyed cities . although it suffered great losses , ostrołęka stayed a district city of płock 's province . ostrołęka 's economy greatly declined . nearly all the city 's craftsmen became bankrupt . only products of ostrołęka 's amber works were still supplied all over europe . ostrołęka got refunds from the tsar 's treasury . however , it took a long time before it rose from its downfall . in 1847 a monument commemorating russian army 's victory in the battle of ostrołęka was raised on 26 may 1831 . at the time of january 's insurrection , no battles took place nearby ostrołęka , as the tsar placed a quite large russian detachment in the city worrying of another kurp uprising . in 1864 , after the russian government 's order , the benedictines left ostrołęka and the monastery buildings were placed under the parish-priest authority . until the first world war , the city managed to develop , but it was still a relatively unremarkable small town . the first world war destroyed its peaceful and monotonous character . confiscation and forced labor devastated the economy caused rising prices for essential products , and generally caused the city to decline . in 1915 , military operations in the territory of polish kingdom intensified . by july , the city was situated on the front line , and in august 1915 , germans crossed the river narew and entered the ruined city . at the time of the german occupation , life in ostrołęka was as hard as in the time of russian occupation . between the years of 1916 and 1918 , the germans greatly exploited the forests for timber . to make transporting the wood easier , they built of road from ostrołęka to myszyniec and a narrow-gauge railway line . interbellum . after the first world war and re-establishment of independent poland in 1918 , the city became a part of the białystok voivodeship . 75 % of the city and population was devastated . new schools and departments were opened as the city was rebuilt . during the polish-soviet war , ostrołęka once again became a center for military operations . on 4 august 1920 , soviet forces under the command of hayk bzhishkyan took the fort and '' butchered the newly assembled cavalry group '' of general bolesław roja . davies , n . , 1972 , white eagle , red star , london : macdonald & co , however , the soviet occupation was short lived as the soviet xv army retreated on the 20th , with polish forces thundering east towards the former polish-soviet border after the battle of warsaw ( 1920 ) . after the polish-soviet war , ostrołęka began to industrialize . a cinema was opened in 1923 , and a power plant in 1928 . during the summer of 1939 , both sides of the narew beachhead were fortified . second world war . during the invasion of poland , which started world war ii , on 10 september 1939 german forces reached ostrołęka . the germans immediately carried out searches of polish offices and organizations . under german occupation the town was annexed directly to germany and in 1940 it was renamed scharfenwiese to remove traces of polish origin . the germans expelled its jewish minority , wardzyńska ( 2009 ) , p . 123 which was later mostly murdered in the treblinka extermination camp . quickly , a polish resistance movement was established with a substantial presence of local kurpes . churches and schools were changed into workshops and factories controlled by the underground . underground partisans started attacking and destroying german fortifications in and around ostrołęka . the germans established and operated a court prison , in which they held poles arrested in the city and county during the intelligenzaktion . wardzyńska ( 2009 ) , p . 224 , 227 around 500 poles were then massacred in the nearby forest in january–march 1940 . wardzyńska ( 2009 ) , p . 227 on 5–6 april 1940 , the germans carried out further mass arrests of around 200 poles in ostrołęka and nearby villages . wardzyńska ( 2009 ) , p . 230 the germans also operated a forced labour camp in the city from 1940 to 1944 . in december 1940 , german police expelled around 1,150 poles from ostrołęka and wojciechowice ( present-day district of ostrołęka ) , who were transported in trucks to a camp in działdowo and then deported to the krakow and radom districts of to the general government , while their houses were handed over to german colonists as part of the lebensraum policy . a minority of citizens of ostrołęka declared themselves as volksdeutsche and signed the volksliste . jews that survived the holocaust emigrated to israel . several local jews were rescued by poles , who hid them from the germans in nearby villages . the german occupation ended in september 1944 , and the city was restored to poland , although with a soviet-installed communist regime , which then stayed in power until the fall of communism in the 1980s . people 's republic of poland . ostrołęka recovered very slowly from the war . a plan created by communist authorities , which allowed for an improvement of the economic situation in poland , gave ostrołęka a chance for redevelopment . ostrołęka became a central city of warsaw 's region . in 1959 , a cellulose and paper factory was built . next , a sewage refinery was built along the banks of the narew , which was supposed to keep water in the narew clean without destroying its biological life . in 1973 a cellular concrete factory was built in the district of wojciechowice . new jobs brought people to the city and caused a development of alimentary industry . during the 1970s a new factory , '' future '' , producing wooden articles was opened . a new swimming pool , a stadium for 5000 people , and a holiday resort were built . a new hospital was built . ostrołęka since 1989 . in 1989 the city entered a new era of capitalism , which has lasted until the present day . the same year ostrołęka was granted provincial rights . the paper factory cellulose downsized en masse after privatisation . the factory future went bankrupt but small service establishments were opened for average people to invest their money . a new hospital was built in the new century . the economy also developed . three new trade pavilions were built . '' cellulose '' changed its name to '' intercell '' , and the cellular concrete factory was bought by the ytong company . the centre of the city began to fulfill trade functions . in 1996 , a second permanent bridge , '' most im . antoniego madalińskiego '' , was built . in 1999 the city became a district city . a new aquapark was opened in september 2010 . a modernisation of the city stadium or even a completely new stadium is planned to be built in this decade , while two new modern training grounds for football are currently being built . a new power plant is currently being built and planned to open by 2015 , generating 1,000 mw of power . also , the existing power plant is planned to undergo modernisation in the next decade . education . wyższa szkoła administracji publicznej wyższa szkoła ekonomiczno-społeczna . sport . football . narew ostrołęka - soccer team established in 1962 . currently playing in liga okręgowa , ciechanów-ostrołęka group korona ostrołęka - soccer team established in 1998 , dissolved in 2020 ( main team ) . last played in the iv liga , mazovia northern group . volleyball . energa net ostrołęka - male volleyball team currently playing in the 2nd polish league otps nike ostrołęka - female volleyball team currently playing in the 3rd polish league . handball . trójka ostrołęka - male handball team currently playing in the 2nd league . basketball . otk ostrołęka - male basketball team okk ostrołęka - male basketball team muks unia basket ostrołęka - female basketball team . politics . ostrołęka-siedlce constituency . members of parliament ( sejm ) elected from ostrołęka-siedlce constituency chrzanowski zbigniew , po deptuła zbigniew , psl dziewulski zbigniew , samoobrona filipek krzysztof , samoobrona janowski gabriel , lpr kalinowski jarosław , psl krutczenko zbigniew , sld-up kurpiewski stanisław , sld-up józef oleksy , sld-up piłka marian , pis prządka stanisława , sld-up sawicki marek , psl . see also . kurpie . external links . your virtual city interactive map official ostrołęka homepage jewish community in ostrołęka on virtual shtetl . references .