J. Paul Getty

reputation for frugality . many anecdotal stories exist of getty 's reputed thriftiness and parsimony , which struck observers as comical , even perverse , because of his extreme wealth . the two most widely known examples are his reluctance to pay his grandson 's 17 & nbsp ; million kidnapping ransom , and a notorious pay-phone he had installed at sutton place . a darker incident was his fifth wife 's claim that getty had scolded her for spending too much on their terminally ill son 's medical treatment , though he was worth tens of millions of dollars at the time . he was well known for bargaining on almost everything to obtain the lowest possible price , including suites at luxury hotels and virtually all purchases of artwork and real estate . in 1959 , sutton place , a 72-room mansion , was purchased from george sutherland-leveson-gower , 5th duke of sutherland , for £60,000 , about half of what the duke paid for it 40 years earlier . getty 's secretary claimed that getty did his laundry by hand because he did n't want to pay for his clothes to be laundered . when his shirts became frayed at the cuffs , he would trim the frayed part instead of purchasing new shirts . re-using stationery was another obsession of getty 's . he had a habit of writing responses to letters on the margins or back sides and mailing them back , rather than using a new sheet of paper . he also carefully saved and re-used manila envelopes , rubber bands and other office supplies . when getty took a group of friends to a dog show in london , he made them walk around the block for 10 minutes until the tickets became half-priced at 5 & nbsp ; pm , because he did n't want to pay the full 5 shillings per head . getty moved to sutton place in part because the cost of living was cheaper than in london , where he had resided at the ritz . he once boasted to american columnist art buchwald that it cost 10 cents for a rum and coke at sutton place , whereas at the ritz it was more than a dollar . author john pearson attributed part of getty 's extreme penny-pinching to the methodist sensibility of getty 's upbringing , which emphasized modest living and personal economy . his business acumen was also a major factor in getty 's thriftiness . '' he would allow himself no self-indulgence in the purchase of a place to live , a work of art , even a piece of furniture , unless he could convince himself that it would appreciate in value . '' getty claimed his frugality towards others was a response to people taking advantage of him and not paying their fair share . '' it 's not the money i object to , it 's the principle of the thing that bothers me . '' . coin-box telephone . getty famously had a payphone installed at sutton place , helping to seal his reputation as a miser . getty placed dial-locks on all the regular telephones , limiting their use to authorized staff , and the coin-box telephone was installed for others . in his autobiography , he described his reasons : when speaking in a televised interview with alan whicker in february 1963 , getty said that he thought guests would want to use a payphone . talk at the bbc , bbc four , april 5 , 2012 after 18 months , getty explained , '' the in-and-out traffic flow at sutton subsided . management and operation of the house settled into a reasonable routine . with that , the pay-telephone was removed , and the dial-locks were taken off the telephones in the house . '' getty , 1976 , p . 320 . later years and death . on june 30 , 1960 , getty threw a 21st birthday party for a relative of his friend , the 16th duke of norfolk , which served as a housewarming party for the newly purchased sutton place . party goers were irritated by getty 's stinginess , such as not providing cigarettes and relegating everyone to using creosote portable toilets outside . at about 10 p.m . the party descended into pandemonium as party crashers arrived from london , swelling the already overcrowded halls and causing an estimated £20,000 in damage . a valuable silver ewer by the 18th century silversmith paul de lamerie was stolen , but returned anonymously when the london newspapers began covering the theft . the failure of the event made getty the object of ridicule and he never threw another large party again . getty remained an inveterate hard worker , boasting at age 74 that he often worked 16 to 18 hours per day overseeing his operations across the world . the value of getty oil shares quadrupled during the arab-israeli yom kippur war of october 1973 which caused a worldwide oil shortage for years . getty 's earnings topped 25.8 & nbsp ; million in 1975 . getty 's insatiable appetite for sex also continued into his 80s . he used an experimental drug , h3 , to maintain his potency . getty met the english interior designer penelope kitson in the 1950s and entrusted her with decorating his homes and the public rooms of the oil tankers he was launching . from 1960 , kitson resided in a cottage on the grounds of sutton place . getty and kitson maintained a platonic relationship and getty held her in high respect and trust . other mistresses who resided at sutton place included the married mary teissier , a distant cousin of the last tsar of russia , lady ursula d'abo , who had close connections to the british royal family , and nicaraguan-born rosabella burch . the new york times wrote of getty 's domestic arrangement : '' getty ended his life with a collection of desperately hopeful women , all living together in his tudor mansion in england , none of them aware that his favorite pastime was rewriting his will , changing his insultingly small bequests : 209 a month to one , 1,167 to another . '' only kitson received a significant bequest upon getty 's death , receiving 5,000 shares of getty oil , which doubled in value during the 1980s , and a 1,167 monthly income . getty died of heart failure at the age of 83 on june 6 , 1976 , in sutton place near guildford , surrey . he was buried in pacific palisades , los angeles county , california at the getty villa . the gravesite is not open to the public . . media portrayals . the 2017 film all the money in the world , directed by ridley scott and adapted from the book painfully rich : the outrageous fortunes and misfortunes of the heirs of j . paul getty by john pearson , is a dramatization of the abduction of getty 's grandson . the kidnapping is also dramatized in the first season of the american anthology drama series trust , in which getty is portrayed by donald sutherland . . published works . getty , j . paul . the history of the bigger oil business of george f.s . f . and j . paul getty from 1903 to 1939 . los angeles ? , 1941 , getty , j . paul . europe in the eighteenth century . santa monica , calif . : privately printed , 1949 , le vane , ethel , and j . paul getty . collector 's choice : the chronicle of an artistic odyssey through europe . london : w.h . allen , 1955 , getty , j . paul . my life and fortunes . new york : duell , sloan & pearce , 1963 , getty , j . paul . the joys of collecting . new york : hawthorn books , 1965 , getty , j . paul . how to be rich . chicago : playboy press , 1965 , getty , j . paul . the golden age . new york : trident press , 1968 , getty , j . paul . how to be a successful executive . chicago : playboy press , 1971 , getty , j . paul . as i see it : the autobiography of j . paul getty . englewood cliffs , n.j . : prentice-hall , 1976 . , . see also . list of richest americans in history list of wealthiest historical figures . references . further reading . hewins , ralph . the richest american : j . paul getty . new york : dutton , 1960 . lund , robina . the getty i knew . kansas city : sheed andrews and mcmeel , 1977 . miller , russell . the house of getty . new york : henry holt , 1985 . somerset de chair . getty on getty : a man in a billion . london : cassell , 1989 . pearson , john . painfully rich : j . paul getty and his heirs . london : macmillan , 1995 . wooster , martin morse . philanthropy hall of fame , j . paul getty . philanthropyroundtable.org . external links . j . paul getty diaries , 1938–1946 , 1948–1976 finding aid , getty research institute , los angeles . j . paul getty family collected papers , 1880s–1989 , undated ( bulk 1911–1977 ) finding aid , getty research institute , los angeles . hdl:10020/cifaia20013 , finding aid , getty research institute , los angeles .