Vitalism

mesmerism . a popular vitalist theory of the 18th century was '' animal magnetism '' , in the theories of franz mesmer ( 1734–1815 ) . however , the use of the ( conventional ) english term animal magnetism to translate mesmer 's magnétisme animal can be misleading for three reasons : mesmer chose his term to clearly distinguish his variant of magnetic force from those referred to , at that time , as mineral magnetism , cosmic magnetism and planetary magnetism . mesmer felt that this particular force/power only resided in the bodies of humans and animals . mesmer chose the word '' animal , '' for its root meaning ( from latin animus '' breath '' ) specifically to identify his force as a quality that belonged to all creatures with breath ; viz . , the animate beings : humans and animals . mesmer 's ideas became so influential that king louis xvi of france appointed two commissions to investigate mesmerism ; one was led by joseph-ignace guillotin , the other , led by benjamin franklin , included bailly and lavoisier . the commissioners learned about mesmeric theory , and saw its patients fall into fits and trances . in franklin 's garden , a patient was led to each of five trees , one of which had been '' mesmerized '' ; he hugged each in turn to receive the '' vital fluid , '' but fainted at the foot of a 'wrong ' one . at lavoisier 's house , four normal cups of water were held before a '' sensitive '' woman ; the fourth produced convulsions , but she calmly swallowed the mesmerized contents of a fifth , believing it to be plain water . the commissioners concluded that '' the fluid without imagination is powerless , whereas imagination without the fluid can produce the effects of the fluid . '' . medical philosophies . vitalism has a long history in medical philosophies : many traditional healing practices posited that disease results from some imbalance in vital forces . in the western tradition founded by hippocrates , these vital forces were associated with the four temperaments and humours ; eastern traditions posited an imbalance or blocking of qi or prana . one example of a similar notion in africa is the yoruba concept of ase . today forms of vitalism continue to exist as philosophical positions or as tenets in some religious traditions . complementary and alternative medicine therapies include energy therapy , associated with vitalism , especially biofield therapies such as therapeutic touch , reiki , external qi , chakra healing and shen therapy . rubik , bioenergetic medicines , american medical student association foundation , viewed 28 november 2006 , in these therapies , the '' subtle energy '' field of a patient is manipulated by a practitioner . the subtle energy is held to exist beyond the electromagnetic energy produced by the heart and brain . beverly rubik describes the biofield as a '' complex , dynamic , extremely weak em field within and around the human body . '' the founder of homeopathy , samuel hahnemann , promoted an immaterial , vitalistic view of disease : '' . they are solely spirit-like ( dynamic ) derangements of the spirit-like power ( the vital principle ) that animates the human body . '' the view of disease as a dynamic disturbance of the immaterial and dynamic vital force is taught in many homeopathic colleges and constitutes a fundamental principle for many contemporary practising homeopaths . criticism . vitalism has sometimes been criticized as begging the question by inventing a name . molière had famously parodied this fallacy in le malade imaginaire , where a quack '' answers '' the question of '' why does opium cause sleep ? '' with '' because of its dormitive virtue ( i.e . , soporific power ) . '' mihi a docto doctore / demandatur causam et rationem quare / opium facit dormire . / a quoi respondeo , / quia est in eo / vertus dormitiva , / cujus est natura / sensus assoupire . le malade imaginaire , ( french wikisource ) thomas henry huxley compared vitalism to stating that water is the way it is because of its '' aquosity '' . the physical basis of life , pall mall gazette , 1869 his grandson julian huxley in 1926 compared '' vital force '' or élan vital to explaining a railroad locomotive 's operation by its élan locomotif ( '' locomotive force '' ) . another criticism is that vitalists have failed to rule out mechanistic explanations . this is rather obvious in retrospect for organic chemistry and developmental biology , but the criticism goes back at least a century . in 1912 , jacques loeb published the mechanistic conception of life , in which he described experiments on how a sea urchin could have a pin for its father , as bertrand russell put it ( religion and science ) . he offered this challenge : : '' . we must either succeed in producing living matter artificially , or we must find the reasons why this is impossible . '' ( pp . & nbsp ; 5–6 ) loeb addressed vitalism more explicitly : : '' it is , therefore , unwarranted to continue the statement that in addition to the acceleration of oxidations the beginning of individual life is determined by the entrance of a metaphysical '' life principle '' into the egg ; and that death is determined , aside from the cessation of oxidations , by the departure of this '' principle '' from the body . in the case of the evaporation of water we are satisfied with the explanation given by the kinetic theory of gases and do not demand that to repeat a well-known jest of huxley the disappearance of the '' aquosity '' be also taken into consideration . '' ( pp . & nbsp ; 14–15 ) bechtel states that vitalism '' is often viewed as unfalsifiable , and therefore a pernicious metaphysical doctrine . '' for many scientists , '' vitalist '' theories were unsatisfactory '' holding positions '' on the pathway to mechanistic understanding . in 1967 , francis crick , the co-discoverer of the structure of dna , stated '' and so to those of you who may be vitalists i would make this prophecy : what everyone believed yesterday , and you believe today , only cranks will believe tomorrow . '' crick , francis ( 1967 ) of molecules and men ; great minds series prometheus books 2004 , reviewed here . crick 's remark is cited and discussed in : hein h ( 2004 ) molecular biology vs . organicism : the enduring dispute between mechanism and vitalism . synthese 20:238–253 , who describes crick 's remark as '' raising spectral red herrings '' . while many vitalistic theories have in fact been falsified , notably mesmerism , the pseudoscience retention of untested and untestable theories continues to this day . alan sokal published an analysis of the wide acceptance among professional nurses of '' scientific theories '' of spiritual healing . ( pseudoscience and postmodernism : antagonists or fellow-travelers ? ) . pseudoscience and postmodernism : antagonists or fellow-travelers ? use of a technique called therapeutic touch was especially reviewed by sokal , who concluded , '' nearly all the pseudoscientific systems to be examined in this essay are based philosophically on vitalism '' and added that '' mainstream science has rejected vitalism since at least the 1930s , for a plethora of good reasons that have only become stronger with time . '' joseph c . keating , jr . joseph c . keating , jr . , phd : biographical sketch discusses vitalism 's past and present roles in chiropractic and calls vitalism '' a form of bio-theology . '' he further explains that : : '' vitalism is that rejected tradition in biology which proposes that life is sustained and explained by an unmeasurable , intelligent force or energy . the supposed effects of vitalism are the manifestations of life itself , which in turn are the basis for inferring the concept in the first place . this circular reasoning offers pseudo-explanation , and may deceive us into believing we have explained some aspect of biology when in fact we have only labeled our ignorance . 'explaining an unknown ( life ) with an unknowable ( innate ) , ' suggests chiropractor joseph donahue , 'is absurd ' . '' keating views vitalism as incompatible with scientific thinking : : '' chiropractors are not unique in recognizing a tendency and capacity for self-repair and auto-regulation of human physiology . but we surely stick out like a sore thumb among professions which claim to be scientifically based by our unrelenting commitment to vitalism . so long as we propound the 'one cause , one cure ' rhetoric of innate , we should expect to be met by ridicule from the wider health science community . chiropractors ca n't have it both ways . our theories can not be both dogmatically held vitalistic constructs and be scientific at the same time . the purposiveness , consciousness and rigidity of the palmers ' innate should be rejected . '' keating also mentions skinner 's viewpoint : : '' vitalism has many faces and has sprung up in many areas of scientific inquiry . psychologist b.f . skinner , for example , pointed out the irrationality of attributing behavior to mental states and traits . such 'mental way stations , ' he argued , amount to excess theoretical baggage which fails to advance cause-and-effect explanations by substituting an unfathomable psychology of 'mind ' . '' according to williams , '' today , vitalism is one of the ideas that form the basis for many pseudoscientific health systems that claim that illnesses are caused by a disturbance or imbalance of the body 's vital force . '' '' vitalists claim to be scientific , but in fact they reject the scientific method with its basic postulates of cause and effect and of provability . they often regard subjective experience to be more valid than objective material reality . '' victor stenger victor j . stenger 's site states that the term '' bioenergetics '' '' is applied in biochemistry to refer to the readily measurable exchanges of energy within organisms , and between organisms and the environment , which occur by normal physical and chemical processes . this is not , however , what the new vitalists have in mind . they imagine the bioenergetic field as a holistic living force that goes beyond reductionist physics and chemistry . '' such a field is sometimes explained as electromagnetic , though some advocates also make confused appeals to quantum physics . joanne stefanatos states that '' the principles of energy medicine originate in quantum physics . '' stefanatos , j . 1997 , introduction to bioenergetic medicine , shoen , a.m . and s.g . wynn , complementary and alternative veterinary medicine : principles and practices , mosby-yearbook , chicago . stenger offers several explanations as to why this line of reasoning may be misplaced . he explains that energy exists in discrete packets called quanta . energy fields are composed of their component parts and so only exist when quanta are present . therefore , energy fields are not holistic , but are rather a system of discrete parts that must obey the laws of physics . this also means that energy fields are not instantaneous . these facts of quantum physics place limitations on the infinite , continuous field that is used by some theorists to describe so-called '' human energy fields '' . biley , francis c . 2005 , unitary health care : martha rogers ' science of unitary human beings , university of wales college of medicine , viewed 30 november 2006 , stenger continues , explaining that the effects of em forces have been measured by physicists as accurately as one part in a billion and there is yet to be any evidence that living organisms emit a unique field . vitalistic thinking has also been identified in the naive biological theories of children : '' recent experimental results show that a majority of preschoolers tend to choose vitalistic explanations as most plausible . vitalism , together with other forms of intermediate causality , constitute unique causal devices for naive biology as a core domain of thought . ''