University of North London

structure . under the board of governors , the university was arranged into four faculties each led by a dean and pro vice-chancellor : — ; faculty of environmental and social studies : school of law , governance and information management ( formerly schools of law and of information and communications studies ) school of social sciences ( formerly policy studies , politics and social research ) school of community health , psychology and social work ( formerly schools of health and of social work ) school of geography and environmental studies ( until 1997 ) school of architecture and interior design ; faculty of humanities and teacher education : school of arts and humanities ( formerly historical , philosophical and contemporary studies ) school of area and language studies ( formerly european and language studies ) school of education ; faculty of science , computing and engineering : school of biological and applied sciences ( formerly applied chemistry ) school of communications technology and mathematical sciences ( formerly schools of electronic and communications engineering and applied physics and of mathematical studies ) school of informatics and multimedia technology ( formerly computing ) school of health and sport science ( formerly life sciences ) school of polymer technology ( founded as the national college of rubber technology in 1948 ) ; the business school faculties organised undergraduate and postgraduate schemes within a university modular framework . an interdisciplinary undergraduate scheme for inter-faculty combined honours degrees was managed centrally by the academic registry . learning centre . in 1994 , the learning centre library opened on the site of a former mirror factory . in 1996 , the trades union congress library collections , which had been established in 1922 , were transferred there . it is the major research library for the study of all aspects of trade unions , collective bargaining and labour history , with both historical and contemporary coverage . trades union congress library collections london metropolitan university ( retrieved 1 march 2010 ) . the rocket . the great hall was officially opened by the lord mayor of london in 1897 , as a social and academic events space catering for dances and recitals . by 1929 , a proscenium arch and stage were installed and it was renamed the theatre , playing host to operas and theatrical productions . throughout the 1980s , it was a solid fixture on the capitals gig circuit and an essential stop for touring bands . when electronic dance music and the club scene took hold at the turn of the decade , it was relaunched as the rocket complex and became one of london 's leading all-nighter venues . the 1990s also saw the building divided vertically , creating its two separate floors . in 2015 , the great hall had its name and grandeur restored , with the rocket now referring exclusively to the ground floor bar and adjacent courtyard garden . vice-chancellors . the vice-chancellor and chief executive was supported by the deputy vice-chancellor ( academic ) and the deputy vice-chancellor ( research and development ) . in 2000 , the university awarded an honorary degree to the most reverend desmond tutu , archbishop of cape town and primate of the anglican church of southern africa , in a special ceremony . following the merger with london guildhall ( formerly the city of london polytechnic ) , london metropolitan became the largest unitary university in london . history . northern polytechnic institute . the northern polytechnic opened in holloway with aid from the city parochial foundation and substantial donations from the worshipful company of clothworkers in 1896 . under the terms of its royal charter , its objective was '' to promote the industrial skill , general knowledge , health and well-being of young men and women belonging to the poorer classes of islington and to provide for the inhabitants of islington and the neighbouring parts of north london , and especially for the industrial classes , the means of acquiring a sound general , scientific , technical and commercial education at small cost . '' roderick floud and glynn , sean ( eds . ) london higher : the establishment of higher education in london ( pp . 204 and 212 ) london : the athlone press , 1998 the founding principal of the institute was the chemist dr jt dunn . he appointed va mundella as its first professor of physics and head of the department of physics and electrical engineering . by 1911 , five-year university of london evening degrees were available . the modernist cecil stephenson was appointed head of art in 1923 and , from 1925 , courses were recognised by the royal institute of british architects . npi alumni . walter hassan , british automotive engineer and engine specialist for bentley , jaguar cars , and coventry climax . north western polytechnic . the north western polytechnic was eventually opened by the prince of wales ( later king edward viii ) at prince of wales road , kentish town in 1929 . the polytechnic later acquired premises at st . pancras , highbury ( ladbroke house ) and nos . 207–225 essex road . concentrating on social sciences , humanities and arts , by 1967 , when the printing department transferred to the london college of printing ( a founding member of the london institute ) , history of london college of communication university of the arts , london ( retrieved 21 february 2010 ) the north-western was the largest polytechnic in london . nwp alumni . aminu bashir wali , nigerian minister of foreign affairs ( 2014–2015 ) alison weir , author and historian . polytechnic of north london . the polytechnic of north london was founded by the 1971 merger of the northern and north-western polytechnics . its first director was terence miller , former principal of the university of rhodesia . shotgun marriage : a profile of the north london polytechnic education + training vol . 13 , no . 5 ( pp . 150–152 ) may 1971 until the passing of the education reform act 1988 , it came under the control of the inner london education authority , part of the then greater london council . degree awarding authority resided with the former council for national academic awards until the polytechnic , a pioneer of widening participation and access to higher education , was granted university status under the further and higher education act 1992 . after leaving oxford in 1964 , the renowned historian a . j . p . taylor lectured at the polytechnic until his death in 1990 . hughes-warrington , marnie fifty key thinkers on history ( p . 305 ) london : routledge , 2000 . the harrington affair . in 1984 , patrick harrington , a prominent member of the national front and deputy editor of nf news , was the subject of protests by fellow students who picketed and boycotted his lectures , arguing that his presence made life intolerable for ethnic minority students . kirkwood , richard '' changing audiences , changing contexts – reflections on 37 years with students looking at ‘ race ’ issues '' in farrar , max and todd , malcolm ( eds . ) teaching 'race ' in social sciences – new contexts , new approaches ( cap . 1 ) the higher education academy subject network for sociology , anthropology and politics , 2006 disputing this , harrington obtained an injunction which the protesters , backed by the students ' union , ignored . searchlight magazine , june 1984 at one stage the president of the national union of students , phil woolas , reported that the polytechnic was '' simply not functioning any more , '' with lecturers defying the courts by refusing to give names of students on demonstrations . beckett , francis bnp student faces boycott the guardian , 21 may 2002 two student leaders were sent to prison for 16 days for contempt of the court order preventing them from barring harrington and the secretary of state for education , sir keith joseph , threatened to close the polytechnic down . the times , 29 november 1984 in december , david macdowall , then director , resigned after pressure from the inner london education authority to make a complaint against harrington for remarks he made in a radio interview . ilea said the remarks were racist , which harrington denied . the times , 8 december 1984 in his resignation letter , dr . macdowall admitted that he had acted '' in a totally fascistic manner '' over the issue and wished '' all the picketing students the best of luck with their campaign . '' copsey , nigel anti-fascism in britain ( p . 156 ) london : macmillan , 2000 harrington subsequently faced a disciplinary hearing for a television interview in which , in line with nf policy , he questioned the right of black people to citizenship . the times , 15 and 19 december 1984 in january 1985 , with a new director , john beishon , in post and final examinations approaching , the polytechnic , students ' union and harrington agreed a deal in which his classes would be taught separately in another building . the times , 8 and 12 january 1985 he eventually graduated with a degree in philosophy . milman , david educational conflict and the law ( pp . 114–116 ) beckenham : croom helm , 1986 dr . beishon remained at pnl for three years . price , christopher john beishon : managing change in a turbulent student world the guardian , 1 may 2001 . pnl alumni . jeremy corbyn , former leader of the labour party ( did not graduate ) sadiq khan , mayor of london ( b.a . law ) matthew sweeney , poet ( b.a . honours , 1978 ) . in fiction . the 1997 mike leigh film career girls is about a reunion between two women who shared a flat six years earlier whilst studying at the polytechnic of north london . . see also . new universities . references . further reading . . external links . internet archive ( university of north london , 17 january 2004 )