Memín Pinguín

characters . the stories were partially based on recollection of the childhood adventures of yolanda vargas dulché in the colonia guerrero near downtown mexico city . the character of memín pinguín was inspired by cuban children seen by the author yolanda vargas dulché on her travels . memín is an alteration of memo , the shortened form of guillermo , her husband 's name ; pinguín comes from pingo ( roughly meaning mischievous , in an affectionate tone ) . memín is a restless boy who is not a very good student , not because of a lack of intelligence , but for not being able to pay attention ( he is surprisingly good at arithmetic ) . he helps his mother working in the street , selling newspapers , and as a shoe shine boy . memín reflects the life of a poor mexican boy in mexico city . memín and his mother are the only afro-mexican characters . memín is accompanied in his adventures by a group of three loyal friends : ; carlos '' carlangas '' arozamena : a shrewd curly-haired boy who was abandoned by his rich father and was raised by his working class mother . he likes to solve things with his fists , and rarely shows fear . he 's a tough boy with a heart of gold . he is not as intelligent as ernestillo but he manages to get the best scores in a private school test when he moved to live with his father . he thinks his mother has an honest job until he realizes she worked as a '' fichera '' ( dancer in night clubs ) and got involved in a fight that leaves his mother bullet injured and carlangas in jail due to almost killing her aggressor . his mother lately reencounter with carlos arozamena sr . , and while they fail to reconcile they decide to bring carlangas a better future sending him to live with his father , but carlos got homesick and came back to his mother 's side . finally his parents got married again , but not after carlos sr . got bankrupt and really learn to appreciate true love than things . ; ernesto '' ernestillo '' vargas : the intelligent and hard working one . his mother died when he was young and has since been raised by his father , an alcoholic carpenter . ernestillo is so poor he has no shoes . later , with the help of ricardo and his friends , he has better clothes and helps his father to overcome his alcoholism and an accident that almost left him without a leg . he acts as the voice of reason of the group but sometimes he is not patient enough to send a '' coscorrón '' ( noogie ) to memín . he is memín 's best friend and was involved in one of memín 's dreams when both go to china . ; ricardo '' riquillo '' arcaraz : a blond rich boy who has traveled around the world . his father decided it would be better for him to attend a public school ; a self-made man , he thinks his son was being pampered too much at private schools . at first he had significant troubles fitting in , until some incidents after school led to create a bond with memín and his friends , to the point of standing up to his mother to defend them . he learns the value of work from memín , as well as the realities and hardships of life . for a while , he even works as a shoeshine boy with memín . when his parents tried to get a divorce , he ran away to guadalajara to live with his godmother , but memín , who accompanied him , left a note to eufrosina , leading ricardo 's parents to them . other prominent characters as listed : ; eufrosina : she is the hot-tempered but charming mother of memín that makes a living by taking in washing the clothes of her neighbors . she also likes to cook , specially the '' tortas de miel '' ( bread with honey ) that memín loves to eat . however , when she got angry to memín punishes him by hitting his butt with a table with a nail attached . her main stories were concerned to adopt a pretty girl that was abandoned in a park while memín was playing even the poverty of the family ; later she tries to get a job in new york city but not without having memín lost and then confronting memín homesick attitude after an unfortunate job in a mansion . a more memorable story puts her sick and with the need of a kidney transplant after suffering because of memín cheating his notes in school . ; trifon : an obese boy that comes from the north of mexico . in his first appearance is picked on by memín because of his obesity to the point to have memín jumping over his stomach . later , he got severely ill while memín decided to not take communion ; however memín is not able to make trifon realize he is acting bad even after slapping him in the face . later , memín got really repentant when he learns about trifon 's illness and got scared when he did not find him after his communion , just to know that he is cured . lately is a prominent character in the memín 's adventure in monterrey and texas , because he helps memín and his friends to get some hospitality from his aunt canuta . in a later adventure , he dies bringing an uproar among fans and pushing the creator to avoid killing another characters . ; professor romero : the teacher of memín 's class , he is a very comprehensive teacher while also very strict , going to the extreme to punish memín sometimes due to his laziness . however , he manages to help his students to help ernestillo and his father to overcome the alcoholic problems of ernestillo 's father . some stories later , memín was punished to study with the lower grade kids and while doing this makes a mischief that pushes the teacher really angry so she went to professor romero 's classroom to complain about it ; however romero stands for memín and , in the process , the teachers fell in love and they are married later . during their honeymoon they find memín 's gang lost after they follow a fake treasure map and manages to bring them back to their parents . later adventures were involved around memín 's incapability to study . although memín is a comedy comic , it resembles soap operas in that the comic 's story is a continuous one . every week , the newest publication of memín begins where the last publication had left off . in addition , because of the elements involved in the comic magazine 's story , such as poverty , parental abandonment , death and alcoholism , often there are dramatic moments in the magazine as well . based on the popularity of memín , yolanda and her husband don guillermo de la parra were able to found editorial vid , a comics publishing company that eventually published hundreds of titles of mexican comics , some of them written by yolanda and her husband . some of these titles also had stories related to black people , such as '' rarotonga '' , '' majestad negra '' , and '' carne de ébano '' , but only memín was set in mexico . racial issues . while memín suffers a degree of racism taunting , especially in the first issues , the characters mocking him are depicted as either cruel or ignorant . as the story progresses , his race becomes less of an issue . in an earlier story , memín and his friends go to ricardo 's house after the then spoiled kid decides to make them to take a bath because of a mud fight they were involved . while bathing memín forgets a soap bar and walked outside the bathroom without caring to dress , just to walk in front of ricardo 's mother that , scared , began to scream that a chimp was in her house , memín , not catching the offense , really thinks that there is a chimp in the house and both began running scared , the woman from memín , himself from the supposed chimp . in one famous issue , memín , having read that cleopatra vii of egypt took milk baths to lighten her skin , tries the same treatment . his mother weeps with sorrow that her son would want to change his skin color . a repentant memín decides to be proud of his race and color to honor his good mother . in another , memín decides not eucharist , after a cruel boy tells him blacks are not allowed in heaven , pointing to the lack of black angels in religious paintings as proof ( this was inspired by a popular song '' angelitos negros '' that asked the same question and a popular mexican motion picture of 1948 of the same name ) . memín reasons that , since he is going to hell anyway , he can get away with any mischief he wants . this prompted some roman catholic priests to boycott the magazine . after sales plummeted in response to the boycott , an issue was published in which memín 's friends , with the aid of the church priest , paint one of the angels in the church black ; memín returns to church and dreams of becoming an angel . in yet another adventure called '' líos gordos '' memín and his friends travel to texas to play soccer . they go for a chocolate milkshake , but the place refuses service to memín , because it does n't serve '' negroes '' . his friends stand up for him , get into a fight , and end up in jail . lios gordos 2 on flickr - photo sharing ! in a later adventure , memín and eufrosina decide to work in new york city but memín gets lost in the process and begins working for a mexican family where a blind girl begins to bring affection to her new employee . she thinks that he is blond and white because of his cheerful attitude ( inspired by marianela from benito perez galdos ) . later , memín meets her cousin , a spoiled kid who he begins to have some fights . finally , the girl is cured of her condition , but memín , scared to be seen by the girl , decides to retire from the house while the girl misses her cousin with memín . some days later , she frees memín and his mother from jail and reveals that she learned about the truth and explains all the masquerade to eufrosina 's dismay . finally , memín and his friends went along a millionaire to africa , where the most racial details were put in hot place , first memín got a motherly friendship with a female gorilla , that later tends to be very useful for the kids to save the millionaire to be killed by his ambitious son . later , they got trapped by cannibals that thought that memín is a gift from the gods because of his bald condition and they named him king , just to be captured by slave traders ( that freed memín 's friends in the process ) and , while memín was suffering in the ship , his friends finally freed him not without having a very angry memín punching everyone ( including his friends ) due to their bad attitude over black people . memín in popular culture . as a result of the character 's fame , memín has appeared in other magazines . in 1965 , he gave a lengthy interview for the magazine contenido , where he appeared in a tuxedo . in addition , he was considered one of the most famous members of the mexican scout association , and included in the cover of their magazine in june 1995 to coincide with the publication of the '' history of mexican comics '' stamps by the mexican postal service . controversy . memín was criticized on its first runs ( 1960–1970 ) , but the critics were more concerned with his popularity , since intellectuals of that time had a very low opinion of comics in general . the average age of the comic reader in mexico was higher than in the united states , about 18 instead of 13 , not just for children : the mexican comic book in the late 1960s and 1970s by harold e . hinds , jr . and charles m . tatum so some argue the content of comics had a very strong influence on mexican society . memín was read mostly by poor and middle-class mexicans . some of the critics touch upon the racial aspects , but this topic was mostly ignored . critics were more concerned with the stereotypical treatment of certain social themes and the values the stories typically reflect , which more or less echo the ideals of a catholic middle class . yolanda was very sensitive to critics , since they reflect heavily on sales . as harold hinds comments in his book not just for children , the study of these comics is important to understand mexican society . in june 2005 , as part of a '' history of mexican comics '' series , the mexican postal service ( sepomex ) issued a series of postage stamps featuring the character of memín . the stamps were deemed offensive by a number of african american community groups and politicians in the united states , including jesse jackson , prompting the mexican government to assert that memín had done a lot to oppose racism and that the stereotypical warner brothers ' character speedy gonzales was never interpreted as offensive in mexico . tacha casa blanca de racista estampilla de memín '' , el universal , june 30 , 2005 lulac and nclr , hispanic americans civil rights organizations , also issued statements calling the stamps racist . the charges of racism stem from the manner in which pinguín and his mother are rendered , in the style of '' darky iconography '' ( a form which , in the united states , has its roots in blackface and the american minstrel show tradition . ) early mexican comic artists adopted this mode of depicting people of african descent which had become commonplace around the world . memín and his mother are depicted stereotypically as the '' pickaninny '' and the '' mammy '' , respectively . the dress and attitudes of memín 's mother are a caricature of afro-cuban women of the time interview with sixto valencia ( in spanish ) , '' interview with sixto valencia ( in spanish ) '' ] , lanuez.blogspot.com , july 12 , 2008 and mirror afrodiasporic clothing in various latin american countries . memin : racist cartoon ? mexican minister of foreign affairs luis ernesto derbez declared to the press that '' it is a total lack of knowledge of our culture ; it looks to me that it is a total lack of respect to our culture that some people are making an issue out of this which does not resemble the reality . '' according to mexican author enrique krauze , the difference of reactions to memín pinguín in the united states and mexico stem from each nations history . krauze claimed that due to american history being more fraught with racism than mexico , including racist legislation such as the jim crow laws , americans will perceive things in a far more racialized manner than mexicans . he elaborated on this point by saying that although mexico had racial issues of its own , acts such as the earlier abolition of slavery in mexico caused mexicans to view the comics from a less racialized perspective than the american populace . enrique krauze , '' the pride in memin pinguin '' , washington post , july 12 , 2005 the criticism from united states officials was not only ridiculed by public opinion leaders in mexico and by most of the mexican population , but it also spurred interest in the stamps : from the day they were criticized , they were offered in internet auction sites for several times their face value , and mexican collecting bought the full edition of 750,000 copies in a few days . sales of the magazine increased , and the publisher decided to relaunch the series from the first issue alongside the current printing . mexican intellectuals both from right and left have denounced this criticism as an attack on mexico , and political magazines like proceso have questioned the chain of events that led to the criticism , making this criticism , a political issue against méxico . in 2008 , after complaints from an african-american shopper regarding what one news organization reported to be memín 's simian-like appearance and his '' aunt jemima-like mother , '' all memín periodicals were pulled from wal-mart stores in texas . ed lavandera , '' mexican comic-book character called racist '' , cnn , july 9 , 2008 this came after the latest issue titled '' memín para presidente '' ( '' memín for president '' ) was being sold at locations with a large hispanic population . in 2011 , in one of the mexican reprints of the comic , there is a picture involving memín pinguín walking alongside michelle obama . memín says '' and this job is one that african-americans really want to do '' poking fun on the 2005 comment of president fox , but probably also telling the irony over the fact that an african-american is currently the president of the united states ( and that the latest issue of memín pinguín in usa was called memín for president ) . see also . afro-mexican blackface comics in mexico rarotonga maría isabel rubí yesenia gabriel y gabriela alondra el pecado de oyuki . references . external links . the pride in memín pinguín by enrique krauze , the washington post . publisher background information