Dispensationalism

theology . progressive revelation . progressive revelation is the doctrine in christianity that each successive book of the bible provides further revelation of god and his program . for instance , the theologian charles hodge wrote : . history . the concept of the arranging of divisions of biblical history dates back to irenaeus during the second century . other christian writers since then have offered their own arrangements of history , such as augustine of hippo and joachim of fiore ( 1135–1202 ) . many protestant and calvinist writers also developed theological schemes and divisions of history , in particular after the westminster confession of faith noted '' various dispensations '' . , chapter 6 dispensationalism developed as a system from the teachings of john nelson darby , considered by some to be the father of dispensationalism ( 1800–82 ) , who strongly influenced the plymouth brethren of the 1830s in ireland and england . the original concept came when darby considered the implications of isaiah 32 for israel . he saw that prophecy required a future fulfillment and realization of israel 's kingdom . the new testament church was seen as a separate program not related to that kingdom . thus arose a prophetic earthly kingdom program for israel and a separate '' mystery '' heavenly program for the church . in order to not conflate the two programs , the prophetic program had to be put on hold to allow for the church to come into existence . then it is necessary for the church to be raptured away before prophecy can resume its earthly program for israel . update on dispensationalism by charles c . ryrie in issues in dispensationalism edited by wesley r . willis and john r . master , page 17 in darby 's conception of dispensations , the mosaic dispensation continues as a divine administration over earth up until the return of christ . the church , being a heavenly designated assembly , does not have its own dispensation as per scofield . darby conceives of dispensations relating exclusively to the divine government of the earth and thus the church is not associated with any dispensations . while his brethren ecclesiology failed to catch on in america , his eschatology doctrine became widely popular in the united states , especially among baptists and old school presbyterians . american dispensationalism crossed over many denominational boundaries . regarding any supposed connection to edward irving : . united states . dispensationalism was adopted , modified , and made popular in the united states by the scofield reference bible . it was introduced to north america by james inglis ( 1813–72 ) through the monthly magazine waymarks in the wilderness , published intermittently between 1854 and 1872 . during 1866 , inglis organized the believers ' meeting for bible study , which introduced dispensationalist ideas to a small but influential circle of american evangelicals . they were disturbed by the inroads of religious liberalism and saw premillennialism as an answer . dispensationalism was introduced as a premillennial position , and it largely took over the fundamentalist movement , over a period of several decades . the american church denominations rejected darby 's ecclesiology but accepted his eschatology . many of these churches were presbyterian and baptist , and they retained darby 's calvinistic soteriology . after inglis ' death , james h . brookes ( 1830–98 ) , the pastor of walnut street presbyterian church in st . & nbsp ; louis , organized the niagara bible conference ( 1876–97 ) to continue the dissemination of dispensationalist ideas . dispensationalism was boosted after dwight l . moody ( 1837–1899 ) learned of dispensational theology from an unidentified member of the brethren during 1872 . moody worked with brookes and other dispensationalists and encouraged the spread of dispensationalism . the efforts of c.i . scofield and his associates introduced dispensationalism to a wider audience in america by his scofield reference bible . the publication of the scofield reference bible during 1909 by the oxford university press for the first time displayed overtly dispensationalist notes on the pages of the biblical text . the scofield bible became a popular bible used by independent evangelicals in the united states . evangelist and bible teacher lewis sperry chafer ( 1871–1952 ) was influenced by scofield ; he founded the dallas theological seminary during 1924 , which has become the main institution of dispensationalism in america . the baptist bible seminary in clarks summit , pennsylvania became another dispensational school . grace school of theology opened in houston , tx in 2003 as a dispensational school . founded by graduates of dallas theological seminary , it holds '' that the bible must be interpreted as language is normally used , recognizing the importance of dispensational distinctions . '' other prominent dispensationalists include reuben archer torrey ( 1856–1928 ) , james m . gray ( 1851–1925 ) , william j . erdman ( 1833–1923 ) , a . c . dixon ( 1854–1925 ) , a . j . gordon ( 1836–95 ) , and william eugene blackstone , author of the book jesus is coming ( endorsed by torrey and erdman ) . these men were active evangelists who promoted a host of bible conferences and other missionary and evangelistic efforts . they also gave the dispensationalist philosophy institutional permanence by assuming leadership of new independent bible institutes , such as the moody bible institute during 1886 , the bible institute of los angeles ( now biola university ) during 1908 , and philadelphia college of bible ( now cairn university , formerly philadelphia biblical university ) during 1913 . the network of related institutes that soon developed became the nucleus for the spread of american dispensationalism . dispensationalism has become very popular with american evangelicalism , especially among nondenominational bible churches , baptists , pentecostal , and charismatic groups . conversely , protestant denominations that embrace covenant theology as a whole tend to reject dispensationalism . for example , the general assembly of the presbyterian church ( u.s . ) ( which subsequently merged with the united presbyterian church in the u.s.a . ( pcusa ) , in which dispensationalism existed ) termed it '' evil and subversive '' and regarded it as a heresy . . the churches of christ underwent division during the 1930s as robert henry boll ( who taught a variant of the dispensational philosophy ) and foy e . wallace ( representing the amillennial stance ) disputed severely over eschatology . prior to world war ii , there had been no significant presence of amillennialism in churches of christ . see also augustine of hippo , the theologian who established amillennialism as the eschatology of the roman catholic church . . influence . dispensationalism rejects the notion of supersessionism , still considers the jewish people as god 's chosen people , and some see the modern israel as resulting in the israel who will receive the fulfillment of all of god 's old testament promises . john nelson darby taught , and most subsequent dispensationalists have maintained , that god considers the jews as his earthly chosen people , even as they remain in rejection of jesus christ , and god continues to maintain an earthly destiny in the future millennial kingdom when the lord jesus christ returns to earth and establishes it in fulfillment of prophecy in the prophetic scheme . dispensationalists teach that a remnant within the nation of israel will be born again , called of god , and by grace brought to realize that they crucified their messiah . dispensationalism is unique in teaching that the church stands in a dispensation that occurs as a parenthesis in the prophetic kingdom program , a dispensational '' mystery '' or '' grace '' period , meaning that it was not directly revealed in prophecy in the old testament , and that this '' age of grace '' will end with the rapture of the church allowing the prophetic clock for israel to start up again . then the jewish remnant becomes manifest through the great tribulation as a result of recognizing jesus as their promised messiah during the trials that come upon them in this tribulation which serves to purify the nation . darby 's teachings envision judaism as continuing to enjoy god 's protection literally to the end of time , and teach that god has a separate earthly and prophetic kingdom '' program , '' to use j . dwight pentecost 's term , for israel and another heavenly ( destined ) mystery program for the church . dispensationalists teach that god has eternal covenants with israel which can not be violated and must be honored and fulfilled . dispensationalists affirm the necessity for jews to receive jesus as messiah , while also stressing that god has not forsaken those who are physically descended from abraham through jacob . they claim that god made unconditional covenants with israel as a people and nation in the abrahamic , palestinian , davidic , and new covenant . united states politics . israel has allied with u.s . evangelicals and dispensationalists to influence u.s . foreign policy , including protection of the jewish people in israel and continued aid for the state of israel . israel 's alliance with televangelist john hagee began in the early 1980s as he met with every prime minister of israel since menachem begin . since the mid-2000s israel has been in commercial alliance with televangelist and sometime-politician pat robertson , and in 2005 prime minister benjamin netanyahu said that '' we have no greater friend in the whole world than pat robertson . '' political commentator kevin phillips claimed in american theocracy ( 2006 ) that dispensationalist and other fundamentalist christians , together with the oil lobby , provided political assistance for the invasion of iraq during 2003 . dispensationalists typically endorse the modern state of israel , consider its existence as a political entity as god revealing his will for the last days , and reject anti-semitism . . messianic judaism . some messianic jews reject dispensationalism in favor of related but distinct hermeneutics called olive tree theology . david h . stern , messianic jewish manifesto , the complete jewish bible , and the jewish new testament commentary . the name refers to the passages of romans 11:17–18 : '' if some of the branches were broken off , and you , a wild olive , were grafted in among them and have become equal sharers in the rich root of the olive tree , then do n't boast as if you were better than the branches ! '' . in fiction . dispensationalist themes form the basis of the popular left behind series of books . see also . anglo-israelism christian eschatology law of christ millennial day theory progressive revelation ( baháʼí ) whore of babylon . references . further reading . allis , oswald t . prophecy and the church ( presbyterian & reformed , 1945 ; reprint : wipf & stock , 2001 ) . bass , clarence b . backgrounds to dispensationalism ( baker books , 1960 ) berubee , carol . a case for pauline dispensationalism : defining paul 's gospel and mission ( blue dromos books , 2017 ) boyer , paul . when time shall be no more : prophecy belief in modern american culture ( belknap , 1994 ) clouse , robert g . , ed . the millennium : four views ( intervarsity , 1977 ) enns , paul . the moody handbook of theology ( moody , 1989 ) john gerstner wrongly dividing the word of truth : a critique of dispensationalism . third edition . nicene council , 2009 . grenz , stanley . the millennial maze ( intervarsity , 1992 ) lahaye , tim , and jerry b . jenkins . are we living in the end times ? ( tyndale house , 1999 ) mangum , r . todd , the dispensational-covenantal rift ( wipf & stock , 2007 ) mangum , r . todd and mark sweetnam , '' the scofield bible : its history and impact on the evangelical church '' ( colorado springs : paternoster publishing , 2009 ) mcdonald , marci the armageddon factor : the rise of christian nationalism in canada ( random house canada , 2010 ) phillips , kevin american theocracy : the peril and politics of radical religion , oil , and borrowed money in the 21st century ( viking adult , 2006 ) vern poythress . understanding dispensationalists ( p & r publishing 2nd ed . , 1993 ) charles c . ryrie dispensationalism ( moody , 1995 ) ryrie , charles c . basic theology ( moody , 1999 ) showers , renald ( 1990 ) . '' there really is a difference : a comparison of covenant and dispensational theology . '' friends of israel gospel ministry . sutton , matthew avery . american apocalypse : a history of modern evangelicalism . harvard university press . sweetnam , mark the dispensations : god 's plan for the ages ( scripture teaching library , 2013 ) grant underwood . ( 1999 ) 1993 . the millenarian world of early mormonism . urbana : university of illinois press . john walvoord . the millennial kingdom ( zondervan , 1983 ) walvoord , john f . prophecy in the new millennium ( kregel publications , 2001 ) . external links . o'hair , j . c . the unsearchable riches of christ stam , c.r . things that differ ( fundamentals of dispensationalism )