Katy, Texas

education . primary and secondary schools . people who live in katy are zoned to schools in the katy independent school district . '' school assignment by residential address '' ( sara ) . katy independent school district . retrieved on july 8 , 2017 . - this map shows which public schools are in the katy city limits . while multiple katy isd schools have '' katy , texas '' postal addresses , only a portion are located in and/or serve the katy city limits . elementary schools . zelma hutsell elementary school '' lookup hutsell elementary school attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed april 11 , 2016 . katy elementary school '' lookup katy elementary school attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed april 11 , 2016 . woodcreek elementary school '' lookup woodcreek elementary school attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed april 11 , 2016 . bryant elementary school '' lookup bryant elementary school attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed january 29 , 2020 bonnie holland elementary school . middle schools . katy junior high school '' katy junior high school attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed september 5 , 2008 . woodcreek junior high school '' woodcreek junior high school attendance zone . '' katy independent school district . accessed september 5 , 2008 . seven lakes junior high school . high schools . katy high school , the oldest high school , is located nearest to the center city . it was established in 1898 , and relocated to its present location in 1947 . katy isd 's three alternative education schools ( martha raines high school , miller career and technology center , and the opportunity awareness center ) are all located within the city . aristoi classical academy is a charter school in katy . seven lakes high school the following private schools are located in katy and serve residents of the city of katy and greater houston : mirus academy is a flexibly-scheduled and gifted-and-talented-friendly private school which allows for students to be placed in classes according to ability . it was previously called '' the curious mind '' when it was a homeschooling academy ; it transitioned into a private school and took its present name in 2010 . colleges . katy is served by the houston community college system . hcc northwest college operates the katy campus in an unincorporated section of harris county . '' northwest college . '' houston community college district . accessed september 5 , 2008 . the bible seminary offers non-denominational college-level bible study and ministry training , including a variety of graduate-level master 's programs . these programs include an ma in biblical archeology , with dynamic leaders in the field . it also offers a bible certificate program for local church members and leaders . the university of houston purchased the verde park development site , with plans to break ground on a katy campus at i10 and 99 . its construction was completed in 2019 . . public libraries . katy is served by the katy branch of harris county public library ( hcpl ) at 5414 franz road . the branch is a partnership between hcpl and the city of katy . the city joined the county library system in 1921 . the katy garden club started the first library , which was housed in several private houses . at a later point it shared space with the katy fire department . the first katy branch opened in 1940 . the friends of the katy library began in 1972 . the construction of the current branch began in 2002 . the current branch building opened for regular business in monday april 28 , 2003 , with its grand opening ceremony on the previous day . '' katy branch library . '' harris county public library . retrieved november 29 , 2008 . . parks and recreation . harris county operates the mary jo peckham community center at 5597 gardenia lane , katy , texas 77493 . '' community centers : mary jo peckham . '' harris county . accessed april 11 , 2016 . the city of katy dog park is located at 5414 franz road . '' city of katy parks and recreation '' accessed april 11 , 2016 . the annual katy rice harvest festival is two days of continuous live entertainment , craft and food booths , carnival and more . . transportation . mass transit . metropolitan transit authority of harris county ( metro ) operates the kingsland park and ride ( route 221 ) east of katy at 21669 kingsland boulevard . in february 2008 metro opened a new park and ride location at the cinemark parking lots near the intersection of grand parkway and i-10 . the new route is 222 . currently , only these express routes operate to and from downtown houston during morning and evening commute hours . metro opened a six-story garage park and ride bus depot at the intersection of i-10 west and the grand parkway to service commuters . intercity buses . greyhound bus lines operates the katy station at millers exxon . '' megabus.com stops at katy mills en route between austin , san antonio and houston . this serves as a park-and-ride location for riders from the katy and greater houston area . airports . privately owned airports for fixed-wing aircraft for public use located near katy include : sack-o-grande acroport ( also known as harbican airport ) in unincorporated harris county houston executive airport in unincorporated waller county west houston airport in unincorporated harris county privately owned airports for private use include : hoffpauir airport in unincorporated harris county cardiff brothers airport in unincorporated fort bend county area airports with commercial airline service include george bush intercontinental airport and william p . hobby airport , both of which are in houston . notable people . rodney anderson , cincinnati bengals running back in the nfl clint black , country singer and musician kimberly caldwell , american idol contestant , singer , actress , television hostess bill callegari , businessman , engineer , and a republican member of the texas house of representatives from katy from 2001 to 2015 the catt family , 21st-century bank robbing family i would only rob banks for my family ; article ; skip hollandsworth ; june 2014 issue ; texas monthly ; accessed may 2014 roger creager , texas country singer and songwriter dan crenshaw , texas representative andy dalton , quarterback in the nfl for the cincinnati bengals and the dallas cowboys bernice edwards , classic female blues singer , pianist and songwriter paddy fisher , college football player courtney ford , actress de'aaron fox , professional basketball player for the sacramento kings in the nba and mcdonald 's all american janeane garofalo , actress , stand-up comedian , and writer cullen gillaspia , houston texans fullback in the nfl sammy guevara , professional wrestler from aew julie henderson , model bo levi mitchell , professional quarterback currently playing for the calgary stampeders in the canadian football league , 2014 grey cup mvp tyler myers , pro hockey player for the vancouver canucks in the national hockey league megan nicole , singer sage northcutt , ufc fighter renee o'connor , actress and director , best known for her role as gabrielle in xena : warrior princess jesse sorensen , professional wrestler ty tabor , guitarist and vocalist of melodic progressive metal band king 's x brett velicovich , soldier renée zellweger , actress and producer . see also . references . external links . city of katy official website greater katy area chamber of commerce harris county block book map ( historical map showing portion in harris county ) : pdf format , jpg format