Wilbur Sweatman

early life . sweatman was born february 7 , 1882 in brunswick , missouri to parents matilda and coleman sweatman . wilbur 's father ran a barbershop in the riverside town to provide for his family , which also included daughters eva and lula . his mother was apparently of mixed racial background as she and the children were listed as mulatto on some census reports . while wilbur was still a toddler his father abandoned the family , moving to st . joseph , missouri , and starting a new family . his mother persevered , continuing to operate the barbershop as well as taking in boarders . wilbur received his education at the segregated elliott school in brunswick and helped out around the barbershop after school . his older sister eva was responsible for much of wilbur sweatman 's early music training , teaching him to play piano . later sweatman would become a self-taught violinist , and then taking up the clarinet . over the years he would also learn to play trombone , bass clarinet and organ . . music career . wilbur sweatman 's professional music career began in the late 1890s when , still a teenager , he toured with circus bands , first with professor clark smith 's pickaninny band from kansas city , then with the p.g . lowery band . brooks , tim lost sounds : blacks and the birth of the recording industry , university of illinois press , 2004 , pp.337-340 by 1901 he had become the youngest orchestra leader in america by fronting the sells brothers circus band . sweatman briefly played with the bands of w.c . handy and mahara 's minstrels before organizing his own dance band in minneapolis by late 1902 . it was there that sweatman made his first recordings on phonograph cylinders in 1903 for the metropolitan music store . these included what is reputed to have been the first recorded version of scott joplin 's '' maple leaf rag '' ; no copies are known . in 1908 sweatman moved to chicago , playing around the city in places like the pekin inn and the monogram theater before becoming the bandleader at the grand theater , and began to attract notice ; a 1910 article referred to his nickname , '' sensational swet . '' as well as performing , sweatman wrote and arranged music for his band . in addition , he worked with dave peyton and william henry '' billy '' dorsey to arrange and transcribe music for other performers . by 1911 , he had moved to the vaudeville circuit full-time , developing a successful act of playing three clarinets at once . an indianapolis account described his performance there : though somewhat diminutive in stature , wilbur c . sweatman has a style and grace of manner in all of his executions that is at once convincing , and the soulfulness of expression that he blends into his tones is something wonderful . his first number was a medley of popular airs and '' rags '' and had everybody shuffling their pedal extremities before it was half over . he wrote a number of rags , '' down home rag '' ( 1911 ) being the most commercially successful . the song was recorded by multiple bands in america and europe . sweatman moved to new york in 1913 , touring widely . he was one of the few black solo acts to appear regularly on the major white vaudeville circuits . around this time he became close friends with scott joplin ; joplin 's will would name sweatman as executor of his estate . joplin 's musical papers , including unpublished manuscripts , were willed to sweatman , who took care of them while generously sharing access to those who inquired . however , as joplin 's music came to be considered passé , such requests were few . after sweatman 's death in 1961 , the papers went into storage during a legal battle between sweatman 's heirs and their current location is unknown , or even whether they still exist . in december 1916 , sweatman recorded for minor label emerson records , including his own '' down home rag '' . some historians consider these recordings among the earliest examples of jazz on record . taking note of the commercial success of the original dixieland jass band and the original creole orchestra , sweatman abruptly changed his sextet 's sound and instrumentation in early 1917 . sweatman 's band consisted of five saxophonists and himself on clarinet , a combo which soon signed with pathé . they recorded rags , as well as some of the hit songs of the day . sweatman was the first african american to make recordings labeled as '' jass '' and '' jazz '' . since sweatman can be heard making melodic variations even in his 1916 recordings , it might be argued that sweatman recorded an archaic type of jazz earlier than the original dixieland band . in 1917 , he became one of the first blacks to join ascap . in 1918 , sweatman landed with major label columbia records , where he would enjoy a meteoric rise with a wide variety of songs under his own name . his band also delivered several shorter anonymous performances for the label 's '' little wonder '' line of 90-second-long budget releases . the sweatman band 's first release , '' regretful blues '' / '' everybody 's crazy '' would ship 140,000 copies , at a time when a third as many sales was considered a hit . sweatman singles shipped over a million copies in 1919 alone . several more successful releases followed in 1918–19 , sweatman 's peak of popularity . his best-selling song was '' kansas city blues '' ( 1919 ) , which shipped 180,000 copies . however , by 1920 sales were on the wane , perhaps reflecting the ephemeral interest in his novelty style of jazz , and the growing popularity of syncopated big bands such as columbia 's own ted lewis . later years . sweatman continued to ply his somewhat dated style in live appearances throughout the northeast . several notable musicians passed through his band , including duke ellington , coleman hawkins and cozy cole . sweatman also continued to record for such labels as gennett , edison , grey gull and victor . he frequently played at the well known harlem club connie 's inn . he continued playing in new york through the 1940s and early 1950s , but increasingly concentrated his efforts on the music publishing business and talent booking . his earlier compositions provided sweatman with a steady income . in 1937 alone , ascap reported that '' down home rag '' had been played on the radio over 2000 times , sweatman receiving royalties for each play . wilbur sweatman died in new york city on march 9 , 1961 . his daughter barbara initially inherited his estate , consisting mostly of his publishing business and some personal papers . the estate , which also included the papers of scott joplin , eventually ended up in the hands of sweatman 's sister eva .