Retail

etymology . the word retail comes from the old french verb tailler , meaning '' to cut off , clip , pare , divide in terms of tailoring '' ( c . 1365 ) . it was first recorded as a noun in 1433 with the meaning of '' a sale in small quantities '' from the middle french verb retailler meaning '' a piece cut off , shred , scrap , paring '' . at the present , the meaning of the word retail ( in english , french , dutch , german and spanish ) refers to the sale of small quantities of items to consumers ( as opposed to wholesale ) . definition and explanation . retail refers to the activity of selling goods or services directly to consumers or end-users . the free dictionary some retailers may sell to business customers , and such sales are termed non-retail activity . in some jurisdictions or regions , legal definitions of retail specify that at least 80 percent of sales activity must be to end-users . pride , w.m . , ferrell , o.c . lukas , b.a . , schembri , s . niininen , o . and casidy , r . , marketing principles , 3rd asia-pacific ed . , cengage , 2018 , pp . 449–50 retailing often occurs in retail stores or service establishments , but may also occur through direct selling such as through vending machines , door-to-door sales or electronic channels . pride , w.m . , ferrell , o.c . lukas , b.a . , schembri , s . niininen , o . and casidy , r . , marketing principles , 3rd asia-pacific ed . , cengage , 2018 , p . 451 although the idea of retail is often associated with the purchase of goods , the term may be applied to service-providers that sell to consumers . retail service providers include retail banking , tourism , insurance , private healthcare , private education , private security firms , legal firms , publishers , public transport and others . for example , a tourism provider might have a retail division that books travel and accommodation for consumers plus a wholesale division that purchases blocks of accommodation , hospitality , transport and sightseeing which are subsequently packaged into a holiday tour for sale to retail travel agents . some retailers badge their stores as '' wholesale outlets '' offering '' wholesale prices . '' while this practice may encourage consumers to imagine that they have access to lower prices , while being prepared to trade-off reduced prices for cramped in-store environments , in a strictly legal sense , a store that sells the majority of its merchandise direct to consumers , is defined as a retailer rather than a wholesaler . different jurisdictions set parameters for the ratio of consumer to business sales that define a retail business . history . mcgeough , k.m . , the romans : new perspectives , abc-clio , 2004 , pp . 105–06 the roman forum was arguably the earliest example of a permanent retail shop-front . coleman , p . , shopping environments , elsevier , oxford , 2006 , p . 28 recent research suggests that china exhibited a rich history of early retail systems . moore , k . , and reid . , s . , '' the birth of the brand : 4000 years of branding '' , business history , vol . 50 , 2008 . pp . 419–32 . from as early as 200 bce , chinese packaging and branding were used to signal family , place names and product quality , and the use of government imposed product branding was used between 600 and 900 ce . eckhardt , g.m . and bengtsson . a . '' a brief history of branding in china '' , journal of macromarketing , vol , 30 , no . 3 , 2010 , pp . 210–21 eckhart and bengtsson have argued that during the song dynasty ( 960–1127 ) , chinese society developed a consumerist culture , where a high level of consumption was attainable for a wide variety of ordinary consumers rather than just the elite . eckhardt , g.m . and bengtsson . a . '' a brief history of branding in china '' , journal of macromarketing , vol , 30 , no . 3 , 2010 , p . 212 in medieval england and europe , relatively few permanent shops were to be found ; instead , customers walked into the tradesman 's workshops where they discussed purchasing options directly with tradesmen . thrupp , s.l . , the merchant class of medieval london , 1300–1500 , pp . 7–8 in the more populous cities , a small number of shops were beginning to emerge by the 13th century . pevsner , n . and hubbard , e . , the buildings of england : cheshire penguin , 1978 , p . 170 outside the major cities , most consumable purchases were made through markets or fairs . gazetteer of markets and fairs in england and wales to 1516 , the list and index society , no . 32 , 2003 market-places appear to have emerged independently outside europe . the grand bazaar in istanbul is often cited as the world 's oldest continuously-operating market ; its construction began in 1455 . the spanish conquistadors wrote glowingly of markets in the americas . in the 15th century , the mexica ( aztec ) market of tlatelolco was the largest in all the americas . by the 17th century , permanent shops with more regular trading hours were beginning to supplant markets and fairs as the main retail outlet . provincial shopkeepers were active in almost every english market town . cox , n.c . and dannehl , k . , perceptions of retailing in early modern england , aldershot , hampshire , ashgate , 2007 , p , . 129 as the number of shops grew , they underwent a transformation . the trappings of a modern shop , which had been entirely absent from the sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century store , gradually made way for store interiors and shopfronts that are more familiar to modern shoppers . prior to the eighteenth century , the typical retail store had no counter , display cases , chairs , mirrors , changing rooms , etc . however , the opportunity for the customer to browse merchandise , touch and feel products began to be available , with retail innovations from the late 17th and early 18th centuries . cox , n.c . and dannehl , k . , perceptions of retailing in early modern england , aldershot , hampshire , ashgate , 2007 , pp . 153–54 by the late eighteenth century , grand shopping arcades began to emerge across europe and in the antipodes . a shopping arcade refers to a multiple-vendor space , operating under a covered roof . typically , the roof was constructed of glass to allow for natural light and to reduce the need for candles or electric lighting . some of the earliest examples of shopping arcade appeared in paris , due to its lack of pavement for pedestrians . conlin , j . , tales of two cities : paris , london and the birth of the modern city , atlantic books , 2013 , chapter 2 while the arcades were the province of the bourgeoisie , a new type of retail venture emerged to serve the needs of the working poor . john stuart mill wrote about the rise of the co-operative retail store , which he witnessed first-hand in the mid-nineteenth century . mill , j.s . , principles of a political economy with some of their applications to social philosophy , 7th ed . , london , longman , 1909 , section iv.7.53 the modern era of retailing is defined as the period from the industrial revolution to the 21st century . reshaping retail : why technology is transforming the industry and how to win in the new consumer dr in major cities , the department store emerged in the mid- to late 19th century , and permanently reshaped shopping habits , and redefined concepts of service and luxury . many of the early department stores were more than just a retail emporium ; rather they were venues where shoppers could spend their leisure time and be entertained . howard moss , m . , shopping as an entertainment experience , plymouth , lexington books , pp . 35–39 retail , using mail order , came of age during the mid-19th century . although catalogue sales had been used since the 15th century , this method of retailing was confined to a few industries such as the sale of books and seeds . however , improvements in transport and postal services led several entrepreneurs on either side of the atlantic to experiment with catalogue sales . goldstein . j . , 101 amazing facts about wales , andrews , uk , 2013 in the post-war period , an american architect , victor gruen developed a concept for a shopping mall ; a planned , self-contained shopping complex complete with an indoor plaza , statues , planting schemes , piped music , and car-parking . gruen 's vision was to create a shopping atmosphere where people felt so comfortable , they would spend more time in the environment , thereby enhancing opportunities for purchasing . the first of these malls opened at northland mall near detroit in 1954 . malcolm gladwell , the terrazzo jungle , the new yorker , march 15 , 2004 throughout the twentieth century , a trend towards larger store footprints became discernible . the average size of a u.s . supermarket grew from square feet in 1991 to square feet in 2000 . byrne-paquet , l . , the urge to splurge : a social history of shopping , ecw press , toronto , canada , p . 83 by the end of the twentieth century , stores were using labels such as '' mega-stores '' and '' warehouse '' stores to reflect their growing size . the upward trend of increasing retail space was not consistent across nations and led in the early 21st century to a 2-fold difference in square footage per capita between the united states and europe . as the 21st century takes shape , some indications suggest that large retail stores have come under increasing pressure from online sales models and that reductions in store size are evident . wetherell , s . , '' the shopping mall ’ s socialist pre-history '' , jacobin magazine , 4 august 2014 under such competition and other issues such as business debt , there has been a noted business disruption called the retail apocalypse in recent years which several retail businesses , especially in north america , are sharply reducing their number of stores , or going out of business entirely . retail strategy . the distinction between '' strategic '' and '' managerial '' decision-making is commonly used to distinguish '' two phases having different goals and based on different conceptual tools . strategic planning concerns the choice of policies aiming at improving the competitive position of the firm , taking account of challenges and opportunities proposed by the competitive environment . on the other hand , managerial decision-making is focused on the implementation of specific targets . '' volpato , g . and stocchetti , a . , '' old and new approaches to marketing : the quest of their epistemological roots '' , mpra paper no . 30841 , 2009 , p . 34 in retailing , the strategic plan is designed to set out the vision and provide guidance for retail decision-makers and provide an outline of how the product and service mix will optimize customer satisfaction . as part of the strategic planning process , it is customary for strategic planners to carry out a detailed environmental scan which seeks to identify trends and opportunities in the competitive environment , market environment , economic environment and statutory-political environment . the retail strategy is normally devised or reviewed every 3– 5 years by the chief executive officer . the strategic retail analysis typically includes following elements : lambda , a.j . , the art of retailing , mcgraw-hill , ( 2003 ) , 2008 , pp . 315–26 ; market analysis : :market size , stage of market , market competitiveness , market attractiveness , market trends ; customer analysis : :market segmentation , demographic , geographic and psychographic profile , values and attitudes , shopping habits , brand preferences , analysis of needs and wants , media habits ; internal analysis : : other capabilities e.g . human resource capability , technological capability , financial capability , ability to generate scale economies or economies of scope , trade relations , reputation , positioning , past performance ; competition analysis : : availability of substitutes , competitor 's strengths and weaknesses , perceptual mapping , competitive trends ; review of product mix : : sales per square foot , stock-turnover rates , profitability per product line ; review of distribution channels : : lead-times between placing order and delivery , cost of distribution , cost efficiency of intermediaries ; evaluation of the economics of the strategy : : cost-benefit analysis of planned activities at the conclusion of the retail analysis , retail marketers should have a clear idea of which groups of customers are to be the target of marketing activities . not all elements are , however , equal , often with demographics , shopping motivations , and spending directing consumer activities . retail research studies suggest that there is a strong relationship between a store 's positioning and the socio-economic status of customers . fill , c . , marketing communications : framework , theories and application , london , prentice hall , 1995 , p . 70 in addition , the retail strategy , including service quality , has a significant and positive association with customer loyalty . yu-jia , h . ( 2012 ) . '' the moderating effect of brand equity and the mediating effect of marketing mix strategy on the relationship between service quality and customer loyalty '' . international journal of organizational innovation , 155–62 . a marketing strategy effectively outlines all key aspects of firms ' targeted audience , demographics , preferences . in a highly competitive market , the retail strategy sets up long-term sustainability . it focuses on customer relationships , stressing the importance of added value , customer satisfaction and highlights how the store 's market positioning appeals to targeted groups of customers . morschett , d . , swoboda , b . and schramm , h . , '' competitive strategies in retailing : an investigation of the applicability of porter ’ s framework for food retailers journal of retailing and consumer services , vol . 13 , 2006 , pp . 275–87 . the retail marketing mix . once the strategic plan is in place , retail managers turn to the more managerial aspects of planning . a retail mix is devised for the purpose of coordinating day-to-day tactical decisions . the retail marketing mix typically consists of six broad decision layers including product decisions , place decisions , promotion , price , personnel and presentation ( also known as physical evidence ) . the retail mix is loosely based on the marketing mix , but has been expanded and modified in line with the unique needs of the retail context . a number of scholars have argued for an expanded marketing , mix with the inclusion of two new ps , namely , personnel and presentation since these contribute to the customer 's unique retail experience and are the principal basis for retail differentiation . yet other scholars argue that the retail format ( i.e . retail formula ) should be included . constantinides , e . , '' the marketing mix revisited : towards the 21st century marketing '' , journal of marketing management , vo . 22 , 2006 , pp . 422-423 the modified retail marketing mix that is most commonly cited in textbooks is often called the 6 ps of retailing ( see diagram at right ) . berens , j.s . , '' the marketing mix , the retailing mix and the use of retail strategy continua '' , proceedings of the 1983 academy of marketing science ( ams ) , part of the series developments in marketing science , pp . 323–27 lamb , c.w . , hair , j.f . and mcdaniel , c . , mktg 2010 , mason , oh , cengage , pp . 193–94 facing the retailer are the product assortment ( what product lines , how many lines and which brands to carry ) ; the type of customer service ( high contact through to self-service ) and the availability of support services ( e.g . credit terms , delivery services , after sales care ) . these decisions depend on careful analysis of the market , demand , competition as well as the retailer 's skills and expertise . customer service is the '' sum of acts and elements that allow consumers to receive what they need or desire from the retail establishment . '' retailers must decide whether to provide a full service outlet or minimal service outlet , such as no-service in the case of vending machines ; self-service with only basic sales assistance or a full service operation as in many boutiques and speciality stores . in addition , the retailer needs to make decisions about sales support such as customer delivery and after sales customer care . the broad pricing strategy is normally established in the company 's overall strategic plan . in the case of chain stores , the pricing strategy would be set by head office . broadly , there are six approaches to pricing strategy mentioned in the marketing literature : operations-oriented , dibb , s . , simkin , l . , pride , w.c . and ferrell , o.c . , marketing : concepts and strategies , cengage , 2013 , chapter 12 revenue-oriented , customer-oriented , value-based , nagle , t . , hogan , j . and zale , j . , the strategy and tactics of pricing : a guide to growing more profitably , oxon , routledge , 2016 , p . 1 and 6 brennan , r . , canning , l . and mcdowell , r . , business-to-business marketing , 2nd ed . , london , sage , 2011 , p . 331 relationship-oriented , neumeier , m . , the brand flip : why customers now run companies and how to profit from it ( voices that matter ) , 2008 , p . 55 and socially-oriented . when decision-makers have determined the broad approach to pricing ( i.e . , the pricing strategy ) , they turn their attention to pricing tactics . tactical pricing decisions are shorter term prices , designed to accomplish specific short-term goals . pricing tactics that are commonly used in retail include discount pricing , rao , v.r . and kartono , b . , '' pricing strategies and objectives : a cross-cultural survey '' , in handbook of pricing research in marketing , rao , v.r . ( ed ) , northampton , ma , edward elgar , 2009 , p . 15 everyday low prices , high-low pricing , kaufmann , p . , '' deception in retailer high-low pricing : a 'rule of reason ' approach '' , journal of retailing , volume 70 , issue 2 , 1994 , pp . 115–1383 . loss leaders , product bundling , guiltnan , j.p . , '' the price bundling of services '' , journal of marketing , april 1987 promotional pricing , and psychological pricing . poundstone , w . , priceless : the myth of fair value ( and how to take advantage of it ) , new york : hill and wang , 2011 , pp . 184–200 retailers must also plan for customer preferred payment modes & nbsp ; – e.g . cash , credit , lay-by , electronic funds transfer at point-of-sale ( eftpos ) . all payment options require some type of handling and attract costs . barr , a . , '' paypal deepens retail drive in discover payments deal '' , technology news . 22 august 2012 contrary to common misconception , price is not the most important factor for consumers , when deciding to buy a product . because patronage at a retail outlet varies , flexibility in scheduling is desirable . employee scheduling software is sold , which , using known patterns of customer patronage , more or less reliably predicts the need for staffing for various functions at times of the year , day of the month or week , and time of day . usually needs vary widely . conforming staff utilization to staffing needs requires a flexible workforce which is available when needed but does not have to be paid when they are not , part-time workers ; as of 2012 70 % of retail workers in the united states were part-time . this may result in financial problems for the workers , who while they are required to be available at all times if their work hours are to be maximized , may not have sufficient income to meet their family and other obligations . retailers can employ different techniques to enhance sales volume and to improve the customer experience , such as add-on , upsell or cross-sell ; selling on value ; hee , j.k . , '' stand-alone sale of a free gift : is it effective to accentuate promotion value ? '' social behavior & personality , vol . 43 , no . 10 , 2015 , pp . 1593–1606 and knowing when to close the sale . transactional marketing aims to find target consumers , then negotiate , trade , and finally end relationships to complete the transaction . in this one-time transaction process , both parties aim to maximize their own interests . as a result , transactional marketing raises follow-up problems such as poor after-sales service quality and a lack of feedback channels for both parties . in addition , because retail enterprises needed to redevelop client relationships for each transaction , marketing costs were high and customer retention was low . all these downsides to transactional marketing gradually pushed the retail industry towards establishing long-term cooperative relationships with customers . through this lens , enterprises began to focus on the process from transaction to relationship . monash university , dictionary , while expanding the sales market and attracting new customers is very important for the retail industry , it is also important to establish and maintain long term good relationships with previous customers , hence the name of the underlying concept , '' relational marketing '' . under this concept , retail enterprises value and attempt to improve relationships with customers , as customer relationships are conducive to maintaining stability in the current competitive retail market , and are also the future of retail enterprises . presentation refers to the physical evidence that signals the retail image . physical evidence may include a diverse range of elements & nbsp ; – the store itself including premises , offices , exterior facade and interior layout , websites , delivery vans , warehouses , staff uniforms . the environment in which the retail service encounter occurs is sometimes known as the retail servicescape . '' the impact of retail servicescape on buying behaviour '' , bvimsr 's journal of management research , vol 6 , no . 2 , 2014 , pp . 10–17 the store environment consists of many elements such as smells , the physical environment ( furnishings , layout and functionality ) , ambient conditions ( lighting , temperature , noise ) as well as signs , symbols and artifacts ( e.g . sales promotions , shelf space , sample stations , visual communications ) . retail designers pay close attention to the front of the store , which is known as the decompression zone . in order to maximise the number of selling opportunities , retailers generally want customers to spend more time in a retail store . however , this must be balanced against customer expectations surrounding convenience , access and realistic waiting times . wakefield , l.k . and blodgett , g j . , '' the effect of the servicescape on customers ’ behavioral intentions in leisure service settings '' , the journal of services marketing , vol . 10 , no . 6 , pp . 45–61 . the way that brands are displayed is also part of the overall retail design . where a product is placed on the shelves has implications for purchase likelihood as a result of visibility and access . hall , c.m . and mitchell , r . , wine marketing : a practical guide , pp . 182–83 ambient conditions , such as lighting , temperature and music , are also part of the overall retail environment . bailey , p . ( 2015 , april ) . marketing to the senses : a multisensory strategy to align the brand touchpoints . admap , 2–7 . it is common for a retail store to play music that relates to their target market . . shopper profiles . two different strands of research have investigated shopper behaviour . one strand is primarily concerned with shopper motivations . another stream of research seeks to segment shoppers according to common , shared characteristics . to some extent , these streams of research are inter-related , but each stream offers different types of insights into shopper behaviour . babin et al . carried out some of the earliest investigations into shopper motivations and identified two broad motives : utilitarian and hedonic . utilitarian motivations are task-related and rational . for the shopper with utilitarian motives , purchasing is a work-related task that is to be accomplished in the most efficient and expedient manner . on the other hand , hedonic motives refer to pleasure . the shopper with hedonic motivations views shopping as a form of escapism where they are free to indulge fantasy and freedom . hedonic shoppers are more involved in the shopping experience . many different shopper profiles can be identified . retailers develop customised segmentation analyses for each unique outlet . however , it is possible to identify a number of broad shopper profiles . one of the most well-known and widely cited shopper typologies is that developed by sproles and kendal in the mid-1980s . durvasula , s . , lysonski , s . and andrews , j.c . ( 1993 ) , “ cross-cultural generalizability of a scale for profiling consumers ’ decision-making styles ” , the journal of consumer affairs , vol . 27 no . 1 , pp . 55–65 sproles , g.b . ( 1985 ) , “ from perfectionism to faddism : measuring consumers ’ decision-making styles ” , in schnittgrund , k.p . ( ed . ) , american council on consumer interests ( acci ) , conference proceedings , columbia , mo , pp . 79–85 . sproles , g.b . ( 1983 ) . conceptualisation and measurement of optimal consumer decision making . journal of consumer affairs , vol . 17 no . 2 , pp . 421–38 . sproles and kendall 's consumer typology has been shown to be relatively consistent across time and across cultures . jain , r . and sharma , a . , '' a review on sproles & kendall 's consumer style inventory ( csi ) for analyzing decision making styles of consumers '' , indian journal of marketing , vol . 43 , no . 3 , 2013 their typology is based on the consumer 's approach to making purchase decisions . sproles , g.b . , & kendall , e.l . , '' a methodology for profiling consumers ' decision-marking styles '' , journal of consumer affairs , vol . , 20 no . 2 , 1986 , pp . 267–79 quality conscious/perfectionist : quality-consciousness is characterised by a consumer 's search for the very best quality in products ; quality conscious consumers tend to shop systematically making more comparisons and shopping around . brand-conscious : brand-consciousness is characterised by a tendency to buy expensive , well-known brands or designer labels . those who score high on brand-consciousness tend to believe that the higher prices are an indicator of quality and exhibit a preference for department stores or top-tier retail outlets . recreation-conscious/hedonistic : recreational shopping is characterised by the consumer 's engagement in the purchase process . those who score high on recreation-consciousness regard shopping itself as a form of enjoyment . price-conscious : a consumer who exhibits price-and-value consciousness . price-conscious shoppers carefully shop around seeking lower prices , sales or discounts and are motivated by obtaining the best value for money novelty/fashion-conscious : characterised by a consumer 's tendency to seek out new products or new experiences for the sake of excitement ; who gain excitement from seeking new things ; they like to keep up-to-date with fashions and trends , variety-seeking is associated with this dimension . impulsive : impulsive consumers are somewhat careless in making purchase decisions , buy on the spur of the moment and are not overly concerned with expenditure levels or obtaining value . those who score high on impulsive dimensions tend not to be engaged with the object at either a cognitive or emotional level . confused ( by overchoice ) : characterised by a consumer 's confusion caused by too many product choices , too many stores or an overload of product information ; tend to experience information overload . habitual/brand loyal : characterised by a consumer 's tendency to follow a routine purchase pattern on each purchase occasion ; consumers have favourite brands or stores and have formed habits in choosing ; the purchase decision does not involve much evaluation or shopping around . some researchers have adapted sproles and kendall 's methodology for use in specific countries or cultural groups . bauer , h.h . , sauer , n.e . , and becker , c . , '' investigating the relationship between product involvement and consumer decision-making styles '' , journal of consumer behaviour . vol . 5 , 2006 342–54 . consumer decision styles are important for retailers and marketers because they describe behaviours that are relatively stable over time and for this reason , they are useful for market segmentation . retail format : types of retail outlet . the european service directive applies to all retail trade including periodic markets , street traders and peddlers . retail stores may be classified by the type of product carried . softline retailers sell goods that are consumed after a single-use , or have a limited life ( typically under three years ) in they are normally consumed . soft goods include clothing , other fabrics , footwear , toiletries , cosmetics , medicines and stationery . grocery stores , including supermarkets and hypermarkets , along with convenience stores carry a mix of food products and consumable household items such as detergents , cleansers , personal hygiene products . retailers selling consumer durables are sometimes known as hardline retailers – automobiles , appliances , electronics , furniture , sporting goods , lumber , etc . , and parts for them . specialist retailers operate in many industries such as the arts e.g . green grocers , contemporary art galleries , bookstores , handicrafts , musical instruments , gift shops . types of retail outlets by marketing strategy include shopping arcade , anchor store , '' icsc shopping center definitions : basic configurations and types for the united states '' , international council of shopping centers . accessed july 10 , 2008 . bazaar , boutique , category killer , merriam-webster dictionary online , chain store , merriam-webster dictionary online : co-operative store cambridge english dictionary cooperative store convenience store , department stores , business dictionary department store discount stores , business dictionary discount store e-tailer , the free dictionary online : general store , merriam-webster dictionary , give-away shop , hawkers also known as peddlers , costermongers or street vendors , high street store , hypermarket , collins dictionary ; hypermart pop-up retail , gregory , s . , '' why pop-up shops are hot '' , time magazine , marketplace , financial dictionary online , market square , shopping center , zimring , c.a . ( ed . ) , encyclopedia of consumption and waste : the social science of garbage , volume 1 , sage , 2012 , p . 495 speciality store , supermarket merriam-webster dictionary , variety stores , vending machine , business dictionary online , no frills , warehouse clubs , economic times ( definitions ) , warehouse clubs warehouse stores , cambridge dictionary , warehouse store automated retail , big-box stores , second-hand shop , and charity shop . retailers can opt for a format as each provides different retail mix to its customers based on their customer demographics , lifestyle and purchase behavior . an effective format will determine how products are display products , as well as how target customers are attracted . challenges . to achieve and maintain a foothold in an existing market , a prospective retail establishment must barriers to entry : regulatory barriers including : restrictions on real-estate purchases , especially as imposed by municipality and against '' big-box '' big-box store restrictions on foreign investment in retailers , in terms of both absolute amount of financing provided and percentage share of voting stock ( e.g . common stock ) purchased unfavorable tax code , especially those designed to penalize or keep out '' big box '' retailers ( see '' regulatory '' above ) absence of developed supply-chain and integrated it management high competitiveness among existing market participants and resulting low profit margins , caused in part by : constant advances in product design resulting in constant threat of product obsolescence and price declines for existing inventory lack of a properly-educated and/or -trained work-force , often including management , caused in part by loss in business lack of educational infrastructure enabling prospective market entrants to respond to the above challenges direct e-tailing ( for example , through the internet ) and direct delivery to consumers from manufacturers and suppliers , cutting out any retail reseller . . consolidation . among retailers and retails chains a lot of consolidation has appeared over the last couple of decades . between 1988 and 2010 , worldwide 40,788 mergers & acquisitions with a total known value of us 2.255 trillion have been announced . the largest transactions with involvement of retailers in/from the united states have been : the acquisition of albertson 's inc . for us 17 billion in 2006 , the merger between federated department stores inc with may department stores valued at 16.5 bil . usd in 2005 & nbsp ; – now macy 's , and the merger between kmart and sears with a value of us 10.9 billion in 2004 . between 1985 and 2018 there have been 46,755 mergers or acquisitions conducted globally in the retail sector ( either acquirer or target from the retail industry ) . these deals cumulate to an overall known value of around us 2,561 billion . the three major retail m & a waves took place in 2000 , 2007 and lately in 2017 . however the all-time high in terms of number of deals was in 2016 with more than 2,700 deals . in terms of added value 2007 set the record with the us 225 billion . here is a list of the top ten largest deals ( ranked by volume ) in the retail industry : . see also . types of sales person : types of store or shop : influential thinkers in sales and retail : the names cited in this section are based on the names of retailers cited in tsang , d . , kazeroony , h.h . and ellis , g . , the routledge companion to international management education , oxon , routledge , 2013 , pp . 119–20 dale carnegie : author and lecturer ; proponent of salesmanship , public speaking and self-improvement e . st . elmo lewis : salesmen for ncr and developer of the aida ( marketing ) william thomas rawleigh : founder of rawleigh 's company with one of the largest travelling sales teams in the united states harry gordon selfridge : founder of uk selfridges ; redefined shopping away from essential errand to a pleasurable activity ; was noted for introducing a touch of theatre and celebrity appearances to department stores ; also wrote the book , the romance of commerce published in 1918 . walter dill scott : psychologist and author ; wrote a number of books on the psychology of selling in the early twentieth century thomas j . watson : salesman at ncr and ceo of ibm ; often described as the '' greatest american salesman '' . references . further reading . adburgham , a . , shopping in style : london from the restoration to edwardian elegance , london , thames and hudson , 1979 alexander , a . , '' the study of british retail history : progress and agenda '' , in the routledge companion to marketing history , d.g . brian jones and mark tadajewski ( eds . ) , oxon , routledge , 2016 , pp . & nbsp ; 155–72 feinberg , r.a . and meoli , j . , online : brief history of the mall '' , in advances in consumer research , volume 18 , rebecca h . holman and michael r . solomon ( eds . ) , provo , ut : association for consumer research , 1991 , pp . & nbsp ; 426–27 hollander , s.c . , '' who and what are important in retailing and marketing history : a basis for discussion '' , in s.c . hollander and r . savitt ( eds . ) first north american workshop on historical research in marketing , lansing , mi : michigan state university , 1983 , pp . & nbsp ; 35–40 . jones , f . , '' retail stores in the united states , 1800–1860 '' , journal of marketing , october 1936 , pp . & nbsp ; 135–40 kowinski , w.s . , the malling of america : an inside look at the great consumer paradise , new york , william morrow , 1985 furnee , j.h . , and lesger , c . ( eds ) , the landscape of consumption : shopping streets and cultures in western europe , 1600–1900 , springer , 2014 mackeith , m . , the history and conservation of shopping arcades , mansell publishing , 1986 nystrom , p.h . , '' retailing in retrospect and prospect '' , in h.g . wales ( ed . ) changing perspectives in marketing , urbana : university of illinois press , 19951 , pp . & nbsp ; 117–38 . stobard , j . , sugar and spice : grocers and groceries in provincial england , 1650–1830 , oxford university press , 2016 underhill , paco , call of the mall : the author of why we buy on the geography of shopping , simon & schuster , 2004 . external links . ecropedia & nbsp ; – free global collection of retail/fmcg best practices by ecr community investopedia.the industry handbook : the retailing industry national retail federation ( u.s.-based trade association )