Television film

origins and history . precursors of '' television movies '' include talk faster , mister , which aired on wabd ( now wnyw ) in new york city on december 18 , 1944 , and was produced by rko pictures , and the 1957 the pied piper of hamelin , based on the poem by robert browning , and starring van johnson , one of the first filmed '' family musicals '' made directly for television . that film was made in technicolor , a first for television , which ordinarily used color processes originated by specific networks . most '' family musicals '' of the time , such as peter pan , were not filmed but broadcast live and preserved on kinescope , a recording of a television program made by filming the picture from a video monitor – and the only ( relatively inexpensive ) method of recording a television program until the invention of videotape . many television networks were hostile toward film programming , fearing that it would loosen the network 's arrangements with sponsors and affiliates by encouraging station managers to make independent deals with advertisers and film producers . conversely , beginning in the 1950s episodes of american television series would be placed together and released as feature films in overseas cinemas . television networks were in control of the most valuable prime time slots available for programming , so syndicators of independent television films had to settle for fewer media market and less desirable time periods . this meant much smaller advertising revenues and license fees compared with network-supplied programming . the term '' made-for-tv movie '' was coined in the united states in the early 1960s as an incentive for movie audiences to stay home and watch what was promoted as the equivalent of a first-run theatrical film . beginning in 1961 with nbc saturday night at the movies , a prime time network showing of a television premiere of a major theatrical film release , the other networks soon copied the format , with each of the networks having several day of the week night at the movies showcases which led to a shortage of movie studio product . the first of these made-for-tv movies is generally acknowledged to be see how they run , which debuted on nbc on october 7 , 1964 . a previous film , the killers , starring lee marvin and ronald reagan , was filmed as a tv-movie , although nbc decided it was too violent for television and it was released theatrically instead . combustible celluloid.com , '' hemingway-esque '' , review by jeffrey m . anderson , paragraph 3 the second film to be considered a television movie , don siegel 's the hanged man , was broadcast by nbc on november 18 , 1964 . these features originally filled a 90-minute programming time slot ( including commercials ) , later expanded to two hours , and were usually broadcast as a weekly anthology television series ( for example , the abc movie of the week ) . many early television movies featured major stars , and some were accorded higher budgets than standard television series of the same length , including the major dramatic anthology programs which they came to replace . in 1996 , 264 made-for-tv movies were made by five of the six largest american television networks at the time ( cbs , nbc , fox , abc , and upn ) , averaging a 7.5 rating . by 2000 , only 146 tv movies were made by those five networks , averaging a 5.4 rating . while the number of made-for-cable movies made annually in the u.s . doubled between 1990 and 2000 . in several respects , television films resemble b movies , the low-budget films issued by major studies from the 1930s through the 1950s for short-term showings in movie theaters , usually as a double bill alongside a major studio release . like made-for-tv movies , b movies were designed as a disposable product , had low production costs and featured second-tier actors . film genres , dartmouth university . examples . abc 's saga of a star world premiered to an audience of over 60 million people on september 17 , 1978 . possibly the most-watched television movie of all time was abc 's the day after , which premiered on november 20 , 1983 , to an estimated audience of 100 million people . the film depicted america after a nuclear war with the soviet union , and was the subject of much controversy and discussion at the time of its release due to its graphic nature and subject matter . the bbc ’ s 1984 television film threads earned a similar reputation in the united kingdom as it followed two families and workers of sheffield city council in the run up and aftermath of a nuclear war . the two are often compared on aspects such as realism . another popular and critically acclaimed television movie was 1971 's duel , written by richard matheson , directed by steven spielberg and starring dennis weaver . such was the quality and popularity of duel that it was released to cinemas in europe and australia , and had a limited theatrical release to some venues in the united states and canada . the 1971 made-for-tv movie brian 's song was also briefly released to theatres after its success on television , and was even remake in 2001 . in some instances , television movies of the period had more explicit content included in the versions prepared to be exhibited theatrically in europe . examples of this include the legend of lizzie borden , helter skelter , prince of bel air and spectre . many television movies released in the 1970s were a source of controversy , such as linda blair 's 1974 film born innocent and 1975 's sarah t . - portrait of a teenage alcoholic , as well as 1976 's dawn : portrait of a teenage runaway and its 1977 sequel , alexander : the other side of dawn , which were vehicles for former brady bunch actress eve plumb . another significant film was elizabeth montgomery 's portrayal of a rape victim in the drama a case of rape ( 1974 ) . my sweet charlie ( 1970 ) with patty duke and al freeman jr . dealt with racial prejudice , and that certain summer ( 1972 ) , starring hal holbrook and martin sheen , although controversial , was considered the first television movie to approach the subject of homosexuality in a non-threatening manner . if these walls could talk , a film which deals with abortion in three different decades ( the 1950s , the 1970s and the 1990s ) became a huge success , and was hbo 's highest rated film on record . if a network orders a two-hour television pilot for a proposed show , it will usually broadcast it as a television movie to recoup some of the costs even if the network chooses to not order the show to series . often a successful series may spawn a television movie sequel after ending its run . for example , babylon 5 : the gathering launched the science fiction series babylon 5 and is considered to be distinct from the show 's regular run of one-hour episodes . babylon 5 also has several made-for-tv movie sequels set within the same fictional continuity . the 2003 remake of battlestar galactica began as a two-part miniseries that later continued as a weekly television program . another example is the showtime movie sabrina , the teenage witch , which launched the sitcom of the same name that originally aired on abc , and used the same actress ( melissa joan hart ) for the lead role in both . the term '' tv movie '' is also frequently used as vehicles for '' reunions '' of long-departed series , as in return to mayberry and a very brady christmas . they can also be a spin-off from a tv series including the incredible hulk returns , the trial of the incredible hulk and the death of the incredible hulk . occasionally , television movies are used as sequels to successful theatrical films . for example , only the first film in the parent trap series was released theatrically . the parent trap ii , iii and hawaiian honeymoon were produced for television , and similarly , the midnight run sequels have all been released as made-for-tv movies despite the first having a strong run in theaters . these types of films may be , and more commonly are , released direct-to-video ; there have been some films , such as the dukes of hazzard : the beginning ( a prequel to the film version of the dukes of hazzard ) and james a . michener 's texas , which have been released near simultaneously on dvd and on television , but have never been released in theatres . made-for-tv movie musicals have also become popular . one prime example is the high school musical series , which aired its first two films on the disney channel . the first television movie was so successful that a sequel was produced , high school musical 2 , that debuted in august 2007 to 17.2 million viewers ( this made it the highest-rated non-sports program in the history of basic cable and the highest-rated made-for-cable movie premiere on record ) . due to the popularity of the first two films , the second hsm sequel , high school musical 3 : senior year , was released as a theatrical film in 2008 instead of airing on disney channel ; high school musical 3 became one of the highest-grossing movie musicals . television movies traditionally were often broadcast by the major networks during sweeps season . such offerings now are very rare ; as ken tucker noted while reviewing the jesse stone cbs television movies , '' broadcast networks aren ’ t investing in made-for-tv movies anymore '' . why do we like tom selleck so much ? the slack has been taken up by cable networks such as hallmark channel , syfy , lifetime and hbo , with productions such as temple grandin and recount , often utilizing top creative talent . high-calibre limited programming which would have been formerly scheduled solely as a two-hour film or miniseries also has been re-adapted to the newer '' limited series '' format over a period of weeks ( rather than the consecutive days usually defined by a miniseries ) where a conclusion is assured ; an example of such would be the people v . o . j . simpson : american crime story , and these are most often seen on cable networks and streaming services such as netflix . production and quality . in a 1991 new york times article , television critic john j . o'connor wrote that '' few artifacts of popular culture invite more condescension than the made-for-television movie '' . network-made television movies in the united states have tended to be inexpensively-produced and perceived to be of low quality . stylistically , these films often resemble single episodes of dramatic television series . often , television films are made to '' cash in '' on the interest centering on stories currently prominent in the news , as the films based on the '' long island lolita '' scandal involving joey buttafuoco and amy fisher were in 1993 . the stories are written to reach periodic semi-cliffhangers coinciding with the network-scheduled times for the insertion of commercials , and are further managed to fill , but not exceed , the fixed running times allotted by the network to each movie '' series '' . in the case of films made for cable channels , they may rely on common , repetitive tropes ( hallmark channel , for example , is notorious for its formulaic holiday romances , while lifetime movies are well known for their common use of damsel in distress storylines ) . the movies tend to rely on smaller casts , one such exception being those produced for premium cable , such as behind the candelabra ( which featured established film actors michael douglas and matt damon in the lead roles ) and a limited range of scene settings and camera setups . even spielberg 's duel , while having decent production values , features a very small cast ( apart from dennis weaver , all other actors appearing in the film play smaller roles ) and mostly outdoor shooting locations in the desert . the movies typically employ smaller crews , and rarely feature expensive special effects . although a film 's expenses would be lessened by filming using video , as the movies were contracted by television studios , these films were required to be shot on 35 & nbsp ; mm film . various techniques are often employed to '' pad '' television movies with low budgets and underdeveloped scripts , such as music video-style montages , flashbacks , or repeated footage , and extended periods of dramatic slow motion footage . however , the less expensive digital 24p video format has made some quality improvements on the television movie market . part of the reason for the lower budgets comes from the lack of revenue streams from them ; whereas a theatrical film can make money from ticket sales , re-releases and syndication to television stations , most television films lacked those revenue streams , and the films are seldom rerun . raconteur jean shepherd produced several television films in the 1970s and 1980s before realizing that the proceeds from his first theatrical film , a christmas story , far exceeded anything he had ever done in television . nonetheless , notable exceptions exist of high production quality and well-known casts and crews that even earned awards , such as the diamond fleece , a 1992 canada tv film directed by al waxman and starring ben cross , kate nelligan and brian dennehy . it earned nelligan the 1993 gemini award for '' best performance by an actress in a leading role in a dramatic program or mini-series '' . human cargo , cbc.ca . accessed april 29 , 2008 . . movie-length episodes of television shows . occasionally , a long-running television series is used as the basis for television movies that air during the show 's run ( as opposed to the above-mentioned '' reunion specials '' ) . typically , such movies employ a filmed single-camera setup even if the television series is videotaped using a multiple-camera setup , but are written to be easily broken up into individual 30- or 60-minute episodes for syndication . many such movies relocate the cast of the show to an exotic overseas setting . however , although they may be advertised as movies , they are really simply extended episodes of television shows , such as the pilots and the finales of star trek : the next generation , star trek : deep space nine and star trek : voyager . most of these are made and shown during sweeps period in order to attract a large television audience and boost viewership for a show . crossover episodes containing a number of episodes of the characters of individual series interacting with characters across different shows ( as has been done with the csi , ncis and chicago franchises , along with between murder , she wrote and magnum , p.i . , scandal and how to get away with murder , and ally mcbeal and the practice ) also play as films , encouraging tune-in among all the series crossed over to effectively create a multiple-hour plot that plays as a film when watched as a whole .