John Couch Adams

early life . adams was born at lidcot , a farm at laneast , near launceston , cornwall , the eldest of seven children . his parents were thomas adams ( 1788–1859 ) , a poor tenant farmer , and his wife , tabitha knill grylls ( 1796–1866 ) . the family were devout wesleyans who enjoyed music and among john 's brothers , thomas became a missionary , george a farmer , and william grylls adams , professor of natural philosophy and astronomy at king 's college london . tabitha was a farmer 's daughter but had received a rudimentary education from john couch , her uncle , whose small library she had inherited . john was intrigued by the astronomy books from an early age . john attended the laneast village school where he acquired some greek and algebra . from there , he went , at the age of twelve , to devonport , where his mother 's cousin , the rev . john couch grylls , kept a private school . there he learned classics but was largely self-taught in mathematics , studying in the library of devonport mechanics ' institute and reading rees 's cyclopædia and samuel vince 's fluxions . he observed halley 's comet in 1835 from landulph and the following year started to make his own astronomical calculations , predictions and observations , engaging in private tutoring to finance his activities . in 1836 , his mother inherited a small estate at badharlick and his promise as a mathematician induced his parents to send him to the university of cambridge . in october 1839 he entered as a sizar at st john 's college , graduating b.a . in 1843 as senior wrangler and first smith 's prizewinner of his year . . discovery of neptune . in 1821 , alexis bouvard had published astronomical tables of the orbit of uranus , making predictions of future positions based on newton 's laws of motion and gravitation . bouvard , a . ( 1821 ) tables astronomiques publiées par le bureau des longitudes de france , paris , fr : bachelier subsequent observations revealed substantial deviations from the tables , leading bouvard to hypothesise some perturbing body . anon . ( 2001 ) '' bouvard , alexis '' , encyclopædia britannica , deluxe cdrom edition adams learnt of the irregularities while still an undergraduate and became convinced of the '' perturbation '' theory . adams believed , in the face of anything that had been attempted before , that he could use the observed data on uranus , and utilising nothing more than newton 's law of gravitation , deduce the mass , position and orbit of the perturbing body . on 3 july 1841 , he noted his intention to work on the problem . left after his final examinations in 1843 , adams was elected fellow of his college and spent the summer vacation in cornwall calculating the first of six iterations . while he worked on the problem back in cambridge , he tutored undergraduates , sending money home to educate his brothers , and even taught his bed maker to read . apparently , adams communicated his work to james challis , director of the cambridge observatory , in mid-september 1845 , but there is some controversy as to how . on 21 october 1845 , adams , returning from a cornwall vacation , without appointment , twice called on astronomer royal george biddell airy in greenwich . failing to find him at home , adams reputedly left a manuscript of his solution , again without the detailed calculations . airy responded with a letter to adams asking for some clarification . it appears that adams did not regard the question as '' trivial '' , as is often alleged , but he failed to complete a response . various theories have been discussed as to adams 's failure to reply , such as his general nervousness , procrastination and disorganisation . meanwhile , urbain le verrier , on 10 november 1845 , presented to the académie des sciences in paris a memoir on uranus , showing that the preexisting theory failed to account for its motion . on reading le verrier 's memoir , airy was struck by the coincidence and initiated a desperate race for english priority in discovery of the planet . the search was begun by a laborious method on 29 july . only after the discovery of neptune on 23 september 1846 had been announced in paris did it become apparent that neptune had been observed on 8 and 12 august but because challis lacked an up-to-date star-map it was not recognized as a planet . a keen controversy arose in france and england as to the merits of the two astronomers . as the facts became known , there was wide recognition that the two astronomers had independently solved the problem of uranus , and each was ascribed equal importance . however , there have been subsequent assertions that '' the brits stole neptune '' and that adams 's british contemporaries retrospectively ascribed him more credit than he was due . but it is also notable ( and not included in some of the foregoing discussion references ) that adams himself publicly acknowledged le verrier 's priority and credit ( not forgetting to mention the role of galle ) in the paper that he gave 'on the perturbations of uranus ' to the royal astronomical society in november 1846 : adams held no bitterness towards challis or airy and acknowledged his own failure to convince the astronomical world : . work style . his lay fellowship at st john 's college came to an end in 1852 , and the existing statutes did not permit his re-election . however , pembroke college , which possessed greater freedom , elected him in the following year to a lay fellowship which he held for the rest of his life . despite the fame of his work on neptune , adams also did much important work on gravitational astronomy and terrestrial magnetism . he was particularly adept at fine numerical calculations , often making substantial revisions to the contributions of his predecessors . however , he was '' extraordinarily uncompetitive , reluctant to publish imperfect work to stimulate debate or claim priority , averse to correspondence about it , and forgetful in practical matters '' . it has been suggested that these are symptoms of asperger syndrome which would also be consistent with the '' repetitive behaviours and restricted interests '' necessary to perform the neptune calculations , in addition to his difficulties in personal interaction with challis and airy . in 1852 , he published new and accurate tables of the moon 's parallax , which superseded johann karl burckhardt 's , and supplied corrections to the theories of marie-charles damoiseau , giovanni antonio amedeo plana , and philippe gustave doulcet . he had hoped that this work would leverage him into the vacant post as superintendent of hm nautical almanac office but john russell hind was preferred , adams lacking the necessary ability as an organiser and administrator . . lunar theory — secular acceleration of the moon . since ancient times , the moon 's mean rate of motion relative to the stars had been treated as being constant , but in 1695 , edmond halley had suggested that this mean rate was gradually increasing . also philos . trans . r . soc . ( abridgements ) vol.4 ( 1694–1702 ) pp . 60 at 65 : halley concluded his 1695 article on middle-eastern antiquities by writing : '' and if any curious traveller . would please to observe , with due care , the phases of the moon 's eclipses at bagdat , aleppo and alexandria , thereby to determine their longitudes , they could not do the science of astronomy a greater service : for in and near these places were made all the observations by which the mean motions of the sun and moon are limited : and i could then pronounce in what proportion the moon 's motion does accelerate ; which that it does , i think i can demonstrate . '' but it was left to richard dunthorne actually to make the first quantitative assessment of the moon 's apparent acceleration . later , during the eighteenth century , richard dunthorne estimated the rate as +10 '' ( arcseconds/century 2 ) in terms of the resulting difference in lunar longitude , -- also given in philosophical transactions ( abridgements ) ( 1809 ) , vol.9 ( for 1744–49 ) , pp . 669–675 as '' on the acceleration of the moon , by the rev . richard dunthorne '' . an effect that became known as the secular acceleration of the moon . pierre-simon laplace had given an explanation in 1787 in terms of changes in the eccentricity of the earth 's orbit . he considered only the radial gravitational force on the moon from the sun and earth but obtained close agreement with the historical record of observations . in 1820 , at the insistence of the académie des sciences , damoiseau , plana and francesco carlini revisited laplace 's work , investigating quadratic and higher-order perturbing terms , and obtained similar results , again addressing only a radial , and neglecting tangential , gravitational force on the moon . hansen obtained similar results in 1842 and 1847 . in 1853 , adams published a paper showing that , while tangential terms vanish in the first-order theory of laplace , they become substantial when quadratic terms are admitted . small terms integral in time come to have large effects and adams concluded that plana had overestimated the secular acceleration by approximately 1.66 '' per century . at first , le verrier rejected adams 's results . in 1856 , plana admitted adams 's conclusions , claiming to have revised his own analysis and arrived at the same results . however , he soon recanted , publishing a third result different both from adams 's and plana 's own earlier work . delaunay in 1859 calculated the fourth-order term and duplicated adams 's result leading adams to publish his own calculations for the fifth , sixth and seventh-order terms . adams now calculated that only 5.7 '' of the observed 11 '' was accounted for by gravitational effects . later that year , philippe gustave doulcet , comte de pontécoulant published a claim that the tangential force could have no effect though peter andreas hansen , who seems to have cast himself in the role of arbitrator , declared that the burden of proof rested on pontécoulant , while lamenting the need to discover a further effect to account for the balance . much of the controversy centred around the convergence of the power series expansion used and , in 1860 , adams duplicated his results without using a power series . sir john lubbock also duplicated adams 's results and plana finally concurred . adams 's view was ultimately accepted and further developed , winning him the gold medal of the royal astronomical society in 1866 . the unexplained drift is now known to be due to tidal acceleration . in 1858 adams became professor of mathematics at the university of st andrews , but lectured only for a session , before returning to cambridge for the lowndean professorship of astronomy and geometry . two years later he succeeded challis as director of the cambridge observatory , a post adams held until his death . . the leonids . left the great meteor shower of november 1866 turned his attention to the leonids , whose probable path and period had already been discussed and predicted by hubert anson newton in 1864 . newton had asserted that the longitude of the ascending node , that marked where the shower would occur , was increasing and the problem of explaining this variation attracted some of europe 's leading astronomers . using a powerful and elaborate analysis , adams ascertained that this cluster of meteors , which belongs to the solar system , traverses an elongated ellipse in 33.25 years , and is subject to definite perturbations from the larger planets , jupiter , saturn , and uranus . these results were published in 1867 . some experts consider this adams 's most substantial achievement . his '' definitive orbit '' for the leonids coincided with that of the comet 55p/tempel-tuttle and thereby suggested the , later widely accepted , close relationship between comets and meteors . . later career . ten years later , george william hill described a novel and elegant method for attacking the problem of lunar motion . adams briefly announced his own unpublished work in the same field , which , following a parallel course had confirmed and supplemented hill's . over a period of forty years , he periodically addressed the determination of the constants in carl friedrich gauss 's theory of terrestrial magnetism . again , the calculations involved great labour , and were not published during his lifetime . they were edited by his brother , william grylls adams , and appear in the second volume of the collected scientific papers . numerical computation of this kind might almost be described as his pastime . he calculated the euler–mascheroni constant , perhaps somewhat eccentrically , to 236 decimal places and evaluated the bernoulli numbers up to the 62nd . adams had boundless admiration for newton and his writings and many of his papers bear the cast of newton 's thought . in 1872 , isaac newton wallop , 5th earl of portsmouth , donated his private collection of newton 's papers to cambridge university . adams and g . g . stokes took on the task of arranging the material , publishing a catalogue in 1888 . a catalogue of the portsmouth collection of books and papers written by or belonging to sir isaac newton , the scientific part of which has been presented by the earl of portsmouth to the university of cambridge , drawn up by the syndicate appointed 6 november 1982 , cambridge : cambridge university press , 1888 the post of astronomer royal was offered him in 1881 , but he preferred to pursue his teaching and research in cambridge . he was british delegate to the international meridian conference at washington in 1884 , when he also attended the meetings of the british association at montreal and of the american association at philadelphia . . honours . 1847 he is reputed to have been offered a knighthood on queen victoria 's 1847 cambridge visit but to have declined , either out of modesty , or fear of the financial consequences of such social distinction ; 1847 foreign honorary member of the american academy of arts and sciences ; 1848 copley medal of the royal society ; 1848 adams prize , founded by the members of st john 's college , to be given biennially for the best treatise on a mathematical subject ; 1849 elected fellow of the royal society of london and honorary fellow of the royal society of edinburgh ; 1851 and 1874 president of the royal astronomical society ( 1851–1853 and 1874–1876 ) . . family and death . after a long illness , adams died at cambridge on 21 january 1892 and was buried near his home in st giles cemetery , now the parish of the ascension burial ground in cambridge . goldie , mark ( 2009 ) churchill college cambridge : the guide . churchill college . pp . 62–63 . in 1863 he had married miss eliza bruce ( 1827–1919 ) , of dublin , who survived him , and is buried with him . his wealth at death was £32,434 ( £2.6 million at 2003 prices ) . . memorials . memorial in westminster abbey with a portrait medallion , by albert bruce-joy ; 'the abbey scientists ' hall , a.r . p56 : london ; roger & robert nicholson ; 1966 a bust , by joy in the hall of st john 's college , cambridge ; another youthful bust belongs to the royal astronomical society ; portraits by : hubert von herkomer in pembroke college ; paul raphael montord in the combination room of st john 's ; a memorial tablet , with an inscription by archbishop benson , in truro cathedral ; passmore edwards erected a public institute in his honour at launceston , near his birthplace ; adams nunatak , a nunatak on neptune glacier in alexander island in antarctica , is named after him . obituaries . the times , 22 january 1892 , p . & nbsp ; 6 col.d ( link on this page ) anon . ( 1891–92 ) journal of the british astronomical association 2 : 196–7 . about adams and the discovery of neptune . from project gutenberg doggett , l . e . ( 1997 ) '' celestial mechanics '' , in harrison , h . m ( 1994 ) . voyager in time and space : the life of john couch adams , cambridge astronomer . lewes : book guild , . by adams . adams , j . c . , ed . w . g . adams & r . a . sampson ( 1896–1900 ) the scientific papers of john couch adams , 2 vols , london : cambridge university press , with a memoir by j . w . l . glaisher : vol.1 ( 1896 ) previously published writings ; vol.2 ( 1900 ) manuscripts including the substance of his lectures on the lunar theory . adams , j . c . , ed . r . a . sampson ( 1900 ) lectures on the lunar theory , london : cambridge university press a collection , virtually complete , of adams 's papers regarding the discovery of neptune was presented by mrs adams to the library of st john 's college , see : sampson ( 1904 ) , and also : '' the collected papers of prof . adams '' , journal of the british astronomical association , 7 ( 1896–97 ) monthly notices of the royal astronomical society , 53 184 ; observatory , 15 174 ; nature , 34 565 ; 45 301 ; astronomical journal , no.254 ; r . grant , history of physical astronomy , p . & nbsp ; 168 ; and edinburgh review , no.381 , p . & nbsp ; 72 . the papers were ultimately lodged with the royal greenwich observatory and evacuated to herstmonceux castle during world war ii . after the war , they were stolen by olin j . eggen and only recovered in 1998 , hampering much historical research in the subject . . see also . intrigue at ras and cambridge observatory from the biography of richard christopher carrington . references . external links . biography on the st andrews database davor krajnovic , john couch adams : mathematical astronomer , college friend of george gabriel stokes and promotor of women in astronomy