Joel Barlow

biography . barlow was born in redding , fairfield county , connecticut . he briefly attended dartmouth college before he graduated from yale college in 1778 , where he continued for two years as a postgraduate student . in 1778 , he published an anti-slavery poem entitled '' the prospect of peace '' . barlow was an ardent patriot in the american revolution . he was engaged in the battle of long island and served as a chaplain for the 4th massachusetts brigade from september 1780 until the close of the revolutionary war . goetzmann , william h . ( 2009 ) beyond the revolution : a history of american thought from paine to pragmatism , new york : basic books , perseus books group , p . 142 schama observes that '' he had found schoolmastering too humdrum , yale too sober , and a chaplaincy to a massachusetts regiment of the line during the american revolution had not survived his natural irreverence '' ( schama 1995:248 ) . he was an original member of the society of the cincinnati in the state of massachusetts ( and connecticut ) . metcalf , bryce . original members and other officers eligible to the society of the cincinnati , 1783-1938 : with the institution , rules of admission , and lists of the officers of the general and state societies ( strasburg , va . : shenandoah publishing house , inc . , 1938 ) , p . 44 . he was a mason '' enlightenment and freemasonry '' , commonwealth books . and he became a good friend to thomas paine . in 1783 , barlow moved to hartford , connecticut . in july 1784 , he established a weekly paper called american mercury , with which he was connected for a year . after '' reading the law '' in an established office , in 1786 he was admitted to the bar . in hartford , barlow became a member of a group of young writers including lemuel hopkins , david humphreys , and john trumbull , known in american literary history as the '' hartford wits '' . he contributed to the anarchiad , a series of satirico-political papers . in 1787 , he published a long and ambitious poem , the vision of columbus , which gave him a considerable literary reputation and was once much read . land speculator . in 1788 , he went to france as the agent of colonel william duer and the scioto land company , which had been registered in paris the year before . he was to sell lands in part of the newly organized northwest territory ( this section is now in ohio ) , and recruit immigrants for new settlements . he seems to have been ignorant of the fraudulent character of the company , which did not hold title to the lands it sold and failed disastrously in 1790 . he had previously recruited a group of french to emigrate to america . known as the french 500 , most of them were among the founders of gallipolis , ohio , the second oldest european-american city founded in the new northwest territory . john gladden , '' best hometowns 2012 : gallipolis '' , ohio magazine , november 2012 ; accessed 06 september 2018 . french politics and citizenship . in paris , barlow became a liberal in religion and an advanced republican in politics . he believed that '' american civilization was world civilization '' , and was enthusiastic about the cause of world republicanism . he became involved with the french revolution , going so far as to be elected to the french assembly , and being granted french citizenship in 1792 . although he dedicated his '' vision of columbus '' to louis xvi , he joined royal opponents in calling for the execution of the king . goetzmann ( 2009 ) beyond the revolution , p144 . barlow helped thomas paine publish the first part of the age of reason while paine was imprisoned during the reign of terror in france . barlow remained abroad for several years , spending much of his time in london . there he was a member of the society for constitutional information . he also published various radical essays , including a volume entitled advice to the privileged orders ( 1792 ) . this was proscribed by the british government . diplomacy . barlow was appointed as american consul at algiers in 1795-1797 , during the period when barbary pirates were preying on united states and european shipping . he used state department funds for bribes and ransoms to free more than 100 american merchant sailors held by pirates . he helped negotiate treaties with the barbary states of algiers , tripoli , and tunis to avert future seizures of american ships . peter p . hill , joel barlow : american diplomat and nation builder ( 2012 ) he returned to the united states in 1805 , where he lived in the national capital at his mansion , known as kalorama , now the name of a neighborhood in northwest washington , d.c . in 1811 , barlow was appointed as u.s . minister to france ; he sailed across the atlantic on the uss constitution . his task was to negotiate an end to the berlin decree and the milan decree , as well as obtain the release of american ships and crews held by the french during the napoleonic wars . he befriended , and was served as consul and prize agent , by the united-irish exile david bailie warden . in october 1812 , barlow set off for vilnius to negotiate a treaty with the french foreign minister , who was based in lithuania to prepare for the french invasion of russia . by the time he arrived , the french army was already in full retreat from moscow . barlow chose to take the southerly route to return to paris , by way of kraków and vienna . he became ill and died of pneumonia on december 26 , 1812 in the polish village of żarnowiec . a monument was later erected to him there . poetry . in 1807 , he published the epic columbiad , an extended edition of his vision of columbus . it added to his reputation in some quarters , but on the whole it was not well received . it has subsequently been much ridiculed . the poem for which he is now best known is his mock heroic the hasty-pudding ( 1793 ) , first published in new york magazine and now a standard item in literary anthologies . in addition , barlow published conspiracy of kings , a poem addressed to the inhabitants of europe from another quarter of the globe ( 1792 ) . he continued writing political essays , publishing political writings of joel barlow ( 2nd ed . , 1796 ) and view of the public debt , receipts and expenditure of the united states ( 1800 ) . but much of his political speculation never passed beyond his voluminous notebooks , many of which are conserved in harvard 's houghton library . he also composed a satirical version of the british national anthem '' god save the king '' , called '' god save the guillotine '' . a song . tune- '' god save the guillotine '' , stanford.edu catalogue . thought . historian william h . goetzmann describes barlow as a cosmopolitan , along with thomas jefferson , benjamin franklin , engineer robert fulton , and thomas paine , the last two of whom barlow befriended in france . barlow believed that the new country of america was a model civilization that prefigured the '' uniting of all mankind in one religion , one language and one newtonian harmonious whole '' goeztmann ( 2009 ) , beyond the revolution , p . 143 and thought of '' the american revolution as the opening skirmish of a world revolution on behalf of the rights of all humanity . '' an optimist , he believed that scientific and republican progress , along with religion and people 's growing sense of humanity , would lead to the coming of the millennium . for him , american civilization was world civilization . he projected that these concepts would coalesce around the rebuilding of the temple in jerusalem . . legacy . barlow was painted by robert fulton and john vanderlyn ( 1798 ) . illustrated in schama 1995:246 . barlow , ohio is named in his honor . he was one of the contributing editors of the first agricultural magazine in america , the agricultural museum . joel barlow high school in redding , connecticut , is named for him . a monument to him was installed in the village of żarnowiec , now in poland , where he died .