Biophilia hypothesis

natural affinity for living systems . '' biophilia '' is an innate affinity of life or living systems . the term was first used by erich fromm to describe a erich fromm of being attracted to all that is alive and vital . wilson uses the term in a related sense when he suggests that biophilia describes '' the connections that human beings subconsciously seek with the rest of life . '' he proposed the possibility that the deep affiliations humans have with other life forms and nature as a whole are rooted in our biology . both positive and negative ( including phobic ) affiliations toward natural objects ( species , phenomenon ) as compared to artificial objects are evidence for biophilia . although named by fromm , the concept of biophilia has been proposed and defined many times over . aristotle was one of many to put forward a concept that could be summarized as '' love of life '' . diving into the term philia , or friendship , aristotle evokes the idea of reciprocity and how friendships are beneficial to both parties in more than just one way , but especially in the way of happiness . santas , aristotelis . '' aristotelian ethics and biophilia . '' ethics & the environment 19.1 ( 2014 ) : 95-121 . in the book children and nature : psychological , sociocultural , and evolutionary investigations edited by peter kahn and stephen kellert , the importance of animals , especially those with which a child can develop a nurturing relationship , is emphasized particularly for early and middle childhood . chapter 7 of the same book reports on the help that animals can provide to children with autistic-spectrum disorders . . product of biological evolution . human preferences toward things in nature , while refined through experience and culture , are hypothetically the product of biological evolution . for example , adult mammals ( especially humans ) are generally attracted to baby mammal faces and find them cuteness across species . the large eyes and small features of any young mammal face are far more appealing than those of the mature adults . similarly , the hypothesis helps explain why ordinary people care for and sometimes risk their lives to save domestic and wild animals , and keep plants and flowers in and around their homes . in other words , our natural love for life helps sustain life . very often , flowers also indicate potential for food later . most fruits start their development as flowers . for our ancestors , it was crucial to spot , detect and remember the plants that would later provide nutrition . biophilia and conservation . because of our technological advancements and more time spent inside buildings and cars disconnects us from nature , biophilic activities and time spent in nature may be strengthening our connections as humans to nature , so people continue to have strong urges to reconnect with nature . the concern for a lack of connection with the rest of nature outside of us , is that a stronger disregard for other plants , animals and less appealing wild areas could lead to further ecosystem degradation and species loss . therefore , reestablishing a connection with nature has become more important in the field of conservation . examples would be more available green spaces in and around cities , more classes that revolve around nature and implementing smart design for greener cities that integrate ecosystems into them such as biophilic cities . these cities can also become part of wildlife corridors to help with migrational and territorial needs of other animals . . development . the hypothesis has since been developed as part of theories of evolutionary psychology in the book the biophilia hypothesis edited by stephen r . kellert and edward o . wilson and by lynn margulis . also , stephen kellert 's work seeks to determine common human responses to perceptions of , and ideas about , plants and animals , and to explain them in terms of the conditions of human evolution . biophilic design . in architecture , biophilic design is a sustainable design strategy that incorporates reconnecting people with the natural environment . it may be seen as a necessary complement to green architecture , which decreases the environmental impact of the built world but does not address human reconnection with the natural world . caperna and serafini caperna a . , serafini s . ( 2015 ) . biourbanism as new epistemological perspective between science , design and nature . in architecture & sustainability : critical perspectives . '' generating sustainability concepts from an architectural perspective '' , ku leuven - faculty of engineering , belgium ) . define biophilic design as that kind of architecture , which is able to supply our inborn need of connection to life and to the vital processes . according to caperna and serafini , caperna a . , giangrande a . , mirabelli p . , mortola e . , ( 2013 ) . partecipazione e ict . gangemi editore biophilic architecture is characterized by the following elements : i ) the naturalistic dimension ; ( ii ) the wholeness c . alexander , the nature of order , center for environmental structure , 2002 of the site , that is , '' the basic structure of the place '' ; ( iii ) the '' geometric coherency '' , that is , the physical space must have such a geometrical configuration able to exalt the connections human dimension and built and natural environments . similarly , biophilic space has been defined as the environment that strengthens life and supports the sociological and psychological components , serafini , s . ( 2009 ) . totalitarismo del brutto . no alle archistar . in bioarchitettura , 59 ( ottobre ) , pp . 4-11 . caperna , a . , tracada , e . ( 2012 ) . biourbanism for a healthy city . biophilia and sustainable urban theories and practices . bannari amman institute of technology ( bit ) , sathyamangalam , india , 3–5 september 2012 or , in other words , it is able to : caperna a . , serafini s . ( 2015 ) . biourbanism as new epistemological perspective between science , design and nature . in architecture & sustainability : critical perspectives . '' generating sustainability concepts from an architectural perspective '' , ku leuven - faculty of engineering , belgium ) . ( i ) unburden our cognitive system , supporting it in collecting and recognizing more information in the quickest and most efficient way ; ( ii ) foster the optimum of our sensorial system in terms of neuro-motorial influence , avoiding both the depressive and the exciting effects ; ( iii ) induce a strengthening in emotive and biological terms at a neural level ; ( iv ) support , according to the many clinical evidences , the neuro-endocryne and immunological system , especially for those people who are in bad physical condition . having a window looking out to plants is also shown to help speed up the healing process of patients in hospitals . windows looking out to plants helping the healing process similarly , having plants in the same room as patients in hospitals also speeds up their healing process . . biophilia in fiction . canadian author hilary scharper explicitly adapted e.o . wilson 's concept of biophilia for her ecogothic novel , perdita . in the novel , perdita ( meaning '' the lost one '' ) is a mythology who brings biophilia to humanity . biophilia and technology . american philosopher francis sanzaro has put forth the claim that because of advances in technological connectivity , especially the internet of things ( iot ) , our world is becoming increasingly driven by the biophilia hypothesis , namely , the desire to connect to forms of life . see sanzaro 's extended treatment of how algorithms are helping fuel techno-biophilia , '' society elsewhere : why the gravest threat to humanity will come from within . '' sanzaro applies wilson 's theories to trends in artificial intelligence and psychoanalysis and argues that technology is not an antithesis to nature , but simply another form of seeking intimacy with nature .