2001 in literature

events . february 15 – the author michael crichton signs a new deal with harpercollins publishers that reportedly earns him 40 million for two books . april 1 – the bookcrossing scheme for leaving books for strangers to find is launched . april 13 – the film version of helen fielding 's 1996 novel bridget jones 's diary has uncredited cameo roles as themselves for salman rushdie , julian barnes and jeffrey archer , at a literary party . july 19 – the english popular novelist and politician jeffrey archer , having been found guilty of perjury in a libel trial , is sentenced to imprisonment . september 19 – amiri baraka reads his poem '' somebody blew up america ? '' at a poetry festival in new jersey , eight days after 9/11 . december 10 – the live-action film version of j . r . r . tolkien 's the lord of the rings : the fellowship of the ring , directed by peter jackson , opens in london . its appearance has a strong impact on readership of the trilogy . . new books . fiction . niccolò ammaniti – io non ho paura hiromu arakawa – fullmetal alchemist ( 鋼の錬金術師 , hagane no renkinjutsushi , manga series , begins publication ) raymond benson – never dream of dying dennis bock – the ash garden ben bova – the precipice geraldine brooks – year of wonders lois mcmaster bujold – the curse of chalion javier cercas – soldiers of salamis ( soldados de salamina ) joseph connolly – s.o.s . bernard cornwell sharpe 's trafalgar gallows thief douglas coupland – all families are psychotic achmat dangor – bitter fruit helen dunmore – the siege umberto eco – baudolino james ellroy – the cold six thousand leif enger – peace like a river sebastian faulks – on green dolphin street leon forrest – meteor in the madhouse jonathan franzen – the corrections rodrigo fresán – mantra diana gabaldon – the fiery cross martin h . greenberg and larry segriff – past imperfect kate grenville – the idea of perfection john grisham a painted house skipping christmas margaret peterson haddix – among the impostors joanne harris – five quarters of the orange vigdis hjorth – om bare ( if only ) nick hornby – how to be good silas house – clay 's quilt nancy huston – dolce agonia john irving – the fourth hand fleur jaeggy – proleterka p . d . james – death in holy orders greg keyes edge of victory : conquest edge of victory : rebirth stephen king black house' dreamcatcher christian kracht – 1979 hanif kureishi – gabriel 's gift joe r . lansdale – captains outrageous john le carré – the constant gardener ursula k . le guin – the birthday of the world pedro lemebel – tengo miedo torero ( my tender matador ) mario vargas llosa – the feast of the goat ( la fiesta del chivo ) david lodge – thinks . james luceno – cloak of deception ian mcewan – atonement andreï makine – music of a life ( la musique d'une vie ) juliet marillier – child of the prophecy yann martel – life of pi alice munro – hateship , friendship , courtship , loveship , marriage ( short stories ) v s naipaul – half a life r . k . narayan – under the banyan tree joyce carol oates – middle age : a romance chuck palahniuk – choke noni power & ndash ; crawling at night terry pratchett the amazing maurice and his educated rodents thief of time the last hero sven regener – herr lehmann kathy reichs – fatal voyage alain robbe-grillet – la reprise jean-christophe rufin – rouge brésil salman rushdie – fury richard russo – empire falls eric schlosser – fast food nation w . g . sebald – austerlitz nava semel – and the rat laughed ( ואת צחוק של עכברוש ) michael slade – death 's door olga slavnikova – bessmertniy ( the immortal ) danielle steel – leap of faith antonio tabucchi – it 's getting later all the time amy tan – the bonesetter 's daughter timothy taylor – stanley park anne tyler – back when we were grownups jane urquhart – the stone carvers andrew vachss – pain management tim winton – dirt music carlos ruiz zafón – la sombra del viento ( the shadow of the wind ; first in el cementerio de los libros olvidados ( the cemetery of forgotten books ) series ) juli zeh – eagles and angels . children and young people . david almond – secret heart malorie blackman – noughts and crosses ( first in the noughts and crosses series of five books ) eoin colfer – artemis fowl ( first in the eponymous series of eight books ) eva ibbotson – journey to the river sea david klass – you do n't know me hilary mckay – saffy 's angel patricia mckissack & ndash ; goin ' someplace special michael morpurgo more muck and magic out of the ashes toro ! toro ! linda sue park – a single shard j . k . rowling – harry potter and the goblet of fire jacqueline wilson – sleepovers . drama . richard alfieri – six dance lessons in six weeks gurpreet kaur bhatti – behsharam ( shameless ) abdelkader benali – yasser neil labute – the shape of things lynn manning – weights peter morris – the age of consent zlatko topčić – time out . poetry . anne carson – the beauty of the husband . non-fiction . tom allen – rolling home faculty of arts , 2002 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , tom allen . retrieved 2012-11-26 . jan bondeson – buried alive : the terrifying history of our most primal fear dionne brand – a map to the door of no return : notes to belonging edwin bryant – the quest for the origins of vedic culture eamon duffy – the voices of morebath . reformation and rebellion in an english village barbara ehrenreich – nickel and dimed koenraad elst – the saffron swastika mem fox – reading magic antonia fraser – marie antoinette : the journey dorothy gallagher – how i came into my inheritance stephen hawking – the universe in a nutshell laura hillenbrand – seabiscuit christopher hitchens – the trial of henry kissinger gary lachman – turn off your mind lawrence lessig – the future of ideas normand lester – le livre noir du canada anglais ( the black book of english canada ) steven levy – crypto : how the code rebels beat the government—saving privacy in the digital age margaret macmillan – peacemakers : the paris peace conference of 1919 and its attempt to end war michael moore – stupid white men mumtaz mufti – ali pur ka aeeli pavel polian – against their will . a history and geography of forced migrations in the ussr e . hoffmann price – book of the dead miranda seymour – mary shelley andrew solomon – the noonday demon : an atlas of depression ben thompson - ways of hearing türkmenbaşy – ruhnama ( the book of the soul , first part ) ivan vladislavic – the restless supermarket frans de waal – the ape and the sushi master benjamin woolley – the queen 's conjuror : the science and magic of dr . dee . deaths . january 5 – g . e . m . anscombe , english analytic philosopher ( died 2001 ) january 8 – catherine storr , english children 's writer ( born 1913 ) january 11 – lorna sage , english scholar ( born 1943 ) january 31 – gordon r . dickson , canadian-born american science fiction writer ( born 1923 ) february 7 – anne morrow lindbergh , american author and aviator ( born 1906 ) february 14 alan ross , indian-born english poet and editor ( born 1922 ) richard laymon , american horror fiction writer ( born 1947 ) march 12 – robert ludlum , american novelist ( born 1927 ) may 11 – douglas adams , english writer , humorist and dramatist ( born 1952 ) may 13 – r . k . narayan , indian novelist writing in english ( born 1906 ) june 1 – hank ketcham , american cartoonist ( born 1920 ) june 27 – tove jansson , finnish children 's author writing in swedish ( born 1914 ) july 3 – mordecai richler , canadian author , screenwriter and essayist ( born 1931 ) july 18 – james hatfield , american author ( born 1958 ) july 31 – poul anderson , american fantasy and sci-fi author ( born 1926 ) august 6 – jorge amado , brazilian writer ( born 1912 ) august 20 – fred hoyle , english astronomer and science fiction writer ( born 1915 ) november 10 – ken kesey , american author ( born 1935 ) november 25 – david gascoyne , english surrealist poet ( born 1916 ) december 21 – dick schaap , american journalist and author ( born 1934 ) december 14 – w . g . sebald , german novelist and academic ( born 1944 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : v.s . naipaul . australia . miles franklin award : frank moorhouse , dark palace . canada . giller prize : richard b . wright – clara callan see 2001 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : taras grescoe – sacré blues faculty of arts , 2001 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , taras grescoe . retrieved 2012-11-26 . . france . prix décembre : chloé delaume , prix femina : marie ndiaye , prix goncourt : jean-christophe rufin , prix médicis french : edwy plenel , prix médicis non-fiction : prix médicis international : antonio skarmeta , . united kingdom . booker prize : peter carey , true history of the kelly gang carnegie medal for children 's literature : terry pratchett , the amazing maurice and his educated rodents james tait black memorial prize for fiction : sid smith , something like a house james tait black memorial prize for biography : robert skidelsky , john maynard keynes : volume 3 – fighting for britain 1937–1946 caine prize for african writing : helon habila , '' love poems '' cholmondeley award : ian duhig , paul durcan , kathleen jamie , grace nichols eric gregory award : leontia flynn , thomas warner , tishani doshi , patrick mackie , kathryn gray , sally read griffin poetry prize : anne carson , men in the off hours and nikolai popov and heather mchugh , translation of glottal stop : 101 poems by paul celan hugo award : j . k . rowling , harry potter and the goblet of fire samuel johnson prize : michael burleigh , the third reich queen 's gold medal for poetry : michael longley orange prize for fiction : kate grenville , the idea of perfection 2001 whitbread awards : patrick neate , twelve bar blues . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize awarded to gabriel gudding for a defense of poetry aiken taylor award for modern american poetry , frederick morgan bernard f . connors prize for poetry , gabrielle calvocoressi , “ circus fire , 1944 ” bollingen prize for poetry , louise glück brittingham prize in poetry , robin behn , horizon note compton crook award : syne mitchell , murphy 's gambit frost medal : sonia sanchez hugo award : j.k . rowling , harry potter and the goblet of fire newbery medal for children 's literature : richard peck , a year down yonder national book award for fiction : to the corrections by jonathan franzen national book critics circle award : to austerlitz by w.g . sebald pen/faulkner award for fiction : to philip roth for the human stain pulitzer prize for drama : david auburn , proof pulitzer prize for fiction : michael chabon , the amazing adventures of kavalier & clay pulitzer prize for poetry : stephen dunn , different hours wallace stevens award : john ashbery whiting awards : : fiction : emily carter , matthew klam , akhil sharma , samrat upadhyay , john wray : nonfiction : judy blunt , kathleen finneran : plays : brighde mullins : poetry : joel brouwer , jason sommer . other . camões prize : eugénio de andrade europe theatre prize : lev dodin , michel piccoli finlandia prize : hannu raittila , canal grande international dublin literary award : alistair macleod , no great mischief premio nadal : fernando marías , el niño de los coroneles premio strega : domenico starnone , via gemito premio de novela ciudad de torrevieja ( first award ) : javier reverte , la noche detenida saarc literary award : ganesh narayandas devy , shamsur rahman viareggio prize : niccolò ammaniti , io non ho paura , michele ranchetti , verbale , and giorgio pestelli , canti del destino . references . cy : llenyddiaeth yn 2000