Morning Glory (1933 film)

plot . eva lovelace ( katharine hepburn ) is a performer from a small town who has dreamed since childhood of making it big on broadway . she has evidently gone to many auditions , but no one has given her a break . at the management office of the easton theatre , where she hopes to land a role , another actress , current star rita vernon ( mary duncan ) , breezes in to see the handsome middle-aged theater owner and producer , louis easton ( adolphe menjou ) , a consummate businessman who is well aware of his prestige in the theater world . blonde diva rita is high-handed and self-absorbed , with an alcohol problem as well , but she 's under verbal contract to easton . she shamelessly flirts as she negotiates a deal ; she 'll accept a small role ( which she does n't want ) in the upcoming play , for one big concession : her pick of roles in the next production . the principals are taking a risk that she 'll contain her artistic temperament and lay off the bottle . even so , her name and fame will help launch the play , a new comedy by joseph sheridan ( douglas fairbanks jr . ) meanwhile , as she waits to see if she 'll get a chance to talk to easton , eva meets and impresses robert hedges ( c . aubrey smith ) , an experienced character actor also under contract to easton . delighted with her childlike ebullience , hedges agrees to help her . he takes eva into the office and introduces her as his protegee . sheridan , there to cast his upcoming comedy production , is also immediately struck by eva 's vivacious and eccentric personality , a non-stop talker , eva bubbles over with intensity about her small town bourgeois background and her belief in non-conformity and self-realization . she declares that after a long and successful career , she 'll kill herself onstage as a dramatic farewell to her fans . joseph is entranced , but the aristocratic easton sees her as too young and inexperienced , even somewhat crazy . months pass . hedges has lost touch with eva . she frequently moves due to poor finances and has n't been cast in meaningful roles . hedges finds her struggling and hungry . eva expresses regret that easton gave her a small role in one of his lesser plays , one which flopped . she bravely declares she wo n't take any more offers , unless the role truly suits her abilities . realizing she 's broke and basically starving , hodges escorts her to a celebrity party at easton 's apartment . eva quickly downs two glasses of champagne , although she 's not a drinker . inebriated , eva sits on the arm of easton 's chair , stroking his face and vowing to prove her dramatic talents to him . she makes a spectacle of herself before the bemused party guests . then unexpectedly she gives two shakespearean orations , hamlet 's well-known monologue ( '' to be or not to be '' ) followed by juliet 's balcony scene . the difference in the roles demonstrates her art ; she gets a polite ovation from the guests and further impresses sheridan . eva lays her head on easton 's lap and promptly falls asleep . his butler put her to bed in his own bedroom . the next morning , easton asks sheridan for help . easton gave in to temptation and explains the encounter through innuendo . he 's remorseful at taking advantage of a girl 's innocence and ca n't face her . joseph is devastated to learn that the overnight guest was eva . easton apologizes and leaves . a radiant eva comes downstairs and sees joseph , whom she regards as '' just a friend . '' happily she tells him everything . to her , the night with easton is the beginning of a long commitment . joseph ca n't bring himself to break her heart . he lets her go without explaining . more months pass . eva has tried numerous times to see easton . unwilling to face her , easton has simply ignored her . joseph keeps his own love a secret . easton 's theater company is ready to showcase joseph 's dramatic masterpiece . the play will star rita vernon . joseph approves of her performance in rehearsals . backstage on opening night , rita calls easton into her dressing room . heretofore she and easton have had only verbal agreements . aware of the power she holds at this late hour , rita now has outrageous demands . she wants a written contract with a huge salary increase and half the profits from the entire run of the play . otherwise , she wo n't go onstage . easton thinks he has no choice but to comply . joseph draws him aside . he urges easton to let rita go . instead , they can bring in a special understudy , one he 's kept secret until this very moment . she is now revealed as eva lovelace . easton reluctantly agrees and rita storms off the set . eva and joseph end up together in the star 's dressing room . faced with this sudden opportunity , eva seems overcome with doubt and fear . she ca n't perform with easton in the audience ; they have n't spoken since their night together . she feels unsure of her talents and feels doomed to failure . joseph reassures her that she can handle whatever is thrown at her . she 's strong and beautiful , a born actress who can now prove it . eva rallies , gathers her self-confidence , and resolves to conquer the role . as joseph predicted , eva is a complete success . backstage , easton reconciles with eva , offering her his professional friendship and aid . when he goes , joseph gathers the courage to declare his love for eva . unsure of everything , eva hushes him and makes him leave . now she 's there with only her dresser , an elegant elderly lady who was herself once a brief star or '' morning glory . '' the dresser comforts eva , assuring her that she has the talent to succeed in show business and life ; but really only one thing matters , true love . she knows that because she once spurned the love she was offered , choosing fame instead , at the beginning of her all too brief career . renewed , eva readies herself to forge down the rocky road to stardom ahead of her . the film ends with some uncertainty , but on an upbeat note . once again self-confident , dramatic to the heart , eva declares to her dresser , '' i 'm not afraid.to be a morning glory . i am not afraid ! '' . main cast . katharine hepburn as eva lovelace douglas fairbanks jr . as joseph sheridan adolphe menjou as louis easton mary duncan as rita vernon c . aubrey smith as robert harley '' bob '' hedges don alvarado as pepi velez fred santley as will seymour , easton 's assistant richard carle as henry lawrence , theatrical critic tyler brooke as charley van duesen geneva mitchell as gwendoline hall helen ware as nellie navarre , dresser ( wardrobe woman ) and herself a former star . production . in pre-production , the script had been tailored to fit the talents of constance bennett , then rko 's biggest attraction . however , when newcomer katharine hepburn read the script , she convinced producer pandro s . berman that she was born to play the part , and she was given the role over the more popular bennett , who was thereupon reassigned to bed of roses ( 1933 ) . when rko bought the rights to the play from zoë akins , it still had n't been produced on stage . it eventually saw a limited stage run in 1939 . the director lowell sherman managed to get the rko bosses to agree that he was given a week of rehearsal with the actors before the shooting began , in return for promising a shooting schedule of only 18 days ( april 21 - may 12 , 1933 ) . unlike most feature films , morning glory was shot in the same sequence as the script . katharine hepburn was paid 2,500 per week for her work on the picture , for which she eventually won her first academy award for best actress . . reception . after cinema circuits deducted their exhibition share of boxoffice ticket sales this production earned a profit of 115,000 . . radio adaptation . in october , 1942 , lux radio theatre broadcast a radio adaptation of the film , starring judy garland as eva lovelace and adolphe menjou reprising his role of louis easton . garland performed the song '' i 'll remember april '' on the broadcast . in 1949 , a second radio adaptation was aired on the radio , this time with elizabeth taylor in the lead role of eva lovelace . references . external links .