Sanhedrin

hebrew bible . in the hebrew bible , ; , moses and the israelites were commanded by god to establish courts of judges who were given full authority over the people of israel , who were commanded by god through moses to obey the judgments made by the courts and every torah-abiding law they established . judges in ancient israel were the religious leaders and rabbis of the nation of israel . the mishnah ( sanhedrin 1:6 ) arrives at the number twenty-three based on an exegesis derivation : it must be possible for a '' minyan '' to vote for both conviction and exoneration . the minimum size of a '' community '' is 10 men , the hebrew term '' community '' appears in ; i.e . , the 10 spies who had spread a bad report about the land , thus a '' community '' is 10 men . thus 10 vs 10 . one more is required to achieve a majority ( 11 vs 10 ) , but a simple majority can not convict , and so an additional judge is required ( 12 vs 10 ) . finally , a court should not have an even number of judges to prevent deadlocks ; thus 23 ( 12 vs 10 and 1 ) . this court dealt with only religious matters . history . early sanhedrin . the hasmonean court in judea , presided over by alexander jannaeus , until 76 bce , followed by his wife , queen salome alexandra , was called synhedrion or sanhedrin . the exact nature of this early sanhedrin is not clear . it may have been a body of sages or priests , or a political , legislative and judicial institution . the first historical record of the body was during the administration of aulus gabinius , who , according to josephus , organized five synedra in 57 bce as roman administration was not concerned with religious affairs unless sedition was suspected . mantel , hugo . ( 1972 ) '' sanhedrin '' . in encyclopaedia judaica . jerusalem : macmillan . 14 , p . 836 only after the destruction of the second temple was the sanhedrin made up only of sages . . herodian and early roman rule . the first historic mention of a synedrion ( greek : συνέδριον ) occurs in the psalms of solomon ( xvii:49 ) , a jewish religious book written in greek . a synhedrion is mentioned 22 times in the greek new testament , including in the gospels in relation to the trial of jesus , and in the acts of the apostles , which mentions a ″great synhedrion″ in chapter 5 where rabbi gamaliel appeared , and also in chapter 7 in relation to the stoning death of saint stephen . the mishnah tractate sanhedrin ( iv:2 ) states that the sanhedrin was to be recruited from the following sources : priests ( kohanim ) , levites ( levi'im ) , and ordinary jews who were members of those families having a pure lineage such that their daughters were allowed to marry priests . in the second temple period , the great sanhedrin met in the hall of hewn stones in the temple in jerusalem . the court convened every day except festivals and the sabbath day ( shabbat ) . during jewish–roman wars . after the destruction of the second temple in 70 ce , the sanhedrin was re-established in yavneh with reduced authority . the seat of the patriarchate moved to usha under the presidency of gamaliel ii in 80 ce . in 116 it moved back to yavneh , and then again back to usha . after bar kokhba revolt . rabbinic texts indicate that following the bar kokhba revolt , southern galilee became the seat of rabbinic learning in the land of israel . this region was the location of the court of the patriarch which was situated first at usha , then at bet shearim , later at sepphoris and finally at tiberias . the great sanhedrin moved in 140 to shefaram under the presidency of shimon ben gamliel ii , and to beit she'arim ( roman-era jewish village ) and sepphoris in 163 , under the presidency of judah i . finally , it moved to tiberias in 193 , under the presidency of gamaliel iii ( 193–230 ) ben judah hanasi , where it became more of a consistory , but still retained , under the presidency of judah ii ( 230–270 ) , the power of excommunication . during the presidency of gamaliel iv ( 270–290 ) , due to roman persecution , it dropped the name sanhedrin ; and its authoritative decisions were subsequently issued under the name of yeshiva . in the year 363 , the emperor julian ( r . 355–363 ce ) , an apostate from christianity , ordered the temple rebuilt . ammianus marcellinus , res gestae , 23.1.2–3 . the project 's failure has been ascribed to the galilee earthquake of 363 , and to the jews ' ambivalence about the project . sabotage is a possibility , as is an accidental fire . divine intervention was the common view among christian historians of the time . see '' julian and the jews 361–363 ce '' and '' julian the apostate and the holy temple '' . as a reaction against julian 's pro-jewish stance , the later emperor theodosius i ( r . 379–392 ce ) forbade the sanhedrin to assemble and declared semicha illegal . capital punishment was prescribed for any rabbi who received ordination , as well as complete destruction of the town where the ordination occurred . however , since the hebrew calendar was based on witnesses ' testimony , which had become far too dangerous to collect , rabbi hillel ii recommended change to a mathematically based calendar that was adopted at a clandestine , and maybe final , meeting in 358 ce . this marked the last universal decision made by the great sanhedrin . gamaliel vi ( 400–425 ) was the sanhedrin 's last president . with his death in 425 , theodosius ii outlawed the title of nasi , the last remains of the ancient sanhedrin . an imperial decree of 426 diverted the patriarchs ' tax ( post excessum patriarchorum ) into the imperial treasury . the exact reason for the abrogation of the patriarchate is not clear , though gamaliel vi , the last holder of the office who had been for a time elevated by the emperor to the rank of prefect , may have fallen out with the imperial authorities . thereafter , jews were gradually excluded from holding public office . . powers . the talmud tractate sanhedrin identifies two classes of rabbinical courts called sanhedrin , a great sanhedrin ( בית דין הגדול ) and a lesser sanhedrin ( בית דין הקטן ) . each city could have its own lesser sanhedrin of 23 judges , but there could be only one great sanhedrin of 71 , which among other roles acted as the supreme court , taking appeals from cases decided by lesser courts . the uneven numbers of judges were predicated on eliminating the possibility of a tie , and the last to cast his vote was the head of the court . function and procedures . the sanhedrin as a body claimed powers that lesser jewish courts did not have . as such , they were the only ones who could try the king , extend the boundaries of the temple and jerusalem , and were the ones to whom all questions of law were finally put . before 191 bce the kohen gadol acted as the ex officio head of the sanhedrin , goldwurm , hersh and holder , meir , history of the jewish people , i '' the second temple era '' ( artscroll : 1982 ) . but in 191 bce , when the sanhedrin lost confidence in the high priest , the office of nasi was created . after the time of hillel the elder ( late 1st century bce and early 1st century ce ) , the nasi was almost invariably a descendant of hillel . the second highest-ranking member of the sanhedrin was called the av beit din , or '' head of the court '' ( literally , av beit din means '' father of the house of judgment '' ) , who presided over the sanhedrin when it sat as a criminal court . during second temple era , the sanhedrin met in a building known as the hall of hewn stones ( lishkat ha-gazit ) , which has been placed by the talmud and many scholars as built into the northern wall of the temple mount , half inside the sanctuary and half outside , with doors providing access variously to the temple and to the outside . the name presumably arises to distinguish it from the buildings in the temple complex used for ritual purposes , which could not be constructed of stones hewn by any iron implement . in some cases , it was necessary only for a 23-member panel ( functioning as a lesser sanhedrin ) to convene . in general , the full panel of 71 judges was convened only on matters of national significance ( e.g . , a declaration of war ) or when the 23-member panel failed to reach a conclusive verdict . babylonian talmud : sanhedrin 2a . by the end of the second temple period , the sanhedrin reached its pinnacle of importance , legislating all aspects of jewish religious and political life within parameters laid down by biblical and rabbinic tradition . summary of patriarchal powers . the following is a summary of the powers and responsibilities of the patriarchate from the onset of the third century , based on rabbinic sources as understood by l.i . levine : representative to imperial authorities ; focus of leadership in the jewish community : receiving daily visits from prominent families ; declaration of public fast days ; initiating or abrogating the ban ( herem ) ; appointment of judges to jewish courts in the land of israel ; regulation of the calendar ; issuing enactments and decrees with respect to the applicability or release from legal requirements , e.g . : use of shmita produce and applicability of sabbatical year injunctions ; repurchase or redemption of formerly jewish land from gentile owners ; status of hellenistic cities of the land of israel re : purity , tithing , sabbatical year ; exemptions from tithing ; conditions in divorce documents ; use of oil produced by gentiles ; dispatching emissaries to diaspora communities ; taxation : both the power to tax and the authority to rule/intervene on the disposition of taxes raised for local purposes by local councils . up to the middle of the fourth century , the patriarchate retained the prerogative of determining the hebrew calendar and guarded the intricacies of the needed calculations , in an effort to constrain interference by the babylonian community . christian persecution obliged hillel ii to fix the calendar in permanent form in 359 ce . this institution symbolized the passing of authority from the patriarchate to the babylonian talmudic academies . . archaeological findings . in 2004 , excavations in tiberias conducted by the israel antiquities authority uncovered a structure dating to the 3rd century ce that may have been the seat of the sanhedrin when it convened in that city . at the time it was called beit hava'ad . . nasi ( president ) . before 191 bce the kohen gadol acted as the ex officio head of the sanhedrin , but in 191 bce , when the sanhedrin lost confidence in the high priest , the office of nasi was created . the sanhedrin was headed by the chief scholars of the great talmudic academies in the land of israel , and with the decline of the sanhedrin , their spiritual and legal authority was generally accepted , the institution itself being supported by voluntary contributions by jews throughout the ancient world . being a member of the house of hillel and thus a descendant of king david , the patriarch , known in hebrew as the nasi ( prince ) , enjoyed almost royal authority . their functions were political rather than religious , though their influence was not limited to the secular realm . the patriarchate attained its zenith under judah ha-nasi who compiled the mishnah , a compendium of views from judean thought leaders of judaism other than the torah . revival attempts . the sanhedrin is traditionally viewed as the last institution that commanded universal jewish authority among the jewish people in the long chain of tradition from moses until the present day . since its dissolution in 358 ce by imperial decree , there have been several attempts to re-establish this body either as a self-governing body , or as a puppet of a sovereign government . there are records of what may have been attempts to reform the sanhedrin in arabia , the persian conquest of jerusalem in 614 compared with islamic conquest of 638 in jerusalem under the caliph 'umar , and in babylon ( iraq ) , sefer yuchsin , cf . yarchei kallah , rabbi nassan describes '' the seventy judges who comprise the sanhedrin '' . but none of these attempts were given any attention by rabbinic authorities and little information is available about them . napoleon bonaparte 's '' grand sanhedrin '' . the '' grand sanhedrin '' was a jewish high court convened by napoleon i to give legal sanction to the principles expressed by the assembly of notables in answer to the twelve questions submitted to it by the government ( see jew . encyc . v . 468 , s.v . france ) . on october 6 , 1806 , the assembly of notables issued a proclamation to all the jewish communities of europe , inviting them to send delegates to the sanhedrin , to convene on october 20 . this proclamation , written in hebrew , french , german , and italian , speaks in extravagant terms of the importance of this revived institution and of the greatness of its imperial protector . while the action of napoleon aroused in many jews of germany the hope that , influenced by it , their governments also would grant them the rights of citizenship , others looked upon it as a political contrivance . when in the war against prussia ( 1806–07 ) the emperor invaded poland and the jews rendered great services to his army , he remarked , laughing , '' the sanhedrin is at least useful to me . '' david friedländer and his friends in berlin described it as a spectacle that napoleon offered to the parisians . state of israel . since the dissolution of the sanhedrin in 358 ce , the dissolution of the sanhedrin , in terms of its power to give binding universal decisions , is usually dated to 358 ce when hillel ii 's jewish calendar was adopted . this marked the last universally accepted decision made by that body . there has been no universally recognized authority within halakha . maimonides ( 1135–1204 ) was one of the greatest scholars of the middle ages , and is arguably one of the most widely accepted scholars among the jewish people since the closing of the talmud in 500 . influenced by the rationalist school of thought and generally showing a preference for a natural ( as opposed to miraculous ) redemption for the jewish people , maimonides proposed a rationalist solution for achieving the goal of re-establishing the highest court in jewish tradition and reinvesting it with the same authority it had in former years . there have been several attempts to implement maimonides ' recommendations , the latest being in modern times . there have been rabbinical attempts to renew semicha and re-establish a sanhedrin by rabbi jacob berab in 1538 , rabbi yisroel shklover in 1830 , rabbi aharon mendel hacohen in 1901 , rabbi zvi kovsker in 1940 and rabbi yehuda leib maimon in 1949 . in october 2004 ( tishrei 5765 ) , a group of rabbis representing varied orthodox communities in israel undertook a ceremony in tiberias , where the original sanhedrin was disbanded , in which it claimed to re-establish the body according to the proposal of maimonides and the jewish legal rulings of rabbi yosef karo . the controversial attempt has been subject to debate within different jewish communities . see also . council of jamnia beth din shel kohanim great assembly – or anshei knesset hagedolah ( hebr . '' men of the great assembly '' ) magnum concilium , a similar body in medieval england synedrion , a general term for judiciary organs of greek and hellenistic polis and treaty organisations . tombs of the sanhedrin . references . bibliography . chen , s.j.d . , '' patriarchs and scholarchs , '' paajr 48 ( 1981 ) , 57–85 . goodman , m . , '' the roman state and the jewish patriarch in the third century , '' in l.i . levnie ( ed . ) , the galilee in late antiquity ( new york , 1992 ) , 127.39 . habas ( rubin ) , e . , '' rabban gamaliel of yavneh and his sons : the patriarchate before and after the bar kokhva revolt , '' jjs 50 ( 1999 ) , 21–37 . levine , l.i . , '' the patriarch ( nasi ) in third-century palestine , '' anrw 2.19.2 ( 1979 ) , 649–88 . external links . secular and religious history of the jewish sanhedrin english web site of the re-established jewish sanhedrin in israel the jewish court system by rabbi aryeh kaplan jewish encyclopedia : '' sanhedrin ''