Alpha (disambiguation)

arts and entertainment . fictional characters and places . alpha ( computer ) , a fictional computer in mike walker 's radio play alpha alpha ( dc comics ) , a character from dc comics alpha ( marvel comics ) , a character from marvel comics alpha ( the walking dead , an antagonist from the walking dead comic and tv series alpha 4 ( power rangers ) , alpha 5 ( power rangers ) , alpha 6 ( power rangers ) , alpha 7 ( power rangers ) , characters in the power rangers universe alpha the ultimate mutant , a character in marvel comics moonbase alpha ( space : 1999 ) , the primary setting for the television series space : 1999 alpha , a wolf character in the animated film storks alpha , the lead dog from up alpha trion , an autobot character in the transformers . films . alpha ( 2018 film ) , a 2018 film starring kodi smit-mcphee alpha ( 2019 film ) , a 2019 bangladeshi film . gaming . alpha ( magic : the gathering ) , a card set alpha , a sequel of the death trap alpha metroid , a form of the fictional metroid species introduced in metroid ii : return of samus . literature . alpha ( lombard ) , a franco-belgian comics series the alphas , a young-adult novel series by lisi harrison alpha 1 through alpha 9 , books by robert silverberg alpha ( australian magazine ) , an australian men 's sport magazine alpha , an investor magazine , later incorporated into absolute return + alpha . music . alpha ( band ) , a british electronic music group alpha , a french early music label record label , now part of outhere alpha chord , in the octatonic scale alpha ( alice nine album ) ( 2007 ) alpha ( asia album ) ( 1983 ) alpha ( sevendust album ) ( 2007 ) alpha ( war of ages album ) ( 2017 ) alpha ( jelena karleuša album ) ( 2021 ) alpha ( song ) , a 2014 song by kollegah alpha , a 1986 album by selena '' alpha '' , a track on the 1976 album albedo 0.39 by vangelis '' alpha '' , a song by c418 from the 2013 soundtrack minecraft – volume beta . television and radio . alphas , an american science fiction tv series 2011–2012 alpha ( the x-files ) , a sixth-season episode of the x-files alpha and omega ( radio plays ) . businesses . alpha bank , a greek bank , or their stock symbol alpha alpha books , an imprint of penguin group alpha industries , an american clothing company alpha media , an american radio broadcasting company alpha tv , a greek terrestrial channel alpha video , an american entertainment company . language . latin alpha , a letter of the latin alphabet , a glyph in the international phonetic alphabet , a vowel in the general alphabet of cameroon languages alfa , the first letter in the nato phonetic alphabet . places . united states . alpha , california , a ghost town alpha , illinois , a village alpha , iowa , an unincorporated community alpha , kentucky , an unincorporated community alpha , maryland , an unincorporated community alpha , michigan , a village alpha , minnesota , a city alpha , missouri , an unincorporated community alpha , new jersey , a borough alpha , ohio , a neighborhood of the city of beavercreek alpha , oregon , an unincorporated community alpha , tennessee , an unincorporated community and neighborhood alpha , texas , an unincorporated freedman 's town alpha , virginia alpha , washington , an unincorporated community alpha , wisconsin , an unincorporated community alpha ridge , alaska , a mountain ridge . elsewhere . alpha , queensland , a town in australia alpha ridge , an undersea ridge in the arctic ocean . science , technology and mathematics . computing . alpha ( programming language ) , an early database language alpha compositing , an image processing technique alpha phase in a software release life cycle alphaserver , dec now hp machine successor to the vax alphastation , dec now hp workstation successor to the vax dec alpha , an instruction set architecture developed by digital equipment corporation ( dec ) wolfram alpha , a computational knowledge engine . mathematics and statistics . alpha ( finance ) , a measurement of active return on an investment cronbach 's alpha , a statistical measure of reliability α , the conventional symbol for angular eccentricity α , a symbol for navigational azimuth α , a symbol for one of the feigenbaum constants describing a bifurcation diagram , in mathematics α , a symbol representing the probability of a type i error in statistics the ackermann function inverse α , sometimes used as a placeholder for ordinal numbers . science . alpha ( ethology ) ( also '' alpha male '' and '' alpha female '' ) , the highest ranking individuals in a community of social animals alpha , a particle physics experiment at cern alpha collaboration , ( antihydrogen laser physics apparatus ) , a team of scientists alpha particle , form of particle radiation alpha waves , recorded by electroencephalography α , a symbol for the angle of attack in aerodynamics α , a symbol for angular acceleration in physics α , a symbol for coefficient of thermal expansion in thermodynamics α , a symbol for the fine-structure constant in physics α , a symbol for thermal diffusivity in thermodynamics α , a symbol for common-base current gain of a transistor in electronics α , the isotope fractionation factor between two substances in geochemistry alpha , the brightest star in a constellation according to the bayer designation α receptors , a type of adrenergic receptor . technology . alpha ( navigation ) , a russian radio navigation system minolta alpha , the japanese name for a series of slr cameras known as maxxum or dynax elsewhere sony α or sony alpha , a digital slr series by sony . transportation . gm alpha platform , the underpinning of various gm vehicles alpha ( sternwheeler ) , a 19th-century river vessel advance alpha , a swiss paraglider design alpha 2000 , a light aircraft built in new zealand kohler alpha , an american glider pipistrel alpha trainer , a slovenian light-sport aircraft . tropicalsubtropical cyclones . subtropical storm alpha ( 1972 ) , first storm of the 1972 atlantic hurricane season tropical storm alpha ( 2005 ) , twenty-third storm of the 2005 atlantic hurricane season subtropical storm alpha ( 2020 ) , twenty-second storm of the 2020 atlantic hurricane season . other uses . alpha ( name ) , given name , including a list of people with the name alpha ( psychedelic ) , psychedelic drug alpha-ethyl-3,4-methylenedioxybenzylamine alpha course , an introductory course in christianity alpha group , an elite russian counterterrorism unit alpha , or service '' a '' , one of the uniforms of the united states marine corps alpha secondary school , a public high school in burnaby , british columbia , canada . see also . alpha and omega ( disambiguation ) alpha value ( disambiguation ) alfa ( disambiguation ) moonbase alpha ( disambiguation ) a , the letter space station alpha space complex alpha