101 Dalmatians (1996 film)

plot . american video game designer roger dearly lives with his pet dalmatian pongo in london . one day , pongo sets his eyes on a female dalmatian named perdy . after a frantic chase through the streets of london that ends in st . james 's park , roger discovers that pongo likes perdy . her owner , anita campbell-green falls in love with roger when they meet . they both fall into the lake as a result of their dogs chasing each other , but they return to roger 's home and anita accepts his proposal . they get married along with perdy and pongo . anita works as a fashion designer at the house of de vil . her boss , the pampered and very glamorous cruella de vil , has a deep passion for fur , going so far as to have a taxidermy , mr . skinner , skin a white tiger at the london zoo to make it into a rug for her . anita , inspired by her dalmatian , designs a coat made with spotted fur . cruella is intrigued by the idea of making garments out of actual dalmatians , and finds it amusing that it would seem as if she was wearing anita 's dog . anita soon discovers that perdy is pregnant and is then informed that she ( anita ) is too , much to her shock . sometime later , cruella visits their home and expresses contempt upon meeting roger . her initial disgust at them having a baby turns to excitement when she finds out perdy is expecting too . several weeks later , she returns when a litter of 15 puppies are born and offers roger and anita £7,500 for them , but they refuse . enraged , cruella dismisses anita and vows revenge against her and roger . one winter evening , she has her henchmen , jasper and horace , break into their home and steal the puppies , while roger and anita are walking in the park with pongo and perdy . along with 84 other dalmatians that were previously stolen , they deliver them to her ancient country estate , de vil mansion . cruella also asks skinner to kill and skin them to create her coat . with the family devastated at the loss of their puppies , pongo uses the twilight bark to carry the message via the dogs and other animals of great britain , while roger and anita notify the metropolitan police . a dog who had witnessed the stolen puppies follows jasper and horace to the mansion , and finds all of them inside , before helping them escape under the duo 's noses . they make their way to a nearby farm , where they are later joined by pongo and perdy . cruella arrives at the mansion and soon discovers what has happened . angry with the thieves ' failure , she decides to carry out the job herself , while jasper and horace attempt to search for them also . after several mishaps , jasper and horace discover nearby police on the hunt for cruella and her henchmen and hand themselves in , joining skinner who was beaten earlier while trying to kill lucky ( one of the 15 puppies ) , who had been left behind . meanwhile , cruella tracks the puppies to the farm where they are hiding and tries to retrieve them . however , the animals outwit her , causing her to fall into a vat of molasses and get thrown through a window into a pigpen . shortly afterwards , the fleeing dalmatians ( including lucky ) are found and sent home via the suffolk constabulary , while the cops were looking for cruella at the farm , where they finally arrest her . in the police van , she berates jasper , horace , and skinner for their incompetence before they are all sprayed by a skunk which she had mistaken for her purse . pongo , perdy and their puppies are reunited with roger and anita . after being informed that the remaining 84 puppies have no home to go to , as they have not yet been claimed by their original owners , they decide to adopt them , bringing the total to 101 . roger designs a successful video game featuring dalmatian puppies as the protagonists and cruella as the villain and they move to the countryside with their millions . roger and anita have a baby daughter , and a year later the puppies have grown up with puppies of their own . cast . glenn close as cruella de vil jeff daniels as roger dearly joely richardson as anita campbell-green-dearly joan plowright as nanny hugh laurie as jasper mark williams as horace john shrapnel as mr . skinner tim mcinnerny as alonzo hugh fraser as frederick zohren weiss as herbert brian capron as television news reporter . production . the animatronic creatures used in the film are provided by jim henson 's creature shop . sigourney weaver was offered the role of cruella de vil . cathy moriarty did a screen test for the role , but was later deemed too frightening for a children 's film . minster court was used as the exterior of cruella de vil 's fashion house . sarum chase was used as the exterior of her home . cruella de vil 's car is a modified 1974 panther de ville . . release . box office . 101 dalmatians was released on november 27 , 1996 . the uk premiere of the film was held on december 4 , 1996 , at the royal albert hall , london , and the exterior of the hall was lit with dalmatian spots . it grossed 136.2 million in north america and 320.7 million worldwide . . home media . 101 dalmatians was released on vhs for the first time on april 15 , 1997 , laserdisc in early 1997 , and on dvd on april 21 , 1998 . it was re-released on september 16 , 2008 . video game . a video game based on the film entitled 101 dalmatians : escape from devil manor was released in may 1997 . reception . on rotten tomatoes , 101 dalmatians has an approval rating of 41 % and an average rating of 5.32/10 , based on 37 reviews . the site 's critic consensus reads : '' neat performance from glenn close aside , 101 dalmatians is a bland , pointless remake . '' on metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 49 out of 100 , based on 20 critics , indicating '' mixed or average reviews '' . audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of '' a '' on an a+ to f scale . 101 dalmatians ( 1996 ) a cinemascore . controversy . animal rights organizations protested the film 's release , saying that dalmatian sales shot up after the premiere , fueled by impulsive purchases of puppies by parents for their children . being ill-prepared to care for a relatively difficult breed of dog past puppy-hood , many of these new owners eventually surrendered their animals to pounds , where many dogs ended up being euthanized . . sequel and prequel films . a sequel , 102 dalmatians , was released on november 22 , 2000 . the film 's early working title was 101 dalmatians returns . disney is planning a live-action cruella de vil prequel titled cruella directed by alex timbers . marc platt and andrew gunn will produce ; glenn close is executive producer . screenwriter aline brosh mckenna was set to write it , but kelly marcel replaced her . emma stone will play the eponymous role . timbers left the project in december 2018 due to scheduling conflicts and will be replaced by the i , tonya director craig gillespie . dev patel was considered for the role of roger dearly , while nicole kidman was considered for the role of '' the baroness '' , described as '' an antagonist to cruella who 's thought to be pivotal in her transformation to the villain we know today '' . emma thompson , charlize theron , julianne moore , and demi moore were also in consideration for the role of the baroness . jasper and horace are also set to appear in the film , with disney reportedly looking for an african-american actor to portray jasper . in may 2019 , thompson was cast as the baroness and in july 2019 , paul walter hauser reportedly joined the film in an undisclosed role . on august 7 , 2019 , joel fry joined the cast as jasper , while hauser was revealed to be playing horace . filming was set to begin at the end of 2019 . on august 24 , 2019 , during the d23 expo , it was revealed that principal photography for cruella had already begun . the first official image from the film featuring stone as cruella de vil with three adult dalmatians on a leash , hauser as horace and fry as jasper was also unveiled during the event . ‘ cruella ’ is next , and here ’ s your first look ! filming wrapped on november 26 , 2019 . in september 2019 , mark strong , emily beecham and kirby howell-baptiste were cast as boris , anita and tabitha , respectively . ‘ cruella ’ : cannes best actress winner emily beecham joins disney live-action prequel with emma stone the film was originally scheduled to be released on december 23 , 2020 . however , in august 2019 , it was announced that the film would be delayed to may 28 , 2021 . . references . external links . 101 dalmatians at box office mojo