Norrland

geography . except for the coastal areas , norrland is sparsely populated . approximately 12 percent of sweden 's population lives in norrland . population of sweden 2008-12-31 , statistics sweden except for some coastal areas most of norrland is made up by the norrland terrain – hilly and mountainous land covered by taiga . more in detail norrland is made up of three north-south belts : the scandinavian mountains in the west , the muddus plains covering much of the inland , and the mixed relief of the eastern coast . unlike the much more densely populated svealand and götaland , which are better known for big cities ( stockholm , gothenburg , malmö ) with landmarks and tourist attractions , norrland is known for its nature : wide forests , large rivers and untouched wilderness . most inhabitants live in rural areas and small villages , and in cities along the coast . towards the end of the 20th century there was a noticeable increase of the population in norrland , mainly from people moving from bigger cities . the largest cities in norrland , from north to south , are luleå , skellefteå , umeå , östersund , sundsvall and gävle . with the exception of östersund , all these cities are located near the coast . during the industrial revolution , which reached sweden in the mid-19th century , norrland became the source for the important wood and pulp industry . all of the major norrland rivers but four have been exploited for water power . the rivers in norrland account for the bulk of hydroelectric power in sweden – in many countries a limited energy source , but in sweden hydroelectrical power accounts for approximately 40 percent of sweden 's total production of electricity . mines for producing precious metals have also been located in norrland . in older history and still today , the administration in stockholm viewed norrland pretty much as a colony consisting of natural resources to be exploited . '' in norrland we have an india within our borders , if only we realize we should be taking advantage of it '' ( i norrland hava vi inom våra gränser ett indien , blott vi förstå att bruka det ) is a quote attributed to axel oxenstierna that fairly well describes the attitude . in the official history of sweden not much is written about the northern parts of the country . kebnekaise , sweden 's tallest mountain at 2,111 metres ( 6,926 feet ) , is located in lappland in the north of norrland . norrland has a highly variable climate depending on altitude , latitude and distance to water . the southern coastal areas have a humid continental climate , but further north the subarctic climate is abundant , although it in many areas is very mild for that classification , especially in coastal regions . in the mountain ranges the tundra climate can be found with summer temperatures averaging below , although this is due to altitude and not in populated areas . all low-lying areas of norrland are below the tree line due to the mild summers , meaning that the boreal forest is dominant . history . in older history , norrland is one of the four lands of sweden . to the west it represented the northern half of sweden bounded to the south by svealand and to the east it represented the northern half of finland – which was then a part of sweden – bounded to the south by österland . in svealand and götaland , the land boundaries were of major juridical and administrative importance , but this was not the case with norrland . the name norrland just gradually became a denomination of everything north of svealand . up to the middle ages , the northern part of norrland ( norrbotten and lappland ) was basically a no man 's land . the area was sparsely populated by sami , kvens and different tribes/people related to the finns . in the southern part of norrland , swedish and norwegian settlers lived side by side with the sami population . from the middle ages on , the swedish kings tried hard to colonize and christianize the area . but it took time – even today , finnish and sami minorities live in the northern parts of norrland and have maintained their culture and customs . as a result of the changing relations to finland , the northern borders of norrland have shifted . while the word finland originally meant only the southwestern part of what is now finland ( finland proper ) , the border of norrland was drawn at the rivers kaakamojoki or , later , simojoki . this changed when the eastern half of sweden ( finland ) was lost to russia in 1809 , and the new border was drawn at torne river . the southern border was originally everything north of the gästrikland province ( until the 14th or 15th century a part of uppland ) , but since the mid 17th century , gästrikland is also considered a part of norrland . the name can be first traced from karl 's chronicle , explaining how engelbrekt engelbrektsson in 1433 sent a letter to erik puke requesting assistance to conquer entire norrland ( al norland vnte han honom wolla ) . sport . three norrland teams compete at the swedish hockey league : brynäs if , skellefteå aik and luleå hf . timrå ik , modo hockey and if björklöven are also three popular teams from norrland except that they play in the second highest league hockeyallsvenskan also have long traditions within swedish ice hockey . notable norrland soccer ( football ) teams include selånger fk , sandvikens if , gefle if , östersunds fk , and gif sundsvall . in fiction . norrland is sometimes portrayed slightly negatively in swedish fiction , sometimes being a place of terror and dread . the thriller films the hunters and false trail ( the hunters 2 ) show a highly negative portrait of norrland , filled with racial prejudice and violence . the people of norrland in their turn tend to have a fairly negative view of people from stockholm and the rest of southern sweden , for example by referring to stockholm as '' fjollträsk '' , which loosely translated means '' sissy town '' . this dynamic is portrayed in movies and series such as sällskapsresan 2 – snowroller , the hunters and pistvakt – en vintersaga . despite norrland being the most diverse of the three lands of sweden in terms of languages and cultures it is usually portrayed as one homogeneous region . fiction usually portrays characters from norrland as villagers from the wilderness even though the majority of the population live in and around the coastal cities . in the 2006 horror film frostbite , the portrait is more balanced . unlike most other swedish films , it takes place in a larger community at the northern peak of sweden , being filmed in kalix and kiruna . the people are shown to be pretty warm and welcoming towards outsiders . rather than the people , the nature of norrland is shown to be hostile . a constant darkness roams over the town and there is extreme cold . vampires have been shown taking a liking to the land and hunt the towns people in the arctic night . the film is notorious for having the actors speak without the district norrland accent , even the actors in the film who are native to norrland . a mixed portrait of the region is found in as it is in heaven ( 2004 ) , which '' vividly conveys both the delights and the challenges of small town living . '' the northern town is initially inhospitable to the main character as a boy , whose mother chooses to take him out of the town to escape bullying . he returns years later as an accomplished musician , only to find an insular town where bullying continues in several forms , including from the original classmates who troubled him as a youth . it is through his outside status—along with his music and desire share its joy—that the town finds redemption . the plot of the well-known thriller the girl with the dragon tattoo shifts back and forth between stockholm and the fictional norrland town of hedestad . a constantly repeated theme in the book 's background are the social , cultural and physical differences between these two locations : norrland is more sedate , conservative and slow-moving in comparison with the cosmopolitan stockholm ; a stockholmer having to live for an extended period in norrland feels '' exiled to the back of beyond '' ; norrland is also colder , and a stockholmer coming there must urgently buy warmer clothes ( a theme highlighted also in as it is in heaven ) ; norrlanders often speak norrland dialects which stockholm people find nearly incomprehensible ; stockholm people look down their noses at '' a working class boy from norrland '' even when he had lived many years in stockholm . the book 's great success and translation into numerous languages made non-swedish people more aware of norrland and its special characteristics .