Tiamat

etymology . thorkild jacobsen jacobsen 1968:105 . and walter burkert both argue for a connection with the akkadian word for sea , tâmtu ( 𒀀𒀊𒁀 ) , following an early form , ti'amtum . burkert continues by making a linguistic connection to tethys . the later form , which appears in the hellenistic babylonian writer berossus ' first volume of universal history , is clearly related to greek , an eastern variant of . it is thought that the proper name ti'amat , which is the construct or vocative form , was dropped in secondary translations of the original texts because some akkadian copyists of enûma elish substituted the ordinary word tāmtu ( '' sea '' ) for tiamat , the two names having become essentially the same due to association . tiamat also has been claimed to be cognate with northwest semitic tehom ( תְּהוֹם ) ( '' the deeps , abyss '' ) , in the book of genesis 1:2 . the babylonian epic enuma elish is named for its incipit : '' when above '' the heavens did not yet exist nor the earth below , apsu the subterranean ocean was there , '' the first , the begetter '' , and tiamat , the overground sea , '' she who bore them all '' ; they were '' mixing their waters '' . it is thought that female deities are older than male ones in mesopotamia and tiamat may have begun as part of the cult of nammu , a female principle of a watery creative force , with equally strong connections to the underworld , which predates the appearance of ea-enki . harriet crawford finds this '' mixing of the waters '' to be a natural feature of the middle persian gulf , where fresh waters from the arabian aquifer mix and mingle with the salt waters of the sea . this characteristic is especially true of the region of bahrain , whose name in arabic means '' two seas '' , and which is thought to be the site of dilmun , the original site of the sumerian creation beliefs . the difference in density of salt and fresh water drives a perceptible separation . appearance . in the enûma elish her physical description includes a tail , a thigh , '' lower parts '' ( which shake together ) , a belly , an udder , ribs , a neck , a head , a skull , eyes , nostrils , a mouth , and lips . she has insides ( possibly '' entrails '' ) , a heart , arteries , and blood . tiamat is usually described as a sea serpent or dragon , although assyriologist alexander heidel disagreed with this identification and argued that '' dragon form can not be imputed to tiamat with certainty . '' other scholars have disregarded heidel 's argument : joseph fontenrose in particular found it '' not convincing '' and concluded that '' there is reason to believe that tiamat was sometimes , not necessarily always , conceived as a dragoness . '' the enûma elish states that tiamat gave birth to dragons and serpents among a more general list of monsters including scorpion men and mermaid , but does not identify her form as that of a dragon ; however , other sources containing the same myth do refer to her as such . the depiction of tiamat ( dungeons & dragons ) was popularized in the 1970s as a fixture of the dungeons & dragons roleplaying game inspired by earlier sources associating tiamat with later mythological characters such as lotan ( leviathan ) . four ways of creation : '' tiamat & lotan . '' retrieved on august 23 , 2010 . mythology . abzu ( or apsû ) fathered upon tiamat the elder deities lahmu and lahamu ( masc . the '' hairy '' ) , a title given to the gatekeepers at enki 's abzu/e'engurra-temple in eridu . lahmu and lahamu , in turn , were the parents of the 'ends ' of the heavens ( anshar , from an-šar heaven-totality/end ) and the earth ( kishar ) ; anshar and kishar were considered to meet at the horizon , becoming , thereby , the parents of anu ( heaven ) and ki ( earth ) . tiamat was the '' shining '' personification of the sea who roared and smote in the chaos of original creation . she and apsu filled the cosmic abyss with the primeval waters . she is '' ummu-hubur who formed all things '' . in the myth recorded on cuneiform , the deity enki ( later ea ) believed correctly that apsu was planning to murder the younger deities , upset with the noisy tumult they created , and so captured him and held him prisoner beneath his temple , the e-abzu ( '' temple of abzu '' ) . this angered kingu , their son , who reported the event to tiamat , whereupon she fashioned eleven monsters to battle the deities in order to avenge apsu 's death . these were her own offspring : bašmu ( “ venomous snake ” ) , ušumgallu ( “ great dragon ” ) , mušmaḫḫū ( “ exalted serpent ” ) , mušḫuššu ( “ furious snake ” ) , lahmu ( the “ hairy one ” ) , ugallu ( the “ big weather-beast ” ) , uridimmu ( “ mad lion ” ) , girtablilu ( “ scorpion-man '' ) , umū dabrūtu ( “ violent storms '' ) , kulullû ( “ fish-man '' ) and kusarikku ( “ bull-man ” ) . tiamat possessed the tablet of destinies and in the primordial battle she gave them to kingu , the deity she had chosen as her lover and the leader of her host , and who was also one of her children . the terrified deities were rescued by anu , who secured their promise to revere him as '' king of the gods '' . he fought tiamat with the arrows of the winds , a net , a club , and an invincible spear . anu was later replaced by enlil and , in the late version that has survived after the first dynasty of babylon , by marduk , the son of ea . and the lord stood upon tiamat 's hinder parts , and with his merciless club he smashed her skull . he cut through the channels of her blood , and he made the north wind bear it away into secret places . slicing tiamat in half , he made from her ribs the vault of heaven and earth . her weeping eyes became the sources of the tigris and the euphrates , her tail became the milky way . with the approval of the elder deities , he took from kingu the tablet of destinies , installing himself as the head of the babylonian pantheon . kingu was captured and later was slain : his red blood mixed with the red clay of the earth would make the body of humankind , created to act as the servant of the younger igigi deities . the principal theme of the epic is the rightful elevation of marduk to command over all the deities . '' it has long been realized that the marduk epic , for all its local coloring and probable elaboration by the babylonian theologians , reflects in substance older sumerian material , '' american assyriologist e . a . speiser remarked in 1942 speiser , '' an intrusive hurro-hittite myth '' , journal of the american oriental society 62.2 ( june 1942:98–102 ) p . 100 . adding '' the exact sumerian prototype , however , has not turned up so far . '' this surmise that the babylonian version of the story is based upon a modified version of an older epic , in which enlil , not marduk , was the god who slew tiamat , expressed , for example , in e . o . james , the worship of the skygod : a comparative study in semitic and indo-european religion ( london : university of london , jordan lectures in comparative religion ) 1963:24 , 27f . is more recently dismissed as '' distinctly improbable '' . as by w . g . lambert , reviewing james 1963 in bulletin of the school of oriental and african studies , university of london , 27.1 ( 1964 ) , pp . 157–158 . in fact , marduk has no precise sumerian prototype . it is generally accepted amongst modern assyriologists that the enûma elish—the babylonian creation epic to which this mythological strand is attributed—was written as babylonian political and religious propaganda rather than reflecting a sumerian tradition ; the dating of the epic is not completely clear , but judging from the mythological topics covered and the cuneiform versions discovered thus far , it is likely to date to the 15th century bce . interpretations . the tiamat myth is one of the earliest recorded versions of the chaoskampf , the battle between a culture hero and a chthonic or aquatic monster , serpent or dragon . e.g . thorkild jacobsen in '' the battle between marduk and tiamat '' , journal of the american oriental society , 88.1 ( january–march 1968 ) , pp 104–108 . chaoskampf motifs in other mythologies linked directly or indirectly to the tiamat myth include the hittite illuyanka myth , and in greek tradition apollo 's killing of the python as a necessary action to take over the delphic oracle . martkheel according to some analyses there are two parts to the tiamat myth , the first in which tiamat is creator goddess , through a '' sacred marriage '' between different waters , peacefully creating the cosmos through successive generations . in the second '' chaoskampf tiamat is considered the monstrous embodiment of primordial chaos . robert graves graves , the greek myths , rev . ed . 1960 : §4.5 . considered tiamat 's death by marduk as evidence for his hypothesis of an ancient shift in power from a matriarchy society to a patriarchy . graves ' ideas were later developed into the great goddess theory by marija gimbutas , merlin stone and others . the theory suggests tiamat and other ancient monster figures were depictions of former supreme deities of peaceful , woman-centered religions that turned into monsters when violent . their defeat at the hands of a male hero corresponded to the overthrow of these matristic religions and societies by male-dominated ones . this theory is rejected by academic authors such as lotte motz , cynthia eller and others . the faces of the goddess , lotte motz , oxford university press ( 1997 ) , the myth of matriarchal prehistory : why an invented past will not give women a future , cynthia eller , beacon press ( 2000 ) , . . in popular culture . the five headed dragon goddess in the dungeons & dragons game is named tiamat , and stars as one of the primary antagonists in the dungeons & dragons tv series . tiamat appears as a six-headed dragon in the first final fantasy as a member of the four fiends . in bruce coville 's jeremy thatcher , dragon hatcher ( from the magic shop series ) , a boy is given a dragon egg from elias 's magic shop and names the dragon tiamat , with whom he develops a mental connection . the mobile game fate/grand order depicts tiamat as a powerful goddess and an evil of humanity . she firstly appears as a woman with gigantic horns , then as a massive humanoid with demonic horns and a tail , and finally as a draconic being of similar size . the anime fate/grand order - absolute demonic front : babylonia shows her in the same manner as the game . in music , tiamat is a swedish gothic metal band that formed in stockholm in 1987 . in the 2010 video game darksiders , one of the chosen that must be slain by horseman war is tiamat , the gigantic queen of vampire bats . the eighth book of the expanse series by james s . a . corey is called tiamat 's wrath , and was published in 2019 . tiamat , in the image of a giant mermaid , appears as a boss in the platform game spelunky 2 . tiamat is one of the playable gods in the moba smite , the first mage released in 2021 . notes . external links . enuma elish enuma elish , the babylonian creation story