Lifting body

history . the lifting body was conceived as long ago as 1917 , when it was described in a patent by roy scroggs . us patent 1,250,033 . however at low airspeeds the lifting body is inefficient and did not enter mainstream airplane design . aerospace-related lifting body research arose from the idea of spacecraft re-entering the earth 's atmosphere and landing much like a regular aircraft . following atmospheric re-entry , the traditional capsule-like spacecraft from the mercury , gemini , and apollo series had very little control over where they landed . a steerable spacecraft with wings could significantly extend its landing envelope . however , the vehicle 's wings would have to be designed to withstand the dynamic and thermal stresses of both re-entry and hypersonic flight . a proposed solution eliminated wings altogether : design the fuselage body itself to produce lift . image : x24.jpg thumb 250px right the martin aircraft company x-24 built as part of a 1963 to 1975 experimental us military program nasa 's refinements of the lifting body concept began in 1962 with r . dale reed of nasa 's armstrong flight research center . the first full-size model to come out of reed 's program was the nasa m2-f1 , an unpowered craft made of wood . initial tests were performed by towing the m2-f1 along a dry lakebed at edwards air force base california , behind a hot rod pontiac catalina . classical pontiac and nasa later the craft was towed behind a c-47 and released . since the m2-f1 was a glider , a small rocket motor was added in order to extend the landing envelope . the m2-f1 was soon nicknamed the '' flying bathtub '' . in 1963 , nasa began programs with heavier rocket-powered lifting-body vehicles to be air launched from under the starboard wing of a nb-52b , a derivative of the b-52 jet bomber . the first flights started in 1966 . of the dryden lifting bodies , all but the unpowered nasa m2-f1 used an xlr11 rocket engine as was used on the bell x-1 . nasa dryden fact sheet - lifting bodies a follow-on design designated the northrop hl-10 was developed at nasa langley research center . air flow separation caused the crash of the northrop m2-f2 lifting body . the hl-10 attempted to solve part of this problem by angling the port and starboard vertical stabilizers outward and enlarging the center one . starting 1965 the russian lifting-body mikoyan-gurevich mig-105 or epos ( russian acronym for experimental passenger orbital aircraft ) was developed and several test flights made . work ended in 1978 when the efforts shifted to the buran program , while work on another small-scale spacecraft partly continued in the bor program . the ixv is a european space agency lifting body experimental re-entry vehicle intended to validate european reusable launchers which could be evaluated in the frame of the flpp program . the ixv made its first flight in february 2015 , launched by a vega rocket . orbital sciences proposed a commercial lifting-body spaceplane in 2010 . the prometheus is more fully described below . aerospace applications . lifting bodies pose complex control , structural , and internal configuration issues . lifting bodies were eventually rejected in favor of a delta wing design for the space shuttle . data acquired in flight test using high-speed landing approaches at very steep descent angles and high sink rates was used for modeling shuttle flight and landing profiles . in planning for atmospheric re-entry , the landing site is selected in advance . for reusable reentry vehicles , typically a primary site is preferred that is closest to the launch site in order to reduce costs and improve launch turnaround time . however , weather near the landing site is a major factor in flight safety . in some seasons , weather at landing sites can change quickly relative to the time necessary to initiate and execute re-entry and safe landing . due to weather , it is possible the vehicle may have to execute a landing at an alternate site . furthermore , most airports do not have runways of sufficient length to support the approach landing speed and roll distance required by spacecraft . few airports exist in the world that can support or be modified to support this type of requirement . therefore , alternate landing sites are very widely spaced across the u.s . and around the world . the shuttle 's delta wing design was driven by these issues . these requirements were further exacerbated by military requirements ( the usaf would use the future shuttle for defense satellite payloads and other missions ) that extended the shuttle 's flight landing envelope . although a lifting body configuration would not have been vulnerable to the wing leading edge failure that caused the second shuttle loss , such a configuration could not meet the flight envelope requirements of both nasa and the military . nonetheless , the lifting body concept has been implemented in a number of other aerospace programs , the previously mentioned nasa x-38 , lockheed martin x-33 , bac 's multi unit space transport and recovery device , europe 's eads phoenix , and the joint russian-european kliper spacecraft . of the three basic design shapes usually analyzed for such programs ( capsule , lifting body , aircraft ) the lifting body may offer the best trade-off in terms of maneuverability and thermodynamics while meeting its customers ' mission requirements . another use of a lifting body is spacex 's falcon 9 rocket 's first stage . during landing attempts , the first stage deploys grid fins which steer lift produced by the cylindrical body of the first stage . according to spacex , the grid fins can tilt the first stage to approximately twenty degrees to generate lift and steer the stage towards a floating landing platform or ground landing pad . . lifting body aircraft today . the dream chaser is a crewed suborbital and orbital vthl ( vthl ) lifting-body spaceplane being developed by sierra nevada corporation ( snc ) . the dream chaser design is planned to carry up to seven people to and from low-earth orbit . the vehicle would launch vertically on an atlas v and vthl on conventional runways . . body lift . some aircraft with wings also employ bodies that generate lift . some of the early 1930s high-wing monoplane designs of the bellanca aircraft company , such as the bellanca aircruiser , had vaguely airfoil-shaped fuselages capable of generating some lift , with even the wing struts on some versions given widened fairings to give them some lift-generating capability . the gee bee model r racing plane of the 1930s , likewise , from more modern aerodynamic studies , has been shown to have had considerable ability to generate lift with its fuselage design , important for the r-1 's intended racing role , while in highly banked pylon turns while racing . vincent burnelli developed several aircraft between the 1920s and 1950 that used fuselage lift . like the earlier bellanca monoplanes , the short sc.7 skyvan produces a substantial amount of lift from its fuselage shape , almost as much as the 35 % each of the wings produces . fighters like the f-15 eagle also produce substantial lift from the wide fuselage between the wings . because the f-15 eagle 's wide fuselage is so efficient at lift , an f-15 was able to land successfully with only one wing , albeit under nearly full power , with thrust contributing significantly to lift . in the summer of 1983 , an israeli f-15 staged a mock dogfight with skyhawks for training purposes , near nahal tzin in the negev desert . during the exercise , one of the skyhawks miscalculated and collided forcefully with the f-15 's wing root . the f-15 's pilot was aware that the wing had been seriously damaged , but decided to try and land in a nearby airbase , not knowing the extent of his wing damage . it was only after he had landed , when he climbed out of the cockpit and looked backward , that the pilot realized what had happened : the wing had been completely torn off the plane , and he had landed the plane with only one wing attached . a few months later , the damaged f-15 had been given a new wing , and returned to operational duty in the squadron . the engineers at mcdonnell douglas had a hard time believing the story of the one-winged landing : as far as their planning models were concerned , this was an impossibility . history channel-heavy metal f-15 in 2010 , orbital sciences proposed the prometheus '' blended lifting-body '' spaceplane vehicle , about one-quarter the size of the space shuttle , as a commercial option for carrying astronauts to low-earth orbit under the ccdev . the vtvl other approaches ( vthl ) vehicle was to have been launched on a human-rated atlas v rocket but would land on a runway . orbital proposes spaceplan for astronauts , wall street journal , december 14 , 2010 , accessed december 15 , 2010 . the initial design was to have carried a crew of 4 , but it could carry up to 6 , or a combination of crew and cargo . in addition to orbital sciences , the consortium behind the proposal included northrop grumman , which would have built the spaceplane , and the united launch alliance , which would have provided the launch vehicle . jumping into the new space race , orbital sciences unveils mini-shuttle spaceplane design , popular science , 2010-12-16 , accessed 2010-12-18 . '' orbital sciences isn ’ t the kind of independent , private , “ new space ” enterprise as , say , spacex . it ’ s a consortium of defense and aviation heavy-hitters : northrop would build the plane , and the rockets would be provided by united launch alliance ( read : boeing and lockheed ) . '' failing to be selected for a ccdev phase 2 award by nasa , orbital announced in april 2011 that they would likely wind down their efforts to develop a commercial crew vehicle . design principles of lifting bodies are used also in the construction of hybrid airships . list of armstrong flight research center lifting body vehicles ( 1963 to 1975 ) . the us government developed a variety of proof-of-concept and flight-test vehicle lifting body designs from the early 1960s through the mid-1970s at armstrong flight research center . these included : m2-f1 m2-f2 m2-f3 hl-10 x-24a x-24b . lifting body pilots and flights . : wood , haise and engle each made a single , car-towed , ground flight of the m2-f1 . popular culture . lifting bodies have appeared in some science fiction works , including the movie marooned , and as john crichton 's spacecraft farscape-1 in the tv series farscape . the discovery channel tv series conjectured using lifting bodies to deliver a probe to a distant earth-like planet in the computer animated alien planet . gerry anderson 's 1969 doppelgänger used a vtol lifting body lander / ascender to visit an earth-like planet , only to crash in both attempts . his series ufo featured a lifting body craft visually similar to the m2-f2 for orbital operations ( '' the man who came back '' ) . in the buzz aldrin 's race into space computer game , a modified x-24a becomes an alternative lunar capable spacecraft that the player can choose over the gemini or apollo capsule . the 1970s television program the six million dollar man used footage of a lifting body aircraft , culled from actual nasa exercises , in the show 's title sequence . the scenes included an hl-10 's separation from its carrier plane—a modified b-52—and an m2-f2 piloted by bruce peterson , crashing and tumbling violently along the edwards dry lakebed runway . the cause of the crash was attributed to the onset of dutch roll stemming from control instability as induced by flow separation . see also . martin x-23 prime bor-4 kliper hl-20 personnel launch system dream chaser ( spacecraft ) space rider prometheus ( spacecraft ) facetmobile blended wing body flying wing mustard 1953 horton '' wingless '' arup s-2 1932 , snyder '' arup '' ( blurs the boundary between '' flying wing '' and lifting body ) burnelli rb-1 . references . references . . other sources . john mcphee ( 1973 ) , the deltoid pumpkin seed ; . ( story of the aereon , a combination aerodyne/aerostat , a.k.a . hybrid airship . ) . external links . lifting bodies fact sheet ( nasa ) nasa tech paper 3101 : numerical analysis and simulation of an assured crew return vehicle flow field ( the math of airflow over a lifting body ) nasa photo collections from dryden flight research center hl-10 m2-f1 m2-f2 m2-f3 x-24a and x24b short m2-f1 history some history of lifting body flight wingless flight : the lifting body story . nasa history series sp-4220 1997 pdf