1972 in music

specific locations . 1972 in british music 1972 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1972 in country music 1972 in heavy metal music 1972 in jazz . events . january 17 – highway 51 south in memphis , tennessee , usa , is renamed '' elvis presley boulevard . '' january 20 – the debut of pink floyd 's dark side of the moon at the dome , brighton , is halted by technical difficulties . dark side of the moon would be played in its entirety the following night , but it would be a full year before the album was released . january 21 – keith richards jumps on stage to jam with chuck berry at the hollywood palladium , but is ordered off for playing too loud . berry later claims that he did not recognize keith and would not have booted him if he did . january 29–31 – the first sunbury pop festival is held in sunbury , victoria . performers include billy thorpe & the aztecs , wendy saddington , chain and the la de das . january 31 – over 40,000 mourners file past mahalia jackson 's open casket to pay their respects in chicago 's great salem baptist church . february 9 – paul mccartney 's new band , wings , make their live debut at the university of nottingham in england . it 's mccartney 's first public concert since the beatles ' 1966 us tour . february 10 – david bowie opens the ziggy_stardust_tour at the toby jug pub , tolworth , surrey . february 13 – led zeppelin 's concert in singapore is canceled when government officials will not let them off the airplane because of their long hair . february 14–18 – john lennon and yoko ono co-host an entire week of the mike douglas show . february 15 – the united states gives federal copyright protection to sound recordings . prior to this , phonograph records were only protected at state level , and not in all states . february 19 paul mccartney 's single '' give ireland back to the irish '' ( inspired by the '' bloody sunday '' massacre in ireland on january 30 , 1972 ) is banned by the bbc . the controversy caused by the banning only increases the song 's popularity and it ends up in the top 20 in england . sammy davis , jr . makes a guest appearance on the television show all in the family . february 23 – elvis and priscilla presley separate . february 29 – john lennon 's u.s . immigration visa expires , beginning his three-and-a-half-year fight to remain in the country . march 15 at the 14th annual grammy awards , hosted by andy williams , winners include carole king , kris kristofferson , colin davis , michel legrand , isaac hayes , julian bream , vladimir horowitz , the juilliard string quartet and bill withers . king wins album of the year ( for tapestry ) , record of the year ( for '' it 's too late '' ) and song of the year ( for ” you 've got a friend '' ) , while carly simon wins best new artist . l.a . disc jockey robert w . morgan plays donny osmond 's '' puppy love '' non-stop for 90 minutes . police are called , but no arrests are made . march 21 – terry knight announces he is launching a 5 million lawsuit against grand funk 's new manager john eastman , one week after being fired as grand funk 's manager . it triggers a series of suits and counter-suits between knight and the band throughout the coming months . march 25 – the 17th eurovision song contest , held in the usher hall , edinburgh , scotland , is won by german-based greek singer vicky leandros , representing luxembourg with the song après toi . the song is subsequently released around europe , having been recorded in several languages , including in english as come what may . march 31 – official beatles fan club closes down . april 2 – john lennon and yoko ono hold a press conference in new york . the lennons discuss their appeal against the us immigration department 's decision to deport john . april 9 – first solo concert of valery leontiev . april 16 – electric light orchestra make their live debut at the fox and greyhound pub in park lane , croydon , england . april 29 – new york city mayor john lindsay announces that he is supporting john lennon and yoko ono in their fight to remain in the united states . may 2 – stone the crows lead guitarist les harvey is electrocuted on stage during a show in swansea , wales , by touching a poorly connected microphone . harvey died in a hospital a few hours later . the band 's lead singer , maggie bell , harvey 's longtime girlfriend , was also hospitalized , having collapsed on stage after the incident . may 8 – billy preston becomes the first rock performer to headline at new york 's radio city music hall may 27 – the opryland usa country music theme park opens in nashville , tennessee . june – founding member roy wood leaves the electric light orchestra line-up just as the band scores its first hit single . june 3 – the rolling stones open their north american tour in vancouver , british columbia , canada . june 10 – elvis presley does the first of four concerts at the madison square garden in new york city . he sells out all the shows in one day . june 14 – simon & garfunkel reunite briefly to perform live at madison square garden at a campaign benefit for democratic presidential candidate george mcgovern . other performers include peter , paul and mary and dionne warwick . july 24 – bobby ramirez , drummer for edgar winter 's white trash , is beaten to death in a chicago bar fight , reportedly because his hair was too long . august 5 – clive davis signs aerosmith to columbia records at max 's kansas city in new york city . august 30 – john lennon and yoko ono headline the '' one to one concert '' at madison square garden to benefit mentally handicapped children . elephant 's memory , roberta flack , stevie wonder and sha na na also perform . september 1–7 – karlheinz stockhausen directs performances of his works at the shiraz arts festival , including mantra , hymnen , an all-day performance of aus den sieben tagen , and world premieres of two compositions from für kommende zeiten september 21 – abc premieres the new tv series in concert . the first episode features alice cooper . september 29 – miles davis unveils his new nine-piece band at the avery fisher hall . october 12 – diana ross makes her acting debut in the successful film lady sings the blues , garnering her first academy award nomination for best actress . november 3 – james taylor and carly simon are married in a tiny ceremony in simon 's manhattan apartment . november 12 – 51,778 fans pack san diego stadium for a concert promoted by klsd to see j . geils band , quicksilver messenger service , foghat and dr . hook and the medicine show . november 25 – the 1st oti festival , held in the congres and expositions palace , madrid , spain , is won by singers tobias and claudia regina , representing brazil with the song diálogo ( '' dialogue '' ) . november 26 – family , touring north america as the warmup act for elton john , play their last concert on u.s . soil in st . petersburg , florida . december 23 – grand funk railroad , completing its 1972 tour , with a sold-out concert at nyc 's madison square garden , with the proceeds from the concert benefiting the phoenix house drug rehabilitation program , and with the show being filmed for abc-tv 's '' in concert '' series , the band is met by a lawsuit taken out by their former manager , terry knight , who attempts to block the show from going on , attempting to seize their equipment . fortunately , a court injunction is given later in the day , allowing the concert to take place . december 31 – the first new year 's rockin ' eve , with host dick clark , airs on nbc ( before moving to abc ) with three dog night as the featured act . blood , sweat & tears , helen reddy and al green also perform . unknown date herbert howells becomes a companion of honour . billy ray hearn founds myrrh records . joseph hoo kim founds channel one studios in kingston , jamaica . numa labinsky ( bass singer ) and the brothers michael and gerald reynolds found nimbus records , a specialist classical music recording company at wyastone leys in herefordshire , england . heisei college of music is established in mifune , kumamoto , japan . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1972 . bands disbanded . creedence clearwater revival jefferson airplane martha and the vandellas mc5 them the velvet underground . albums released . january . . other selected singles ( us , uk ) . '' 10538 overture '' – electric light orchestra '' a cowboy 's work is never done '' – sonny & cher '' a horse with no name '' – america '' ai n't understanding mellow '' – jerry butler and brenda lee eager '' all the young dudes '' – mott the hoople '' alone again ( naturally ) '' – gilbert o'sullivan '' amazing grace '' – royal scots dragoon guards '' america '' – simon & garfunkel '' american pie '' – don mclean '' anticipation '' – carly simon '' apache '' – the shadows ( reissue ) '' baby blue '' – badfinger '' baby , do n't get hooked on me '' – mac davis '' baby let me take you ( in my arms ) '' – the detroit emeralds '' back off boogaloo '' – ringo starr '' back stabbers '' – the o'jays '' get it on ( t . rex song ) '' – t . rex '' beautiful sunday '' – daniel boone . published popular music . '' alone again ( naturally ) '' w.m . gilbert o'sullivan '' alone at a drive-in movie '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . jim jacobs & warren casey '' american pie '' w.m . don mclean '' bad , bad leroy brown '' w.m . jim croce '' beautiful through and through '' w . bob merrill m . jule styne from the musical sugar '' beauty school dropout '' w.m . warren casey & jim jacobs from the musical grease '' the beauty that drives men mad '' w . bob merrill m . jule styne from the musical sugar '' bein ' green '' w.m . joe raposo from the television series sesame street . '' blues for newport '' m . dave brubeck '' born to hand jive '' w.m . warren casey & jim jacobs from the musical grease '' burning love '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . dennis linde '' c is for cookie '' w.m . joe raposo '' clair '' w.m . gilbert o'sullivan '' come dream with me '' w . sammy cahn m . jimmy van heusen '' corner of the sky '' w.m . stephen schwartz from the musical pippin '' for emily , whenever i may find her '' – simon & garfunkel greased lightning w.m . warren casey & jim jacobs from the musical grease '' i can see clearly now '' w.m . johnny nash '' killing me softly with his song '' w . norman gimbel m . charles fox '' liza with a z '' w . fred ebb m . john kander from the television production liza with a z '' magic to do '' w.m . stephen schwartz . introduced by ben vereen in the musical pippin '' maybe this time '' w . fred ebb m . john kander from the musical film cabaret '' mooning '' w.m . warren casey & jim jacobs from the musical grease '' the morning after '' w.m . joel hirschhorn & al kasha from the film the poseidon adventure '' no time at all '' w.m . stephen schwartz from the musical pippin '' the old fashioned way '' w . charles aznavour , joel hirschhorn & al kasha m . george garvarentz '' ring them bells '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w . fred ebb m . john kander from the television production liza with a z '' rock and roll '' – led zeppelin '' shakin ' at the high school hop '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . jim jacobs & warren casey '' sing '' w.m . joe raposo . introduced by bob mcgrath on sesame street '' speak softly , love '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w . larry kusik m . nino rota from the film the godfather '' summer nights '' w.m . warren casey & jim jacobs from the musical grease '' taxi ( song ) '' — harry chapin '' there are worse things i could do '' w.m . warren casey & jim jacobs from the musical grease '' tie a yellow ribbon round the ole oak tree '' w.m . l . russell brown & irwin levine '' vincent '' w.m . don mclean '' you are the sunshine of my life '' w.m . stevie wonder . other notable songs ( world ) . '' caro mozart '' – sylvie vartan ( france ) '' holidays '' – michel polnareff ( france ) . classical music . arthur bliss – metamorphic variations friedrich cerha – spiegel george crumb – makrokosmos volume i for amplified piano mario davidovsky – transientes for orchestra paul le flem – symphony no . 4 karel goeyvaerts bélise dans un jardin nachklänge aus dem theater i–ii , for tape piano quartet hans werner henze – heliogabalus imperator klaus huber . ausgespannt . , sacred music for baritone , five instrumental groups , loudspeakers , two two-track tapes , and organ ein hauch von unzeit i : plainte sur la perte de la réflexion musicale – quelques madrigaux pour flûte seule ou flûte avec quelques instruments quelquonques . ein hauch von unzeit ii : plainte sur la perte de la réflexion musicale pour piano à une main et demie . , for piano ein hauch von unzeit iii , for 2–7 players ( variable instrumentation ) dmitri kabalevsky – a letter to the 30th century ( oratorio ) wojciech kilar – prelude and carol for 4 oboes and strings györgy ligeti – double concerto for flute , oboe and orchestra theo loevendie – horn concerto , '' orbits '' yves prin – actions-simultanées ii , for orchestra einojuhani rautavaara cantus arcticus , for orchestra canto iii – a portrait of the artist at a certain moment , for string orchestra credo , for mixed chorus book of life ( elämän kirja ) , choral suite steve reich – clapping music george rochberg – recordanza ( soliloquy for cello and piano ) peter ruzicka – bewegung karlheinz stockhausen – alphabet für liège , for soloists and duos , nr . 36 ylem , for variable ensemble of 19 or more players , nr . 37 toru takemitsu – distance veljo tormis – curse upon iron ( raua needmine ) . opera . peter maxwell davies – taverner ( 12 july , covent garden , london ) kiyoshige koyama – sansho dayu per nørgård – gilgamesh thomas pasatieri black widow the trial of mary lincoln charles wilson – héloise and abelard . jazz . musical theater . berlin to broadway with kurt weill – off-broadway revue opened at the theatre de lys on october 1 and ran for 152 performances company ( stephen sondheim ) – london production opened at her majesty 's theatre on january 18 and ran for 344 performances cowardy custard – london production opened at the mermaid theatre on july 10 and ran for 405 performances do n't bother me , i ca n't cope – london production opened at the playhouse theatre on april 19 and ran for 914 performances do n't play us cheap – broadway production opened at the ethel barrymore theatre on may 16 and ran for 164 performances a funny thing happened on the way to the forum ( stephen sondheim ) – broadway revival the good old , bad old days ( music , lyrics & book : anthony newley & leslie bricusse ) london production opened at the prince of wales theatre on december 20 and ran for 309 performances jesus christ superstar ( andrew lloyd webber and tim rice ) – london production opened at the palace theatre on august 9 and ran for 3358 performances grease – broadway production ran for 3388 performances , the longest run ever at that time joseph and the amazing technicolor dreamcoat ( lloyd webber & rice ) – london production opened at the roundhouse on november 8 and ran for 43 performances man of la mancha & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway revival pippin – broadway production opened at the imperial theatre on october 23 and ran for 1944 performances sugar – broadway production opened at the kajestic theatre and ran for 505 performances . musical films . baharo phool barsao cabaret fillmore ( musical documentary ) jawani diwani lady sings the blues man of la mancha propala hramota . musical television productions . liza with a z . births . january 3 – nichole nordeman , american singer january 17 – aqualung , english songwriter , musician and record producer january 19 – angham , egyptian singer , record producer and actress january 26 – christopher boykin , american rapper january 27 wynne evans , welsh tenor mark owen , british singer ( take that ) february 2 – dana international , israeli eurovision-winning singer february 11 – craig jones , american heavy metal sampler/keyboardist ( slipknot ) february 14 – rob thomas , american singer-songwriter , musician , multi instrumentalist , advocate ( matchbox twenty ) february 16 – taylor hawkins , american rock musician ( foo fighters ) february 17 billie joe armstrong , american rock musician , playwright , activist , advocate , actor , and singer-songwriter ( green day ) yuki isoya , japanese singer february 20 – k-os , canadian alternative rapper , singer , songwriter and record producer february 24 teodor currentzis , greek orchestral conductor chris fehn , american heavy metal percussionist/backing vocalist ( slipknot ) march 4 – alison wheeler , british singer ( the beautiful south ) march 6 – jaret reddick , american musician ( bowling for soup ) march 8 – angie hart , australian pop singer march 9 – az , american rapper march 10 – timbaland , american record producer , rapper , singer , songwriter and dj ( ginuwine , aaliyah , justin timberlake ) march 11 – ua , japanese singer-songwriter april 12 – şebnem ferah , turkish singer and songwriter march 13 – common , american rapper and actor march 15 – mark hoppus , american rock musician ( blink-182 ) march 17 – melissa auf der maur ( hole ) march 20 – alexander kapranos , british rock singer and guitarist ( franz ferdinand ) april 1 – sukshinder shinda , british bhangra singer-songwriter and record producer april 8 – paul gray , american heavy metal bass guitarist ( slipknot ) april 10 – sami yli-sirniö , finnish rock and metal guitarist april 12 – şebnem ferah , turkish singer and songwriter april 13 – aaron lewis , american nu metal musician ( staind ) april 20 željko joksimović , serbian singer , composer songwriter , multi-instrumentalist and producer marko kon , serbian composer , producer and singer stephen marley , jamaican-american musician april 23 – amira medunjanin , singer from bosnia and herzegovina april 24 – corey cerovsek , canadian violinist and pianist april 28 – violent j , american rapper april 29 – fredrik kempe , swedish songwriter and opera and pop singer may 4 mike dirnt american musician , songwriter and composer . ( green day ) chris tomlin , american contemporary christian musician ( ccm ) may 7 – felix da housecat , american house music dj and record producer may 11 – daniel ornellas , south african bass player may 14 – salaam remi , american record producer may 19 – jenny berggren , swedish singer ( ace of base ) may 20 – busta rhymes , american hip hop recording artist , actor , record producer and record executive may 21 the notorious b.i.g . , american rapper ( d . 1997 ) mitch allen , american record producer , songwriter and musician . may 26 – ahmad dhani , indonesian rock musician , songwriter , arranger , producer and politician may 27 – ivete sangalo , brazilian female singer june 5 toni pearen , australian singer , songwriter , tv host , dancer and actor paweł kotla , polish conductor june 6 – cristina scabbia , italian singer june 12 – bounty killer , reggae/dancehall singer june 23 – fredwreck , palestinian american music artist and record producer june 25 – mike kroeger , canadian rock bass guitarist ( nickelback ) june 26 – garou , french canadian singer july 1 sunshine becker , american backing singer ( furthur ) alex machacek , austrian guitarist ( bpm and cab ) july 4 – rogue , american dark wave lead singer ( the crüxshadows ) july 10 – tilo wolff , german musician july 12 – brett reed , drummer ( rancid ) july 17 elizabeth cook , american singer and guitarist jason rullo , american drummer ( symphony x and redemption ) july 20 – vitamin c , american singer-songwriter , dancer and actress ( eve 's plum ) july 26 – wayne wonder , reggae singer july 29 – anssi kela , finnish rock musician august 6 – geri halliwell , british singer , clothes designer , author and actress ( spice girls ) august 8 – lüpüs thünder ( bloodhound gang ) august 9 – a-mei , taiwanese puyuma singer-songwriter august 12 del tha funky homosapien , american hip-hop artist demir demirkan , turkish rock musician and songwriter august 15 – mikey graham , irish singer ( boyzone ) august 16 – emily robison , american country music performer ( dixie chicks ) august 18 leo ku , hong kong actor and singer keiko yamada , japanese singer ( globe ) august 27 – jimmy pop , american musician ( bloodhound gang ) september 4 – carlos ponce , puerto rican actor , singer , composer september 6 – idris elba , english actor , producer , musician and dj september 21 – liam gallagher , british singer ( oasis ) september 23 – jermaine dupri , american rapper , record producer , musician september 26 – shawn stockman , american singer ( boyz ii men ) september 30 – shaan , indian singer october 10 – tor erik hermansen , american record producer and songwriter of the team stargate ( music producers ) october 17 eminem , american rapper , producer , record producer , musician , business man ( d12 and soul intent ( group ) ) tarkan , turkey singer october 6 – anders iwers , swedish heavy metal guitarist october 19 – pras ( michél ) , american rapper , hip hop musician , record producer , songwriter and actor ( fugees ) october 20 – stephan moccio , canadian pianist , composer , producer , arranger and conductor october 27 – elissa , lebanese singer october 28 – brad paisley , american country music performer november 17 – kimya dawson , american singer/songwriter november 25 – mark morton , american heavy metal guitarist ( lamb of god ) november 28 – jesper strömblad , swedish death metal guitarist december 1 – greg upchurch , american rock drummer ( puddle of mudd , 3 doors down ) december 9 – tré cool , german-born american musician , drummer and composer ( green day ) december 10 scot alexander , american alternative rock bass guitarist ( dishwalla ) brian molko , british rock singer ( placebo ) mikkel storleer eriksen , american songwriter and producer of the team stargate ( music producers ) december 11 – easther bennett , british singer ( eternal ) december 12 – kevin parent , canadian singer-songwriter and actor december 13 – niki evans , english actress and singer december 16 – ben kowalewicz , canadian rock lead singer ( billy talent ) december 18 – dj lethal , latvian-born rock musician ( limp bizkit , house of pain ) december 19 – alyssa milano , american activist , advocate , producer , singer and actress december 22 – vanessa paradis , french singer and actress december 27 – matt slocum , american pop guitarist-composer and multi-instrumentalist ( sixpence none the richer ) december 31 – joey mcintyre , american singer ( new kids on the block ) . deaths . january 1 – maurice chevalier , 83 , french singer and actor january 16 – david seville , 52 , voice of the chipmunks january 19 – michael rabin , 35 , violinist ( fell downstairs ) january 20 – jean casadesus , 44 , french pianist ( car accident ) january 23 – big maybelle , 47 , singer and pianist january 24 – gene austin , 69 , singer-songwriter january 27 – mahalia jackson , 61 , gospel singer january 29 – margherita grandi , 77 , operatic soprano february 8 – markos vamvakaris , 66 , greek composer february 11 – rudi gfaller , austrian operetta singer and composer ( b . 1882 ) february 19 – lee morgan , 33 , hard bop trumpeter february 21 – marie dubas , 77 , french music-hall singer march 2 – erna sack , 74 , coloratura soprano ( cancer ) march 17 – linda jones , 27 , soul singer ( diabetic coma ) march 27 – sharkey bonano , 67 , jazz musician and bandleader april 3 – ferde grofé , 80 , composer , arranger , and pianist april 4 – stefan wolpe , 69 , composer may 2 – les harvey , 27 , guitarist ( stone the crows ) ( electrocuted on stage ) may 5 – reverend gary davis , 76 , blues and gospel singer and guitarist may 12 – david hughes , 43 , operatic tenor ( heart failure ) june 8 – jimmy rushing , 70 , blues and jazz singer june 13 – clyde mcphatter , 39 , r & b singer july 3 – '' mississippi '' fred mcdowell , 68 , blues musician july 9 – robert weede , 69 , operatic baritone july 10 – lovie austin , 84 , american pianist , composer , and bandleader july 24 – bobby ramirez , drummer ( edgar winter 's white trash ) july 28 – helen traubel , 73 , operatic soprano august 2 brian cole , 29 , bass player in the association ( drug overdose ) rudolph ganz , 95 , swiss pianist , conductor and composer august 14 – oscar levant , 65 , pianist and composer august 21 – yvonne gall , 87 , operatic soprano august 29 – lale andersen , 67 , danish singer august 31 – dalva de oliveira , 55 , brazilian singer ( internal bleeding ) september 19 – robert casadesus , french pianist and composer , 73 september 24 – alfred kalmus , music publisher , 93 september 28 – rory storm , 33 , english singer ( appendicitis ) september 30 – grigore cugler , 69 , romanian riter , artist , composer and violinist october 3 – kari marie aarvold glaser , 71 , norwegian pianist and music teacher october 24 – thelma votipka , 67 , operatic mezzo-soprano november 3 – harry richman , 77 , us singer , actor and composer november 6 – billy murcia , 21 , drummer of new york dolls ( suffocation ) november 11 – berry oakley , 24 , bass player ( the allman brothers band ) ( motorcycle accident ) november 12 – rudolf friml , 92 , rose-marie composer november 18 – danny whitten , 29 , guitarist ( crazy horse ) ( drug overdose ) november 28 – havergal brian , 96 , english classical composer december 3 – bill johnson , 100 , african american dixieland jazz double-bassist . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1972 grammy album of the year : the concert for bangladesh grammy best new artist : america grammy best album design : '' school 's out '' – alice cooper grammy best pop duo or group : '' where is the love '' – roberta flack and donny hathaway grammy best pop female vocal : '' i am woman '' – helen reddy grammy best pop male vocal : '' without you '' – harry nilsson grammy best r & b duo or group : '' papa was a rollin ' stone '' – the temptations grammy best r & b female vocal : '' young , gifted and black '' – aretha franklin grammy best r & b male vocal : '' me and mrs . jones '' – billy paul grammy record of the year : '' the first time ever i saw your face '' – roberta flack grammy song of the year : '' the first time ever i saw your face '' – roberta flack . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1972 . leeds piano competition . murray perahia . references .