Mount Erebus

geology and volcanology . mount erebus is currently the most active volcano in antarctica and is the current eruptive zone of the erebus hotspot . the summit contains a persistent convecting phonolite lava lake , one of five long-lasting lava lakes on earth . characteristic eruptive activity consists of strombolian eruptions from the lava lake or from one of several subsidiary vents , all within the volcano 's inner crater . the volcano is scientifically remarkable in that its relatively low-level and unusually persistent eruptive activity enables long-term volcanological study of a strombolian eruptive system very close ( hundreds of metres ) to the active vents , a characteristic shared with only a few volcanoes on earth , such as stromboli in italy . scientific study of the volcano is also facilitated by its proximity to mcmurdo station ( u.s . ) and scott base ( new zealand ) , both sited on ross island around 35 km away . mount erebus is classified as a polygenetic stratovolcano . the bottom half of the volcano is a shield and the top half is a stratocone . the composition of the current eruptive products of erebus are anorthoclase-porphyritic tephritic phonolite and phonolite , which are the bulk of exposed lava flow on the volcano . the oldest eruptive products consist of relatively undifferentiated and viscosity basanite lavas that form the low broad platform shield of erebus . slightly younger basanite and phonotephrite lavas crop out on fang ridge—an eroded remnant of an early erebus volcano—and at other isolated locations on the flanks of erebus . erebus is the world 's only presently erupting phonolite volcano . lava flows of more viscous phonotephrite and trachyte erupted after the basanite . the upper slopes of mount erebus are dominated by steeply dipping ( about 30° ) tephritic phonolite lava flows with large-scale flow levees . a conspicuous break in slope around 3,200 m asl calls attention to a summit plateau representing a caldera . the summit caldera was created by an explosive vei-6 eruption that occurred 18,000 ± 7,000 years ago . it is filled with small volume tephritic phonolite and phonolite lava flows . in the center of the summit caldera is a small , steep-sided cone composed primarily of decomposed lava bombs and a large deposit of anorthoclase crystals known as erebus crystals . the active lava lake in this summit cone undergoes continuous degassing . researchers spent more than three months during the 2007–08 field season installing an atypically dense array of seismometers around mount erebus to listen to waves of energy generated by small , controlled blasts from explosives they buried along its flanks and perimeter , and to record scattered seismic signals generated by lava lake eruptions and local ice quakes . by studying the refracted and scattered seismic waves , the scientists produced an image of the uppermost ( top few km ) of the volcano to understand the geometry of its '' plumbing '' and how the magma rises to the lava lake . these results demonstrated a complex upper-volcano conduit system with appreciable upper-volcano magma storage to the northwest of the lava lake at depths hundreds of meters below the surface . ice fumaroles . mt . erebus is notable for its numerous ice fumaroles – ice towers that form around gases that escape from vents in the surface . for photographs of ice fumaroles , see ice towers mount everest volcano observatory the ice caves associated with the fumaroles are dark , in polar alpine environments starved in organics and with oxygenated hydrothermal circulation in highly reducing host rock . the life is sparse , mainly bacteria and fungi . this makes it of special interest for studying oligotrophs – organisms that can survive on minimal amounts of resources . the caves on erebus are of special interest for astrobiology , as most surface caves are influenced by human activities , or by organics from the surface brought in by animals ( e.g . bats ) or ground water . the caves at erebus are at high altitude , yet accessible for study . almost no chance exists of photosynthetic-based organics , or of animals in a food chain based on photosynthetic life , and no overlying soil to wash down into them . they are dynamic systems that collapse and rebuild , but persist over decades . the air inside the caves has 80 to 100 % humidity , and up to 3 % carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , and some carbon monoxide ( co ) and hydrogen ( h 2 ) , but almost no methane ( ch 4 ) or hydrogen sulfide ( h 2 s ) . many of them are completely dark , so can not support photosynthesis . organics can only come from the atmosphere , or from ice algae that grow on the surface in summer , which may eventually find their way into the caves through burial and melting . as a result , most micro-organisms there are chemolithoautotrophic i.e . microbes that get all of their energy from chemical reactions with the rocks , and that do not depend on any other lifeforms to survive . the organisms survive using co 2 fixation and some may use co oxidization for the metabolism . the main types of microbe found there are chloroflexi and acidobacteria . . named features . mount erebus is large enough to have several named features on its slopes , including a number of craters and rock formations . named craters located on mount erebus include side crater , a nearly circular crater named for its location on the side of the main summit cone , and western crater , named for the slope on which it sits . there are many rock formations on mount erebus . on the northwest upper slope of the active cone near a former exploration camp site , lava flow has formed a prominent outcropping called nausea knob , named for the nausea caused by elevation sickness . also on the northwest slope sits tarr nunatak , named by the new zealand geographic board ( nzgb ) in 2000 after sgt . l.w . tarr , an aircraft mechanic with the new zealand contingent of the commonwealth trans-antarctic expedition . on the southwest rim of the summit caldera sits seismic bluff , named for a seismic station nearby . the cashman crags are two rock summits at about high on the west slope of mount erebus , southwest of hoopers shoulder . it was , at the suggestion of p.r . kyle , named by the advisory committee on antarctic names after katherine v . cashman , united states antarctic research program team member . . history . discovery and naming . mount erebus was discovered on january 27 , 1841 ( and observed to be in eruption ) , ross , voyage to the southern seas , vol . i , pp . 216–8 . by polar explorer sir james clark ross on ross expedition , who named it and its companion , mount terror , after his ships , hms erebus and hms terror ( which were later used by sir john franklin on his disastrous arctic expedition ) . present with ross on hms erebus was the young joseph hooker , future president of the royal society and close friend of charles darwin . erebus is a dark region in hades in greek mythology , personified as the greek primordial deities of darkness , the son of chaos . hesiod , theogony 116–124 . . historic sites . the mountain was surveyed in december 1912 by a science party from robert falcon scott 's terra nova expedition , who also collected geological samples . two of the camp sites they used have been recognised for their historic significance : upper “ summit camp ” site ( hsm 89 ) consists of part of a circle of rocks , which were probably used to weight the tent valances . lower “ camp e ” site ( hsm 90 ) consists of a slightly elevated area of gravel , as well as some aligned rocks , which may have been used to weight the tent valances . they have been designated historic sites or monuments following a proposal by the united kingdom , new zealand , and the united states to the antarctic treaty system . . climbing . mount erebus ' summit crater rim was first achieved by members of sir ernest shackleton 's party ; edgeworth david , douglas mawson , alistair mackay , jameson adams , eric marshall and phillip brocklehurst ( who did not reach the summit ) , in 1908 . its first known solo ascent and the first winter ascent was accomplished by british mountaineer roger mear on 7 june 1985 , a member of the '' in the footsteps of scott '' expedition . mear , roger and robert swan , in the footsteps of scott , pp . 95–104 . on january 19–20 , 1991 , charles j . blackmer , an iron-worker for many years at mcmurdo station and the south pole , accomplished a solo ascent in about 17 hours completely unsupported , by snow mobile and on foot . . robotic exploration . in 1992 , the inside of the volcano was explored by dante i , an eight legged tethered robotic explorer . dante was designed to acquire gas samples from the magma lake inside the inner crater of mount erebus to understand the chemistry better through the use of the on-board gas chromatograph , as well as measuring the temperature inside the volcano and the radioactivity of the materials present in such volcanoes . dante successfully scaled a significant portion of the crater before technical difficulties emerged with the fibre-optic cable used for communications between the walker and base station . since dante had not yet reached the bottom of the crater , no data of volcanic significance was recorded . the expedition proved to be highly successful in terms of robotic and computer science , and was possibly the first expedition by a robotic platform to antarctica . air new zealand flight 901 . mount erebus disaster was a scheduled sightseeing service from auckland airport in new zealand to antarctica and return with a scheduled stop at christchurch airport to refuel before returning to auckland . holmes p . , daughters of erebus , hachette new zealand ltd ( 2011 ) , p . 31 the air new zealand flyover service , for the purposes of antarctic sightseeing , was operated with mcdonnell douglas dc-10 aircraft and began in february 1977 . the flight crashed into mount erebus on november 28 , 1979 , killing all 257 people on board . passenger photographs taken seconds before the collision ruled out the '' flying in a cloud '' theory , showing perfectly clear visibility well beneath the cloud base , with landmarks to the left and to the right of the aircraft visible . royal commission report , para 28 the mountain directly ahead was lit by sunlight shining from directly behind the aircraft through the cloud deck above , resulting in a lack of shadows that made mount erebus effectively invisible against the overcast sky beyond in a classic whiteout ( more accurately , '' flat-light '' ) phenomenon . royal commission report , para 40 ( a ) further investigation of the crash showed an air new zealand navigational error and a cover-up that resulted in about 100 million in lawsuits . air new zealand discontinued its flyovers of antarctica . its final flight was on february 17 , 1980 . during the antarctic summer , snow melt on the flanks of mount erebus continually reveals debris from the crash that is visible from the air . . image gallery . file : ross island map usgs 250k.png topographic map of ross island ( 1:250,000 scale ) mount erebus is in the lower left . mount bird is in the upper left . mount terra nova is in the middle . mount terror is in the right . file : mount erebus craters , ross island , antarctica ( aerial view , 18 december 2000 ) . jpg aerial view of mount erebus craters file : mounterebusnasa.jpg satellite picture of mount erebus showing glow from its persistent lava lake file : operation-deep-freeze-mt-erebus-6851.jpg mount erebus in december 1955 . see also . charles neider coleman peak erebus glacier erebus ice tongue ice tower ridge list of volcanoes in antarctica lower erebus hut – home of mevo volcanic seven summits volcanic seven second summits helo cliffs , a prominent feature on the caldera . references . ; general the mount erebus volcano observatory ( includes live camera images of the volcano 's lava lake , video clips of eruptions , and other information ) . external links . a picture from space of the lava lake at the summit of mount erebus erebus glacier tongue a panoramic view from the summit of mount erebus footage of mount erebus erupting in 2005