Parliamentary system

history . since ancient times , when societies were tribal , there were councils or a headman whose decisions were assessed by village elders . eventually , these councils have slowly evolved into the modern parliamentary system . the first parliaments date back to europe in the middle ages : specifically in 1188 alfonso ix , king of leon ( spain ) convened the three states in the cortes of león . john keane : the life and death of democracy , london 2009 , 169-176 . an early example of parliamentary government developed in today 's netherlands and belgium during the dutch revolt ( 1581 ) , when the sovereign , legislative and executive powers were taken over by the states general of the netherlands from the monarch , king philip ii of spain . the modern concept of parliamentary government emerged in the kingdom of great britain and its contemporary , the age of liberty . in england , simon de montfort is remembered as one of the fathers of representative government for convening two famous parliaments . ; the first , in 1258 , stripped the king of unlimited authority and the second , in 1265 , included simon de montfort 's parliament . later , in the 17th century , the parliament of england pioneered some of the ideas and systems of liberal democracy culminating in the glorious revolution and passage of the bill of rights 1689 . in the kingdom of great britain , the monarch , in theory , chaired cabinet and chose ministers . in practice , king george i 's inability to speak english led the responsibility for chairing cabinet to go to the leading minister , literally the prime or first minister , robert walpole . the gradual democratisation of parliament with the broadening of the voting franchise increased parliament 's role in controlling government , and in deciding whom the king could ask to form a government . by the 19th century , the great reform act of 1832 led to parliamentary dominance , with its choice invariably deciding who was prime minister and the complexion of the government . other countries gradually adopted what came to be called the westminster model of government , with an executive answerable to parliament , and exercising , in the name of the head of state , powers nominally vested in the head of state . hence the use of phrases like her majesty 's government or his excellency 's government . such a system became particularly prevalent in older british dominions , many of which had their constitutions enacted by the british parliament ; such as australia , new zealand , canada , the irish free state and the union of south africa . some of these parliaments were reformed from , or were initially developed as distinct from their original british model : the australian senate , for instance , has since its inception more closely reflected the us senate than the british house of lords ; whereas since 1950 there is no upper house in new zealand . democracy and parliamentarism became increasingly prevalent in europe in the years after world war i , partially imposed by the democratic victors , the united states , great britain and france , on the defeated countries and their successors , notably weimar germany and the new austrian republic . nineteenth-century urbanisation , the industrial revolution and modernism had already fuelled the political left 's struggle for democracy and parliamentarianism for a long time . in the radicalised times at the end of world war i , democratic reforms were often seen as a means to counter popular revolutionary currents . characteristics . a parliamentary system may be either bicameral , with two chambers of parliament ( or houses ) or unicameral , with just one parliamentary chamber . a bicameral parliament usually consists of a directly elected lower house with the power to determine the executive government , and an upper house which may be appointed or elected through a different mechanism from the lower house . scholars of democracy such as arend lijphart distinguish two types of parliamentary democracies : the westminster and consensus systems . the westminster system is usually found in the commonwealth of nations and countries which were influenced by the british political tradition . these parliaments tend to have a more adversarial style of debate and the plenary session of parliament is more important than committees . some parliaments in this model are elected using a plurality voting system ( first past the post ) , such as the united kingdom , canada , and india , while others use some form of proportional representation , such as ireland and new zealand . the australian house of representatives is elected using instant-runoff voting , while the senate is elected using proportional representation through single transferable vote . regardless of which system is used , the voting systems tend to allow the voter to vote for a named candidate rather than a closed list . the western european parliamentary model ( e.g . , spain , germany ) tends to have a more consensual debating system and usually has semi-circular debating chambers . consensus systems have more of a tendency to use proportional representation with open party lists than the westminster model legislatures . the committees of these parliaments tend to be more important than the plenary chamber . some western european countries ' parliaments ( e.g . , in the netherlands , luxembourg and sweden ) implement the principle of dualism as a form of separation of powers . in countries using this system , members of parliament have to resign their place in parliament upon being appointed ( or elected ) minister . ministers in those countries usually actively participate in parliamentary debates , but are not entitled to vote . implementations of the parliamentary system can also differ as to how the prime minister and government are appointed and whether the government needs the explicit approval of the parliament , rather than just the absence of its disapproval . some countries such as india also require the prime minister to be a member of the legislature , though in other countries this only exists as a convention . the head of state appoints a prime minister who will likely have majority support in parliament . while in practice most prime ministers under the westminster system ( including australia , canada , india , new zealand and the united kingdom ) are the leaders of the largest party in parliament , technically the appointment of the prime minister is a prerogative exercised by the monarch , the governor-general , or the president . no parliamentary vote takes place on who is forming a government , but since parliament can immediately defeat the government with a motion of no confidence , the head of state is limited by convention to choosing a candidate who can command the confidence of parliament , and thus has little or no influence in the decision . the head of state appoints a prime minister who must gain a vote of confidence within a set time . examples : italy , thailand . the head of state appoints the leader of the political party holding a plurality of seats in parliament as prime minister . for example , in greece , if no party has a majority , the leader of the party with a plurality of seats is given an exploratory mandate to receive the confidence of the parliament within three days . if this is not possible , then the leader of the party with the second highest seat number is given the exploratory mandate . if this fails , then the leader of the third largest party is given it and so on . the head of state nominates a candidate for prime minister who is then submitted to parliament for approval before appointment . example : spain , where the king sends a proposal to the congress of deputies for approval . also , germany where under the german basic law ( constitution ) the bundestag votes on a candidate nominated by the federal president . in these cases , parliament can choose another candidate who then would be appointed by the head of state . parliament nominates a candidate whom the head of state is constitutionally obliged to appoint as prime minister . example : japan , where the emperor appoints the prime minister on the nomination of the national diet . also , ireland where the president of ireland appoints the taoiseach on the nomination of the dáil éireann . a public officeholder ( other than the head of state or their representative ) nominates a candidate , who , if approved by parliament , is appointed as prime minister . example : under the swedish instrument of government ( 1974 ) , the power to appoint someone to form a government has been moved from the monarch to the speaker of parliament and the parliament itself . the speaker nominates a candidate , who is then elected to prime minister ( statsminister ) by the parliament if an absolute majority of the members of parliament does not vote no ( i.e . they can be elected even if more members of parliament vote no than yes ) . direct election by popular vote . example : israel , 1996–2001 , where the prime minister was elected in a general election , with no regard to political affiliation , and whose procedure can also be described as of a semi-parliamentary system . furthermore , there are variations as to what conditions exist ( if any ) for the government to have the right to dissolve the parliament : in some countries , such as denmark , malaysia , australia and new zealand , the prime minister has the de facto power to call an election , at will . this was also the case in the united kingdom until the passage of the fixed-term parliaments act 2011 . in israel , parliament may vote in order to call an election or pass a vote of no confidence against the government . other countries only permit an election to be called in the event of a vote of no confidence against the government , a supermajority vote in favour of an early election or prolonged deadlock in parliament . these requirements can still be circumvented . for example , in germany in 2005 , gerhard schröder deliberately allowed his government to lose a confidence motion , in order to call an early election . in sweden , the government may call a snap election at will , but the newly elected riksdag is only elected to fill out the previous riksdag 's term . the last time this option was used was in 1958 . norway is unique among parliamentary systems in that the storting always serves the whole of its four-year term . since 2011 in the united kingdom , the house of commons may be dissolved early only by a vote of two-thirds of its members , or if a vote of non-confidence passes and no alternative government is formed in the next fourteen days . the parliamentary system can be contrasted with a presidential system which operates under a stricter separation of powers , whereby the executive does not form part of—nor is appointed by—the parliamentary or legislative body . in such a system , parliaments or congresses do not select or dismiss heads of governments , and governments can not request an early dissolution as may be the case for parliaments . there also exists the semi-presidential system that draws on both presidential systems and parliamentary systems by combining a powerful president with an executive responsible to parliament : for example , the french fifth republic . parliamentarianism may also apply to regional and local governments . an example is the city of oslo , which has an executive council ( byråd ) as a part of the parliamentary system . anti-defection law . a few parliamentary democratic nations such as india , pakistan , bangladesh etc . have enacted a law which prohibits floor crossing or switching the party after election process . with this law , the elected representative have to lose their seat in the parliament house , if they defy the direction of the party in any voting . in the uk parliament , a member is free to cross over to the other side , without being daunted by any disqualification law . in canada and australia , there is no restraint on legislators switching sides . . advantages . supporters generally claim three basic advantages for parliamentary systems : adaptability scrutiny and accountability distribution of power . adaptability . parliamentary systems like that found in the united kingdom are widely considered to be more flexible , allowing rapid change in legislation and policy as long as there is a stable majority or coalition in parliament , allowing the government to have 'few legal limits on what it can do ' due to the first-past-the-post 'this system produces the classic '' westminster model '' with the twin virtues of strong but responsive party government' . this electoral system providing a strong majority in the house of commons , paired with the fused power system results in a particularly powerful government able to provide change and 'innovate' . . scrutiny and accountability . the united kingdom 's fused power system is often noted to be advantageous with regards to accountability . the centralised government allows for more transparency as to where decisions originate from , this directly contrasts with the united states ' system with former treasury secretary c . douglas dillon saying '' the president blames congress , the congress blames the president , and the public remains confused and disgusted with government in washington '' . furthermore , ministers of the u.k . cabinet are subject to weekly question periods in which their actions/policies are scrutinised , no such regular check on the government exists in the u.s . system . distribution of power . parliamentary government has attractive features for nations that are ethnicity , racially , or ideology divided . in a presidential system , all executive power is vested in one person , the president , whereas power is more divided in a parliamentary system with its collegial executive . in the 1989 lebanese taif agreement , in order to give muslims greater political power , lebanon moved from a semi-presidential system with a powerful president to a system more structurally similar to classical parliamentary government . iraq similarly disdained a presidential system out of fears that such a system would be tantamount to shiite domination of the large sunni minority . afghanistan 's minorities refused to go along with a presidency as strong as the pashtuns desired . it can be argued that power is more evenly spread out in parliamentary government , as the government and prime minister do not have the power to make unilateral decisions , as the entire government cabinet is answerable and accountable to parliament . parliamentary systems are less likely to allow celebrity-based politics to fully dominate a society , unlike what often happens in presidential systems , where name-recall and popularity can catapult a celebrity , actor , or popular politician to the presidency despite such candidate 's lack of competence and experience . some scholars like juan linz , fred riggs , bruce ackerman , and robert dahl have found that parliamentary government is less prone to authoritarian collapse . these scholars point out that since world war ii , two-thirds of third world countries establishing parliamentary governments successfully made the transition to democracy . by contrast , no third world presidential system successfully made the transition to democracy without experiencing coups and other constitutional breakdowns . a 2001 world bank study found that parliamentary systems are associated with less corruption , which is supported by a separate study that arrived at the same conclusions . calling of elections . in his 1867 book the english constitution , walter bagehot praised parliamentary governments for producing serious debates , for allowing for a change in power without an election , and for allowing elections at any time . bagehot considered the four-year election rule of the united states to be unnatural , as it can potentially allow a president who has disappointed the public with a dismal performance in the second year of his term to continue on until the end of his four-year term . under a parliamentary system , a prime minister that has lost support in the middle of his term can be easily replaced by his own peers . although bagehot praised parliamentary governments for allowing an election to take place at any time , the lack of a definite election calendar can be abused . previously under some systems , such as the british , a ruling party could schedule elections when it felt that it was likely to retain power , and so avoid elections at times of unpopularity . ( election timing in the uk , however , is now partly fixed under the fixed-term parliaments act 2011 . ) thus , by a shrewd timing of elections , in a parliamentary system , a party can extend its rule for longer than is feasible in a functioning presidential system . this problem can be alleviated somewhat by setting fixed dates for parliamentary elections , as is the case in several of australia 's state parliaments . in other systems , such as the dutch and the belgian , the ruling party or coalition has some flexibility in determining the election date . conversely , flexibility in the timing of parliamentary elections can avoid periods of legislative gridlock that can occur in a fixed period presidential system . in any case , voters ultimately have the power to choose whether to vote for the ruling party or someone else . disadvantages and criticisms . critics of parliamentarianism , namely proponents of anti-parliamentarianism , generally claim these basic disadvantages for parliamentary systems : legislative flip-flopping party fragmentation . legislative flip-flopping . the ability for strong parliamentary governments to 'push ' legislation through with the ease of fused power systems such as in the united kingdom , whilst positive in allowing rapid adaptation when necessary e.g . the nationalisation of services during the world wars , does have its drawbacks . the flip-flopping of legislation back and forth as the majority in parliament changed between the conservatives and labour over the period 1940–1980 , contesting over the nationalisation and privatisation of the british steel industry resulted in major instability for the british steel sector . . party fragmentation . in r . kent weaver 's book are parliamentary systems better ? , he writes that an advantage of presidential systems is their ability to allow and accommodate more diverse viewpoints . he states that because '' legislators are not compelled to vote against their constituents on matters of local concern , parties can serve as organizational and roll-call cuing vehicles without forcing out dissidents . '' . countries . africa .