Ralph d'Escures

early life . ralph was the son of seffrid d'escures and his first wife rascendis , brett '' escures , ralph d ' '' oxford dictionary of national biography and a half brother of seffrid i , greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 5 : chichester : bishops bishop of chichester from 1125 to 1145 . knowles , et al . heads of religious houses pp . 51,250 the surname of de turbine , by which he is sometimes known in older scholarship , is only attested in the fourteenth century and possibly resulted from confusion with william de corbeil , ralph 's successor at canterbury . ralph studied at the school at the abbey of bec cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 176 before entering the abbey of st martin at séez in 1079 . st . martin was a house founded by the montgomery and bellême families , and was still under their lordship . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 109 he became abbot of the house in 1091 , and his election was attended by anselm of canterbury . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 61 . time in england . soon afterwards ralph paid a visit to england , perhaps to visit shrewsbury abbey , which was a daughter house of séez . he may have been involved in the mediating the surrender of robert of bellême at shrewsbury in 1102 , for some chroniclers state that it was ralph who delivered the keys of the castle to king henry i of england . hollister henry i p . 163 in 1103 he took refuge in england from the demands of robert of bellême for homage . ralph declined to do homage because pope urban ii had ordered that no clergy could do homage to the laity . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan pp . 24–25 robert was also demanding heavy taxes , and ralph fled with serlo , bishop of séez , who was also subjected to robert 's demands . hollister henry i p . 181 he passed his time in england with his friends saint anselm and gundulf the bishop of rochester . barlow english church p . 82 he attended the translation of saint cuthbert 's remains at durham , where he was one of examiners of the body , and declared the saint 's remains uncorrupt . in 1106 he visited anselm at the abbey of bec , but probably did not try to assert himself at séez . after anselm was elected to the see of canterbury , ralph appears to have become part of the archbishop 's household . in june 1108 ralph succeeded gundulf as bishop of rochester , having been nominated by gundulf before his death . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : rochester : bishops ralph was consecrated on 9 august 1108 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 267 he was at anselm 's deathbed in april 1109 , and , afterwards , ralph acted as administrator of the see of canterbury powell and wallis house of lords p . 57 until 26 april 1114 , when he was chosen archbishop at windsor . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 232 the king had wanted his doctor , faricus , who was an italian and abbot of abingdon , but the nobles and the bishops objected to anyone but a norman being appointed . the bishops also desired someone who was not a monk , or at least not one who was so close to henry . knowles monastic order p . 181 as a compromise , ralph was chosen , rather than the secular clergy that the bishops favoured . knowles monastic order p . 628 although ralph was a monk and had not served as a royal clerk , he was also a bishop , which seems to have reconciled the other bishops to his selection . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 33 . archbishop of canterbury . it is noteworthy that , while ralph was not chosen by the chapter of canterbury alone , his election involved an assembly of the magnates and bishops meeting with the king . he was not selected solely by the king , nor solely by the bishops or chapter . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 281 ralph received his pallium from the pope , rather than travelling to rome to retrieve it . barlow english church 1066–1154 p . 38 it was only with difficulty , however , that pope paschal ii was persuaded to grant the pallium , as the papacy was attempting to again assert papal jurisdiction over the english church . it was anselm of st saba who brought the pallium to england , along with letters from paschal complaining that the english church was translating bishops from see to see without papal permission , that legates from the papacy were being refused entry to england and that the king was allowing no appeals to be made to the pope over ecclesiastical issues . hollister henry i pp . 240–243 in 1116 the pope even demanded the payment of peter 's pence , a payment direct to the papacy of a penny from every household in england . ralph , when he took the pallium , professed '' fidelity and canonical obedience '' to the pope , but did not submit to the papal demands and , in fact , supported king henry in opposing the pope 's demands . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture pp . 301–308 as archbishop ralph championed the rights of the see of canterbury and the english church . barlow english church p . 83 he claimed authority in wales and scotland , writing to the pope that '' the church of canterbury has not ceased to provide pastoral care for the whole of britain and ireland , both as a benevolence and from its rights of primacy . '' quoted in bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 92 he advised the bishop of llandaff that a new llandaff cathedral should be built and granted an indulgence to contributors . hollister henry i p . 395 he even refused to consecrate thurstan as archbishop of york because thurstan would not profess obedience to the archbishop of canterbury , vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan pp . 357–359 part of the canterbury-york dispute . barlow english church pp . 39–44 at first , ralph depended only on the king to demand thurstan to submit , but later he appealed to the popes to force thurstan to obey . his refusal brought him into a dispute with the papacy , for pope paschal ii supported thurstan . ralph visited rome in 1117 , but was unable to obtain an interview with paschal as the pope had fled the city in front of an invading imperial army . ralph had taken ill with an ulcer on his face during the trip to rome and , for a time , it was feared that he would die . he recovered enough to continue on to rome , however , although it was a fruitless trip . despite instructions from paschal 's successors , gelasius ii and calixtus ii , the archbishop continued to refuse to consecrate thurstan , and thurstan was still unconsecrated when ralph died . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 362 thurstan was eventually consecrated at reims by pope calixtus ii in may 1119 , although the issue of primacy remained unresolved . although he feuded with york over the primacy , it appears clear that ralph considered the investiture crisis settled in england for , in 1117 while visiting rome , he took a neutral position as regards the issues between the pope and the emperor . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture pp . 275–276 in 1115 , however , he refused to consecrate bernard as bishop of st david 's in the royal chapel , although robert of meulan , the king 's chief counsellor , advocated that the consecration must take place in the royal chapel according to ancient custom . the king did not insist and ralph won the confrontation . he was also involved in ecclesiastical affairs in normandy , as he attended the provincial synod , or council of rouen , held in 1118 . spear '' norman empire '' journal of british studies p . 3 . final years and legacy . ralph suffered a stroke on 11 july 1119 as he was removing his vestments after celebrating mass . from then until his death , ralph was partially paralysed and unable to speak clearly . bethell '' english black monks '' english historical review p . 673 he was still involved in decision making and , in 1120 , he agreed to king alexander i of scotland 's suggestion that eadmer become the next bishop of st andrew's . ralph was one of the lords consulted about the remarriage of henry i to adeliza of leuven at london in 1121 . powell and wallis house of lords p . 58 he also successfully asserted his right to celebrate the king 's new marriage , over attempts by roger of salisbury to officiate instead . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 299 due to the damage from the stroke , ralph was unable to perform the ceremony but , when roger made an attempt to do so , ralph successfully insisted on choosing the officiant and william giffard the bishop of winchester performed the marriage . hollister henry i pp . 280–281 ralph died on 20 october 1122 , at canterbury . he was buried in the nave of canterbury cathedral on 23 october 1122 . his nephew , john , was a clerk under ralph , and later ralph appointed him archdeacon of canterbury . after ralph 's death , john was elected to the see of rochester . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : archdeacons : canterbury ralph was regarded as a '' witty , easygoing '' man . hollister henry i p . 235 the struggle with york , however , along with his illnesses and the effects of the stroke , turned ralph in his last years into a quarrelsome person . orderic vitalis said that he was well educated and well loved by people . even william of malmesbury , no lover of ecclesiastics and always ready to find fault with them , could only find fault with him for his occasional lapses into unbecoming frivolity . ralph wrote a sermon for the feast of the assumption of mary and it survives in some fifty latin manuscripts , probably because it was thought to have been written by anselm of canterbury , until shown to be ralph 's in 1927 . treharne '' life of english '' writers of the reign of henry ii pp . 172–173 a surviving english translation of the sermon is also preserved in the manuscript british library , cotton vespasian d . xiv . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 494 the latin version , which ralph was a translation of his originally spoken french version , has been edited and published in 1997 . ralph also had the monks of canterbury cathedral search for documents relating to the privileges of canterbury and had those documents copied into a manuscript which still survives , bm ms cotton cleopatra e . his seal is one of the first to take the usual form for bishop 's seals , with ralph standing , in full vestments including a mitre , and performing a benediction with his right hand while holding his crosier in his left . the seal took the form of a pointed oval . harvey and mcguinness guide to british medieval seals pp . 64–65 . citations . references .