Jan Masaryk

early life . born in prague , he was a son of professor and politician tomáš garrigue masaryk ( who became the first president of czechoslovakia in 1918 ) and charlotte garrigue , tomáš garrigue masaryk 's american wife . masaryk was educated in prague and also in the us , where he also for a time lived as a drifter and lived on the earnings of his manual labor . he returned home in 1913 and served in the austria-hungary world war i . vratislav preclík . masaryk a legie ( tgm and legions ) , váz . kniha , 219 str . , vydalo nakladatelství paris karviná , žižkova 2379 ( 734 01 karviná ) ve spolupráci s masarykovým demokratickým hnutím ( masaryk democratic movement in prague ) , 2019 , he then joined the diplomatic service and became chargé d'affaires to the us in 1919 , a post he held until 1922 . in 1921 , he became secretary to the czech foreign minister edvard beneš . in 1925 , he was made ambassador to britain . his father resigned as president in 1935 and died two years later . he was succeeded by edvard beneš . wartime . in september 1938 the sudetenland was occupied by german forces and masaryk resigned as ambassador in protest , although he remained in london . other government members including beneš also resigned . in march 1939 germany occupied the remaining parts of the czech provinces of bohemia and moravia , and a puppet slovak state was established in slovakia . when a czechoslovak government-in-exile was established in britain in 1940 , masaryk was appointed foreign minister . during the war he regularly made broadcasts over the bbc to occupied czechoslovakia . foreword by madeleine albright . he had a flat at westminster gardens , marsham street in london but often stayed at the czechoslovak chancellery residence at wingrave or with president beneš at aston abbotts , both near aylesbury in buckinghamshire . in 1942 masaryk received an ll.d . from bates college . after the war . masaryk remained foreign minister following the liberation of czechoslovakia as part of the multi-party , communist-dominated national front government . cook , bernard a . ( 2001 ) europe since 1945 : an encyclopedia , volume 1 , p . 251 new york : taylor & francis the communists under klement gottwald saw their position strengthened after the 1946 elections but masaryk stayed on as foreign minister . owen , john m . ( 2010 ) the clash of ideas in world politics , p . 185 princeton , nj : princeton university press he was concerned with retaining the friendship of the soviet union , but was dismayed by the veto they put on czechoslovak participation in the marshall plan . czechoslovakia sold arms to israel during the 1948 arab–israeli war . the deliveries from czechoslovakia proved important for the establishment of israel . masaryk personally signed the first contract on 14 january 1948 . because masaryk was viewed as the most sympathetic to the jews of members of the postwar government , he was given the task of '' appeasing jewish organisations in the west '' in terms of the government 's plans to expel the country 's german population , including german jews . in february 1948 the majority of the non-communist cabinet members resigned , hoping to force new elections , but instead a communist government under gottwald was formed in what became known as the czech coup ( victorious february in the eastern bloc ) . masaryk remained foreign minister , and was the only prominent minister in the new government who was neither a communist nor a fellow traveller . however , he was apparently uncertain about his decision and possibly regretted his decision not to oppose the communist coup by broadcasting to the czech people on national radio , where he was a much loved celebrity . masaryk served as the president of the world federation of united nations associations . a memorial to his memory and his presidency of the organisation is located in geneva , switzerland . flowers are laid annually by the permanent representative of the czech republic to the united nations . death . image : jan masaryk deska.jpg thumb left memorial plaque with masaryk 's quote '' pravda vítězí , ale dá to fušku '' ( the truth prevails , but it 's a chore ) . it is a reference to the czechoslovak national motto pravda vítězí ( truth prevails ) . image : laurence steinhardt a jan masaryk.jpg thumb jan masaryk with laurence steinhardt , the united states ambassador to czechoslovakia . on 10 march 1948 masaryk was found dead , dressed only in his pyjamas , in the courtyard of the foreign ministry ( the černín palace in prague ) below his bathroom window . axelrod , alan ( 2009 ) the real history of the cold war : a new look at the past , p . 133 new york : sterling publishing co . , inc . the ministry of the interior claimed that he had committed suicide by jumping out of the window , but it was at the time , and is still , widely assumed that he was murdered on behest of the nascent communist government . ( others in the country put it thus : '' jan masaryk was a very tidy man . he was such a tidy man that when he jumped he shut the window after himself . '' ) on the other hand , many of his close associates ( e.g . his secretary antonín sum , or avigdor dagan ) have always defended the suicide story . in a second investigation taken in 1968 during the prague spring , masaryk 's death was ruled an accident , not excluding a murder and a third investigation in the early 1990s after the velvet revolution concluded that it had been a murder . in his 1981 autobiography history and memory , us ambassador charles w . yost , a friend of masaryk who worked with him in prague in 1947 , and also a friend of masaryk 's fiancé marcia davenport , wrote , '' the communists used him and , when his usefulness was past , flung him out of a window to his death . '' discussions about the mysterious circumstances of his death continued for some time . those who believe that masaryk was murdered called it the third defenestration of prague , and point to the presence of nail marks on the window sill from which masaryk fell , as well as smearings of feces and masaryk 's stated intention to leave prague the next day for london . members of masaryk 's family—including his former wife , frances crane leatherbee , a former in-law named sylvia e . crane , and his sister alice masaryková — stated their belief that he had indeed killed himself , according to a letter written by sylvia e . crane to the new york times , and considered the possibility of murder a '' cold war cliché '' . crane , john o . & sylvia e . ( 1991 ) czechoslovakia : anvil of the cold war , pp . xiv , 321-323 new york : praeger however , a prague police report in 2004 concluded after forensic research that masaryk had indeed been thrown out of the window to his death . cameron , rob , '' police close case on 1948 death of jan masaryk - murder , not suicide '' , radio prague , 06-01-2004 . this report was seemingly corroborated in 2006 when a russian journalist claimed that his mother knew the russian intelligence officer who threw masaryk out of the window of the west bathroom of masaryk 's flat . cameron , rob , '' masaryk murder mystery back in headlines as russian journalist speaks out '' , radio prague , 18-12-2006 . the highest-ranking soviet bloc intelligence defector , lt . gen . ion mihai pacepa , described his conversation with nicolae ceauşescu , who told him about '' ten international leaders the kremlin killed or tried to kill '' . jan masaryk was one of them . the kremlin ’ s killing ways , at national review online , by ion mihai pacepa ; published november 28 , 2006 ; retrieved october 15 , 2015 czech historian václava jandečková has tentatively suggested in her 2015 monograph '' kauza jan masaryk : nový pohled '' ( the jan masaryk case : a new perspective ) that masaryk might have been murdered by jan bydžovský and františek fryč , who believed they were working for the british intelligence service sis , but most probably fell victim to nkvd agents . bydžovský confessed to murdering masaryk when interrogated in prison by the czech secret police stb in the 1950s ( in an unrelated case ) ; but later denied it . jandečková argues that this confession can not be so easily dismissed as has been believed , especially since bydžovský certainly was not hallucinating or drugged , and the interrogators seem to have been surprised by his confession ( at his trial , the masaryk murder was not '' used '' or even mentioned , although a separate re-investigation by the stb continued for more than a year ) . private life . from 1924 until their divorce in 1931 , masaryk was married to frances crane leatherbee ( 1887-1954 ) . an heiress to the crane piping , valves and elevator fortune , and the former wife of robert leatherbee , she was a daughter of charles r . crane , a u.s . minister to china ; and a sister of richard teller crane ii , a u.s . ambassador to czechoslovakia . by that marriage , masaryk had three stepchildren : charles leatherbee , robert leatherbee jr . , and richard crane leatherbee . leatherbee , richard , '' my family tree , 1772 - present '' , genealogyboard.com , december 13 , 2005 . stepson charles leatherbee ( harvard 1929 ) co-founded the university players , a summer stock company in falmouth , massachusetts , in 1928 with bretaigne windust . he married mary lee logan ( 1910-1972 ) , younger sister of joshua logan , who became one of the co-directors of the university players in 1931 . see , norris houghton . but not forgotten : the adventure of the university players . new york , william sloane associates : 1951 . masaryk was a skilled amateur pianist . in that capacity , he accompanied jarmila novotná in a recital of czech folk songs issued on 78 rpm records to commemorate the victims of the nazi eradication of lidice . crutchfield , will , '' classical music ; once , the voice was melody itself . in fact , it still is '' , the new york times , march 7 , 1993 , accessed october 30 , 2008 . he is reputed to have had an exquisite sense of humour . it is reported that when he was a young czechoslovak ambassador to the us , he attended many parties and once the hostess invited him to play the violin . accepting graciously , he played a czech nursery song to enthusiastic applause from the audience . leaving the party with a friend , he was asked why had he been asked to play the violin , to which he replied : '' oh , it 's all very simple -- do n't you see ? they have mixed me up with my father ; they mixed him up with paderewski . and they mixed the piano up with the violin . '' clifton fadiman ( ed . ) the little brown book of anecdotes , little brown , boston 1985 , p . 389 at the time of his death , masaryk was reportedly planning to marry the american writer marcia davenport . jan masaryk medal . the honorary silver medal of jan masaryk ( czech : stříbrná medaile jana masaryka ) is awarded by the ministry of foreign affairs of the czech republic and is one of the highest awards that can be received by foreign nationals . : de : jan-masaryk-medaille . see also . a prominent patient , a 2017 film list of unsolved deaths