1905 in sports

american football . college championship college football national championship – chicago maroons professional championships ohio league – massillon tigers western pennsylvania championship – latrobe athletic association events the college football season is blighted by a spate of serious injuries , some fatal , and u s president theodore roosevelt calls upon the game 's authorities to reform it . 6 october — night game is played west of the mississippi for the first time ( see 1905 cooper vs . fairmount football game ) december 25 — an experimental game using new rules is played in wichita , kansas under the supervision of john h . outland . proposed rules changes include the addition of the forward pass . . association football . argentina boca juniors was founded in buenos aires turkey galatasaray founded in istanbul . athletics . frederick lorz wins the ninth running of the boston marathon . . australian rules football . vfl premiership fitzroy wins the 9th vfl premiership : fitzroy 4.6 ( 30 ) d collingwood 2.5 ( 17 ) at melbourne cricket ground ( mcg ) . baseball . world series 9–14 october — new york giants ( nl ) defeats philadelphia athletics ( al ) by 4 games to 1 in the 1905 world series , which is the first organized by the modern national and american leagues . boxing . events 13 may — james j . jeffries announces his retirement from boxing and relinquishes the world heavyweight championship title 3 july — jeffries referees the marvin hart v . jack root fight at reno and '' awards '' his title to hart , who has won by a 12th round knockout . besides winning this bout , hart has earlier in the year defeated jack johnson over 20 rounds at san francisco . hart holds the title until 1906 . 9 september — battling nelson defeats jimmy britt by an eighteenth-round knockout to win the world lightweight championship . 20 december — bob fitzsimmons loses his world light heavyweight championship to philadelphia jack o'brien on a 13th round technical knockout in san francisco . o'brien effectively relinquishes the title soon afterwards and it remains vacant until 1914 . lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – james j . jeffries → vacant → marvin hart world light heavyweight championship – bob fitzsimmons → philadelphia jack o'brien → vacant world middleweight championship – tommy ryan world welterweight championship – barbados joe walcott world lightweight championship – jimmy britt → battling nelson world featherweight championship – abe attell world bantamweight championship – joe bowker → vacant → jimmy walsh . cricket . england county championship – yorkshire minor counties championship – norfolk most runs – c b fry 2801 70.02 ( hs 233 ) most wickets – walter lees 193 18.01 ( bb 9–81 ) wisden cricketers of the year – david denton , walter lees , george thompson , joe vine , levi wright australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – warwick armstrong 460 57.50 ( hs 200 ) most wickets – frederick collins 27 23.37 ( bb 6–64 ) india bombay presidency – parsees south africa currie cup – transvaal west indies inter-colonial tournament – not contested . cycling . tour de france louis trousselier ( france ) wins the 3rd tour de france . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – ulrich salchow ( sweden ) . golf . major tournaments british open – james braid u.s . open – willie anderson other tournaments british amateur – gordon barry us amateur – chandler egan . horse racing . england grand national – kirkland 1,000 guineas stakes – cherry lass 2,000 guineas stakes – vedas the derby – cicero the oaks – cherry lass st . leger stakes – challacombe australia melbourne cup – blue spec canada queen 's plate – inferno ireland irish grand national – red lad irish derby stakes – flax park usa kentucky derby – agile preakness stakes – cairngorm belmont stakes – tanya . ice hockey . stanley cup ottawa hockey club wins a challenge series against the dawson city nuggets of dawson city , yukon two games to nil . the dawson club has travelled over 4,000 miles by dog sled , boat and train to play the silver seven but are outmatched . frank mcgee , incensed by comments from the dawson squad , scores 14 goals as ottawa wins the second game 23–2 . ottawa wins the federal amateur hockey league ( fahl ) championship to defend the stanley cup . ottawa defeats rat portage thistles 2 games to one in a stanley cup challenge . events 9 december — eastern canada amateur hockey association ( ecaha ) is formed from teams in the canadian amateur hockey league ( cahl ) and the fahl . stanley cup champion ottawa and montreal wanderers join from fahl and montreal , montreal shamrocks , montreal victorias and quebec bulldogs join from the cahl . lacrosse . events the intercollegiate lacrosse association ( ila ) is replaced by the intercollegiate lacrosse league , which will be renamed the u.s . intercollegiate lacrosse association ( usila ) in 1929 . motor racing . gordon bennett cup sixth and final running of the gordon bennett cup takes place in france on the charade circuit , then known as the circuit d'auvergne , at clermont-ferrand . as road racing has been banned in france , this is the first time the trophy is contested on a circuit . the winner for the second successive year is léon théry ( france ) driving a richard-brasier . ardennes circuit the fourth circuit des ardennes is run on 7 august over 591.255 & nbsp ; km ( 118.251 & nbsp ; km x 5 laps ) in the vicinity of bastogne . the winner is victor hémery ( france ) driving a darracq 80 & nbsp ; hp in a time of 5:58:32 . vanderbilt cup the second vanderbilt cup is run on 14 october over 455.430 & nbsp ; km ( 45.543 & nbsp ; km x 10 laps ) on long island . the winner is victor hémery ( france ) driving a darracq 80 & nbsp ; hp in a time of 4:36:08 . shelsley walsh speed hill climb first running of the shelsley walsh speed hill climb on august 12 , still run annually on the same course . rowing . the boat race 1 april — oxford wins the 62nd the boat race 1905 . rugby league . england championship – oldham challenge cup – warrington 6–0 hull kingston rovers at headingley rugby stadium , leeds rugby league county leagues – not contested rugby league county leagues – not contested county cup competitions introduced in both lancashire and yorkshire ahead of the 1905–06 season . these are knockout competitions in the same format as the challenge cup except for their regional character . rugby union . home nations championship 23rd home nations championship series is won by wales . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion january 22 - dutchman coen de koning wins the 1,500m , 5,000m & 10,000m at world allround speed skating championships in groningen , netherlands to become 2nd dutchman to win a world title . tennis . events inaugural australian open is held , but for men only australia australian men 's singles championship – rodney heath defeats arthur curtis 4–6 6–3 6–4 6–4 england the championships , wimbledon – laurence doherty ( gb ) defeats norman brookes ( australia ) 8–6 6–2 6–4 the championships , wimbledon – may sutton bundy defeats dorothea douglass lambert chambers 6–3 6–4 france french men 's singles championship – maurice germot defeats andré vacherot : details unknown french women 's singles championship – kate gillou defeats y de pfooffel 6–0 11–9 usa us open ( tennis ) – beals wright defeats holcombe ward 6–2 6–1 11–9 us open ( tennis ) – elisabeth moore defeats helen homans 6–4 5–7 6–1 davis cup 1905 international lawn tennis challenge – 5–0 at queen 's club ( grass ) london , united kingdom . references .