Thuja

description . thuja are evergreen trees growing from tall , with stringy-textured reddish-brown bark . the shoots are flat , with side shoots only in a single plane . the leaves are scale-like 1–10 & nbsp ; mm long , except young seedlings in their first year , which have needle-like leaves . the scale leaves are arranged in alternating decussate pairs in four rows along the twigs . the male cones are small , inconspicuous , and are located at the tips of the twigs . the female cones start out similarly inconspicuous , but grow to about 1–2 & nbsp ; cm long at maturity when 6–8 months old ; they have 6-12 overlapping , thin , leathery scales , each scale bearing 1–2 small seeds with a pair of narrow lateral wings . the five species in the genus thuja are small to large evergreen trees with flattened branchlets . the leaves are arranged in flattened fan shaped groupings with resin-glands , and oppositely grouped in 4 ranks . the mature leaves are different from younger leaves , with those on larger branchlets having sharp , erect , free apices . the leaves on flattened lateral branchlets are crowded into appressed groups and scale-like and the lateral pairs are keeled . with the exception of t . plicata , the lateral leaves are shorter than the facial leaves ( li et al . 2005 ) . the solitary flowers are produced terminally . pollen cones with 2-6 pairs of 2-4 pollen sacked sporophylls . seed cones ellipsoid , typically 9-14mm long , they mature and open the first year . the thin woody cone scales number from 4-6 pairs and are persistent and overlapping , with an oblong shape , they are also basifixed . the central 2-3 pairs of cone scales are fertile . the seed cones produce 1 to 3 seeds per scale , the seeds are lenticular in shape and equally 2 winged . seedlings produce 2 cotyledons . a hybrid between t . standishi and t . plicata has been named as the cultivar thuja 'green giant ' . another very distinct and only distantly related species , formerly treated as thuja orientalis , is now treated in a genus of its own , as platycladus . the closest relatives of thuja are thujopsis , distinct in its thicker foliage and stouter cones , and tetraclinis articulata ( ancient greek or , formerly classed in the genus and after which thuja is named ) , distinct in its quadrangular foliage ( not flattened ) and cones with four thick , woody scales . the genus thuja , like many other forms of conifers , is represented by ancestral forms in cretaceous rocks of northern europe , and with the advance of time is found to migrate from northerly to more southerly regions , until during pliocene time it disappeared from europe . thuja is also known in the miocene beds of the dakotas . pruning on 'emerald green ’ thuja arborvitae ‘ emerald green ’ arborvitae faqs is rarely needed due to their growth rate and shape . however , if pruning is needed , the tops of arborvitae can be pruned to a point and the sides can be sheared back with a hedge trimmer or pruners to manage the width . species . the five extant species are : species formerly placed in thuja include : austrocedrus chilensis ( d.don ) pic.serm . & bizzarri ( as t . chilensis d.don ) callitris rhomboidea r.br . ex rich . ( as t . australis poir . ) cupressus nootkatensis d.don ( as t . excelsa bong . ) dacrycarpus imbricatus ( blume ) de laub ( as t . javanica burm.f . ) glyptostrobus pensilis ( staunton ex d.don ) k.koch ( as t . pensilis staunton ex d.don ) libocedrus plumosa ( d.don ) sarg . ( as t . doniana hook . ) platycladus orientalis ( l . ) franco ( as t . orientalis l . ) tamarix aphylla ( l . ) h.karst . ( as t . aphylla l . ) tetraclinis articulata ( vahl ) mast . ( as t . articulata vahl ) thujopsis dolabrata ( thunb . ex l.f . ) siebold & zucc . ( as t . dolabrata thunb . ex l.f . ) widdringtonia nodiflora ( l . ) powrie ( as t . cupressoides l . ) and many more the extant species thuja sutchuenensis was believed to be extinct until 1999 , when a small population was discovered in southeast china . . ecology . thuja species are used as food plants by the larvae of some lepidoptera species including autumnal moth , the engrailed and juniper pug . the foliage is also readily eaten by deer , and where deer population density is high , can adversely affect the growth of young trees and the establishment of seedlings . . distribution . the genus thuja has current populations in both north america and east asia . t . plicata has wide distribution in the pacific northwest from northern california to alaska , reaching east into idaho and central british columbia . t . occidentalis has populations in the northeastern united states , reaching north into ontario and quebec , with some distribution as far south as tennessee . t . standishii has populations in mountainous regions of honshu and shikoku islands in japan , with no recorded population in the north of the country . t . koraiensis is native to both north and south korea and has a small population in the northern chinese province of jilin . the newly rediscovered species t . sutchuenensis has extremely limited distribution in the mountains of chengkou county in southeastern china . genus origin and historical migration . current research suggests that thuja originated in the americas and migrated to east asia via the bering landbridge in the miocene . fossil records show that thuja was significantly more widely distributed during the late cretaceous and early tertiary than we see today . the oldest known thuja fossil is of t . polaris ( an extinct species ) from the paleocene of ellesmere island in present-day nunavut , canada . other hypotheses of thuja origin involved an east asian origin , with the genus migrating twice—once east into northwestern america and then west to the northeastern united states . however , no reliable fossil records of thuja exist in either western asia or europe , the possibility of a migration from asia through europe and into northeastern america ( the second dispersal event via the north atlantic landbridge as described above ) can be eliminated . . systematics . thuja is a monophyletic genus that sits within the order pinales in the cupressaceae . thuja is in the cupressoid clade and is sister to the genus thujopsis . the sister relationship between thuja and thujopsis is supported with 100 % bootstrap support and 1.0 posterior probability . within the genus the taxonomy is in flux , but most recent research based on molecular analysis of plastomes in the genus thuja showed evidence for a new grouping , with two sister clades : t . standishii and t . koraiensis together and t . occidentalis and t . sutchuenensis together , with t . plicata sister to t . occidentails and t . sutchuenensis . this newest grouping is hypothesized to be the result of reticulate evolution and hybridization within the genus . uses . they are widely grown as ornamental trees , and extensively used for hedges . a number of cultivars are grown and used in landscapes . homeowners will sometimes plant them as privacy trees . the cultivar 'green giant ' is popular as a very vigorous hedging plant , growing up to 80 & nbsp ; cm/year when young . u.s . national arboretum : gardens : faqs : 'green giant ' arborvitae the wood is light , soft and aromatic . it can be easily split and resists decay . the wood has been used for many applications from making chests that repel moths to shingles . thuja poles are also often used to make fence posts and rails . the wood of thuja plicata is commonly used for guitar sound boards . its combination of light weight and resistance to decay has also led to t . plicata ( western redcedar ) being widely used for the construction of bee hives . thuja plicata is an important tree to the first nations people of the pacific northwest and is sometimes called '' canoe tree '' because of its use as a material for native american canoes . oil of thuja contains the terpene thujone which has been studied for its gaba receptor antagonizing effects , with potentially lethal properties . cedarwood oil and cedar leaf oil , which are derived from thuja occidentalis , have different properties and uses . the natives of canada used the scaled leaves of thuja occidentalis ( eastern white cedar ) to make a tea that has been shown to contain 50 & nbsp ; mg of vitamin c per 100 & nbsp ; grams ; this helped prevent and treat scurvy . in the 19th century thuja was commonly used as an externally applied tincture or ointment for the treatment of warts , ringworm and thrush , and a local injection of the tincture was used for treating genital wart . thuja is antibacterial . a 2017 trial showed that its extract effectively killed both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria . . references . external links .