Palatine Hill

etymology . according to livy livy 1.5.1 . ( 59 bc & ndash ; ad 17 ) the palatine hill got its name from the arcadian settlers from pallantium , named from its founder pallas of arcadia . more likely , it is derived from the noun palātum '' palate '' ; ennius uses it once for the '' heaven '' , and it may be connected with the etruscan word for sky , falad . ernout and meillet , dictionnaire étymologique de la langue latine , s.v . palātum . the name of the hill is the etymology origin of the word palace and its cognates in other languages ( greek : παλάτιον , , , spanish : palacio , portuguese : palácio , , , etc . ) . '' palace '' . from the oxford english dictionary the palatine hill is also the etymology origin ( via the latin adjective of '' palatine '' , a 16th-century english adjective that originally signified something pertaining to the caesar 's palace , or someone who is invested with the king 's authority . later its use shifted to a reference to the german palatinate . '' palatine '' . from the oxford english dictionary the office of the german count palatine ( pfalzgraf ) had its origins in the comes palatinus , an earlier office in merovingian and carolingian times . another modern english word '' '' , came into usage to refer to any distinguished knight ( especially one of the paladin ) under charlemagne in late renditions of the matter of france . '' paladin '' . from the oxford english dictionary . mythology . according to roman mythology , the palatine hill was the location of the cave , known as the lupercal , where romulus and remus were found by the she-wolf lupa that kept them alive . another legend occurring on the palatine is hercules ' defeat of cacus after the monster had stolen some cattle . hercules struck cacus with his characteristic club so hard that it formed a cleft on the southeast corner of the hill , where later a staircase bearing the name of cacus was constructed . cacus : giant of the land of latium '' . theoi.com . . history . rome has its origins on the palatine . excavations show that people have lived in the area since the 10th century bc . excavations performed on the hill in 1907 and again in 1948 unearthed a collection of huts believed to have been used for funerary purposes between the 9th and 7th century bc approximating the time period when the city of rome was founded . archeology 03mar2011 pallantium ( ancient greek : παλλάντιον ) was an ancient city near the tiber river on the italian peninsula . roman mythology , as recounted in virgil 's aeneid for example , states that the city was founded by evander of pallene and other ancient greeks sometime previous to the trojan war . in addition , dionysius of halicarnassus writes that romans say that the city was founded by greeks from pallantium of arcadia , about sixty years before the trojan war and the leader was evander . the myth of the city 's origin was significant in ancient roman mythology because pallantium became one of the cities that was merged later into ancient rome , thereby tying rome 's origins to the ancient greek heroes . other cities in the area were founded by various italic tribes . virgil states that evander named the city in honor of his ancestor , pallas , although pausanias as well as dionysius of halicarnassus say that evander 's birth city was pallantium , and thus he named the new city after the one in arcadia . dionysius of halicarnassus also mention that some writers , including polybius of megalopolis , say that the town was named after pallas , who was the son of heracles and lavinia , the daughter of evander , and when he died his grandfather raised a tomb to him on the hill and called the place pallantium , after him . according to livy , after the immigration of the sabines and the albans to rome , the original romans lived on the palatine . livy , ab urbe condita , 1:33 the palatine hill was also the site of the ancient festival of the lupercalia . many affluent romans of the roman republic ( c.509 bc & ndash ; 44 bc ) had their residences there . from the start of the empire ( 27 bc ) augustus built his palace there and the hill gradually became the exclusive domain of emperors ; the ruins of the palaces of at least augustus ( 27 bc & ndash ; 14 ad ) , tiberius ( 14 & ndash ; 37 ad ) and domitian ( 81 & ndash ; 96 ad ) can still be seen . augustus also built a temple to apollo here . the great fire of 64 ad destroyed nero 's palace , the domus transitoria , but he replaced it by 69 ad with the even larger domus aurea over which was eventually built domitian 's palace rome , an oxford archaeological guide , a . claridge , 1998 , p . 120 from the 16th century , the hill was owned by the farnese family and was occupied by the farnese gardens , still partially preserved above the remains of the domus tiberiana . at the top of the hill , between the domus flavia and the domus augustana , the villa mattei was built in the 16th century , then purchased around 1830 by the scot charles mills who turned it into an elaborate neo-gothic villa . at the end of the 19th century the villa was converted into a convent . this was partially demolished from 1928 to allow excavations and in the surviving part of the building the palatine museum has been installed . monuments . dominating the site is the palace of domitian which was rebuilt largely during the reign of domitian over earlier buildings of nero . later emperors , particularly those of the severan dynasty , made significant additions to the buildings , notably the domus severiana . the palace of domitian . . houses of livia and augustus . the house of livia , the wife of augustus , is conventionally attributed to her based only on the generic name on a clay pipe and circumstantial factors such as proximity to the house of augustus . the building is located near the temple of magna mater at the western end of the hill , on a lower terrace from the temple . it is notable for its beautiful frescoes . house of tiberius . known as the domus tiberiana because the original house was built by tiberius , he spent much of his time in his palaces in campania and capri . it was later incorporated into nero 's domus transitoria . encyclopedia of the roman empire , 184p . part of its remains lie in the current farnese gardens . domus severiana . . temple of cybele . . temple of apollo palatinus . . septizodium . . domus transitoria . . excavations . already during augustus ' reign an area of the palatine hill was subject to a sort of archaeology expedition which found fragments of bronze age pots and tools . he declared this site the '' original town of rome . '' modern archaeology has identified evidence of bronze age settlement in the area which predates rome 's founding . intensive archaeological excavations began in the 18th century and culminated in the late 19th century , after the proclamation of rome as the capital of the kingdom of italy . discoveries continued spasmodically throughout the 20th century until the present time . in 2006 , archaeologists announced the discovery of the palatine house , believed to be the birthplace of rome 's first emperor , augustus . for a classical account of the birth ( and birthplace ) of augustus , refer to : suetonius , life of augustus , 5 . a section of corridor and other fragments under the hill were found and described as '' a very ancient aristocratic house . '' the two-story house appears to have been built around an atrium , with frescoed walls and mosaic flooring , and is situated on the slope of the palatine that overlooks the colosseum and the arch of constantine . the republican-era houses on the palatine were overbuilt by later palaces after the great fire of rome ( ad 64 ) , but apparently this one was not and perhaps was preserved for an important reason . on the ground floor , three shops opened onto the via sacra . the location of the domus is significant because of its potential proximity to the curiae veteres , the earliest shrine of the curia of rome . varro linguae latinae 5.155 ; festus l 174 ; tacitus annales 12.24 in 2007 the legendary lupercal cave was claimed to have been found beneath the remains of the domus livia ( house of livia ) on the palatine . archaeologists came across the 16-metre-deep cavity while restoring the decaying palace , with a richly decorated vault encrusted with mosaics and seashells . the lupercal was probably converted to a sanctuary by romans in later centuries . many others have denied its identification with the lupercal on topographic and stylistic grounds , and believe that the grotto is actually a nymphaeum or underground triclinium from neronian times . aloisi , silvia '' expert doubts lupercale 'find ' '' the australian november 24 , 2007 theaustralian.news.com '' è uno splendido ninfeo , ma il lupercale non era lì '' la repubblica november 23 , 2007 matthia '' is italy 's spectacular find authentic ? '' spiegel online november 29 , 2007 spiegel.de