Frederick Delius

memorials and legacy . just before his death , delius prepared a codicil to his will whereby the royalties on future performances of his music would be used to support an annual concert of works by young composers . delius died before this provision could be legally effected ; fenby says that beecham then persuaded jelka in her own will to abandon the concerts idea and apply the royalties towards the editing and recording of delius 's main works . fenby ( 1981 ) , p . 255 after jelka 's death in 1935 the delius trust was established , to supervise this task . as stipulated in jelka 's will , the trust operated largely under beecham 's direction . after beecham 's death in 1961 advisers were appointed to assist the trustees , and in 1979 the administration of the trust was taken over by the musicians ' benevolent fund . over the years the trust 's objectives have been extended so that it can promote the music of other composers who were delius 's contemporaries . the trust is a co-sponsor of the royal philharmonic society 's composition prize for young composers . herbert stothart made arrangements of delius 's music , particularly appalachia , for the 1946 film the yearling . music web international . retrieved 1 september 2017 film score monthly . retrieved 1 september 2017 in 1962 , enthusiasts for delius 's music who had gone to bradford for the centenary festival formed the delius society ; fenby became its first president . with around 400 members , the society is independent from the trust , but works closely with it . its general objectives are the furtherance of knowledge of delius 's life and works , and the encouragement of performances and recordings . in 2004 , as a stimulus for young musicians to study and perform delius 's music , the society established an annual delius prize competition , with a prize of £1,000 to the winner . in june 1984 , at the grand theatre , leeds , the delius trust sponsored a commemorative production of a village romeo and juliet by opera north , to mark the 50th anniversary of delius 's death . public interest in delius 's life was stimulated in the uk in 1968 , with the showing of the ken russell film song of summer on bbc television . the film depicted the years of the delius–fenby collaboration ; fenby co-scripted with russell . max adrian played delius , with christopher gable as fenby and maureen pryor as jelka . fenby ( 1981 ) , pp . 258–60 in america , a small memorial to delius stands in solano grove . the delius association of florida has for many years organised an annual festival at jacksonville , to mark the composer 's birthday . at jacksonville university , the music faculty awards an annual delius composition prize . in february 2012 delius was one of ten prominent britons honoured by the royal mail in the '' britons of distinction '' stamps set . beecham stresses delius 's role as an innovator : '' the best of delius is undoubtedly to be found in those works where he disregarded classical traditions and created his own forms '' . beecham ( 1975 ) , p . 217 fenby echoes this : '' the people who really count are those who discover new ways of making our lives more beautiful . frederick delius was such a man '' . palmer writes that delius 's true legacy is the ability of his music to inspire the creative urge in its listeners and to enhance their awareness of the wonders of life . palmer concludes by invoking george eliot 's poem the choir invisible : '' frederick delius & nbsp ; . belongs to the company of those true artists for whose life and work the world is a better place to live in , and of whom surely is composed , in a literal sense , 'the choir invisible/whose music is the gladness of the world ' '' . palmer , p . 193 . recordings . the first recordings of delius 's works , in 1927 , were conducted by beecham for the columbia label : the '' walk to the paradise garden '' interlude from a village romeo and juliet , and on hearing the first cuckoo in spring , performed by the orchestra of the royal philharmonic society . these began a long series of delius recordings under beecham that continued for the rest of the conductor 's life . see malcolm walker 's '' beecham/delius discography '' , included ( unpaginated ) in beecham 's frederick delius ( 1975 ) he was not alone , however ; geoffrey toye in 1929–30 recorded brigg fair , in a summer garden , summer night on the river and the '' walk to the paradise garden '' . fenby recounts that on his first day in grez , jelka played beecham 's first cuckoo recording . fenby ( 1981 ) , p . 23 in may 1934 , when delius was close to death , fenby played him toye 's in a summer garden , the last music , fenby says , that delius ever heard . fenby ( 1981 ) , p . 221 by the end of the 1930s beecham had issued versions for columbia of most of the main orchestral and choral works , together with several songs in which he accompanied the soprano dora labbette on the piano . by 1936 columbia and hmv had issued recordings of violin sonatas 1 and 2 , the elegy and caprice , and of some of the shorter works . darrell , r.d . the gramophone shop encyclopedia of recorded music , the gramophone shop , new york 1936 . full recordings of the operas were not available until after the second world war . once again beecham , now with the hmv label , led the way , with a village romeo and juliet in 1948 , performed by the new royal philharmonic orchestra and chorus . later versions of this work include those of meredith davies for emi in 1971 , charles mackerras for argo in 1989 , and a german-language version conducted by klauspeter seibel in 1995 . beecham 's former protégé norman del mar recorded a complete irmelin for bbc digital in 1985 . march ( ed . ) pp . 69–70 in 1997 emi reissued meredith davies 's 1976 recording of fennimore and gerda , which richard hickox conducted in german the same year for chandos . recordings of all the major works , and of many of the individual songs , have been issued at regular intervals since the second world war . many of these recordings have been issued in conjunction with the delius society , which has prepared various discographies of delius 's recorded music . notes . references . sources . . further reading . a revised edition , a reprint of the original '' with additions , annotations , and comments by hubert foss '' was published by bodley head in 1952 ( in the us by greenwood press , 1974 : . external links . delius 's house in solano grove , florida , before and after restoration in 1961 life , music and character of frederick delius julian lloyd webber on delius , the guardian the delius society