1985 in music

specific locations . 1985 in british music 1985 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1985 in country music 1985 in heavy metal music 1985 in hip hop music 1985 in jazz . events . january–march . january 1 – the newest music video channel , vh1 , begins broadcasting on american cable . it is aimed at an older demographic than its sister station , mtv . the first video played is marvin gaye 's rendition of '' the star-spangled banner '' . january 11 one of the biggest music festivals in the world begins in rio de janeiro , brazil , the rock in rio , had a public of 1.5 million people at all , including iron maiden , nina hagen , the b52 's , go go 's , queen , rod stewart , james taylor , ac/dc , and many more . national artists such as gilberto gil , elba ramalho , barão vermelho and paralamas do sucesso also perform . willie dixon sues led zeppelin over the song '' whole lotta love '' , on the grounds that it contains too many similarities to his own song '' you need love '' . the lawsuit is settled out of court . january 28 – various artists , under the group name usa for africa , including ray charles , bob dylan , michael jackson , billy joel , cyndi lauper , steve perry , kenny loggins , willie nelson , lionel richie , smokey robinson , kenny rogers , diana ross , paul simon , bruce springsteen , huey lewis , tina turner , sheila e . , harry belafonte , amy '' sunflower '' johnson , lindsey buckingham , kim carnes , dionne warwick , waylon jennings , bob geldof and stevie wonder , record the song '' we are the world '' , written by jackson and ritchie . february – just months after the compact disc release of his sixteenth and most recent studio album , tonight , and nearly two years after the initial cd release of its predecessor , let 's dance , rca records reissues david bowie 's previous fourteen studio albums plus four greatest hits albums on the format . consequently , bowie becomes the first major artist to have his entire catalog converted to cd . february 22 whitney houston releases her debut album . the '' one night with blue note '' concert , celebrating the relaunch of blue note records and featuring over 30 jazz greats , is held at the town hall in new york . freddie hubbard , herbie hancock , jack dejohnette , mccoy tyner and grover washington , jr . are just a few of the performers . february 26 – the 27th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by john denver . lionel richie 's ca n't slow down wins album of the year , while tina turner 's '' what 's love got to do with it '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . cyndi lauper wins best new artist . march 27 – the south african broadcasting corporation bans stevie wonder 's music in response to wonder dedicating the oscar he had won the night before to nelson mandela . march 28 – a wax likeness of michael jackson is unveiled at madame tussaud 's in london , uk . . april–june . april 1 – after months of squabbling , david lee roth leaves van halen to begin a solo career . april 7 – wham ! becomes the first western pop group to perform in china when they play a concert in beijing 's workers stadium during an historic 10-day visit . april 10 – madonna begins her very first tour , the virgin tour ( named after her like a virgin album ) in seattle , washington , usa . may – russian singer valery leontiev starts his 10-date tour '' alone with all '' and it becomes an instant hit . queues for tickets blocked the traffic on a few central streets of leningrad . may 4 – with '' la det swinge '' by bobbysocks ! , norway scores its first win at the eurovision song contest , in gothenburg , sweden . may 13 – dire straits release their fifth studio album , brothers in arms . the album becomes highly successful in part because of its unusually high sound quality , the result of it being recorded entirely digitally as opposed to with standard analog magnetic tape . the album additionally serves as a killer app for the compact disc format , becoming the first album to sell more copies on cd than on phonograph record , and goes on to become the highest selling album of the 1980s in the uk . june 11 – madonna ends the virgin tour at madison square garden in new york , usa . july–september . july 13 – the live aid concert takes place in wembley stadium , london , uk , and jfk stadium in philadelphia , usa . the headlining acts at the latter venue included a led zeppelin reunion , the first since their 1980 disbandment . the former venue , however , becomes the more notable of the two over the years , in part due to the high acclaim of queen 's performance of '' radio ga ga '' , which serves as the band 's comeback in the united kingdom ( queen would still remain a pariah in the united states in the wake of hot space until after freddie mercury 's death six years later ) . with a little help from the british concorde jet , singer phil collins manages to perform at both venues . this would be the last time duran duran would perform together with the original line up until they reunited to record their 2004 album astronaut . on this day they would also have the number 1 song on the us billboard charts with their james bond theme to the film a view to a kill . september 6 – michael jackson purchases the publishing rights for most of the beatles ' music for 47 million , much to the dismay of paul mccartney , against whom he is bidding . september 19 – the parents music resource center 's ( p.m.r.c . ) united states senate hearing on rock censorship begin in washington , d.c . heavy metal singer dee snider of twisted sister , rock star frank zappa and country singer john denver testify against the p.m.r.c . september 22 the farm aid concert is held in champaign , illinois , usa . massimo bogianckino , general manager of the paris opera and former head of both the maggio musicale fiorentino and la scala , is elected mayor of florence . peter nichols , '' opera head to be mayor of florence '' , the times issue 62252 ( september 25 , 1985 ) : 8h . . october–december . december 5 – the first fully digital reggae single , wayne smith 's '' ( under me ) sleng teng '' , is recorded at king jammy 's studio ; it is the beginning of ragga style reggae . december 23 – two young fans of judas priest in sparks , nevada shoot themselves , one fatally , after listening to the band 's records . a lawsuit is brought against the group in 1986 claiming that they were compelled by backwards subliminal messages hidden in their music . december 31 – the fourteenth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special is aired on abc television , with appearances by four tops , the judds , barry manilow , the motels , tears for fears and the temptations . also in 1985 . several hundreds of thousands of us dollars in publishing royalties are released to the surviving members , and families of the deceased members , of the british music group , badfinger . two band members , pete ham and tom evans , previously committed suicide due to financial problems . metal edge magazine is launched . roger waters announces his intention to leave pink floyd ; describing the band as '' a spent force creatively , '' he would spend the next two years in a legal battle with his now-former bandmates over the rights to the '' pink floyd '' name and other associated assets . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1985 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1985 . albums released . january–march . . top hits . classical music . john adams – the chairman dances kalevi aho oboe sonata solo ii , for piano pierre boulez – dialogue de l'ombre double mario davidovsky – capriccio for two pianos peter maxwell davies – an orkney wedding , with sunrise henri dutilleux – l'arbre des songes ( violin concerto ) morton feldman for bunita marcus , for piano violin and string quartet piano and string quartet lorenzo ferrero canzoni d'amore ( song cycle ) empty stage my rock karel goeyvaerts pas à pas , for solo piano les voix de verseau , for soprano , flute , clarinet , violin , cello , and piano jacques hétu – missa pro trecentisimo anno nicholas jackson – organ sonata tristan keuris string quartet no . 2 variations for strings aria for flute and piano witold lutosławski – chain 2 for violin and orchestra andrew lloyd webber – requiem john rutter – requiem alfred schnittke – string trio salvatore sciarrino allegoria della notte , symphonic work canzona di ringraziamento lo spazio inverso isabel soveral – fragmentos karlheinz stockhausen – ave , for basset horn and alto flute joan tower – piano concerto manfred trojahn requiem symphony no . 3 robert ward – raleigh divertimento . opera . dominick argento – casanova 's homecoming lorenzo ferrero mare nostro night philip glass and robert moran – the juniper tree hans werner henze – the english cat ( first english language production ) dorothy rudd moore – frederick douglass salvatore sciarrino – la perfezione di uno spirito sottile . ballet . lorenzo ferrero lotus eaters the miracle . jazz . musical theater . big river – broadway production opened at the eugene o'neill theatre and ran for 1005 performances dames at sea – off broadway revival the king and i ( rodgers & hammerstein ) – broadway revival leader of the pack – broadway production opened at the ambassador theatre and ran for 120 performances me and my girl ( noel gay ) – london revival les misérables – london production drood – broadway production opened at the imperial theatre and ran for 108 performances seven brides for seven brothers ( saul chaplin , gene de paul and johnny mercer ) – london production singin ' in the rain – broadway production ( based on 1952 film of the same name ) song and dance – broadway production opened at the royale theatre and ran for 474 performances . musical films . a chorus line alag alag donga hum dono kathodu kathoram krush groove naná rappin' that 's dancing ! . births . january 2 – luis beza , american trumpet player ( suburban legends ) january 3 – justin paul , american singer , composer and lyricist ( pasek and paul ) january 6 – amalie bruun , danish multi instrumentalist , singer and actress . january 8 – rachael lampa , american contemporary christian singer , songwriter and record producer . january 16 – gintaras janusevicius , lithuanian classical pianist january 18 – simone simons , dutch symphonic metal singer/songwriter january 22 – orianthi , australian musician , singer and songwriter january 28 – j . cole , german-american hip hop recording artist and record producer january 29 – mikey hachey , american bass player giovanna fletcher , british author , stage actress , singer , and internet personality ( wife of tom fletcher of mcfly , sister in law of carrie hope fletcher ) january 31 – kalomira , american-greek singer february 5 – lindsey cardinale , american singer february 8 – jeremy davis , american bass player and songwriter ( paramore ) february 11 – william beckett , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( the academy is . ) february 14 – havana brown ( musician ) , australian dj , recording artist , record producer and dancer february 17 – anne curtis , filipina actress , recording artist , entertainer , sister of jasmine curtis-smith , and married to erwan heussaff , brother of solenn heussaff february 19 – haylie duff , american actress , singer-songwriter , television host , writer and fashion designer ( sister of hilary duff ) february 20 – yulia volkova , russian singer , ( t.a.t.u . ) february 28 – fefe dobson , canadian songwriter march 4 – scott michael foster , american actor and singer ( crazy ex girlfriend ) march 8 – ewa sonnet , polish model and singer march 12 – stromae , belgian musician , rapper , singer and songwriter march 29 mirusia louwerse , dutch-australian lyric soprano emil nava , british music video director april 3 – leona lewis , british singer/songwriter april 13 – ty dolla sign , american singer , songwriter , rapper and record producer . april 20 – jadyn douglas , puerto rican-american singer-songwriter and actress may 2 – lily allen , english singer-songwriter may 4 – jidenna , nigerian-american rapper , singer-songwriter and record producer may 7 – j balvin , colombian reggaeton singer . may 10 – ashley poole , american singer ( dream ) may 11 – matt giraud , american singer-songwriter and pianist may 17 – derek hough , american latin and ballroom dancer , choreographer , actor and singer may 18 – francesca battistelli , american singer , ccm may 22 – vangie tang , hong kong singer may 28 colbie caillat , american singer/songwriter/musician carey mulligan , english actress and singer may 30 – katie stelmanis , canadian musician and producer june 2 – ana cristina , american singer-songwriter , dancer and actress june 9 – benj pasek , american singer-songwriter and composer ( pasek and paul ) june 15 – nadine coyle , irish pop singer-songwriter , actress and model ( girls aloud ) june 20 – caroline polachek , american musician , singer-songwriter , activist and record producer known as the vocalist for chairlift june 21 – lana del rey , american singer-songwriter , director , model , poet and activist june 22 – scott macintyre , american singer-songwriter and pianist june 23 – kavka shishido , japanese drummer and vocalist june 24 – aste , finnish rapper june 30 k.flay , born kristine flaherty , american singer-songwriter and rapper hugh sheridan , australian actor , singer , musician and television presenter july 2 – ashley tisdale , american singer , actress , producer , songwriter and youtuber ( high school musical , vanessa hudgens ) july 5 – alle farben , german dj and producer july 6 diamond rings , canadian singer-songwriter , guitarist and producer ( matters ) d . woods , american singer , dancer and actress ( danity kane ) july 9 – hee ah lee , south korean handicapped pianist july 10 – emily king , american singer-songwriter july 11 – tobias jesso jr . , canadian musician july 12 – luiz ejlli , albanian singer july 15 – nathaniel willemse , south african-born australian singer and songwriter july 17 tom fletcher british singer/songwriter/musician ( mcfly ) taylor goldsmith , american singer-songwriter and guitarist , ( lead singer and chief songwriter of the american folk rock band dawes ) ( mandy moore ) july 18 – hopsin , american rapper , producer and actor july 19 – amy pearson , english singer-songwriter july 20 – solenn heussaff , filipina singer , entertainer , and sister-in-law of anne curtis july 31 alissa white-gluz , canadian singer-songwriter ( the agonist , arch enemy ) allie x , canadian singer-songwriter august 1 – dina , norwegian singer august 2 – britt nicole , american vocalist , songwriter and recording artist . august 3 holly blake-arnstein , american singer ( dream ) brent kutzle ( onerepublic ) american musician august 4 – kina grannis , american singer-songwriter , guitarist and youtuber . august 5 – annalisa , italian singer-songwriter and musician august 9 – anna kendrick , american actress/singer august 11 – asher roth , american rapper august 13 – lacey brown , american singer-songwriter august 15 – nipsey hussle , american rapper , singer and businessman ( d . 2019 ) august 16 – cristin milioti , american actress , singer and musician august 19 – christina perri , american singer/songwriter/musician august 29 – achilles liarmakopoulos , greek trombonist ( canadian brass ) september 4 – sukrit wisetkaew , thai actor and singer bie life pocket book ( thai ) september 23 – diana ortiz , american singer ( dream ) september 28 – alina ibragimova , russian british violinist october 1 – porcelain black , american industrial indie pop singer-songwriter october 2 – vogue williams , irish dj , radio host , model and dancer october 5 – nicola roberts , english recording artist , fashion designer and songwriter october 8 bruno mars , american singer-songwriter and dancer elliphant , swedish singer-songwriter and rapper october 10 – marina and the diamonds , welsh singer/songwriter october 15 – nicola roberts , british pop singer ( girls aloud ) october 22 – zac hanson . american singer-songwriter ( hanson ) october 23 – miguel , american singer-songwriter , producer october 25 – ciara , american singer , actress and dancer october 26 – soko ( singer ) , french singer-songwriter , musician and actress . october 28 – tina guo , chinese-american cellist and erhuist november 4 – vanessa struhler , german singer-songwriter november 5 – kate dearaugo , australian singer-songwriter , australian idol 3 winner november 15 – nick fradiani , american singer november 19 – ricki-lee coulter , new zealand-born australian singer-songwriter , australian idol contestant november 21 – carly rae jepsen , canadian singer , songwriter and musician ruelle , american edm pop singer/songwriter november 22 – austin brown , american producer , singer , songwriter and musician november 23 – troy ave , american rapper december 1 – janelle monae , american recording artist , record producer , singer-songwriter , model , actor , businesswomen and activist december 3 – amanda seyfried , american singer , musical star , actor december 10 – raven-symoné , american actress and singer grace chatto , english musician and singer , member of clean bandit december 12 – erika van pelt , american singer december 22 – kate tempest , english poet , spoken-word artist , rapper and playwright december 23 – dev hynes , british singer , songwriter , composer , producer and author december 23 – harry judd , british pop drummer ( mcfly ) december 29 – alexa ray joel , american singer-songwriter and pianist . deaths . january 3 – lucien cailliet , clarinetist , conductor , arranger and composer , 87 january 4 – lovro von matačić , croatian conductor , 85 january 10 – anton karas , austrian zither player and composer , 78 january 25 – paul smith , american film and television composer , 78 january 30 – ivar haglund , folk singer and restaurateur , 79 ( heart attack ) february 7 – matt monro , english singer , 54 ( liver cancer ) february 11 – heinz eric roemheld , american composer , 83 february 12 – leslie sarony , english singer , comedian and songwriter , 87 february 18 willy alberti , dutch singer , 58 ( liver cancer ) gábor darvas , composer and musicology , 74 february 22 – delores marie '' d'marie '' warren , founding member of alton mcclain & destiny , 32 ( car crash ) efrem zimbalist , violinist , 94 february 28 – david byron , vocalist of uriah heep , 38 ( alcohol-related ) march 1 – eugene list , american classical pianist , 66 march 16 – roger sessions , american composer , 88 march 23 – zoot sims , jazz saxophonist , 59 march 31 – jeanine deckers , known as the singing nun , 51 ( suicide ) may 2 bridget d'oyly carte , opera impresario , 77 leonard falcone , baritone/eupohonium virtuosos and director of bands at michigan state , 86 may 8 – karl marx , composer and conductor , 87 may 12 – rodolfo arizaga , argentinian composer may 19 – hilding rosenberg , composer , 92 july 23 – kay kyser , us bandleader , 80 july 30 – peter knight , conductor , arranger and composer , 68 august 11 – nick ceroli , jazz drummer , 45 august 12 – kyu sakamoto , japanese singer , 43 ( plane crash ) august 24 – paul creston , american composer , 78 september 6 – little brother montgomery , jazz and blues pianist and singer , 79 september 8 – frederick may , irish composer , 74 september 11 – william alwyn , english composer , 79 september 18 – ed lewis , jazz trumpeter , 76 september 19 – rockdrigo gonzález , folk & rock singer-songwriter , 34 ( 1985 mexico city earthquake ) october 6 lola gjoka , albanian pianist , 75 nelson riddle , us conductor , composer and arranger , 64 october 11 – tex williams , us country singer , 68 october 12 – ricky wilson , guitarist ( the b-52 's ) , 32 ( aids related ) october 14 – emil gilels , pianist , 68 october 18 – stefan askenase , pianist , 94 october 20 – boris lisanevich , dancer , 80 october 22 – viorica ursuleac , operatic soprano , 91 november 15 – seán ryan , irish fiddler and whistler november 18 – stephan henrik barratt-due , norwegian violinist and music teacher , 66 november 24 – big joe turner , blues singer , 74 december 12 – ian stewart ( the rolling stones ) , 42 ( heart attack ) december 22 – d . boon , lead singer of minutemen , 27 ( car accident ) december 31 – ricky nelson , singer , former teen idol , 45 ( plane crash ) . awards . eurovision song contest 1985 27th japan record awards . charts . billboard ( usa ) . us top 100 hits of 1985 . . see also . record labels established in 1985 . references .