General topology

history . general topology grew out of a number of areas , most importantly the following : the detailed study of subsets of the real line ( once known as the topology of point sets ; this usage is now obsolete ) the introduction of the manifold concept the study of metric spaces , especially normed linear spaces , in the early days of functional analysis . general topology assumed its present form around 1940 . it captures , one might say , almost everything in the intuition of continuity , in a technically adequate form that can be applied in any area of mathematics . a topology on a set . let x be a set and let τ be a family of subsets of x . then τ is called a topology on x if : munkres , james r . topology . vol . 2 . upper saddle river : prentice hall , 2000 . adams , colin conrad , and robert david franzosa . introduction to topology : pure and applied . pearson prentice hall , 2008 . both the empty set and x are elements of τ any union of elements of τ is an element of τ any intersection of finitely many elements of τ is an element of τ if τ is a topology on x , then the pair ( x , τ ) is called a topological space . the notation x τ may be used to denote a set x endowed with the particular topology τ . the members of τ are called open sets in x . a subset of x is said to be closed if its complement is in τ ( i.e . , its complement is open ) . a subset of x may be open , closed , both ( clopen set ) , or neither . the empty set and x itself are always both closed and open . basis for a topology . a base ( or basis ) b for a topological space x with topology t is a collection of open sets in t such that every open set in t can be written as a union of elements of b . we say that the base generates the topology t . bases are useful because many properties of topologies can be reduced to statements about a base that generates that topology—and because many topologies are most easily defined in terms of a base that generates them . subspace and quotient . every subset of a topological space can be given the subspace topology in which the open sets are the intersections of the open sets of the larger space with the subset . for any indexed family of topological spaces , the product can be given the product topology , which is generated by the inverse images of open sets of the factors under the projection mappings . for example , in finite products , a basis for the product topology consists of all products of open sets . for infinite products , there is the additional requirement that in a basic open set , all but finitely many of its projections are the entire space . a quotient space is defined as follows : if x is a topological space and y is a set , and if f : x→ y is a surjection function , then the quotient topology on y is the collection of subsets of y that have open inverse images under f . in other words , the quotient topology is the finest topology on y for which f is continuous . a common example of a quotient topology is when an equivalence relation is defined on the topological space x . the map f is then the natural projection onto the set of equivalence classes . examples of topological spaces . a given set may have many different topologies . if a set is given a different topology , it is viewed as a different topological space . discrete and trivial topologies . any set can be given the discrete space , in which every subset is open . the only convergent sequences or nets in this topology are those that are eventually constant . also , any set can be given the trivial topology ( also called the indiscrete topology ) , in which only the empty set and the whole space are open . every sequence and net in this topology converges to every point of the space . this example shows that in general topological spaces , limits of sequences need not be unique . however , often topological spaces must be hausdorff spaces where limit points are unique . cofinite and cocountable topologies . any set can be given the cofinite topology in which the open sets are the empty set and the sets whose complement is finite . this is the smallest t1 space topology on any infinite set . any set can be given the cocountable topology , in which a set is defined as open if it is either empty or its complement is countable . when the set is uncountable , this topology serves as a counterexample in many situations . topologies on the real and complex numbers . there are many ways to define a topology on r , the set of real numbers . the standard topology on r is generated by the open intervals . the set of all open intervals forms a base or basis for the topology , meaning that every open set is a union of some collection of sets from the base . in particular , this means that a set is open if there exists an open interval of non zero radius about every point in the set . more generally , the euclidean spaces r n can be given a topology . in the usual topology on r n the basic open sets are the open balls . similarly , c , the set of complex numbers , and c n have a standard topology in which the basic open sets are open balls . the real line can also be given the lower limit topology . here , the basic open sets are the half open intervals [ a , b ) . this topology on r is strictly finer than the euclidean topology defined above ; a sequence converges to a point in this topology if and only if it converges from above in the euclidean topology . this example shows that a set may have many distinct topologies defined on it . the metric topology . every metric space can be given a metric topology , in which the basic open sets are open balls defined by the metric . this is the standard topology on any normed vector space . on a finite-dimensional vector space this topology is the same for all norms . further examples . there exist numerous topologies on any given finite set . such spaces are called finite topological spaces . finite spaces are sometimes used to provide examples or counterexamples to conjectures about topological spaces in general . every manifold has a natural topology , since it is locally euclidean . similarly , every simplex and every simplicial complex inherits a natural topology from r n . the zariski topology is defined algebraically on the spectrum of a ring or an algebraic variety . on r n or c n , the closed sets of the zariski topology are the solution sets of systems of polynomial equations . a linear graph has a natural topology that generalises many of the geometric aspects of graphs with vertices and edges . many sets of linear operators in functional analysis are endowed with topologies that are defined by specifying when a particular sequence of functions converges to the zero function . any local field has a topology native to it , and this can be extended to vector spaces over that field . the sierpiński space is the simplest non-discrete topological space . it has important relations to the theory of computation and semantics . if γ is an ordinal number , then the set γ [ 0 , & nbsp ; γ ) may be endowed with the order topology generated by the intervals ( a , & nbsp ; b ) , [ 0 , & nbsp ; b ) and ( a , & nbsp ; γ ) where a and b are elements of γ . continuous functions . continuity is expressed in terms of neighborhoods : is continuous at some point if and only if for any neighborhood of , there is a neighborhood of such that . intuitively , continuity means no matter how '' small '' becomes , there is always a containing that maps inside and whose image under contains . this is equivalent to the condition that the preimages of the open ( closed ) sets in are open ( closed ) in . in metric spaces , this definition is equivalent to the ε & ndash ; δ-definition that is often used in analysis . an extreme example : if a set is given the discrete topology , all functions : f\colon x \rightarrow t to any topological space are continuous . on the other hand , if is equipped with the indiscrete topology and the space set is at least t0 space , then the only continuous functions are the constant functions . conversely , any function whose range is indiscrete is continuous . alternative definitions . several equivalent definitions for a topological structure exist and thus there are several equivalent ways to define a continuous function . neighborhood definition . definitions based on preimages are often difficult to use directly . the following criterion expresses continuity in terms of neighborhoods : f is continuous at some point x & nbsp ; ∈ & nbsp ; x if and only if for any neighborhood v of f ( x ) , there is a neighborhood u of x such that f ( u ) & nbsp ; ⊆ & nbsp ; v . intuitively , continuity means no matter how '' small '' v becomes , there is always a u containing x that maps inside v . if x and y are metric spaces , it is equivalent to consider the neighborhood system of open balls centered at x and f ( x ) instead of all neighborhoods . this gives back the above δ-ε definition of continuity in the context of metric spaces . however , in general topological spaces , there is no notion of nearness or distance . note , however , that if the target space is hausdorff , it is still true that f is continuous at a if and only if the limit of f as x approaches a is f ( a ) . at an isolated point , every function is continuous . sequences and nets . in several contexts , the topology of a space is conveniently specified in terms of limit points . in many instances , this is accomplished by specifying when a point is the limit of a sequence , but for some spaces that are too large in some sense , one specifies also when a point is the limit of more general sets of points indexed by a directed set , known as nets . a function is continuous only if it takes limits of sequences to limits of sequences . in the former case , preservation of limits is also sufficient ; in the latter , a function may preserve all limits of sequences yet still fail to be continuous , and preservation of nets is a necessary and sufficient condition . in detail , a function f : x → y is sequentially continuous if whenever a sequence ( x n ) in x converges to a limit x , the sequence ( f ( x n ) ) converges to f ( x ) . thus sequentially continuous functions '' preserve sequential limits '' . every continuous function is sequentially continuous . if x is a first-countable space and countable choice holds , then the converse also holds : any function preserving sequential limits is continuous . in particular , if x is a metric space , sequential continuity and continuity are equivalent . for non first-countable spaces , sequential continuity might be strictly weaker than continuity . ( the spaces for which the two properties are equivalent are called sequential spaces . ) this motivates the consideration of nets instead of sequences in general topological spaces . continuous functions preserve limits of nets , and in fact this property characterizes continuous functions . closure operator definition . instead of specifying the open subsets of a topological space , the topology can also be determined by a closure operator ( denoted cl ) , which assigns to any subset a ⊆ x its closure , or an interior operator ( denoted int ) , which assigns to any subset a of x its interior . in these terms , a function : f\colon ( x , \mathrm such that for any x , y , z \in m , the following holds : d ( x , y ) \ge 0 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; ( non-negative ) , d ( x , y ) 0\ , iff x y\ , & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; ( identity of indiscernibles ) , d ( x , y ) d ( y , x ) \ , & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; ( symmetry ) and d ( x , z ) \le d ( x , y ) + d ( y , z ) & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; ( triangle inequality ) . the function d is also called distance function or simply distance . often , d is omitted and one just writes m for a metric space if it is clear from the context what metric is used . every metric space is paracompact and hausdorff , and thus normal . the metrization theorems provide necessary and sufficient conditions for a topology to come from a metric . baire category theorem . the baire category theorem says : if x is a complete metric space or a locally compact hausdorff space , then the interior of every union of countable nowhere dense sets is empty . r . baire . sur les fonctions de variables réelles . ann . di mat . , 3:1–123 , 1899 . any open subspace of a baire space is itself a baire space . main areas of research . image : peanocurve.svg 400px thumb three iterations of a peano curve construction , whose limit is a space-filling curve . the peano curve is studied in continuum theory , a branch of general topology . continuum theory . a continuum ( pl continua ) is a nonempty compact connected metric space , or less frequently , a compact connected hausdorff space . continuum theory is the branch of topology devoted to the study of continua . these objects arise frequently in nearly all areas of topology and analysis , and their properties are strong enough to yield many 'geometric ' features . dynamical systems . topological dynamics concerns the behavior of a space and its subspaces over time when subjected to continuous change . many examples with applications to physics and other areas of math include fluid dynamics , billiards and flows on manifolds . the topological characteristics of fractals in fractal geometry , of julia sets and the mandelbrot set arising in complex dynamics , and of attractors in differential equations are often critical to understanding these systems . pointless topology . pointless topology ( also called point-free or pointfree topology ) is an approach to topology that avoids mentioning points . the name 'pointless topology ' is due to john von neumann . garrett birkhoff , von neumann and lattice theory , john von neumann 1903-1957 , j . c . oxtoley , b . j . pettis , american mathematical soc . , 1958 , page 50-5 the ideas of pointless topology are closely related to mereotopology , in which regions ( sets ) are treated as foundational without explicit reference to underlying point sets . dimension theory . dimension theory is a branch of general topology dealing with dimensional invariants of topological spaces . topological algebras . a topological algebra a over a topological field k is a topological vector space together with a continuous multiplication : \cdot : a\times a \longrightarrow a : ( a , b ) \longmapsto a\cdot b that makes it an algebra over k . a unital associative topological algebra is a topological ring . the term was coined by david van dantzig ; it appears in the title of his thesis ( 1931 ) . metrizability theory . in topology and related areas of mathematics , a metrizable space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to a metric space . that is , a topological space ( x , \tau ) is said to be metrizable if there is a metric : d\colon x \times x \to [ 0 , \infty ) such that the topology induced by d is \tau . metrization theorems are theorems that give sufficient conditions for a topological space to be metrizable . set-theoretic topology . set-theoretic topology is a subject that combines set theory and general topology . it focuses on topological questions that are independent of zermelo–fraenkel set theory ( zfc ) . a famous problem is the normal moore space question , a question in general topology that was the subject of intense research . the answer to the normal moore space question was eventually proved to be independent of zfc .