Satyagraha

origin and meaning of name . the terms originated in a competition in the news-sheet indian opinion in south africa in 1906 . mr . maganlal gandhi , grandson of an uncle of mahatma gandhi , came up with the word '' sadagraha '' and won the prize . subsequently , to make it clearer , gandhi changed it to satyagraha . '' satyagraha '' is a tatpuruṣa compound of the sanskrit words satya ( meaning '' truth '' ) and āgraha ( '' polite insistence '' , or '' holding firmly to '' ) . satya is derived from the word '' sat '' , which means '' being '' . nothing is or exists in reality except truth . in the context of satyagraha , truth therefore includes a ) truth in speech , as opposed to falsehood , b ) what is real , as opposed to nonexistent ( asat ) and c ) good as opposed to evil , or bad . this was critical to gandhi 's understanding of and faith in nonviolence : '' the world rests upon the bedrock of satya or truth . asatya , meaning untruth , also means nonexistent , and satya or truth also means that which is . if untruth does not so much as exist , its victory is out of the question . and truth being that which is , can never be destroyed . this is the doctrine of satyagraha in a nutshell . '' nagler , michael n . the nonviolence handbook : a guide for practical action . print . for gandhi , satyagraha went far beyond mere '' passive resistance '' and became strength in practising non-violent methods . in his words : in september 1935 , a letter to p . k . rao , servants of india society , gandhi disputed the proposition that his idea of civil disobedience was adapted from the writings of henry david thoreau , especially the essay civil disobedience published in 1849 . gandhi described it as follows : . contrast to '' passive resistance '' . gandhi distinguished between satyagraha and passive resistance in the following letter : . ahimsa and satyagraha . there is a connection between ahiṃsā and satyagraha . satyagraha is sometimes used to refer to the whole principle of nonviolence , where it is essentially the same as ahimsa , and sometimes used in a '' marked '' meaning to refer specifically to direct action that is largely obstructive , for example in the form of civil disobedience . gandhi says : . defining success . assessing the extent to which gandhi 's ideas of satyagraha were or were not successful in the indian independence struggle is a complex task . judith brown has suggested that '' this is a political strategy and technique which , for its outcomes , depends of historical specificities . '' brown , judith m . , '' gandhi and civil resistance in india , 1917–47 : key issues '' , in adam roberts and timothy garton ash ( eds . ) , civil resistance and power politics : the experience of non-violent action from gandhi to the present , oxford university press , 2009 p . 57 the view taken by gandhi differs from the idea that the goal in any conflict is necessarily to defeat the opponent or frustrate the opponent 's objectives , or to meet one 's own objectives despite the efforts of the opponent to obstruct these . in satyagraha , by contrast , '' the satyagrahi 's object is to convert , not to coerce , the wrong-doer . '' gandhi , m.k . “ requisite qualifications ” harijan 25 march 1939 the opponent must be converted , at least as far as to stop obstructing the just end , for this cooperation to take place . there are cases , to be sure , when an opponent , e.g . a dictator , has to be unseated and one can not wait to convert him . the satyagrahi would count this a partial success . means and ends . the theory of satyagraha sees means and ends as inseparable . the means used to obtain an end are wrapped up in and attached to that end . therefore , it is contradictory to try to use unjust means to obtain justice or to try to use violence to obtain peace . as gandhi wrote : '' they say , 'means are , after all , means ' . i would say , 'means are , after all , everything ' . as the means so the end . gandhi used an example to explain this : if i want to deprive you of your watch , i shall certainly have to fight for it ; if i want to buy your watch , i shall have to pay for it ; and if i want a gift , i shall have to plead for it ; and , according to the means i employ , the watch is stolen property , my own property , or a donation . gandhi rejected the idea that injustice should , or even could , be fought against '' by any means necessary '' —if you use violent , coercive , unjust means , whatever ends you produce will necessarily embed that injustice . to those who preached violence and called nonviolent actionists cowards , he replied : i do believe that , where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence , i would advise violence.i would rather have india resort to arms in order to defend her honour than that she should , in a cowardly manner , become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour.but i believe that nonviolence is infinitely superior to violence , forgiveness is greater than punishment . however , in the same book gandhi makes the opposite argument . he admits that even though his book argues that machinery is bad , it was produced by machinery , which he says can do nothing good . thus , he says , '' sometimes poison is used to kill poison '' and for that reason as long as machinery is viewed as bad it can be used to undo itself . satyagraha versus duragraha . the essence of satyagraha is that it seeks to eliminate antagonisms without harming the antagonists themselves , as opposed to violent resistance , which is meant to cause harm to the antagonist . a satyagrahi therefore does not seek to end or destroy the relationship with the antagonist , but instead seeks to transform or '' purify '' it to a higher level . a euphemism sometimes used for satyagraha is that it is a '' silent force '' or a '' soul force '' ( a term also used by martin luther king jr . during his famous '' i have a dream '' speech ) . it arms the individual with moral power rather than physical power . satyagraha is also termed a '' universal force , '' as it essentially '' makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers , young and old , man and woman , friend and foe . '' gandhi , m.k . “ some rules of satyagraha ” young india ( navajivan ) 23 february 1930 ( the collected works of mahatma gandhi vol . 48 , p . 340 ) gandhi contrasted satyagraha ( holding on to truth ) with '' duragraha '' ( holding on by force ) , as in protest meant more to harass than enlighten opponents . he wrote : '' there must be no impatience , no barbarity , no insolence , no undue pressure . if we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy , we can not afford to be intolerant . intolerance betrays want of faith in one 's cause . '' r . k . prabhu & u . r . rao , editors ; from section “ power of satyagraha , ” of the book the mind of mahatma gandhi , ahemadabad , india , revised edition , 1967 . civil disobedience and non-cooperation as practised under satyagraha are based on the '' law of suffering '' , gandhi , m.k . “ the law of suffering ” young india 16 june 1920 a doctrine that the endurance of suffering is a means to an end . this end usually implies a moral uplift or progress of an individual or society . therefore , the non-cooperation of satyagraha is in fact a means to secure the cooperation of the opponent that is consistent with truth and justice . large-scale usage of satyagraha . when using satyagraha in a large-scale political conflict involving civil disobedience , gandhi believed that the satyagrahis must undergo training to ensure discipline . he wrote that it is '' only when people have proved their active loyalty by obeying the many laws of the state that they acquire the right of civil disobedience . '' he therefore made part of the discipline that satyagrahis : appreciate the other laws of the state and obey them voluntarily tolerate these laws , even when they are inconvenient be willing to undergo suffering , loss of property , and to endure the suffering that might be inflicted on family and friends gandhi , m . k . “ pre-requisites for satyagraha ” young india 1 august 1925 this obedience has to be not merely grudging , but extraordinary : . principles . gandhi envisioned satyagraha as not only a tactic to be used in acute political struggle , but as a universal solvent for injustice and harm . he founded the sabarmati ashram to teach satyagraha . he asked satyagrahis to follow the following principles ( yamas described in yoga sutra ) : gandhi , m.k . non-violent resistance ( satyagraha ) ( 1961 ) p . 37 nonviolence ( ahimsa ) truth – this includes honesty , but goes beyond it to mean living fully in accord with and in devotion to that which is true not stealing non-possession ( not the same as poverty ) body-labour or bread-labour control of desires ( gluttony ) fearlessness equal respect for all religions economic strategy such as boycott of imported goods ( swadeshi ) on another occasion , he listed these rules as '' essential for every satyagrahi in india '' : must have a living faith in god must be leading a chaste life , and be willing to die or lose all his possessions must be a habitual khadi weaver and spinner must abstain from alcohol and other intoxicants . rules for satyagraha campaigns . gandhi proposed a series of rules for satyagrahis to follow in a resistance campaign : harbour no anger . suffer the anger of the opponent . never retaliate to assaults or punishment ; but do not submit , out of fear of punishment or assault , to an order given in anger . voluntarily submit to arrest or confiscation of your own property . if you are a trustee of property , defend that property ( non-violently ) from confiscation with your life . do not curse or swear . do not insult the opponent . neither salute nor insult the flag of your opponent or your opponent 's leaders . if anyone attempts to insult or assault your opponent , defend your opponent ( non-violently ) with your life . as a prisoner , behave courteously and obey prison regulations ( except any that are contrary to self-respect ) . as a prisoner , do not ask for special favourable treatment . as a prisoner , do not fast in an attempt to gain conveniences whose deprivation does not involve any injury to your self-respect . joyfully obey the orders of the leaders of the civil disobedience action . american civil rights movement . satyagraha theory also influenced many other movements of nonviolence and civil resistance . for example , martin luther king jr . wrote in his autobiography about gandhi 's influence on his developing ideas regarding the civil rights movement in the united states : . satyagraha in relation to genocide . in view of the nazi persecution of the jews in germany , gandhi offered satyagraha as a method of combating oppression and genocide , stating : when gandhi was criticized for these statements , he responded in another article entitled '' some questions answered '' : in a similar vein , anticipating a possible attack on india by japan during world war ii , gandhi recommended satyagraha as a means of national defense ( what is now sometimes called '' civilian based defense '' ( cbd ) or '' social defence '' ) :