ABC Weekend TV

history . when kemsley-winnick , one of the consortia that had been awarded a franchise in the new itv ( tv network ) network in 1954 , collapsed , the ita approached abpc to step into the breach . the corporation agreed to assume the franchises to broadcast on saturdays and sundays to the midlands and the north of england . the contract agreeing to do so was signed on 21 september 1955 , the day before independent television ( itv ) began in london . this gave the new abc five months to begin broadcasting in the midlands , the service beginning on 18 february 1956 . soon afterwards , it was also up and running in the north ; it began broadcasting there for the first time on 5 may 1956 . it was aided in part by the failure of the original contractor ; kelmsley-winnick had ordered over £1 million ( equivalent to £ million today ) of production equipment from manufacturer pye , which it sold to abc at a much-discounted price . black , p , the mirror in the corner , macmillan , london , 1971 . the 1968 contract round . structural changes in the regional contract areas meant that abc no longer had a contract to reapply for . the northern area ( renamed lancashire ) became a seven-day operation , as did the midlands . existing weekday contractors ( granada and atv respectively ) were correctly considered the favourites . abc consequently submitted two applications : one for the service for london at the weekend , the other for the midlands seven-day operation , although it favoured the first contract . it was expected that abc would be awarded the weekend london licence , but the strength of another application ( from the london weekend television ) ruled this out . this led to a situation where a successful company could be closed down through no fault of its own . to prevent this , the governing body of itv , the independent television authority , ordered a merger with the existing london weekday company rediffusion , abc having majority control of the new operation . despite protests from rediffusion , the two companies eventually became thames television . abc ceased weekend broadcasting in the north and midlands regions on 28 july 1968 and resumed on 30 july in the london region as weekday company thames . studios . abc operated three production sites and had a further sales office . the main production facilities were the teddington studios in teddington , middlesex . although this was outside its contract area , abc wanted a london base , as many performers could not venture outside of the capital to record programmes because they were often committed to runs of theatre plays in the west end . upon the merger with rediffusion , this site became the main production base for the new company thames television . in the midlands , abc formed a joint venture with midlands weekday licensee atv to oversee the running of a production and transmission facility to be used by both . alpha television purchased a former cinema in aston , near birmingham , and extended it by the construction of additional studios and office space ; the site was known as the alpha studios . abc operated a northern studio centre in manchester and a sales office based in television house in the city centre . the production facility was converted from a former capitol cinema in didsbury . abc vacated both premises during 1968 . for its pre-filmed series , the avengers ( from 1965 ) , abc used its parent company 's facilities in elstree . identity . when abc first went on the air , it used the branding of its sister company abc cinemas . this featured a triangular shield with the letters abc upon it , and a bar across it with the caption 'television' . contains flash recreations of the original abc idents , complete with authentic soundtracks . this lasted from the station 's launch in 1956 until c.1958 . the ita had criticised abc 's original presentation style for being bland and too much attached to the existing abc cinemas chain . as a result , abc created a new brand ident featuring three arrows pointing to the bottom of the screen to reveal the letters abc in turn and leaving a triangle behind and on top of the letters . at the end of this , the three triangles would snap together into the new abc logo . this ident lasted until 1964 when the lettering font was altered slightly from a serif font to the latest bold used by the company , this revision lasting until the company 's demise . contains videos of the abc idents . the logo uses the notion of threes , three triangles making another triangle , with the points of a triangle often being labelled ' a ' , ' b ' and ' c ' in geometry . the tune that was used for all of abc 's idents was a vibraphone playing 'la-te-doh ' ( or the notes ' a-b-c ' ) . out of this look , abc television developed a strong corporate identity , effectively becoming the first british tv station to recognise the importance of corporate branding . the company itself was called associated british cinemas ( television ) limited . however , on exports and some continuing productions for thames television , the name 'associated british corporation ' was used . as for on-air , the name was for a few months 'associated british ' , before becoming 'abc television ' . the station also received a joke nickname from bob monkhouse , namely '' all bloody commercials '' . the station 's slogan varied through time , starting off as '' abc - associated british corporation in the north/midlands '' before being replaced in 1958 to '' abc , your weekend television '' and again changed in 1964 to '' abc , your weekend television in the north/midlands '' . programming . networked programmes from abc included the drama series police surgeon , the human jungle , undermined , redcap , the avengers , the armchair theatre series of single plays , the habatales cartoons , the popular shows thank your lucky stars , opportunity knocks , big night out and oh boy ! , the children 's science fiction serials emerald soup , target luna and its sequels pathfinders in space , pathfinders to mars and pathfinders to venus , and the gritty drama series callan and public eye ( both of which continued as thames productions after 1968 ) . itv 's first weekly series devoted to the arts , tempo , was introduced by abc , as was its first hidden camera show , candid camera , and its first attempt to challenge the bbc 's dominance of television sport , with world of sport . abc also introduced british television 's first late night chat show with eamonn andrews ' live from london ! and , together with atv , british television 's first regular weekly series of adult education programmes . . see also . associated television granada television associated rediffusion itv ( tv network ) history of itv . references . external links . abc at large from transdiffusion ( unofficial history site ) animated abc logo , 1960s from 625.uk.com ( macromedia flash 6 or later required ) animated abc logo , c.1964 from 625.uk.com .