Carl Loewe

life and career . loewe was born in löbejün and received his first music lessons from his father . he was a choir-boy , first at köthen , and later at halle , where he went to grammar school . the beauty of loewe 's voice brought him under the notice of madame de staël , who procured him a pension from jérôme bonaparte , then king of westphalia , which enabled him to further his education in music , and to study theology at halle university . in 1810 , he began lessons in halle with daniel gottlob türk . eberl , kathrin : daniel gottlob türk – an urban musician in the late 18th century . beeskow 2011 this ended in 1813 , on the flight of the king . in 1820 , he moved to stettin in prussia ( now szczecin in poland ) , where he worked as organist and music director of the school . it was while there that he did most of his work as a composer , publishing a version of goethe 's '' erlkönig '' in 1824 ( written 1817/18 ) which some say rivals erlkönig ( schubert ) . he went on to set many other poets ' works , including friedrich rückert , and translations of william shakespeare and lord byron . in 1821 he married julie von jacob , who died in 1823 . his second wife , auguste lange , was an accomplished singer , and they appeared together in his oratorio performances with great success . on 20 february 1827 , tuba journal he conducted the first performance of the 18-year-old felix mendelssohn 's overture a midsummer night 's dream , op . 21 . he and mendelssohn were also soloists in mendelssohn 's concerto in a-flat major for 2 pianos and orchestra . later in life , loewe became very popular both as a composer and as a singer . as a youth , he had a high soprano voice ( he could sing the music of the queen of the night in the magic flute as a boy ) , and his voice developed into a fine tenor . he made several tours as a singer in the 1840s and 1850s , visiting england , france , sweden and norway amongst other countries . he eventually moved back to germany , and , after quitting his posts in stettin after 46 years , moved to kiel , where he would die from a stroke on 20 april 1869 . loewe was also active as a music teacher . his most famous student , whom he taught composition from 1841 to 1847 , was emilie mayer , of whom he said that '' such a god-given talent as hers had not been bestowed upon any other person he knew '' . jugenderinnerungen einer stettiner kaufmannstochter , greifswald 1921 mayer would later go on enjoying a successful career in berlin as a freelance composer , ultimately earning her the nickname '' weibliche beethoven '' ( eng . female beethoven ) . . works . loewe wrote five operas , of which only one , , was performed at berlin in 1834 , without much success ; seventeen oratorios , many of them for male voices unaccompanied , or with short instrumental interludes only ; choral ballads , cantatas , three string quartets ( his opus 24 , ) and a pianoforte trio ; in g minor , his opus 12 , broadcast – see here a work for clarinet and piano , published posthumously ; and some piano solos . but the branch of his art by which he is remembered is the solo ballad with pianoforte accompaniment . his treatment of long narrative poems , in a clever mixture of the dramatic and lyrical styles , was undoubtedly modelled on the ballads of johann rudolf zumsteeg , and has been copied by many composers since his day . his settings of the '' erlkönig '' ( a very early example ) , '' archibald douglas '' on a text by theodor fontane , '' '' , '' edward '' on a text by johann gottfried herder , and '' '' , are particularly fine . there are at least two symphonies by loewe – one , in d minor , has been recorded on the koch schwann label together with the first of at least two cd recordings of loewe 's second piano concerto ( in a major ) , and another , in e minor , was given its first performance in 170 years in november 2004 . ( the cpo series of recordings of loewe 's complete ballads includes as well a recording of two piano sonatas and a '' tone poem in sonata form '' , with one of the sonatas – the e major of 1829 – having a vocal part for soprano and baritone . ) in 1875 , at bayreuth , richard wagner remarked of loewe , '' '' ( ha , that is a serious german master , authentic and true , one who uses the beautiful german language with meaning , one who can not be sufficiently revered ! ) . hans joachim moser , das deutsche lied seit mozart ( berlin 1937 ) , p . 135 , note 2 . . style . loewe 's earliest songs , such as the and the , follow the musical pattern of the late 18th century tradition , using a single melodic line , basic accompaniment , and mostly strophic and varied strophic forms . under zumsteeg 's influence , loewe began incorporating and cultivating the ballad form into his vocal songs . when compared to other lieder composers , loewe 's rhapsodic composition style is said to have '' a striking absence of organic musical development '' . ewan west , '' loewe , ( johann ) carl ( gottfried ) '' , in the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , edited by stanley sadie ( london : macmillan publishers , 1980 ) ; also in the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , second edition , edited by stanley sadie and john tyrrell ( london : macmillan publishers , 2001 ) . his settings of poetry separated poetic ideas and treated them episodically rather than using unifying motifs ( like fellow lieder composer , franz schubert ) . one of loewe 's strengths as a composer were his '' imaginative and , at times , daring '' accompaniments , which were often atmospheric and exploited the piano 's sonorous and tonal potential . . his heart . in 2012 an urn thought to contain the heart of carl loewe was found inside the szczecin cathedral 's southern pillar during the renovation works carried out that year . a special commission appointed by the szczecińsko-kamieńska metropolitan curia has deduced , on the basis of historical records and an inscription on the pillar , that the urn indeed contains the heart of carl loewe . . recordings . carl loewe : ballads , thomas quasthoff , norman shetler ; emi records 1989 carl loewe : balladen & lieder , 2 discs , dietrich fischer-dieskau , jörg demus ; musical heritage society 1996 lieder & balladen : complete edition , 21 discs , cpo 2007 . references . notes sources . further reading . . external links . texts and translations to vocal music by loewe at the liedernet archive recordings discogs extensive list of works , hermann prey , michael endres , thomas quasthoff , michael raucheisen , josef greindl , josef greindl , josef greindl , josef greindl