Menander I

theories of menander 's successors . menander was the last indo-greek king mentioned by ancient historians , and developments after his death are therefore difficult to trace . a ) the traditional view , supported by w.w . tarn and bopearachchi , is that menander was succeeded by his queen agathokleia , who acted as regent to their infant son strato i until he became an adult and took over the crown . strato i used the same reverse as menander i , athena hurling a thunderbolt , and also the title soter . according to this scenario , agathokleia and strato i only managed to maintain themselves in the eastern parts of the kingdom , punjab and at times gandhara . paropamisadae and pushkalavati were taken over by zoilos i , perhaps because some of agathokleia 's subjects may have been reluctant to accept an infant king with a queen regent . b ) on the other hand , r.c . senior and other numismatics such as david bivar have suggested that strato i ruled several decades after menander : they point out that strato 's and agathokleia 's monograms are usually different from menander 's , and overstrikes and hoard findings also associates them with later kings . in this scenario , menander was briefly succeeded by his son thrason , of whom a single coin is known . after thrason was murdered , competing kings such as zoilos i or lysias may have taken over menander 's kingdom . menander 's dynasty was thus dethroned and did not return to power until later , though his relative nicias may have ruled a small principality in the kabul valley . legacy . buddhism . after the reign of menander i , strato i and several subsequent indo-greek rulers , such as amyntas , nicias , peukolaos , hermaeus , and hippostratos , depicted themselves or their greek deities forming with the right hand a symbolic gesture identical to the buddhist vitarka mudra ( thumb and index joined together , with other fingers extended ) , which in buddhism signifies the transmission of the buddha 's teaching . at the same time , right after the death of menander , several indo-greek rulers also started to adopt on their coins the pāli title of '' dharmikasa '' , meaning '' follower of the dharma '' ( the title of the great indian buddhist king ashoka was dharmaraja '' king of the dharma '' ) . this usage was adopted by strato i , zoilos i , heliokles ii , theophilos , peukolaos and archebios . altogether , the conversion of menander to buddhism suggested by the milinda panha seems to have triggered the use of buddhist symbolism in one form or another on the coinage of close to half of the kings who succeeded him . especially , all the kings after menander who are recorded to have ruled in gandhara ( apart from the little-known demetrius iii ) display buddhist symbolism in one form or another . both because of his conversion and because of his unequaled territorial expansion , menander may have contributed to the expansion of buddhism in central asia . although the spread of buddhism to central asia and northern asia is usually associated with the kushans , a century or two later , there is a possibility that it may have been introduced in those areas from gandhara '' even earlier , during the time of demetrius and menander '' ( puri , '' buddhism in central asia '' ) . around the time , or rather soon after the death of menander , a frieze in sanchi shows buddhist devotees in greek attire . the men are depicted with short curly hair , often held together with a headband of the type commonly seen on greek coins . the clothing too is greek , complete with tunics , capes and sandals . the musical instruments are also quite characteristic , such as the double flute called aulos . also visible are carnyx-like horns . they are all celebrating at the entrance of the stupa . these men would probably be nearby indo-greeks from northwest india visiting the stupa . '' a guide to sanchi '' john marshall . these '' greek-looking foreigners '' are also described in susan huntington , '' the art of ancient india '' , p . 100 . representation of the buddha . the anthropomorphic representation of the buddha is absent from indo-greek coinage , suggesting that the indo-greek kings may have respected the indian an-iconic rule for depictions of the buddha , limiting themselves to symbolic representation only . consistently with this perspective , the actual depiction of the buddha would be a later phenomenon , usually dated to the 1st century , emerging from the sponsorship of the syncretic kushan empire and executed by greek , and , later , indian and possibly roman artists . datation of greco-buddhist statues is generally uncertain , but they are at least firmly established from the 1st century . another possibility is that just as the indo-greeks routinely represented philosophers in statues ( but certainly not on coins ) in antiquity , the indo-greek may have initiated anthropomorphic representations of the buddha in statuary only , possibly as soon as the 2nd-1st century bc , as advocated by foucher and suggested by chinese murals depicting emperor wu of han worshipping buddha statues brought from central asia in 120 bc ( see picture ) . an indo-chinese tradition also explains that nagasena , also known as menander 's buddhist teacher , created in 43 bc in the city of pataliputra a statue of the buddha , the emerald buddha , which was later brought to thailand . stylistically , indo-greek coins generally display a very high level of hellenistic artistic realism , which declined drastically around 50 bc with the invasions of the indo-scythians , yuezhi and indo-parthians . the first known statues of the buddha are also very realistic and hellenistic in style and are more consistent with the pre-50 bc artistic level seen on coins . this would tend to suggest that the first statues were created between 130 bc ( death of menander ) and 50 bc , precisely at the time when buddhist symbolism appeared on indo-greek coinage . from that time , menander and his successors may have been the key propagators of buddhist ideas and representations : '' the spread of gandhari buddhism may have been stimulated by menander 's royal patronage , as may have the development and spread of gandharan sculpture , which seems to have accompanied it '' ( mcevilley , '' the shape of ancient thought '' , p . & nbsp ; 378 ) . education . the milind college in aurangabad , india , is named after king milind . the college is founded by b . r . ambedkar , indian buddhist leader and the father of the indian constitution . geography . in classical antiquity , from at least the 1st century , the '' menander mons '' , or '' mountains of menander '' , came to designate the mountain chain at the extreme east of the indian subcontinent , today 's naga hills and arakan , as indicated in the ptolemy world map of the 1st century geographer ptolemy . boot , hooves and wheels : and the social dynamics behind south asian warfare , saikat k bose , vij books india pvt ltd , 2015 p.222 . see also . kanishka indo-greek kingdom greco-buddhism indo-scythians . notes . references . monnaies gréco-bactriennes et indo-grecques , catalogue raisonné , osmund bopearachchi , 1991 , bibliothèque nationale de france , . the shape of ancient thought . comparative studies in greek and indian philosophies by thomas mcevilley ( allworth press and the school of visual arts , 2002 ) buddhism in central asia by b.n . puri ( motilal banarsidass pub , january 1 , 2000 ) the greeks in bactria and india , w . w . tarn , cambridge university press . dictionary of buddhism , damien keown , oxford university press de l'indus à l'oxus , archéologie de l'asie centrale , osmund bopearachchi , christine sachs , the diffusion of classical art in antiquity by john boardman ( princeton university press , 1994 ) the crossroads of asia . transformation in image and symbol , 1992 , indo-greek , indo-scythian and indo-parthian coins in the smithsonian institution , smithsonian institution , bopearachchi , 1993 . external links . coins of king menander more coins of menander kapisa coinage of menander the debate of king milinda the questions of king milinda catalogue of the coins of menander