Khanate of Sibir

aristocracy of the khanate . the sibir khanate was administered by mirzas who originated from various indigenous siberian tribes . these mirzas organized loosely knit dominions , which were all under the nominal authority of the khan of tyumen and sibir . mirzas also led the warriors of the khanate of sibir into battle and owed nominal allegiance to the khan of tyumen and sibir . culture . islam was the professed religion of the sibir khanate ; it was the religion of the ruling khan of tyumen and sibir . mosques , palaces and fortified walls were constructed in both tyumen and sibir . the leading imams and muftis of the sibir khanate are known to have had some influence in the nearby regions of kazan and even in samarqand . the khanate of sibir was the northernmost muslim state in recorded history ; its territories even included parts of the shore of the arctic ocean . . history . the khanate of sibir was founded in the fifteenth century , at a time when the mongols of the house of jochi were generally in a state of decline . the original capital of the khans was chimgi-tura . the first khan was taibuga , who was a member of the borjigin . he was succeeded by his son khoja or hoca , who was in turn succeeded by his son mar . the taibugids ' control of the region between the tobol and middle irtysh was not uncontested . the shaybanids , descendants of jochi , frequently claimed the area as their own . ibak khan , a member of a junior branch of the shaybanid house , killed mar and seized chimgi-tura . a taibugid restoration occurred when mar 's grandson muhammad fled to the eastern territories around the irtysh and killed ibak in battle in c . 1493 . muhammad decided not to remain at chimgi-tura , but chose a new capital named iskar ( or sibir ) located on the irtysh . the siege of kazan ( 1552 ) in 1552 prompted the taibugid khan of sibir , yadigar , to seek friendly relations with moscow . yadigar , however , was challenged by a shaybanid , ibak 's grandson kuchum . several years of fighting ( 1556–1563 ) ended with yadigar 's death and kuchum becoming khan . conquest of sibir . kuchum attempted to convert the siberian tatars , who were mostly shamanism , to islam . his decision to conduct a raid on the stroganov trading posts resulted in an expedition led by the cossack yermak against the khanate of sibir . kuchum 's forces were defeated by yermak at the battle of chuvash cape in 1582 and the cossacks entered iskar later that year . kuchum reorganized his forces , killed yermak in battle in 1584 , and reasserted his authority over sibir . over the next fourteen years , however , the russians slowly conquered the khanate . in 1598 kuchum was defeated on the banks of the ob and was forced to flee to the territories of the nogai , bringing an end to his rule . taibugids and shaybanids . the khanate of sibir and the town of tyumen were founded by taibuga probably some time between 1405 and 1428 . the latter was probably of keraite origin . миллер г . ф . глава первая . события древнейших времён до русского владычества // история сибири — м.-л . : ан ссср , 1937 . — т . 1 . — с . 189-194 . however , some scholars also attempt to link the taibugids to the kipchak elites and others . control alternated between the descendants of taibuga and the shaybanids who had descended from genghis khan . there are hints that the shaybanids were more connected to the steppe nomads and that the taibugids were more connected with the forest peoples to the north and east . taibuga 's father was called on ( on-son , onsom and other variants ) . grousset says that they were 'the issue of taibugha-bäki ' without explanation ( 'bäki ' ( bek ) was a princely suffix and taibuqa was a naiman chief at the time of genghis khan . ) a few sources identify him with bek ondi oglan , the great-great-great grandson of shayban , and thus a shaybanid . the stroganov chronicle says that on was killed by a chief called chingi who spared taibuga , sent him to fight the ostyaks and granted him his own principality . taibuga founded tyumen and named it chingi-tura in honor of his benefactor . another source makes on a nogai whose 'hoflager ' ( german for 'court-camp ' ) was kasyl-tura at the mouth of the ishim river about east of tobolsk . another source says that when tokhtamysh was defeated he fled to the 'land of sibir ' ( the first mention of 'sibir ' in russian chronicles ) . here he was protected by on until both were killed by edigu about 1405 . there is no more information about taibuga except that some say he drove the novgoroders from his lands . in 1428 a 17-year old shaybanid called abu ' l-khayr khan was chosen khan on the tura river ( possibly at tyumen ) . this implies that the taibugids had been pushed aside . when he led his followers south for better things the remaining shaybanids gathered around ibak khan , who was from a junior branch of the house . the taibugids must have been restored because some time between 1464 and 1480 ibak killed the taibugid mar and made himself khan . in 1483 fyodor kurbsky is said to have led an army to the irtysh river , but this had no lasting effects . ibak went to the volga where he killed the last khan of the golden horde . returning , he was killed by mar 's grandson called mamuk or makhmet or mamet ( about 1495 ) . makhmet moved the capital from tyumen to sibir and was briefly khan of kazan ( 1496 ) . in 1552 the taibugids yediger and bekbulat congratulated ivan the terrible on his conquest of kazan . later they paid limited tribute to russia . in 1563 ibak khan 's grandson kuchum seized the throne from yediger and bekbulat . in 1573 , following the russo-crimean war ( 1571 ) he stopped paying tribute and raided the perm lands . in 1582 , he was driven out by yermak and died some time after 1600 . list of khans . list of taibugids : on taibugha khoja mar ( killed by ibak ) obder ( perhaps died as ibak 's captive ) makhmet/mamuq ( killed ibak ) abalak ( son of obder ) aguish kasim ( son of makhmet ) yadiger ( killed by kuchum ) bekbulat ( brother of yadiger and possibly co-regent ) seid akhmat ( reoccupied sibir after ermak 's death , captured by russians in 1588 ) . list of shaybanids : ibak khan murtaza khan kuchum khan ali son of kuchum ( tried to reoccupy sibir after ermak 's death ) , ishim ( asim ? ) son of kuchum ( married a kalmyk & settled in their territory in 1620 ) . see also . siberian tatars indigenous peoples of siberia list of sibir khans russian conquest of siberia history of siberia . references . forsyth , james . a history of the peoples of siberia : russia 's north asian colony 1581–1990 . cambridge university press , 1992 . . external links . siberian tatars sufism in russia today russian '' conquest '' 1580–1760 siberia mapping notes on the russian army of the 17th century ( 1632–1698 ) ancient humans the mansi moscovite sahanjar soder