Christian views on magic

biblical references . there are several references to witchcraft in the bible that strongly condemn such practices . for example , condemns anyone who '' . casts spells , or who is a medium or spiritist or who consults the dead . anyone who does these things is detestable to the lord , and because of these detestable practices the lord your god will drive out those nations before you '' , and states '' do not allow a sorceress to live '' ( or in the king james bible '' thou shalt not suffer a witch to live '' ) . it has also been suggested that the word '' witch '' might be a mistranslation of '' poisoner . '' '' thou shalt not suffer a witch to live : a murderous mistranslation ? '' by elizabeth sloane , at haaretz.com , 17 august 2017 . others point to a primitive idealist belief in a relation between bewitching and coveting , reflected in the occasional translation of the tenth commandment as 'thou shalt not bewitch' . '' reflections on ethics 65 : the tenth commandment : the hidden meaning of coveting '' by joseph lewis ( 1946 ) , at apathetic agnostic.com , 2020 . this may suggest that the prohibition related specifically to sorcery or the casting of spells to unnaturally possess something . some adherents of near-east religions acted as mediums , channeling messages from the dead or from a familiar spirit . the bible sometimes is translated as referring to '' necromancer '' and '' necromancy '' . however , some lexicographers , including james strong and spiros zodhiates , disagree . these scholars say that the hebrew word kashaph , used in exodus 22:18 and 5 other places in the tanakh comes from a root meaning '' to whisper '' . strong therefore concludes that the word means '' to whisper a spell , i.e . to incant or practice magic '' . the contemporary english version translates as referring to '' any kind of magic '' . at the very least , older biblical prohibitions included those against 'sorcery ' to obtain something unnaturally ; 'necromancy ' as the practice of magic or divination through demons or the dead ; and any forms of malevolent 'bewitchery ' . early christianity . the apostle paul 's epistle to the galatians includes sorcery in a list of '' works of the flesh '' . this disapproval is echoed in the didache , a very early book of church discipline which dates from the mid-late first century . oxford dictionary of the christian church ( oxford university press : didache . medieval views . during the early middle ages , the christian churches did not conduct witch trials . cohn , norman : '' europe 's inner demons : the demonization of christians in medieval christendom . '' london : sussex university press , 1975 the germanic council of paderborn in 785 explicitly outlawed the very belief in witches , and the holy roman empire charlemagne later confirmed the law . among orthodox eastern christians concentrated in the byzantine empire , belief in witchcraft was widely regarded as deisidaimonia—superstition—and by the 9th and 10th centuries in the western christianity , belief in witchcraft had begun to be seen as heresy . christian perspectives began to change with the influential writings of the mystic poet dante alighieri and scholastic philosopher thomas aquinas , both of whom believed in astrology , whilst condemning sorcery as moral perversion . tarrant , neil '' between aquinas and eymerich : the roman inquisition ’ s use of dominican thought in the censorship of alchemy '' pages 210-231 published online : 22 aug 2018 dante also condemned then-current forms of alchemy and divination , whilst aquinas had a more nuanced and sympathetic view . thomas aquinas '' summa theologiae '' -ca.1274 , 'second part of the second part : question 77 : 2 ' gold produced by alchemy may be sold as real gold 'if it really possesses the properties of gold ' , in catholic encyclopedia , new advent on-line , 2020 . aquinas '' summa theologiae '' -ca.1274 , ii-ii.95 superstition in divinations , in op.cit . 2020 . towards the end of the middle ages and the beginning of the early modern period ( post-reformation ) , belief in witchcraft became more popular and witches were seen as directly in league with the devil . this marked the beginning of a period of witch hunts among early protestants which lasted about 200 years , and in some countries , particularly in north-western europe , tens of thousands of people were accused of witchcraft and sentenced to death . the inquisition within the roman catholic church had conducted trials against supposed witches in the 13th century , but these trials were to punish heresy , of which belief in witchcraft was merely one variety . inquisitorial courts only became systematically involved in the witch-hunt during the 15th century : in the case of the madonna oriente , the inquisition of milan was not sure what to do with two women who in 1384 and in 1390 confessed to have participated in a type of white magic . not all inquisitorial courts acknowledged witchcraft . for example , in 1610 as the result of a witch-hunting craze the suprema ( the ruling council of the spanish inquisition ) gave everybody an edict of grace ( during which confessing witches were not to be punished ) and put the only dissenting inquisitor , alonso de salazar frías , in charge of the subsequent investigation . the results of salazar 's investigation was that the spanish inquisition did not bother witches ever again though they still went after heretics and crypto-jews . 1978 '' a witch with three toes too many '' ; out of this world encyclopedia 23:9-12 . martin luther . martin luther shared some of the views about witchcraft that were common in his time . when interpreting exodus 22:18 , exodus 22:18 he stated that , with the help of the devil , witches could steal milk merely by thinking of a cow . sermon on exodus , 1526 , wa 16 , 551 f . in his small catechism , he taught that witchcraft was a sin against the second commandment martin luther , luther 's little instruction book , trans . robert e . smith , ( fort wayne : project wittenberg , 2004 ) , small catechism 1.2 . and prescribed the biblical penalty for it in a '' table talk '' : on 25 august 1538 there was much discussion about witches and sorceresses who poisoned chicken eggs in the nests , or poisoned milk and butter . doctor luther said : '' one should show no mercy to these women ; i would burn them myself , for we read in the law that the priests were the ones to begin the stoning of criminals . '' wa tr 4:51–52 , no . 3979 quoted and translated in karant-nunn , 236 . the original latin and german text is : '' 25 , augusti multa dicebant de veneficis et incantatricibus , quae ova ex gallinis et lac et butyrum furarentur . respondit lutherus : cum illis nulla habenda est misericordia . ich wolte sie selber verprennen , more legis , ubi sacerdotes reos lapidare incipiebant . luther 's view of practitioners of magic as quasi-demons was at odds with the catholic view that emphasized choice and repentance . he also argued that one of the most serious perversions wrought by magic was the threatened degeneration of traditional female roles in the family . sigrid brauner '' martin luther on witchcraft : a true reformer ? '' , in : brian t . levack ed . '' demonology , religion and witchcraft : new perspectives on witchcraft , magic and demonology '' ( vol.1 ) pp . 217-230 . renaissance views . image : kircher tree of life.png upright thumb right the '' kircher tree '' : athanasius kircher 's 1652 depiction of the tree of life , based on a 1625 version by philippe d'aquin in the era of the inquisition and anti-witchcraft sentiment , there was a more acceptable form of '' purely natural '' occult and pagan study , the study of '' natural '' phenomena in general with no evil or irreligious intent whatsoever . white magic , black magic in the european renaissance by paola zambelli ( brill , 2007 ) renaissance humanism ( 15th and 16th century ) saw a resurgence in hermeticism and neo-platonic varieties of ceremonial magic . both bourgeoisie and nobility of that era showed great fascination with these arts , which exerted an exoticism by their ascription to arabic , jewish , romani , and egyptian sources . there was great uncertainty in distinguishing practices of vain superstition , blasphemous occultism , and perfectly sound scholarly knowledge or pious ritual . the people during this time found that the existence of magic was something that could answer the questions that they could not explain through science . to them it was suggesting that while science may explain reason , magic could explain '' unreason '' . marsilio ficino advocated the existence of spiritual beings and spirits in general , though many such theories ran counter to the ideas of the later age of enlightenment , and were treated with hostility by the roman catholic church . ficino however theorised a '' purely natural '' magic that did not require the invocation of spirits , malevolent or malicious . benedictine abbot johannes trithemius reportedly created incantations of his own related to beneficial communication with spirits . his works , including the steganographia , were immediately placed on the index librorum prohibitorum . however these works were later revealed to be concerned with cryptography and steganography , and the '' magical '' formulae were stegotexts for cryptographic content . behind their methods however , is an underlying theological motive for their contrivance . the preface to the polygraphia establishes the everyday practicability of trithemian cryptography as a '' secular consequent of the ability of a soul specially empowered by god to reach , by magical means , from earth to heaven '' . brann , noel l . , '' trithemius , johannes '' , in dictionary of gnosis & western esotericism , ed . wouter j . hanegraff ( leiden and boston : brill , 2006 ) , pp . 1135-1139 . heinrich cornelius agrippa ( 1486–1535 ) , a german magician , occult writer , theologian , astrologer , and alchemist , wrote the influential three books of occult philosophy , incorporating kabbalah in its theory and practice of western magic . it contributed strongly to the renaissance view of ritual magic 's relationship with christianity . farmer , s.a ; '' syncretism in the west : pico 's 900 theses ( 1486 ) '' , medieval & renaissance texts & studies , 1999 , giambattista della porta expanded on many of these ideas in his magia naturalis . the occult sciences in the renaissance : a study in intellectual patterns by wayne shumaker ( university of california press , 1972 ) giovanni pico della mirandola promoted a syncretic worldview combining platonism , neoplatonism , aristotelianism , hermeticism and kabbalah . farmer , s.a ; '' syncretism in the west : pico 's 900 theses ( 1486 ) '' , medieval & renaissance texts & studies , 1999 , pico 's hermetic syncretism was further developed by athanasius kircher , a jesuit priest , hermeticist and polymath , who wrote extensively on the subject in 1652 , bringing further elements such as orphism and egyptian mythology to the mix . schmidt , edward w . '' the last renaissance man : athanasius kircher '' , sj . company : the world of jesuits and their friends . 19 ( 2 ) , winter 2001–2002 . lutheran bishop james heiser recently evaluated the writings of marsilio ficino and giovanni pico della mirandola as an attempted '' hermetic reformation '' . heiser , james d . , prisci theologi and the hermetic reformation in the fifteenth century , repristination press : texas , 2011 . . john dee . john dee was an intense christian , but his religiosity was influenced by hermetic and renaissance neo-platonism and pervasive pythagoras doctrines . from hermeticism he drew a belief that man had the potential for divine power that could be exercised through mathematics . he immersed himself in magic , astrology and hermetic philosophy . much effort in his last 30 years went into trying to commune with angels , so as to learn the universal language of creation and achieve a pre-apocalyptic unity of mankind . his goal was to help bring forth a unified world religion through the healing of the breach of the roman catholic and protestant churches and the recapture of the pure theology of the ancients . . modern views . during the age of enlightenment , belief in the powers of witches and sorcerers to harm began to die out in the west . but the reasons for disbelief differed from those of early christians . for the early christians the reason was theological—that christ had already defeated the powers of evil . for the post-enlightenment christians in west and north europe , the disbelief was based on a belief in rationalism and empiricism . it was at this time , however , that western christianity began expanding to parts of africa and asia where premodern worldviews still held sway , and where belief in the power of witches and sorcerers to harm was , if anything , stronger than it had been in northern europe . many african initiated church developed their own responses to witchcraft and sorcery . hayes , stephen . 1995 . christian responses to witchcraft and sorcery , in missionalia , vol . 23 ( 3 ) november . pages 339-354 . the situation was further complicated by the rise of new religious movements that considered witchcraft to be a religion . these perspectives do not claim that witches actually consciously enter into a pact with satan because satan is not normally believed to exist in wicca or other modern neo-pagan witchcraft practices . u.s . department of the army , '' religious requirements and practices of certain selected groups : a handbook for chaplains '' : '' it is very important to be aware that wiccans do not in any way worship or believe in '' satan '' , '' the devil '' , or any similar entities . '' . christian opposition to witchcraft . several christian groups continue to believe in witchcraft and view it as a negative force . much of the criticism originates among evangelicalism groups , especially those which have a fundamentalist tendency , which believe that witchcraft is a danger to children . the 2006 documentary jesus camp , which depicts the life of young children attending becky fischer 's summer camp , shows fischer condemning the harry potter novels and telling the students that '' warlocks are enemies of god '' ( see also religious debates over the harry potter series ) . while fischer 's summer camp has sometimes been incorrectly identified as pentecostal , fischer is most closely associated with the neo-pentecostal movement known as the new apostolic reformation . nar prophet lou engle , who serves in the nar apostolic group the apostolic council of prophetic elders , makes an extended appearance in jesus camp . among christian tendencies , the nar is especially aggressive in efforts to counter alleged acts of witchcraft ; the nar 's globally distributed '' transformations '' pseudo-documentaries by filmmaker george otis , jr . show charismatic christians creating mini-utopias by driving off '' territorial spirits '' and by banishing or even killing accused witches . during the 2008 united states presidential election , footage surfaced from a 2005 church ceremony in which a nar apostle , kenyan bishop thomas muthee laid hands on sarah palin and called upon god to protect her from '' every form of witchcraft '' . in 2009 , pope benedict xvi denounced belief in witchcraft during a visit to angola . modern christian views vary as to whether witchcraft is a general term for communion with evil , or a specific form of religious system and practice . christians often espouse the idea that satan and evil are real while condemning accusations of witchcraft found throughout history as dubious . magic in literature . magic in literature , while condemned by some christians , is often viewed by christians as non-evil . the key distinction would be between real-life magic and pretend magic . this view holds that in real life , the practice of supernatural abilities ( i.e . magic ) must have a supernatural power source or origin , which would be either holy or evil . thus born of holy spirit or of demons . ( see spiritual gift and christian demonology for details on these teachings . ) thus , magic in the biblical context would be viewed as only an act of evil , whereas in literature , pretend magic is a morally neutral tool available to conduct both good and bad behaviors . in literature , magical abilities have many different power sources . technological ability ( science ) can appear as magic . , arthur c . clarke . '' profiles of the future '' , 1961 ( clarke 's third law ) often , wielding magic is accomplished by imposing one 's will by concentration and/or use of devices to control an external magical force . this explanation is offered for the force in star wars , magic in dungeons and dragons , and magic in the chronicles of narnia and the lord of the rings . the latter two works are by notable christians , c . s . lewis and j . r . r . tolkien , respectively . in the first book in the chronicles of narnia , the magician 's nephew , lewis specifically explains that magic is a power readily available in some other worlds , less so on earth . the empress jadis ( later , the white witch ) was tempted to use magic for selfish reasons to retain control of her world charn , which ultimately led to the destruction of life there . lewis related questions of the morality of magic to the same category as the morality of technology , including whether it is real , represents an 'unhealthy interest ' , or contravenes the basic divine plan for our universe . matthew t . dickerson , david o'hara . '' narnia and the fields of arbol : the environmental vision of c.s.lewis '' , 2009 tolkien , a devout catholic , had strict rules imposed by the ruling powers , angels who had assumed the 'raiment of the earth ' , for the use of magic by their servants . these included a general discouragement of magic in all but exceptional circumstances , and also prohibitions against use of magic to control others , to set the self up as a political power , or to create a world that violates the natural order . j . r . r . tolkien 'the istari ' , in '' unfinished tales of numenor and middle-earth '' , edited with commentary by christopher tolkien ; published posthumously , george allen & unwin : 1980 , pp.390-391 . he did however allow his wizard character to entertain children with magical fireworks . j . r . r . tolkien '' the hobbit '' , 1937 ; 4th edition , george allen & unwin , 1978 : p.14 j . r . r . tolkien ' a long-expected party ' , in '' the fellowship of the ring '' , 1954 ; 15th impression , george allen & unwin , 1966 , pp . 35-36 . . syncretic religions involving christianity and magic . from the middle ages , many hermeticism combined christianity with occult practices ( mostly alchemy ) . these christo-pagan perspectives have a long history in the middle east and europe , from the neoplatonism and templars right through to mirandola in the 15th century , but also through freemasonry to the early rosicrucian golden dawn of the late 19th and early 20th centuries . another notable example of syncretism is santería , a syncretic hybrid of african animism and christianity . there are also those who practice from a combination of neopagan/wiccan and christian perspectives , as for example in christian wicca or in some gaianism . other modern syncretic traditions include mesoamerican folk healing traditions , such as the curandero practices found in mexico , and andean folk healing traditions of peru and bolivia . see also . references . bibliography . . further reading . ancient christian magic : coptic texts of ritual power by marvin w . meyer and richard smith , princeton university press . 1999 . external links . got questions catholic encyclopedia '' occult art , occultism '' catholic encyclopedia '' witchcraft ''