Compressed air car

tech . engines . compressed air cars are powered by motors driven by compressed air , which is stored in a tank at high pressure such as 31 mpa ( 4500 psi or 310 bar ) . rather than driving engine pistons with an ignited fuel-air mixture , compressed air cars use the expansion of compressed air , in a similar manner to the expansion of steam in a steam engine . there have been prototype cars since the 1920s , with compressed air used in torpedo propulsion . storage tanks . in contrast to hydrogen 's issues of damage and danger involved in high-impact crashes , air , on its own , is non-flammable , it was reported on seven network beyond tomorrow that on its own carbon-fiber is brittle and can split under sufficient stress , but creates no shrapnel when it does so . carbon-fiber tanks safely hold air at a pressure somewhere around 31 mpa , making them comparable to steel tanks . the cars are designed to be filled up at a high-pressure pump . in compressed air vehicles , tank designs tend to be isothermal ; a heat exchanger of some kind is used to maintain the temperature ( and pressure ) of the tank as the air is extracted . energy density . compressed air has relatively low energy density . air at 30 mpa ( about 4,350 & nbsp ; psi ) contains about 50 & nbsp ; wh of energy per liter ( and normally weighs 372 g per liter ) . for comparison , a lead–acid battery contains 60-75 wh/l . a lithium-ion battery contains about 250-620 wh/l . the epa estimates the energy density of gasoline at 8,890 wh/l ; bowlin , ben . '' how to convert gasoline energy to kilowatt-hours ( kwh ) '' , retrieved on 7 january 2015 . however , a typical gasoline engine with 18 % efficiency can only recover the equivalent of 1694 wh/l . the energy density of a compressed air system can be more than doubled if the air is heated prior to expansion . in order to increase energy density , some systems may use gases that can be liquified or solidified . '' co 2 offers far greater compressibility than air when it transitions from gaseous to supercritical form . '' . emissions . compressed air cars could be emission-free at the exhaust . since a compressed air car 's source of energy is usually electricity , its total environmental impact depends on how clean the source of this electricity is . however , most air cars have petrol engines for different tasks . the emission can be compared to half of the amount of carbon dioxide produced by a toyota prius ( being around 0.34 pounds per mile ) . some engines can be fuelled otherwise considering different regions can have very different sources of power , ranging from high-emission power sources such as coal to zero-emission power sources . a given region can also change its electrical power sources over time , thereby improving or worsening total emissions . however , a 2009 study showed that even with very optimistic assumptions , air storage of energy is less efficient than chemical ( battery ) storage . . advantages . the principal advantages of an air powered engine is it uses no gasoline or other bio-carbon based fuel . high degrees of energy recovery can be accomplished with systems storing air using braking and pneumatic suspension . rotary engines and all mechanical and pneumatic parts can be manufactured with fiber reinforced thermosets or thermoplastics , reducing weight considerably and eliminating dependence of metallic resources . it makes easy to use active pneumatic suspension and pneumatic steering . transmission weight can be drastically reduced using in-wheel rotary engines . refueling may be done at home , but filling the tanks to full pressure would require compressors for 250-300 bars , which are not normally available for home standard utilization , considering the danger inherent at these pressure levels . as with gasoline , service stations would have to install the necessary air facilities if such cars became sufficiently popular to warrant it . compressed air engines reduce the cost of vehicle production , because there is no need to build a cooling system , spark plugs , starter motor , or mufflers . the rate of self-discharge is very low opposed to batteries that deplete their charge slowly over time . therefore , the vehicle may be left unused for longer periods of time than electric cars . expansion of the compressed air lowers its temperature ; this may be exploited for use as air conditioning . reduction or elimination of hazardous chemicals such as gasoline or battery acids/metals sweden 's lund university reports that buses could see an improvement in fuel efficiency of up to 60 percent using an air-hybrid system . but this only refers to hybrid air concepts ( due to recuperation of energy during braking ) , not compressed air-only vehicles . disadvantages . the principal disadvantages are the steps of energy conversion and transmission , because each inherently has loss . for combustion engine cars , the energy is lost when chemical energy in fossil fuels is converted by the engine to mechanical energy . for electric cars , a power plant 's electricity ( from whatever source ) is transmitted to the car 's batteries , which then transmits the electricity to the car 's motor , which converts it to mechanical energy . for compressed-air cars , the power plant 's electricity is transmitted to a compressor , which mechanically compresses the air into the car 's tank . the car 's engine then converts the compressed air to mechanical energy . additional concerns : when air expands in the engine it cools dramatically and must be heated to ambient temperature using a heat exchanger . the heating is necessary in order to obtain a significant fraction of the theoretical energy output . the heat exchanger can be problematic : while it performs a similar task to an intercooler for an internal combustion engine , the temperature difference between the incoming air and the working gas is smaller . in heating the stored air , the device gets very cold and may ice up in cool , moist climates . this also leads to the necessity of completely dehydrating the compressed air . if any humidity subsists in the compressed air , the engine will stop due to inner icing . removing the humidity completely requires additional energy that can not be reused and is lost . ( at 10g of water per m3 air -typical value in the summer- you have to take out 900 g of water in 90 m3 ; with a vaporization enthalpy of 2.26mj/kg you will need theoretically minimally 0.6 kwh ; technically , with cold drying this figure must be multiplied by 3 - 4 . moreover , dehydrating can only be done with professional compressors , so that a home charging will completely be impossible , or at least not at any reasonable cost . ) conversely , when air is compressed to fill the tank , its temperature increases . if the stored air is not cooled while the tank is being filled , then when the air cools off later , its pressure decreases and the available energy decreases . to mitigate this , the tank may be equipped with an internal heat-exchanger in order to cool the air quickly and efficiently while charging . alternatively , a spring may be used to store work from the air as it is inserted in the tank , thus maintaining a low pressure difference between the tank and recharger , which results in a lower temperature raise for the transferred air . refueling the compressed air container using a home or low-end conventional air compressor may take as long as 4 hours , though specialized equipment at service stations may fill the tanks in only 3 minutes . to store 2.5 kwh 300 bar in 300 liter reservoirs ( 90 m3 of air 1 bar ) , requires about 30 kwh of compressor energy ( with a single-stage adiabatic compressor ) , or approx . 21 kwh with an industrial standard multistage unit . that means a compressor power of 360 & nbsp ; kw is needed to fill the reservoirs in 5 minutes from a single stage unit , or 250 & nbsp ; kw for a multistage one . however , intercooling and isothermal compression is far more efficient and more practical than adiabatic compression , if sufficiently large heat exchangers are fitted . efficiencies of up to 65 % might perhaps be achieved , ( whereas current efficiency for large industrial compressors is max . 50 % ) however this is lower than the coulomb 's efficiency with lead acid batteries . the overall efficiency of a vehicle using compressed air energy storage , using the above refueling figures , is around 5-7 % . for comparison , well to wheel efficiency of a conventional internal-combustion drivetrain is about 14 % , early tests have demonstrated the limited storage capacity of the tanks ; the only published test of a vehicle running on compressed air alone was limited to a range of 7.22 & nbsp ; km . a 2005 study demonstrated that cars running on lithium-ion battery out-perform both compressed air and fuel cell vehicles more than threefold at the same speeds . mdi claimed in 2007 that an air car will be able to travel 140 & nbsp ; km in urban driving , and have a range of 80 & nbsp ; km with a top speed of on highways , when operating on compressed air alone but as of august 2017 have yet to produce a vehicle that matches this performance . a 2009 study found that '' even under highly optimistic assumptions the compressed-air car is significantly less efficient than a battery electric vehicle and produces more greenhouse gas emissions than a conventional gas-powered car with a coal intensive power mix . '' however , they also suggested , '' a pneumatic–combustion hybrid is technologically feasible , inexpensive and could eventually compete with hybrid electric vehicles . '' . crash safety . safety claims for light weight vehicle air tanks in severe collisions have not been verified . north american crash testing has not yet been conducted , and skeptics question the ability of an ultralight vehicle assembled with adhesives to produce acceptable crash safety results . shiva vencat , vice president of mdi and ceo of zero pollution motors , claims the vehicle would pass crash testing and meet u.s . safety standards . he insists that the millions of dollars invested in the aircar would not be in vain . to date , there has never been a lightweight , 100-plus mpg car which passed north american crash testing . technological advances may soon make this possible , but the aircar has yet to prove itself , and collision safety questions remain . the key to achieving an acceptable range with an air car is reducing the power required to drive the car , so far as is practical . this pushes the design towards minimizing weight . according to a report by the u.s . government 's national highway traffic safety administration , among 10 different classes of passenger vehicles , '' very small cars '' have the highest fatality rate per mile driven . for instance , a person driving 12,000 miles per year for 55 years would have a 1 % chance of being involved in a fatal accident . this is twice the fatality rate of the safest vehicle class , a '' large car '' . according to the data in this report , the number of fatal crashes per mile is only weakly correlated with the vehicle weight , having a correlation coefficient of just ( -0.45 ) . a stronger correlation is seen with the vehicle size within its class ; for example , '' large '' cars , pickups and suvs , have lower fatality rates than '' small '' cars , pickups and suvs . this is the case in 7 of the 10 classes , with the exception of mid-size vehicles , where minivans and mid-size cars are among the safest classes , while mid-size suvs are the second most fatal after very small cars . even though heavier vehicles sometimes are statistically safer , it is not necessarily the extra weight that causes them to be safer . the nhtsa report states : '' heavier vehicles have historically done a better job cushioning their occupants in crashes . their longer hoods and extra space in the occupant compartment provide an opportunity for a more gradual deceleration of the vehicle , and of the occupant within the vehicle . while it is conceivable that light vehicles could be built with similarly long hoods and mild deceleration pulses , it would probably require major changes in materials and design and/or taking weight out of their engines , accessories , etc . '' air cars may use low rolling resistance tires , which typically offer less grip than normal tires . in addition , the weight ( and price ) of safety systems such as airbags , abs and esc may discourage manufacturers from including them . developers and manufacturers . various companies are investing in the r & d of compressed air cars . overoptimistic reports of impending production date back to at least may 1999 . for instance , the mdi air car made its public debut in south africa in 2002 , and was predicted to be in production '' within six months '' in january 2004 . as of january 2009 , the air car never went into production in south africa . most of the cars under development also rely on using similar technology to low-energy vehicles in order to increase the range and performance of their cars . mdi . mdi has proposed a range of vehicles made up of airpod , oneflowair , cityflowair , miniflowair and multiflowair . learn everything about the compressed air cars ! . one of the main innovations of this company is its implementation of its '' active chamber '' , which is a compartment which heats the air ( through the use of a fuel ) in order to double the energy output . this 'innovation ' was first used in torpedoes in 1904 . tata motors . tata motors of india had planned to launch a car with an mdi compressed air engine in 2011 . in december 2009 tata 's vice president of engineering systems confirmed that the limited range and low engine temperatures were causing problems . tata motors announced in may 2012 that they have assessed the design passing phase 1 , the '' proof of the technical concept '' towards full production for the indian market . tata has moved onto phase 2 , '' completing detailed development of the compressed air engine into specific vehicle and stationary applications '' . tata motors enters second phase of air-car development gizmag.com , 2012-05-07 in february 2017 dr . tim leverton , president and head at advanced and product engineering at tata revealed was at a point of '' starting industrialisation '' with the first vehicles to be available by 2020 . other reports indicate tata is also looking at reviving plans for a compressed air version of the tata nano , which had previously been under consideration as part of their collaboration with mdi . . engineair pty ltd . engineair is an australian company which has produced prototypes of a variety of prototype small vehicles using an innovative rotary air engine designed by angelo di pietro . the company is seeking commercial partners to utilise its engine . . peugeot/citroën . peugeot and citroën announced that they intended to build a car that uses compressed air as an energy source . however , the car they are designing uses a hybrid system which also uses a gasoline engine ( which is used for propelling the car over 70 & nbsp ; km/h , or when the compressed air tank has been depleted ) . in january 2015 , there was '' disappointing news from france : psa peugeot citroen has put an indefinite hold on the development of its promising-sounding hybrid air powertrain , apparently because the company has been unable to find a development partner willing to split the huge costs of engineering the system . '' development costs are estimated to 500 million euro for the system , which would apparently have need to be fitted to around 500,000 cars a year to make sense . the head of the project left peugeot in 2014 . . apuq . apuq ( association de promotion des usages de la quasiturbine ) has made the apuq air car , a car powered by a quasiturbine . . see also . air engine charging station compressed air energy storage compressed air battery compressed air vehicles engine swap plug-in hybrid pneumatics . references . external links .