Thomas Bradwardine

life . bradwardine was born in sussex either at hartfield or at chichester , where his family was settled , members of the smaller gentry or burghers . bradwardine was a precocious student , educated at balliol college , oxford where he was a fellow by 1321 ; he took the degree of doctor of divinity , and acquired the reputation of a profound scholar , a skillful mathematics and an able theology . he was also a gifted logician with theories on the insolubles and in particular the liar paradox . bradwardine subsequently moved to merton college , oxford on a fellowship . he was afterwards raised to the high offices of chancellor of the university and professor of divinity . bradwardine ( like his contemporary william of occam ) was a culminating figure of the great intellectual movement at oxford that had begun in the 1240s . bradwardine was an ordinary secular cleric , which gave him intellectual freedom but deprived him of the security and wherewithal that the preaching orders would have afforded ; instead he turned to royal patronage . from being chancellor of the diocese of london as dean of st paul 's , he became chaplain and confessor to edward iii , whom he attended during his wars in france at the battle of crécy , where he preached at the victory mass , and at the subsequent siege of calais . edward repeatedly entrusted him with diplomatic missions . on his return to england , he was successively appointed prebendary of lincoln and dean ( 1348 ) . in 1349 the canons of the chapter at canterbury elected him archbishop following the death of archbishop john stratford , but edward iii withheld his consent , preferring his chancellor john de ufford , perhaps loth to lose his trusted confessor . after ufford died of the black death , 2 may , bradwardine went to receive confirmation from pope clement vi at avignon , but on his return he died of the plague at rochester norman f . cantor , in the wake of the plague : the black death and the world it made on 26 august 1349 , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 233 forty days after his consecration . he was buried at canterbury . chaucer in the nun 's priest 's tale ( line 476 ) ranks bradwardine with augustine and boethius . his great theological work , to modern eyes , is a treatise against the pelagians , entitled de causa dei contra pelagium et de virtute causarum . bradwardine 's major treatise argued that space was an infinite void in which god could have created other worlds , which he would rule as he ruled this one . the '' causes of virtue '' include the astrology , not as predestining a human career , but influencing a subject 's essential nature . this astrophysical treatise was not published until it was edited by sir henry savile and printed in london , 1618 ; its circulation in manuscript was very limited . the implications of the infinite void were revolutionary ; to have pursued them would have threatened the singular relationship of man and this natural world to god ( cantor 2001 ) ; in it he treated theology mathematically . he wrote also de geometria speculativa ( printed at paris , 1530 ) ; de arithmetica practica ( printed at paris , 1502 ) ; de proportionibus velocitatum in motibus ( 1328 ) ( printed at paris , 1495 ; venice , 1505 ) ; de quadratura circuli ( paris , 1495 ) ; and an ars memorative , sloane manuscripts . no . 3974 in the british museum—earning from the pope the title of the profound doctor . another text , de continuo is more tenuously credited to him and thought to be written sometime between 1328 and 1325 . science . thumb merton college sheltered a group of dons devoted to natural science , mainly physics , astronomy and mathematics , rivals of the intellectuals at the university of paris . bradwardine was one of these oxford calculators , studying mechanics with william heytesbury , richard swineshead , and john dumbleton . the oxford calculators distinguished kinematics from dynamics , emphasising kinematics , and investigating instantaneous velocity . they first formulated the mean speed theorem : a body moving with constant velocity travels the same distance as an accelerated body in the same time if its velocity is half the final speed of the accelerated body . they also demonstrated this theorem & nbsp ; — the foundation of '' the law of falling bodies '' & nbsp ; — long before galileo , who is generally credited with it . the mathematical physicist and historian of science clifford truesdell , wrote : clifford truesdell , essays in the history of mechanics , ( springer-verlag , new york , 1968 ) , p . 30 in tractatus de proportionibus ( 1328 ) , bradwardine extended the theory of proportions of eudoxus of cnidus to anticipate the concept of exponential growth , later developed by the bernoulli and euler , with interest as a special case . arguments for the mean speed theorem ( above ) require the modern mathematical concept of limit , so bradwardine had to use arguments of his day . mathematician and mathematical historian carl benjamin boyer writes , '' bradwardine developed the musical note of double or triple or , more generally , what we would call ' n-tuple ' proportion '' . boyer also writes that '' the works of bradwardine had contained some fundamentals of trigonometry gleaned from islam sources '' . yet '' bradwardine and his oxford colleagues did not quite make the breakthrough to modern science '' ( cantor 2001 , p . & nbsp ; 122 ) . the most essential missing tool was calculus . art of memory . bradwardine was also a practitioner and exponent of the art of memory , a loosely associated group of mnemonic principles and techniques used to organise memory impressions , improve recall , and assist in the combination and 'invention ' of ideas . his de memoria artificiali ( c . 1335 ) discusses memory training current during his time . mary carruthers , the book of memory , cambridge , 1990 , p . 130 edith wilks dolnikowski , '' de memoria artificiali : time and memory in the thought of thomas bradwardine . '' in : constructions of time in the late middle ages . ed . carol poster and richard utz . evanston , il : northwestern university press , 1997 . pp . 197–203 . . legacy . bradwardine 's theories on the insolubilia including the liar paradox were a great influence on the work of jean buridan . medieval work on the liar paradox has been most recently studied by paul spade and stephen read ( for which see spade 's entry , '' insolubles , '' in the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy , which offers a brief exposition ) . bradwardine 's work on kinematics was also influential to buridan . marshall clagett , the science of mechanics in the middle ages . madison . 1959 . p . 331 . his de causa dei influenced the theology of john wycliffe on grace and predestination . . works . . latin works and english translations . insolubilia ( insolubles ) , latin text and english translation by stephen read , leuven , peeters editions ( dallas medieval texts and translations , 10 ) , 2010 . de insolubilibus ( on insolubles ) , edited by marie louise roure in 'la problématique des propositions insolubles du xiiie siècle et du début du xive , suivie de l'édition des traités de william shyreswood , walter burleigh et thomas bradwardine ' , archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen age 37 , 1970 : 205–326 . de incipit et desinit ( on 'it begins ' and 'it ceases ' ) , ed . lauge o . nielsen , cahiers de l'institut du moyen age grec et latin 42 , 1982 : 1–83 . geometria speculativa ( speculative geometry ) , latin text and english translation with an introduction and a commentary by george molland , stuttgart : steiner verlag , 1989 . arithmetica speculativa ( speculative arithmetic ) parisiis : g . marchant , 1495 de proportionibus velocitatum in motibus ( on the ratios of velocities in motions ) latin text and english translation by h . lamar crosby , jr . in : 'thomas of bradwardine : his tractatus de proportionibus : its significance for the development of mathematical physics ' , madison , wi : university of wisconsin press , 1955 . de continuo ( on the continuum ) , edited by john emery murdoch in 'geometry and the continuum in the fourteenth century : a philosophical analysis of thomas bradwardine 's tractatus de continuo ' , phd thesis , university of wisconsin , 1957 . de futuris contingentibus ( on future contingents ) : edited by de causa dei contra pelagium et de virtute causarum ad suos mertonenses , libri tres ( in defense of god against the pelagians and on the power of causes , in three books ) , edited by henry savile , london : 1618 ; reprinted at frankfurt : minerva , 1964 . commentary on the sentences of peter lombard : some questions found in a manuscript at the bibliothèque nationale de paris are published in : j.-f . genest and katherine tachau , 'la lecture de thomas bradwardine sur les sentences ' , archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen age 57 , 1990 : 301–6 . de memoria artificiali adquirenda ( on acquiring a trained memory ) , ed . mary carruthers , journal of medieval latin , 2 , ( 1992 ) : 25–43 ; translated in carruthers m . , the book of memory : a study of memory in medieval culture , new york : cambridge univ . press . 1990 , pp . & nbsp ; 281–8 ; carruthers m . and ziolkowski j . , the medieval craft of memory , philadelphia : univ . of pennsylvania press , 2002 , pp . & nbsp ; 205–14 . gillmeister h . ( ed . ) , '' an intriguing fourteenth-century document : thomas bradwardine 's de arte memorativa '' . archiv für das studium der neueren sprachen und literaturen 220 , 1983 , pp . & nbsp ; 111–4 . green-pedersen n.-j . ( ed . ) , '' bradwardine ( ? ) on ockham ’ s doctrine of consequences : an edition '' . cahiers de l ’ institute de moyen age grec et latin , 42 , 1982 , pp . & nbsp ; 85–150 . lamar crosby h . ( ed . ) , thomas of bradwardine : his tractatus de proportionibus : its significance for the development of mathematical physics . madison , university of wisconsin press , 1955 . see also . list of roman catholic scientist-clerics . citations . references . a history of mathematics ( pp . & nbsp ; 288 , 302 ) , carl o . boyer , princeton university press , princeton , 1984 . the science of mechanics in the middle ages , marshall claggett , university of wisconsin press , madison , 1960 . tractatus de proportionibus , its significance for the development of mathematical physics , h . l . crosby , university of wisconsin press , madison , 1955 . essays in the history of mechanics , clifford truesdell , springer-verlag , new york , 1968 , qc122.t7 . see quétif–échard , script . praedic . ( 1719 ) , i . 744 w . f . hook , lives of the archbishops of canterbury , vol . iv . in the wake of the plague , norman f . cantor , simon & schuster , 2001 . '' death comes to the archbishop '' : a chapter sets bradwardine 's political and intellectual career in his oxford milieu , in the context of the black death . . further reading . heiko oberman , archbishop thomas bradwardine , a fourteenth century augustinian : a study of his theology in its historical perspective , utrecht : kemink & zoon , 1957 . gordon leff , bradwardine and the pelagians : a study of his '' de causa dei '' and its opponents , cambridge , england : cambridge university press , 1957 . read , stephen , '' paradox , closure and indirect speech reports '' , logica universalis , 2015 . external links . thomas bradwardine at the mactutor history of mathematics archive thomas bradwardine . geometria speculativa at somni