Super Furry Animals

history . 1990–1993 : formation . super furry animals formed in cardiff after being in various other welsh bands and techno outfits in the area . ifans , ieuan and pryce had been together since the early 1990s and had toured france as a techno group . after bunford and ciaran ( ieuan 's younger brother ) joined , they wrote some songs , and in 1995 signed to ankst , a welsh indie label . the band are considered to be part of the renaissance of welsh music ( and art , and literature ) in the 1990s : other welsh bands of the time include the manic street preachers , stereophonics , catatonia and gorky 's zygotic mynci . the name of the band came from t-shirts being printed by rhys ' sister . she was making super furry animals t-shirts for the fashion and music collective acid casuals ( variants of whose name have appeared throughout super furry animals ' career – for example , in their song '' the placid casual '' , their record label placid casual ) . the band has also made reference to blur , elvis costello , and wynton marsalis as major influences in their work . . 1994–1995 : early recordings . the earliest super furry animals track commercially available is '' dim brys : dim chwys '' , recorded in 1994 for radio cymru : an ambient piece , the track shows the band 's techno roots . however , by the time it was released ( on the '' triskedekaphilia '' compilation album in august 1995 ) , the band had already put out their debut ep on the ankst label . the llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyndrobwllantysiliogogogochynygofod ( in space ) ep appeared in june 1995 and has been listed in the guinness book of records as having the longest-ever title for an ep . the moog droog ep followed in october 1995 , named after the synthesiser manufacturer robert moog and the nadsat term for '' friend '' in a clockwork orange . the ep 's title is also a pun on the welsh '' mwg drwg '' , meaning '' wacky baccy '' ( slang for cannabis , more literally '' bad ( or naughty ) smoke '' ) . the lyrics on all the tracks on both eps were in welsh , except for '' god ! show me magic '' from '' moog droog '' . after gigging in london in late 1995 , they were noticed by creation records boss alan mcgee at the camden monarch club , who signed them to his label . creation was also home to primal scream , my bloody valentine and teenage fanclub , and had recently found massive commercial success with oasis . the band have said that having watched their gig , mcgee asked them if they could sing in english rather than welsh in future shows . in fact , by this stage they were singing in english , but mcgee did n't realise because their welsh accents were so strong . the super furry animals received some criticism in the welsh media for singing in english , something which the band felt '' completely pissed '' about . according to drummer dafydd ieuan : '' it all started when we played this festival in west wales , and for some reason the welsh media started foaming at the mouth because we were singing songs in welsh and english . but they get the dubliners playing and they do n't sing in irish . it 's ridiculous . '' the band have claimed that the decision to sing in english was taken in order to broaden their fanbase . . 1996–1998 : fuzzy logic to out spaced . in february 1996 , the band 's debut on creation , '' hometown unicorn '' , became new musical express 's single of the week , chosen by guest reviewers pulp , and the first super furry animals single to chart in the uk top 50 , peaking at no . & nbsp ; 47 . the follow-up , a re-recording of '' god ! show me magic '' , charted at no . & nbsp ; 33 upon release in april 1996 and also became nme single of the week . rawer than the '' moog droog '' version , it clocks in at 1 min 50 secs . in may , their debut album fuzzy logic was released , to wide critical acclaim . sales were slow , with the album peaking at no . & nbsp ; 23 in the charts , but it garnered a little more interest when next single '' something 4 the weekend '' ( a reworked , more mellow version of the album track ) was given considerable radio airplay and charted at no . & nbsp ; 18 in july 1996 . the final single from the album , '' if you do n't want me to destroy you '' , was to have been backed by a track called '' the man do n't give a fuck '' . however , there were problems in clearing a sample from '' showbiz kids '' by steely dan which formed the basis of the chorus , and it was switched for a different track . the single charted at no . & nbsp ; 18 . however , super furry animals regarded '' the man do n't give a fuck '' as one of their best songs and continued their efforts to clear the sample . when they managed this , there was no upcoming release to attach it to – so it came out as a limited edition single in its own right , in december 1996 . this ultimately cemented its legendary status and did much to establish super furry animals as cult heroes , as the song contained the word '' fuck '' over 50 times and therefore received practically no airplay . however , it hit no . & nbsp ; 22 in the charts and became super furry animals ' standard closing number when they played live . in early 1997 , super furry animals embarked on the nme brats tour and completed work on a speedy follow-up to fuzzy logic . two singles preceded the new album , '' hermann ♥ 's pauline '' in may and '' the international language of screaming '' in july , hitting no . & nbsp ; 26 and no . & nbsp ; 24 respectively : these releases were the first to feature cover art from pete fowler , who went on to design the sleeves of all their releases up until 2007 's hey venus . the album , radiator , hit shelves in august . the reviews were , if anything , better than those for fuzzy logic , and it sold more quickly than its predecessor , reaching a peak of no . & nbsp ; 8 : however , creation did not serve the album particularly well by releasing it just four days after the long-awaited new effort from oasis , be here now . two further singles , '' play it cool '' ( released september 1997 ) and '' demons '' ( november 1997 ) both hit no . & nbsp ; 27 in the charts , suggesting that super furry animals had hit a commercial ceiling though which they were struggling to break . however , they had established themselves as favourites in the music press , a cut above the majority of their britpop peers . after a chance to think about their music and their direction , super furry animals decided to record a new ep in early 1998 at gorwel owen 's house and released it in may . this was the ice hockey hair ep , widely held as one of their finest moments . ( '' ice hockey hair '' is a slang term for a mullet . ) featuring four tracks , the ep sampled from black uhuru . the title track , a melodic and very moving epic , gained airplay while '' smokin ' '' . in a melody maker interview , super furry animals said the '' smokin ' '' referred to smoking haddock , or to truck drivers ' tyres when they 're 'burnin ' the roads ' . it became their most successful single up to this point , hitting no . & nbsp ; 12 in the charts and leading to a memorable appearance on '' top of the pops '' . in november 1998 , the album out spaced was released . this was a collection of songs from the 1995 ankst releases ( including '' dim brys : dim chwys '' ) , the band 's favourite b-sides , plus '' the man do n't give a fuck '' and '' smokin ' '' . a limited edition appeared in a comedy rubber sleeve , shaped like a nipple . 1999–2000 : guerrilla and mwng . in 1999 , nme readers named them 'best new band ' in january ( this despite the fact it was now three years since they released their debut album ) . in may , the single '' northern lites '' was released and made no . & nbsp ; 11 in the charts . a dense production , with steel drums clattering out a calypso rhythm whilst rhys sang an irreverent lyric about the el niño-southern oscillation weather phenomenon , it was an apt taster for the new album , guerrilla . recorded at the real world studios , the album retained sfa 's pop melodies but took a less guitar-centric approach to their execution and was their most experimental work to date . layers of samples over brass , percussion and gruff 's melodic singing produced an album which took the freewheeling approach of 1960s groups such as the beatles , the beach boys and the velvet underground and updated it to the late 1990s . the album swung from glam and garage rock numbers ( '' night vision '' , '' the teacher '' ) to novelty techno ( '' wherever i lay my phone ( that 's my home ) '' ) , ambient indietronica ( '' some things come from nothing '' ) and upbeat drum and bass ( '' the door to this house remains open '' ) . for the cover art , pete fowler created the band 's first three-dimensional models , rather than the paintings he had supplied for the radiator album and singles . after playing several of the summer festivals , sfa released '' fire in my heart '' , the most soulful track from guerrilla , in august and saw it chart at no . & nbsp ; 25 . they then embarked on a us and uk tour . sfa finished their uk tour at the cardiff international arena in cardiff , where they showcased the first ever concert in surround sound and broadcast it on the world wide web . january 2000 involved a series of changes for sfa . the last single from guerrilla , '' do or die '' , was released and made no . & nbsp ; 20 . it was also the last single sfa released on creation records , as founder alan mcgee set off to pursue other interests . it had always been sfa 's plan to release their next album on their own label , placid casual , as it would be a deliberate sidestep from their recent work : a largely acoustic album of welsh language songs entitled mwng . meaning '' mane '' , its lilting melodies established that sfa 's songwriting did not have to fall back on head-spinning production tricks . a limited edition ( of 3000 ) 7 & nbsp ; inch record , '' ysbeidiau heulog '' ( meaning '' sunny intervals '' ) preceded mwng in may 2000 . it came backed with '' charge '' , a hard-rock jam recorded as a peel session for the bbc . the album , released the same month , sold remarkably well for a non-english lp – it made no . & nbsp ; 11 in the charts – and received a rare distinction for a pop record , being commended in parliament for its efforts in keeping the welsh language alive . 2000 also saw the furries contribute two tracks , free now and peter blake 2000 , for the liverpool sound collage project , which was nominated for a grammy . they undertook this remixing of unreleased beatles recordings at the invitation of paul mccartney , whom they had met at the nme awards , where they had won best live act . 2001–2003 : rings around the world and phantom power . with the demise of creation , sfa needed to find a new label for their next album . sony had long held a substantial stake in creation and offered deals to many ex-creation artists , including sfa , who signed with one of sony 's subsidiaries , epic . the band pushed for a deal which allowed them to take a new album elsewhere if the label was n't interested in releasing it – thereby allowing them to find a home for any esoteric project they might want to undertake in the future . the greater resources afforded them by epic were apparent in their first album for the label , rings around the world , an album that recaptured the cohesive , experimental feel of guerrilla but more song-driven and sonically expansive . it is cited by many critics and fans alike as their most polished and accessible work . again the first single was a good indication of what was to come : '' juxtapozed with u '' , released in july 2001 , was a lush soul record which made no . & nbsp ; 14 in the charts . the album followed in the same month and major label marketing muscle made it their biggest-seller to date , reaching no . & nbsp ; 3 in the album charts . one of the tracks from the album , '' receptacle for the respectable '' featured paul mccartney on '' carrot and celery rhythm track '' ( a homage to his performance on the beach boys ' '' vegetables '' ) . sfa unleashed their experimental side on tracks such as '' sidewalk serfer girl '' ( which switches between light techno-pop and hardcore punk ) , '' a touch sensitive '' ( gloomy trip-hop ) and '' no sympathy '' ( which descends into chaotic drum ' n'bass ) , but also apparent was an angrier edge to the lyrics : '' run ! christian , run ! '' seemed to be an attack on the complacency of organised religion . rings around the world is also remarkable for being the world 's first simultaneous release of an audio and dvd album . it was nominated for the mercury music prize in 2001 . the ceremony took place on the day after the terror attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon , and sfa 's performance of the album track '' it 's not the end of the world ? '' took on a somewhat bitter edge . it was released as a single in january 2002 ( chart no . & nbsp ; 30 ) , following '' ( drawing ) rings around the world '' ( chart no . & nbsp ; 28 ) : neither had that much impact but still received some airplay , notably on bbc radio 2 . the next album , phantom power , relied less on sound experimentation and proved to be a more stripped-down , back-to-basics recording in contrast to the orchestral rings around the world . it was also released as both a cd and dvd album in july 2003 , preceded by a single , '' golden retriever '' , in june ( chart no . & nbsp ; 13 ) . although the reviews for the album were generally good and it sold well initially , charting at no . & nbsp ; 4 , the album broke little new ground by sfa 's standards and the band had fallen out of fashion , receiving little coverage in the music press . another single , '' hello sunshine '' , hit no . & nbsp ; 31 in october 2003 and was eventually featured on the soundtrack of the o.c . 2004–2005 : phantom phorce to love kraft . perhaps recognising that their approach to phantom power had been a little too straightforward , the group followed it up in 2004 with a remix version , phantom phorce , with tracks reworked by the likes of killa kela , four tet and brave captain . they accompanied this with a download single , '' slow life '' , which also included the track '' motherfokker '' , a collaboration with goldie lookin chain , both tracks are now available as a free download via the placid casual website . in october 2004 the band released a best of album , songbook : the singles , vol . 1 , accompanied by a single – a live version of '' the man do n't give a fuck '' ( chart no . & nbsp ; 16 ) . in early 2005 , gruff rhys released a solo album yr atal genhedlaeth , ( '' the stuttering generation '' , and also a play on words as '' atal genhedlu '' means contraception ) , sung all in welsh . gruff played most of the instruments himself , mainly using guitars , drums and his own multi-tracked voice . the band also selected tracks for a volume in the under the influence series of compilations , in which artists present the songs that they feel have most contributed to their sound . in 2005 super furry animals were asked to put together the sixth release from the 'under the influence ' series - under the influence ( compilation album ) . each member chose 3 track each - pryce 's selections were dawn penn '' you do n't love me ( no , no , no ) '' , dennis wilson '' lady '' and mc5 '' kick out the jams '' . also in 2005 it was reported that the band turned down a us 1.8m advertising deal with coca-cola after visiting a coca-cola plantation in colombia with charity war on want , where they heard of management-directed killings of trade-union members . the company were asking for use of '' hello sunshine '' as part of their campaign . in a statement to british magazine q , coca-cola denied the allegations , stating they had been '' an exemplary member of the business community '' in colombia . in august 2005 , super furry animals released their seventh studio effort , love kraft , recorded in spain . this represented a departure from their previous working methods : although all five members had always contributed to the development of the songs , rhys had been the main songwriter . on love kraft this was no longer the case , as rhys , bunford , ieuan and ciaran all contributed songs and lead vocals . there was only one single from the album , '' lazer beam '' , released on 15 august ( chart no . & nbsp ; 28 ) . the laid-back ambience recalls early-1970s beach boys albums such as surf 's up ( which sfa have referred to as one of their favourite albums ) , whilst the heavy use of strings suggested the likes of scott walker and curtis mayfield . the album 's cool commercial reception ( it charted at just no . & nbsp ; 19 ) suggested that they had returned to their familiar status of critically acclaimed cult favourites . love kraft was also the last album released under epic records , as their contact expired in early 2006 . 2006–2008 : rough trade and hey venus ! . ciaran 's side project acid casuals released their debut album omni in january 2006 on the placid casual label . drummer ieuan formed a band known as the peth which has been described by rhys in various magazine articles as '' satanic abba '' : the band also reunites rhys ifans with the sfa family , as he takes lead vocal duties . the band signed to rough trade records during 2006 and are reportedly working on three projects for the label . gruff rhys has also signed for rough trade records as a solo artist in his own right and released a single on 7 '' vinyl and download entitled '' candylion '' in late 2006 which preceded an album of the same name that was released during the second week of 2007 . unlike his debut yr atal genhedlaeth , candylion is primarily sung in english but has two welsh tracks and one in '' bad spanish '' : it is primarily an acoustic album , and came about because rhys has written several acoustic pop songs that did n't fit with the direction of the new sfa record . during this time some of the bands ' music was used prominently in the rock-afire explosion documentary movie , namely hello sunshine and some things come from nothing . recording sessions took place in a chateau in the south of france in 2007 for the band 's first release for rough trade , hey venus ! , which was released on 27 august that year . gruff himself described the record as '' speaker blowing '' . the album 's first single , '' show your hand '' , failed to enter the top 40 , their first to do so since 1996 's '' hometown unicorn '' , despite modest airplay . the album itself fared much better , peaking at no . & nbsp ; 11 and was a slight improvement from the sales of love kraft . the album became their first to enter the itunes music store top 10 album charts , peaking at no . & nbsp ; 9 . over the 2007 christmas period sfa released a single , '' the gift that keeps giving '' , free from their website . 2009 & ndash ; 2014 : dark days/light years and hiatus . on 16 march 2009 , super furry animals released their ninth studio album , dark days/light years , digitally via their website . the album 's progress was recorded in a series of short films that were shown on the band 's website in the build-up to the release . later in march , they performed the record in its entirety through an exclusive stream on their website . a physical release on rough trade records followed on 21 april , resulting in a number 23 uk chart placement . dark days/light years notably featured a guest appearance from nick mccarthy of franz ferdinand on '' inaugural trams . '' dark days/light years received strong critical feedback , with the guardian writing that '' it has more spark and invention than most teen bands manage on their debuts . '' in 2010 , super furry animals went on what became a five-year hiatus , as bassist guto pryce revealed in an interview with wales online . pryce noted that the band expected to reconvene as soon as the members finished with the various projects they were working on . super furry animals reconvened for one performance on 29 february 2012 at cardiff city stadium before a wales v costa rica gary speed memorial match , in tribute to the late welsh footballer and team manager . in 2014 , craft brewer the celt experience created a tribute '' fuzzy beer '' in collaboration with the band . . 2015 & ndash ; 2016 : reunion . in may 2015 , the band played several gigs from early may to september to accompany a major reissue of their 15-year-old album mwng , which had been out of print . the same month a biography , rise of the super furry animals , was published by harpercollins . in january 2016 , the band announced their first north american tour in six years . in may 2016 , the band released '' bing bong '' , their first single in seven years . the song was released to celebrate the wales national football team 's qualification for uefa euro 2016 . they headlined the caught by the river festival in august 2016 , and announced the re-release of fuzzy logic . a compilation album , zoom ! the best of 1995–2016 , was released on 4 november 2016 . the final tour of their reunion , in which they played both fuzzy logic and radiator in full across the uk and ireland , took place in december 2016 . . 2017 & ndash ; present : second hiatus and das koolies . in september 2018 , the official super furry animals twitter feed posted an announcement of a multi-disc set of recordings made at the bbc to be released on 23 november 2018 . in 2019 bunford , ciaran , pryce , and ieuan reformed without rhys under the name das koolies , an alter ego sfa used around 2000 for an experimental electronic album that was never officially released . das koolies released their debut single '' it 's all about the dolphins '' on 29 january 2020 . according to ciaran , das koolies is now their main focus ; they are no longer focusing on anything from super furry animals . . discography . fuzzy logic ( 1996 ) radiator ( 1997 ) guerrilla ( 1999 ) mwng ( 2000 ) rings around the world ( 2001 ) phantom power ( 2003 ) love kraft ( 2005 ) hey venus ! ( 2007 ) dark days/light years ( 2009 ) . references . external links . super furry animals biography from bbc wales