Edsel

the wrong car at the wrong time ” . one of the external forces working against the edsel brand was the onset of an economic recession in late 1957 . compounding edsel 's problems was the fact that the car had to compete with well-established nameplates from the big three , such as pontiac , oldsmobile , buick , dodge and desoto , as well as with its sister division mercury , which had never been a stellar sales success . to make matters still worse , as a new make , edsel had no established brand loyalty with buyers , as its competing makes had . even if the 1957–1958 recession had not occurred , edsel would have been entering a shrinking marketplace . in the early 1950s , when the '' e '' car was in its earliest stages of development , ford executive vice president ernest r . breech had convinced ford management that the medium-priced market segment offered great untapped opportunity . at the time , breech 's assessment was basically correct ; in 1955 , pontiac , buick and dodge had sold a combined two million units . but by the fall of 1957 , when edsels were introduced , the market had changed drastically . independent manufacturers in the medium-priced field were drifting to insolvency . hoping to reverse its losses , packard acquired studebaker , which was also in financial difficulty . the board decided to stop production under the venerable packard badge after 1958 . the 1957–58 packards were little more than studebakers badged as packards ( also known as '' packardbakers '' ) . attempting to capitalize on the emerging consumer interest in economy cars , american motors shifted its focus to its compact rambler models and discontinued its pre-merger brands , nash and hudson , after the 1957 model year . sales of chrysler 's desoto marque dropped dramatically from its 1957 high by over 50 % in 1958 . when desoto sales failed to rebound during the 1959 model year , plans were made in highland park to discontinue the nameplate by 1961 . sales for most car manufacturers , even those not introducing new models , were down . among domestic makes , only rambler and lincoln produced more cars in 1958 than in 1957 . customers started buying more fuel-efficient automobiles , particularly volkswagen beetles , which were selling at rates exceeding 50,000 a year in the u.s . from 1957 onward . edsels were equipped with powerful engines and offered brisk acceleration , but they also required premium fuel , and their fuel economy , especially in city driving , was poor even by late-1950s standards . ford motor company had conducted the right marketing study , but it came up with the wrong product to fill the gap between ford and mercury . by 1958 , buyers had become fascinated with economy cars , and a large car like an edsel was seen as too expensive to buy and own . when ford introduced the falcon in 1959 , it sold over 400,000 units in its first year . ford 's investment in expanded plant capacity and additional tooling for edsels helped make the company 's subsequent success with the falcon possible . by 1965 , the market for medium-priced cars had recovered , and this time , ford had the right car ; the galaxie 500 ltd . the ltd 's success led chevrolet to introduce the caprice as a mid-1965 upscale trim option on its top-of-the-line impala four-door hardtop . '' edsel , a difficult name to place '' . the name of the car , edsel , is also often cited as a further reason for its lack of popularity . naming the vehicle after edsel ford was proposed early in its development . however , the ford family strongly opposed its use . henry ford ii declared that he did not want his father 's good name spinning around on thousands of hubcaps . ford also ran internal studies to decide on a name , and even dispatched employees to stand outside movie theaters to poll audiences as to what their feelings were on several ideas . they reached no conclusions . ford retained the advertising firm foote , cone & belding to come up with a name . when the agency issued its report , citing over 6,000 possibilities , ford 's ernest breech commented that they had been hired to develop one name , not 6,000 . early favorites for the name brand included citation , corsair , pacer , and ranger , which were ultimately chosen for the vehicle 's series names . david wallace , manager of marketing research , and coworker bob young unofficially invited freethinker poet marianne moore for input and suggestions . moore 's unorthodox contributions ( among them '' utopian turtletop , '' '' pastelogram , '' '' turcotinga , '' '' resilient bullet , '' '' andante con moto '' and '' mongoose civique '' ) were meant to stir creative thought and were not officially authorized or contractual in nature . by the instruction of ernest breech , who was chairing a board meeting in the absence of henry ford ii , the car was finally called '' edsel '' in honor of edsel ford , former company president and son of henry ford . reliability . even though edsels shared basic technology with other ford cars of the era , a number of issues caused reliability problems , mostly with the 1958 models . reports of mechanical flaws with the cars surfaced , due primarily to lack of quality control and confusion of parts with other ford models . ford never dedicated a stand-alone factory solely to edsel model production . the 1958 edsels were assembled in both mercury and ford factories . the longer-wheelbase models , citation and corsair , were produced alongside the mercury products , while the shorter-wheelbase models , pacer and ranger , were produced alongside ford products . workers assembling fords and mercurys often found the task of assembling the occasional edsel that moved down the line burdensome , because it required them to change tools and parts bins , then switch back to resume assembling fords or mercurys after completing assembly on edsels . the workers were also expected to accommodate edsel assembly with no adjustment in their hourly quota of ford and mercury production . consequently , the desired quality control of the different edsel models proved difficult to achieve , even when the fords and mercurys were satisfactorily assembled on the same lines . many edsels actually left the assembly lines unfinished . uninstalled parts were placed in the trunks along with installation instructions for dealership mechanics , some of whom never installed the additional parts at all . some dealers did not even receive all the parts . in the march 1958 issue of popular mechanics , 16 % of edsel owners reported poor workmanship , with complaints ranging from faulty welding to power steering failure . in its test car , popular mechanics tested for these problems and discovered others , notably a badly leaking trunk during rain , and the odometer showing fewer than actual miles traveled . . design controversies . . body design . undoubtedly , edsel 's most memorable design feature was its trademark '' horsecollar '' grille , which was quite distinct from other cars of the period . according to a popular joke at the time , edsels '' resembled an oldsmobile sucking a lemon '' , while automotive critic dan neil cites the grille 's vaginal appearance . many others compared the grille 's shape to a toilet seat . according to thomas e . bonsall 's book , disaster in dearborn ( 2002 ) , it was assistant stylist bob '' robin '' jones , who suggested a vertical motif for the front end of the '' e-car '' . edsel 's front-end ensemble as it eventually appeared bore little resemblance , if any , to the original concept . roy brown , the original chief designer on the edsel project , had envisioned a slender , almost delicate opening in the center . engineers , fearing engine cooling problems , vetoed the intended design , so a ring design was suggested . ernest breech then demanded the grille be taller and wider , which led to the now-infamous '' horsecollar '' . the vertical grille theme , while improved for the 1959 models , was discontinued for the 1960 models , which were similar to ford models of the same year , although coincidentally , the new front-end design was very similar to that of the 1959 pontiac . complaints also surfaced about the taillights on 1958-model edsel station wagons . the lenses were boomerang-shaped and placed in a reverse fashion . at a distance , they appeared as arrows pointed in the opposite direction of the turn being made . when the left turn signal flashed , its arrow shape pointed right , and vice versa . however , there was little that could be done to give the ford-based station wagons a unique appearance from the rear , because corporate management had insisted that no sheetmetal could be changed . only the taillights and trim could be touched . there was room for separate turn signals in addition to the boomerangs , but the u.s . industry had never supplied them up to that point , and they were probably never seriously considered . powertrain features . the teletouch pushbutton automatic transmission selector was an extremely complex feature . it proved problematic in part because the steering wheel hub , where the pushbuttons were located , was the traditional location of the horn button . some drivers inadvertently shifted gears when they intended to sound the horn . while edsels were fast , the location of the transmission pushbuttons was not conducive to street racing . there were also jokes among stoplight drag racers about the buttons : d for drag , l for leap , and r for race ( instead of drive , low and reverse ) . the control wires for teletouch were also routed too close to the exhaust manifold , which often caused unpredictable movement of the selector mechanism and , in some cases , complete failure . the electrical design required drivers to shift from park to reverse to neutral to drive , in that order , to avoid overloading the teletouch motor . the motor was also not powerful enough to bring the car out of park while on a hill , so dealerships would instruct drivers to set the parking brake before pushing the park button . mechanics of the time were wary of the ford mel engine because its perfectly flat cylinder heads lacked distinct combustion chambers . the heads were set at an angle , with '' roof '' pistons forming both a squish zone on one side and a combustion chamber on the other . combustion thus took place entirely within the cylinder bore . this design was similar to chevrolet big-block engine , which was also introduced in 1958 . while the design reduced the cost of manufacture and may also have helped minimize carbon buildup , it was also unfamiliar to many mechanics . company politics and the role of robert mcnamara . following world war ii , henry ford ii retained robert mcnamara as one of the '' whiz kids '' to help turn ford around . mcnamara 's cost-cutting and cost-containment skills helped ford emerge from its near-collapse after the war . as a result , mcnamara eventually amassed a considerable amount of power at ford . mcnamara was very much a throwback to henry ford in that , like the elder ford , mcnamara was committed to the ford marque to the almost total exclusion of the company 's other products . thus , mcnamara had little use for the continental , lincoln , mercury and edsel brand cars made by the company . mcnamara opposed the formation of the separate divisions for continental , lincoln , mercury , and edsel cars , and moved to consolidate lincoln , mercury , and edsel into the m-e-l division . mcnamara saw to it that the continental program was canceled and that the model was merged into the lincoln range for 1958 . he next set his sights on edsel by maneuvering for elimination of the dual wheelbases and separate bodies used for 1958 . instead , edsels would share the ford platform and use ford 's inner body structure for 1959 . by 1960 , edsels emerged as little more than a ford with different trim . mcnamara also moved to reduce edsel 's advertising budget for 1959 , and for 1960 , he virtually eliminated it . the final blow came in the fall of 1959 , when mcnamara convinced henry ford ii and the rest of ford 's management that edsel was doomed and that it was time to end production before edsel bled the company dry . mcnamara also attempted to discontinue the lincoln nameplate , but that effort ended with elwood engel 's now classic redesign of 1961 . mcnamara left ford when he was named secretary of defense by president john f . kennedy . during the 1964 presidential election , republican nominee barry goldwater blamed mcnamara , then secretary of defense , for edsel 's failure . eventually , ford 's former executive vice president ernest r . breech , who was a financial contributor to goldwater , wrote to the senator 's campaign , explaining that '' mr . mcnamara . had nothing to do with the plans for the edsel car or any part of the program . '' however , the charge continued to be leveled against mcnamara for years . during his time as head of the world bank , mcnamara instructed his public affairs officer to distribute copies of breech 's letter to the press whenever the accusation was made . the ho chi minh museum in hanoi features an edsel crashing through a wall , intended to symbolically represent us military failure in the vietnam war . mcnamara became the us secretary for defense after his career at ford , and oversaw the escalation of the us military presence in vietnam . vehicles . edsel citation edsel corsair edsel pacer edsel ranger edsel bermuda edsel villager edsel roundup edsel comet ( concept ) . epilogue . edsels as mercurys . . comet . while the edsel would cost ford over 250 million ( in 1958 dollars ) , the project would see longer-term benefits for the company , as ford invested over 100 million to build compact cars over the 1960s . prior to the closure of the edsel division , the brand was intending to release the edsel comet compact for the 1960 model year , sharing a body with the ford falcon . running prototypes of sedans and station wagons were developed into november 1959 ( only days before the closure of edsel ) . the design was approved for production , with the comet sold by lincoln-mercury under no divisional branding . though sharing chassis underpinnings and many body stampings with the falcon , the comet was stretched to a 114-inch wheelbase ( longer than the gm y-body '' senior compacts '' ) . the comet adopted multiple design features from the full-size edsel line , including its oblong taillamp lenses ( though canted diagonally , creating its rear tailfins ) along with the instrument cluster . comet keys were styled like edsel keys ( restyling the '' e '' emblem as a '' c '' ) . while sold without divisional branding , the comet proved successful ; lincoln-mercury sold more 1960 comets than the entire edsel model line sold through its 1958-1960 existence . for 1962 , the comet was branded as a mercury ; the model line was produced through 1977 . meteor . for 1961 , lincoln-mercury introduced the mercury meteor as its entry-level full-size sedan , slotted below the mercury monterey . beginning life as a design for the 1961 edsel ranger , the base trim of the meteor was designed with oblong taillamps ( switching to horizontal layout ) , derived from the 1960 ranger and comet ( designed as an edsel ) . for 1962 , the full-size meteor was discontinued , with mercury shifting the nameplate to its newly-introduced intermediate car line ( becoming a counterpart of the ford fairlane through 1963 ) . design influence . while edsel front end designs were considered '' weird '' or '' too different '' by contemporary buyers and critics , multiple automobile manufacturers ( such as pontiac , jaguar , bmw , subaru , lancia , alfa romeo , and saab ) have employed similar vertically-oriented grilles successfully in their car designs . many features included on edsels , such as self-adjusting brakes , climate control , gear selection by steering wheel buttons , etc . , which were considered '' too impractical '' in the late 1950s , are now standard features of current production vehicles . collectors . more than half a century after its spectacular failure , edsels have become highly collectible items among vintage car hobbyists . fewer than 10,000 edsels survive and they are considered valuable collectors ' items . a mint-condition edsel convertible from any of its three model years may sell for over 100,000 . the rarest edsel ( by body style ) is the 1960 ranger convertible : only 76 were built . approximately 25 survive today . the rarest edsel by model is the 1960 ranger deluxe interior 4-door hardtop , model 57b . originally intended to be released as the 1960 corsair , only 31 units were produced . plastic scale models of all three edsel years were produced by aluminum metal toys ( amt ) , in its familiar 1/25 scale . both promotional and kit versions were sold . these command premium prices today , especially the rare 1959 and 1960 models . the 1958 pacer hardtop was re-issued as a totally new and much more detailed kit by amt in the 1990s . the 1960 hardtop is also available as a resin kit from several resin model producers , but is typically priced close to the cost of an original kit . yat ming , a producer of diecast model cars , offered a nicely detailed 1958 citation in 1/18 scale in both hardtop and convertible body styles . yat ming also produced a detailed 1/43 scale diecast of the citation convertible in several color combinations . the franklin mint produced highly detailed 1/24 scale and 1/43 scale diecast models of the 1958 citation convertible . the danbury mint produced a 1/24 scale diecast replica of the 1958 bermuda station wagon , complete with accurately detailed wood trim . nascar . despite lack of sales success , several edsels were nevertheless raced in nascar 's grand national series in the late 1950s . references . further reading . brooks , john . '' the fate of the edsel '' in business adventures . new york : open road , 2014 edition , . dicke , tom . '' the edsel : forty years as a symbol of failure , '' journal of popular culture , june 2010 , vol . 43 issue 3 , pp 486–502 . external links . edsel.com history , specifications , resources for owners . smith motor company virtual edsel dealer the international edsel club edsels in the media listing of edsel references in popular culture . edsel promo time a web site devoted to plastic dealer promotional models of edsels . washington post article about the edsel the edsel tinsmith a catalog of tin toy edsels that were manufactured in japan '' all about ford 's luxury loaded edsel . '' popular science , september 1957 , pp . & nbsp ; 98–103/282-283 .