Robert of Jumièges

background and life in normandy . robert was prior of the monastery of st ouen at rouen before he became abbot of the important jumièges abbey douglas william the conqueror p . 167–170 barlow english church 1000–1066 p . 44 in 1037 . jumièges had been refounded under the norman ruler william longsword . crouch normandy before 1066 p . 30 crouch normans p . 12 around 940 , crouch normandy before 1066 p . 58 its ties with the ducal family were close and it played a role in ducal government and church reform . crouch normandy before 1066 pp . 193–194 robert 's alternate surname '' champart '' or '' chambert '' probably derived from champart , a term for the part of a crop paid as rent to a landlord . besides evidence that the preceding abbot at jumièges was a relative , robert 's origin and family background are otherwise unknown . while abbot , robert began construction of the abbey church , in the new romanesque style . cowdrey '' robert of jumièges '' oxford dictionary of national biography robert became friendly with edward the confessor , a claimant to the english throne , while edward was living in exile in normandy , probably in the 1030s . edward was the son of æthelred the unready , king of england , who had been replaced by cnut the great in 1016 . cnut subsequently married æthelred 's widow emma of normandy , edward 's mother , and had a son with her , harthacanute . for their own safety , edward and his brother alfred were sent to emma 's relatives in normandy . hindley brief history of the anglo-saxons pp . 306–310 after cnut 's death in 1035 , harold harefoot , his elder son by his first wife , acceded to the english throne . following harald 's death in 1040 , harthacanute succeeded him for a short time , but as neither harald nor harthacanute left offspring , the throne was offered to edward on harthacanute 's death in 1042 . hindley brief history of the anglo-saxons pp . 315–318 there is some evidence that edward spent some of his time in exile around jumièges , as after becoming king he gave gifts to the abbey . crouch normans p . 78 . bishop and archbishop . left robert accompanied edward the confessor on edward 's recall to england in 1042 to become king following harthacanute 's death . it was due to edward that in august 1044 robert was appointed bishop of london , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 230 one of the first episcopal vacancies which occurred in edward 's reign . barlow english church 1000–1066 pp . 46–50 robert remained close to the king and was the leader of the party opposed to earl godwin , earl of wessex . godwin , for his part , was attempting to expand the influence of his family , which had already acquired much land . his daughter was edward 's queen , and two of his sons were elevated to earldoms . mason house of godwine pp . 51–53 the vita ædwardi regis , a hagiographical work on king edward 's life , claimed that robert '' was always the most powerful confidential adviser of the king '' . quoted in huscroft ruling england p . 50 robert seems to have favoured closer relations with normandy , and its duke . edward himself had grown up in the duchy , and spent 25 & nbsp ; years in exile there before his return to england . he brought many normans with him to england , and seems to have spent much time in their company . potts '' normandy '' companion to the anglo-norman world p . 33 when archbishop eadsige of canterbury died in october 1050 , higham death of anglo-saxon england pp . 128–129 the post remained vacant for five months . the cathedral chapter elected æthelric , a kinsman of godwin and a monk at canterbury , barlow edward the confessor p . 104 walker harold p . 27 but were over-ruled when edward appointed robert archbishop of canterbury the following year . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 214 godwin was attempting to exercise his power of patronage over the archbishopric , but the king 's appointment signalled that the king was willing to contest with the earl over the traditional royal rights at canterbury . although the monks of canterbury opposed it , the king 's appointment stood . barlow english church 1000–1066 p . 209 robert went to rome to receive his pallium and returned to england barlow edward the confessor p . 106 where he was ceremonially enthroned at canterbury on 29 june 1051 . some norman chroniclers state that he visited normandy on this trip and informed duke william the bastard that he was the childless king edward 's heir . according to these chroniclers , the decision to make william the heir had been decided at the same lenten royal council in 1051 that had declared robert archbishop . after returning from rome , robert refused to consecrate spearhafoc , the abingdon abbey and the king 's goldsmith , huscroft ruling england p . 52 as his successor to the bishopric of london , claiming that pope leo ix had forbidden the consecration . almost certainly the grounds were simony , the purchase of ecclesiastical office , coredon dictionary of medieval terms and phrases p . 260 as leo had recently issued proclamations against the practice . in refusing to consecrate spearhafoc , robert may have been following his own interests against the wishes of both the king and godwin , as he had his own candidate , a norman , in mind . walker harold p . 29–30 in the end robert 's favoured candidate , william the norman , was consecrated instead of spearhafoc . robert also discovered that some lands belonging to canterbury had fallen into godwin 's hands , but his efforts to recover them through the shire courts were unsuccessful . canterbury had lost control of some revenues from the shire of kent to godwin during eadsige 's tenure as archbishop , which robert unsuccessfully attempted to reclaim . rex harold ii pp . 42–43 these disputes over the estates and revenues of the archbishopric contributed to the friction between robert and godwin , campbell '' pre-conquest norman occupation of england '' speculum p . 22 which had begun with robert 's election . robert 's election had disrupted godwin 's patronage powers in canterbury , and now robert 's efforts to recover lands godwin had seized from canterbury challenged the earl 's economic rights . bates '' land pleas of william i 's reign '' bulletin of the institute of historical research p . 16 events came to a head at a council held at gloucester in september 1051 , when robert accused earl godwin of plotting to kill king edward . barlow edward the confessor p . 111 godwin and his family were exiled ; afterwards robert claimed the office of sheriff of kent , probably on the strength of eadsige , his predecessor as archbishop , having held the office . barlow edward the confessor p . 115 although robert refused to consecrate spearhafoc , there is little evidence that he was interested in the growing movement towards church reform being promulgated by the papacy . rex harold ii p . 46 pope leo ix was beginning a reform movement later known as the gregorian reform , initially focused on improving the clergy and prohibiting simony . in 1049 leo ix declared that he would take more interest in english church matters and would investigate episcopal candidates more strictly before confirming them . it may have been partly to appease leo that edward appointed robert instead of æthelric , hoping to signal to the papacy that the english crown was not totally opposed to the growing reform movement . stafford unification and conquest pp . 89–92 it was against this backdrop that robert refused to consecrate spearhafoc , although there is no other evidence that robert embraced the reform position , and his claim that the pope forbade the consecration may have had more to do with finding an easy excuse than any true desire for reform . there are also some indications that spearhafoc was allied to godwin , and his appointment was meant as a quid pro quo for the non-appointment of æthelric . john reassessing anglo-saxon england p . 177 if true , robert 's refusal to consecrate spearhafoc would have contributed to the growing rift between the archbishop and the earl . . royal adviser . the life of saint edward claims that while godwin was in exile robert tried to persuade king edward to divorce edith , godwin 's daughter , but edward refused and instead she was sent to a abbey . however , the life is a hagiography , written soon after edward 's death to show edward as a saint . thus it stresses that edward voluntarily remained celibacy , something unlikely to have been true and not corroborated by any other source . modern historians have felt it more likely that edward , at robert 's urging , wished to divorce edith and remarry in order to have children to succeed him on the english throne , walker harold p . 35–36 although it is possible that he merely wished to be rid of her , without necessarily wanting a divorce . during godwin 's exile , robert is said to have been sent by the king on an errand to duke william of normandy . barlow edward the confessor p . 107 the reason for the embassy is uncertain . william of jumièges says that robert went to tell duke william that edward wished william to be his heir . the medieval writer william of poitiers gives the same reason , but also adds that robert took with him as hostages godwin 's son wulfnoth and grandson hakon ( son of sweyn ) . the anglo-saxon chronicle is silent on the visit however , so it is uncertain whether robert visited normandy or not , or why he did so . walker harold p . 37–38 the entire history of the various missions which robert is alleged to have made is confused , and complicated by propaganda claims made by norman chroniclers after the norman conquest in 1066 , bates william the conqueror p . 73 leaving it unclear if robert visited normandy on his way to receive his pallium or after godwin was in exile , or if he went twice or not at all . john '' edward the confessor '' english historical review oleson '' edward the confessor '' english historical review . outlawing , death , and legacy . after godwin left england , he went to flanders , and gathered a fleet and mercenaries to force the king to allow his return . in the summer of 1052 , godwin returned to england and was met by his sons , who had invaded from ireland . by september , they were advancing on london , where negotiations between the king and the earl were conducted with the help of stigand , the bishop of winchester . mason house of godwine pp . 69–75 when it became apparent that godwin would be returning , robert quickly left england barlow edward the confessor p . 124 with bishop ulfus normanus and bishop william of london , probably once again taking wulfnoth and hakon with him as hostages , whether with the permission of king edward or not . walker harold p . 47 robert was declared an outlaw and deposed from his archbishopric on 14 & nbsp ; september 1052 at a royal council , mainly because the returning godwin felt that robert , along with a number of other normans , had been the driving force behind his exile . robert journeyed to rome to complain to the pope about his own exile , barlow edward the confessor p . 126 where leo ix and successive popes condemned stigand , walker harold p . 50–51 whom edward had appointed to canterbury . stafford unification and conquest p . 94 robert 's personal property was divided between earl godwin , harold godwinson , and the queen , who had returned to court . stenton anglo-saxon england p . 568 robert died at jumièges , higham death of anglo-saxon england p . 137 but the date of his death is unclear . various dates are given , with ian walker , the biographer of harold arguing for between 1053 and 1055 , but h . e . j . cowdrey , who wrote robert 's oxford dictionary of national biography entry , says on 26 & nbsp ; may in either 1052 or 1055 . h . r . loyn , another modern historian , argues that it is likely that he died in 1053 . loyn english church p . 59 robert 's treatment was used by william as one of the justifications for his invasion of england , the other being that edward had named william his heir . ian walker , author of the most recent scholarly biography of harold godwinson , suggests that it was robert , while in exile after the return of godwin , who testified that king edward had nominated duke william to be edward 's heir . however , this view is contradicted by david douglas , a historian and biographer of william the conqueror , who believes that robert merely relayed edward 's decision , probably while robert was on his way to rome to receive his pallium . several medieval chroniclers , including the author of the life of saint edward , felt that the blame for edward and godwin 's conflict in 1051–1052 lay squarely with robert ; stafford queen emma and queen edith p . 11 modern historians tend to see robert as an ambitious man , with little political skill . . artistic patronage . in notable contrast to his successor stigand , robert does not figure among the important benefactors to english churches , dodwell anglo-saxon art mentions many of these , but not robert . but we know of some transfers to jumièges of important english church treasures , the first trickle of what was to become a flood of treasure taken to normandy after the conquest . dodwell anglo-saxon art pp . 216–222 and passim these included the relic of the head of saint valentine only recently given to the monks of winchester cathedral by emma of normandy . though the winchester head remained in place , another one appeared at jumièges ; he '' must have clandestinely removed the head , or at least the greater part of it , and left his monks to venerate the empty or nearly empty capsa '' . kelly chaucer p . 54 two of the four most important surviving late anglo-saxon illuminated manuscripts went the same way , thus probably preventing their destruction in a series of fires that devastated the major english libraries . dodwell anglo-saxon art pp . 224–225 one is the so-called , actually a sacramentary with thirteen surviving full-page miniatures , which bears an inscription apparently in robert 's own hand recording its donation to jumièges when he was bishop of london , and the other the so-called , actually a pontifical with three remaining full-page miniatures and other decoration ( respectively rouen , bibliothèque municipale , manuscripts y.6 and y.7 ) . the latter may well have been commissioned by æthelgar , robert 's predecessor as archbishop in 988–90 , although it is possible the '' archbishop robert '' of the traditional name is emma 's brother robert , archbishop of rouen from 990 to 1037 . turner '' illuminated manuscripts '' golden age p . 60 gameson '' winchester school '' blackwell encyclopaedia p . 482 these masterpieces of the winchester style were the most elaborately decorated anglo-saxon manuscripts known to have reached normandy , either before or after the conquest , and influenced the much less-developed local style , though this remained very largely restricted to initials . dodwell anglo-saxon art pp . 225–226 before he came to england , robert had begun the construction of a new abbey church at jumièges , in the new romanesque style which was then becoming popular , and introduced to normandy the westwork from the rhineland . on his return to normandy he continued to build there , gem '' origins '' westminster abbey p . 15 and the abbey church was not finished until 1067 . higham death of anglo-saxon england p . 148 although the choir has been torn down , the towers , nave and transepts have survived . plant '' ecclesiastical architecture '' companion to the anglo-norman world pp . 219–222 robert probably influenced edward the confessor 's rebuilding of the church at westminster abbey , the first known building in the romanesque style in england , which is so described by william of malmesbury . mason house of godwine p . 83 barlow english church 1000–1066 p . 51 footnote 2 edward 's work began in about 1050 and was completed just before his death in 1065 . the recorded name of one of the senior masons , '' teinfrith the churchwright '' indicates foreign origins , and robert may have arranged for norman masons to be brought over , though other names are english . gem '' origins '' westminster cathedral pp . 13–15 it is possible that westminster influenced the building at jumièges , as the arcade there closely resembles westminster 's arcade , both of them in a style that never became common in normandy . breese '' early normandy and the emergence of norman romanesque architecture '' journal of medieval history p . 212 the early romanesque style of both was to be superseded after the conquest by the anglo-norman high romanesque style pioneered in canterbury cathedral and st étienne , caen by lanfranc . gem '' english romanesque architecture '' english romanesque art p . 26 . notes . citations . references . . further reading . or his collected papers . external links .