USS Thresher (SS-200)

sea trials . following training and sea trials , thresher got underway from new london , connecticut on 25 october 1940 for engineering trials in gravesend bay , new york , and shakedown off the dry tortugas . she operated along the east coast through the end of 1940 and into 1941 . she set sail on 1 may 1941 for the caribbean sea , en route for pearl harbor , transiting the panama canal on 9 may , stopping in san diego , through 21 may , and arriving at pearl harbor on 31 may . she operated out of the hawaiian islands into the fall of 1941 , as tensions rose in the far east and the u.s . prepared for war in both oceans . thresher and her sister-ship departed the submarine base pearl harbor on 31 october 1941 on a simulated war patrol north of midway island ; both carried live torpedoes . tautog returned first ; and , on 7 december , thresher neared the hawaiian islands to end her cruise . escorted by the destroyer through hawaiian waters lest she be mistaken for a hostile submarine , thresher received word at 08:10 pearl harbor was under attack by japanese aircraft . patrols . first and second . litchfield promptly set off to join american light forces departing from the harbor , leaving thresher alone to conduct her first real war patrol . however , the destroyer was ordered back to escort ; radio contact was established , and a rendezvous arranged , with thresher . at the pre-appointed time , thresher poked up her periscope to have a look , and noticed a destroyer—similar to litchfield—approaching bows-on . instead of a warm reception from friends , she got a hot reception from the destroyer 's forward gunners , who opened fire on her as soon as her black conning tower broke the surface . thresher immediately went deep to avoid . she again tried to enter the harbor on 8 december , but was driven off by depth-bombs from a patrol plane , before finally arrived to provide safe conduct for the boat at midday . departing pearl harbor on 30 december 1941 , thresher headed for the marshall and mariana islands . reconnoitering majuro , arno , and mili atolls from 9 to 13 january 1942 , she shifted to waters off japanese-held guam in the early morning darkness of 4 february . a little before daybreak , a small freighter was sighted north of agana harbor and thresher closed for the attack . she loosed a three-torpedo spread , holing the ship and sending it down by the bow and dead in the water . thresher then fired another spread of torpedoes , but all missed . upon returning to the scene one-half-hour later the ship was gone and thresher thought she had scored a kill ; janac did not substantiate it . while en route home to pearl harbor on 24 february , an overzealous navy plane attacked thresher but did no damage and the sub safely returned to port on 26 february . third and fourth . after refit , thresher departed 23 march 1942 for a patrol area near the japanese home islands . there , she was to gather weather data off honshū for use by admiral william halsey 's task force ( the carriers and , then approaching japan . embarked in hornet were 16 united states army air forces b-25 mitchell medium bombers , under the command of lieutenant colonel jimmy doolittle , intended to attack tokyo on 18 april . warned by ultra of four japanese submarines operating off tokyo bay , thresher was detected by one of them and fired on , without damage . blair , clay , jr . silent victory . ( philadelphia : lippincott , 1975 ) , p.214 . on the morning of 10 april , thresher sighted a large japanese freighter . a three-torpedo spread was fired and all missed as the target escaped in the mist . when the target emerged from the murk , thresher was not in a position to launch another attack and proceeded on her way . a second target was sighted later that day , and this time the hunting was better . one torpedo broke the back of freighter sado maru ( 3,000 & nbsp ; tons ) off yokohama , sending it to the bottom in less than three minutes . the subsequent depth charge attack was delivered by three or four patrol vessels ( one of the most severe of the war ) , blair , p.214 . caused thresher to lose depth control and she plunged to . blair , p.214 . this was below her test depth . before control was regained . she then disobeyed orders and remained to assist halsey . on 13 april , running on the surface to recharge her batteries , thresher took a wave over her conning tower . water cascaded down the open hatch and rushed into the boat , shorting many electrical circuits . for a short time , there was a significant danger that chlorine gas would be released , but quick thinking and damage control prevented any hazard . eventually , all shorts were repaired and the boat pumped out . the next day , thresher departed her assigned patrol area and turned her attention to gathering weather data . she conducted periscope patrols in the advance screen of halsey 's task force , searching for any enemy craft that could warn the japanese homeland . she was detached from this duty on 16 april and , after evading two japanese patrol planes , returned to pearl harbor on 29 april . on 26 june 1942 , thresher commenced her fourth war patrol heading for waters between the palau and the marshall islands . on 6 july one torpedo struck home during an attack on a tanker off enijun pass . the two surface escorts were soon joined by aircraft and , after a three-hour depth charging , thresher was able to resume her search for other targets . three days later , midway between kwajalein and wotje atolls , thresher fired two torpedoes at a 4,836 & nbsp ; ton torpedo boat tender which caused tremendous explosions as the tender sank beneath the waves . thresher withdrew from expected countermeasures . within an hour , two depth charges shook the boat , and ten minutes later , a banging and clanking alerted her to the fact the japanese were apparently bringing a large grapnel into play in an attempt to capture the boat . after applying full right rudder , thresher made a 10‑minute high-speed run which shook her free from the giant hook . then , as a depth charge exploded near her conning tower , the boat went deeper . bending on rudder , thresher left the enemy behind , with some 30-odd depth charges exploding in her wake . shaken but not seriously damaged , thresher made minor repairs as she headed for truk to reconnoiter the passes leading into this enemy naval bastion . missing a freighter with torpedoes on the night of 20 july , thresher surfaced in a rain squall before daybreak the next morning . the boat 's sonar picked up the sound of screws , close and closing . soon an enemy patrol craft came into view , on a collision course . surprisingly , the japanese chose not to ram , but instead turned hard right , and came to a parallel course some away . thresher went deep , while the enemy 's guns fired close but ineffective salvoes into the water ahead of the disappearing boat . after escaping to the palaus , thresher tangled with an enemy q-ship off ambon in the former netherlands east indies . the two torpedoes she fired at the enemy failed to explode , a persistent problem for the mark 14 torpedo 's mark 6 exploder . and the q-ship subjected thresher to a salvo of eight depth charges before giving up the attack . since she had been reassigned to the southwest pacific submarine force , thresher sailed away from this encounter en route to australian waters and terminated her fourth war patrol at fremantle on 15 august . fifth and sixth . after refit , thresher loaded mines and departed fremantle on 15 september 1942 , bound for the gulf of siam . she fired torpedoes at two freighters north of lombok strait on 19 september but was unable to determine the results of her attacks . on the night of 25 september , luck again failed to smile on her as a single torpedo streaked beneath a large , high-speed target in the sulu sea . thresher later surfaced at 23:00 and proceeded on a course which took her north to pearl bank . there , in the northernmost reaches of the gulf of siam , she made one of the first mine plants by a submarine in the pacific war . these strategic mine fields laid by thresher and her sisters in subsequent patrols , covered japanese shipping lanes in areas of the southwest pacific command previously unpatrolled by submarines . later , these minefields filled the gap between patrol zones along the coastal waters of malaya , siam , and indochina , when many boats were diverted to participate in the solomon islands campaign . while reconnoitering off balikpapan , borneo , and the celebes coast , thresher sighted a tanker aground on a reef off kapoposang island in the java sea . she soon surfaced for a deck gun attack and left the enemy ship with decks awash . the boat then returned to fremantle on 12 november for refit . underway from fremantle on 16 december 1942 , she arrived off soerabaya , java , on 25 december . she intercepted a convoy of freighters , escorted by two destroyers , several subchasers , and two aircraft . slipping past the escorts , thresher sent five torpedoes towards the leading three ships . two successive explosions followed . rising to periscope depth , the boat observed the second ship in the column down by the bow , with her stern up in the air and her screws , still revolving , out of the water . a second ship lay dead in the water , enveloped in smoke . escaping unscathed from this tangle with a coastal convoy , thresher sighted an enemy aircraft carrier the next night , but was picked up by escorts and held at bay for more than an hour while the tempting target faded into the night . on the night of 29 december 1942 , thresher ( now in the hands of william j . '' moke '' millican , class of 1928 ) made contact with a 3,000-ton freighter . just before midnight , she fired a spread of torpedoes at the cargo ship , but all missed or ran too deep . undaunted , she waited for the moonrise and then surfaced to use her deck gun . outmaneuvering the enemy , who tried to ram her , thresher scored eight hits in succession with her main gun , where her target probably sank in the shallow water , one of the few sunk entirely by deck guns . japanese records do not show this loss , though janac credits moke millican with a 2,700-tonner for this patrol . also , blair , pp.350 & 922 , records all torpedoes expended before this attack . . seventh . after arriving back in fremantle on 10 january 1943 , the boat got underway 15 days later for her seventh war patrol , with four torpedoes short of a normal load . thanks to production shortages at newport torpedo station . blair , p.391 . at 11:00 on 14 february , thresher made contact with a japanese i-65 class submarine east of thwartway island . she launched two torpedoes ; one was a dud , and the other exploded on the ocean bottom . turning north and firing deck guns , threshers adversary soon disappeared over the horizon . proceeding to the flores sea , thresher intercepted a three-ship convoy escorted by two anti-submarine vessels on 21 february . one of the sub 's two torpedoes hit the stern of a transport . thresher then evaded 13 depth charges before returning to periscope depth a little more than an hour later . she observed her target lying dead in the water while barges lightered troops to an undamaged mate . as escorts searched the waters nearby , thresher closed and torpedoed the second transport , which had stopped to transfer survivors . two loud explosions reverberated in the background as the boat dived to avoid possible countermeasures . the following day , thresher returned to celebrate washington 's birthday by finishing off the first transport which jack-knifed into a '' v '' shape and sank within three minutes . thresher prowled for more game and came upon a tanker and a freighter on 2 march . a single torpedo hit on the 5,232-ton tanker and it sank . the freighter , sighting torpedo wakes , took evasive action to avoid being hit . then , a nearby escort arrived on the scene and kept thresher at bay while the target escaped . the boat subsequently concluded this patrol arriving at fremantle on 10 march . on her return to base , her skipper roundly criticized the torpedoes , especially the failure to sink the i-boat . admiral ralph w . christie who had been a member of the mark xiv 's design team . denied it and relieved him . eighth and ninth . her eighth war patrol ( commanded by harry hull , class of 1932 ) , lasting 4 april to 23 may 1943 , was uneventful , but her ninth saw the boat score another kill . off balikpapan , borneo , she sighted a three-ship convoy , escorted by a sole destroyer ( hokaze ) on the night of 30 june 1943 . after an unrewarding try with a trio of torpedoes , thresher dodged the escort 's depth charging attack and returned for another attempt . tracking with radar , thresher set a tanker ablaze from stem to stern and scored hits on a 5,274-ton passenger freighter in the makassar strait . heading for tambu bay on the morning of 5 july , thresher tracked a tanker . chasing her quarry along the sulawesi ( celebes ) coast , the submarine lurked nearby until the escort left . thresher then closed , loosed three torpedoes , and scored one hit on the bow of the enemy vessel . this blow failed to stop the tanker , which fired her guns to keep thresher at bay as she escaped at high speed . four days later , thresher arrived off catmou point , negros island . under cover of darkness , the boat surfaced and delivered of stores and 40,000 rounds of ammunition to filipino guerrillas . receiving intelligence documents in return , thresher got underway for a resumption of her patrol shortly before midnight on 9 july . she soon departed the philippines and sailed via midway island and pearl harbor to the west coast for a major overhaul at the mare island naval shipyard , vallejo , california . tenth . newly refitted , thresher departed the west coast on 8 october 1943 and arrived at pearl harbor one week later ; she commenced her tenth war patrol on 1 november , bound for the waters north of the caroline islands . prowling north of truk , thresher commenced tracking a five-ship convoy on the morning of 12 november and slipped past two escorts shortly before midnight . she fired three torpedoes into a 4,862-ton transport . the next attack , another three torpedo spread , missed their mark . escorting antisubmarine craft hunted in vain for the american attacker , dropping 20 depth charges in a harassing barrage . eleventh and twelfth . thresher ’ s 11th war patrol ( this one under command of duncan c . macmillan , class of 1926 former exec on , he was the oldest regular submarine officer then commanding a fleet boat . blair , p.538 . ) took her to the south china sea south of formosa . while cruising on the surface on 10 january 1944 , thresher sighted a pair of masts , low on the horizon , and quickly dove to avoid possible detection . coming to periscope depth soon thereafter , she approached cautiously , keeping in mind the ship may have been the advance screen of a convoy . the contact proved to be a 150-ton trawler . thresher battle-surfaced , commencing fire at ; the trawler sank after thresher expended 45 shells , 1,000 rounds of m2 browning ; and 770 rounds . thresher next set course for the luzon strait , between batan island and luzon , in the philippines . at 11:43 on 15 january , she came to the surface and spotted a japanese aircraft carrier with an escorting destroyer soon thereafter . the boat submerged to periscope depth in time to observe two enemy destroyers rapidly approaching . with insufficient time to maneuver for a '' down the throat '' shot , thresher went deep and rigged for silent running . the destroyer churned overhead and dropped four depth charges , none close . after remaining overhead two hours , dropping between ten and fifteen more depth charges , blair , p.538 . the enemy finally turned away , leaving thresher unscathed . again coming to periscope depth at 17:00 , thresher soon sighted a four-ship convoy at with a single sub-chaser as escort . surfacing at 19:11 , thresher began the chase , tracking the convoy by radar . the three leading targets steamed in column , with the escort between the third and fourth merchantmen . thresher maneuvered to the west to silhouette the targets against the rising moon . the convoy changed course at 21:55 , giving thresher an excellent setup for her stern tubes . at 22:07 , the boat let fly from with four torpedoes at the lead ship , a 6,960 & nbsp ; ton freighter . thresher observed two hits , and the vessel , its bow in the air , was observed in a sinking condition . thresher next fired three bow tubes at the second target , a 4,092 & nbsp ; ton freighter . three torpedoes struck the freighter and literally blew her to pieces . the cargo of oil burst into flames and illuminated the night as brightly as day . the third ship started firing on thresher with deck guns , passing down the port side at . with the submarine now readily visible , and her stern tubes dry , thresher dove as bullets from the approaching escort splashed nearby . thresher counted some 20 explosions from depth charges before the patrol craft left an hour later . upon surfacing , thresher was again alone and set off to patrol along the singapore-to-japan trade route . on 26 january , thresher made radar contact with a small convoy and soon spotted two ships steaming along beneath the overcast night skies . at 00:11 , thresher fired three bow torpedoes at a 1,266-ton freighter , then bent cleared the area . her '' fish '' scored a bullseye , and the quarry disappeared within a minute . a second spread , 35 seconds after the first , claimed a 2,205-ton freighter . a third target made off to the south at high speed , '' spraying the ocean with five-inch ammunition '' . resuming the approach at 00:20 , thresher doggedly tailed the japanese ship for four hours before reaching a favorable attack position . firing her last torpedoes at 04:46 , thresher began to build up speed and had just commenced a turn when one torpedo struck the enemy ship , causing a tremendous explosion . the blast slowed the freighter , but its tremendous concussion stopped thresher dead in the water . all four main engine overspeed trips were actuated ; cork insulation flew ; lights broke ; clocks stopped ; and water poured down the antenna trunk . by the time thresher regained battle readiness , the enemy was too far away to encourage further pursuit . well within the range of shore-based aircraft , thresher quit the chase . escorts , alerted to the fact an american submarine was prowling in the vicinity , arrived on the scene and conducted a three-hour-long , futile , depth-charging . on 28 and 29 january , thresher patrolled the taiwan-to-palau route , in the luzon strait , before returning via midway island to pearl harbor where she arrived on 18 february . there , lieutenant commander macmillan was awarded the navy cross for his aggressive action during the patrol . picture of a january 1944 victim of the '' thresher '' thresher went to sea again on 18 march 1944 , departing pearl harbor for the central caroline islands . she remained on air-sea rescue ( '' lifeguard '' ) station during american carrier strikes on truk , bombarded oroluk atoll on 11 april , and photographed islands in that group . the boat played '' hide and seek '' with numerous enemy aircraft and witnessed several american bombing raids on truk . she sighted only two enemy ships and was unable to attack either , before she returned to pearl harbor on 8 may . thirteenth . on 14 june 1944 , thresher headed out for her 13th war patrol , again commanded by macmillan . 25 june , she joined a '' wolfpack '' that also included , , and . nicknamed the '' mickey finns '' and under the overall command of captain william v . o'regan commander of subdiv 42 . blair , p.677 . ( flying his flag in guardfish ) , the group picked up '' ditching signals '' from a downed aircraft that afternoon and changed course to investigate . arriving in the vicinity on 27 june , they found only a drop tank and no trace of plane or pilot . over the succeeding days , the boats observed several planes but contacted only a few fishing vessels and small patrol craft . this drought of targets continued until 11 july , when thresher made radar contact with a group of six ships steaming on the formosa-luzon route . as she changed course to intercept , she dispatched contact reports to the other boats . guardfish and apogon picked up the contact , but piranha could not . thresher deployed to a position astern of the convoy , to trail the enemy group and be ready to pick off stragglers . guardfish took the enemy 's port flank , and apogon maneuvered to the convoy 's starboard quarter . a japanese escort latched on to thresher , however , and trailed her , depriving her of a chance to attack the convoy . meanwhile , piranha managed to sink a 6,504-ton passenger/cargo ship . apogon was rammed and forced to return to base for repairs . rendezvousing on 13 july , the remaining boats resumed the hunt . at 16:00 on 16 july , thresher sighted smoke on the horizon . she surfaced and dispatched a contact report . after a cat-and-mouse period of some two hours , she noted the convoy consisted of six ships : a large tanker , three freighters , and two escorts . thresher closed beneath a clear and dark night sky . at 23:29 , with the range to the near escort at , she commenced fire . three torpedoes sped from the forward tubes toward the lead escort , three to the first freighter . thresher then turned and emptied all four stern tubes at the second freighter . four explosions were sighted and as thresher departed at high speed , another six soon after . commencing a reload of her tubes at midnight ( 00.00 or 24.00 ) , thresher returned to the area and continued the attack on the convoy which consisted now of only three ships : a freighter , the oiler , and an escort . at 01:18 , thresher fired two bow tubes at the escort and three at the leading freighter ; the sub then fired her stern tubes at the oiler . soon thereafter , thresher heard at least six explosions . the escort promptly began a depth charge barrage . returning to periscope depth , thresher found the convoy had remained stubbornly afloat . she began reloading her tubes again at 01.22 and returned to the chase . while tube number six was still being reloaded , thresher fired two other bow tubes at the freighter , two more at the oiler , and the remaining full one at the escort ; she then swung about and fired one stern tube at the latter . two torpedoes exploded at 02:46 , and the cargo ship sank immediately . one minute later , two '' fish '' struck the oiler . a tremendous explosion lighted the entire sky , and the ship sank within 15 seconds . while it could not be ascertained whether or not the last escort went down , the effect of two torpedo hits made it likely he had been heavily damaged . all torpedoes expended , thresher headed for midway . the boat claimed to have destroyed the entire convoy , but a post-war assessment confirmed only two cargo vessels , sainei maru ( 4,916 & nbsp ; tons ) and shozan maru ( 2,838 & nbsp ; tons ) , and no escort . moreover , japanese records show no tanker sunk there on this date , while macmillan shared credit with bub ward , who was awarded jinzan maru ( 5,200 & nbsp ; tons ) , mantai maru ( 5,900 & nbsp ; tons ) , and hiyama maru ( 2,800 & nbsp ; tons ) by janac . blair , p.677 . thresher did , however , receive the navy unit commendation for the patrol . fourteenth . upon completion of voyage repairs ( and with john r . middleton , jr . , class of 1935 , now at the helm blair , p.955 . ) , thresher stood out of midway on 23 august 1944 , bound for the yellow sea and east china sea on her fourteenth war patrol . six days later , while cruising on the surface , thresher was battered by heavy seas which caused the boat to roll some 53 degrees from the vertical and produced waves up to high . rounding the southern tip of kyūshū , thresher sighted several small craft before making contact with a minelayer and two subchasers on 10 september . clearing the vicinity at high speed , thresher headed for a new patrol area . thresher was twice frustrated on 13 september , when a large oiler passed far out of reach and a freighter , attacked with four torpedoes , refused to sink . an escorting aircraft harried the boat and prevented any further attacks . at 15:31 on 18 september , thresher sighted the masts , funnel and bridge of a ship on the horizon . after determining the enemy 's base course and zigzag plan , thresher surfaced and locked on the freighter with radar at 19:23 . another pip , an escort vessel , soon appeared on radar . by 21:00 , thresher had maneuvered into position off the enemy 's port bow and waited for the japanese ships to make a zig which would place her at a desirable point for the attack . thresher closed in for the kill and loosed four torpedoes as the group turned to the right . the japanese , however , did not meet her prediction , and the first spread ran wide of its targets . still undetected , thresher quickly came about and fired four stern '' fish '' from . the second spread ran true , hitting 6,854-ton freighter gyōkū maru . the explosions broke the cargoman 's back , and she quickly slipped from sight . thresher retired at high speed when she detected the presence of three additional ships closing rapidly . thresher reloaded and turned upon her pursuers , loosing a spread of torpedoes which barely missed . she evaded her hunters and shifted to waters off manchuria . the boat sighted only fishing craft until 26 august , when a large cargo vessel hove into sight at 09:44 . thresher surfaced at 13:15 and headed for the nearest point on the enemy 's zigzag course . an hour later , the submarine spotted a floatplane on patrol , and hurriedly dived . as she went deep , one depth charge exploded nearby . staying under until 16:00 , thresher came to the surface and reacquired her target at 18:15 . tracking until sunset , she postulated the enemy vessel was bound for daecheongdo and an intercept course was plotted accordingly . attacking from the bright moon side , thresher fired two bow tubes , aiming one torpedo at the hull near the mainmast and one at the foremast . both struck home , and the 1,468-ton freighter broke up and sank within a minute . the following day , 26 september , thresher came upon a 5,000-ton oiler and cut loose with four stern tubes from a range of . those on the bridge saw the target disappear within a minute . tubes dry , thresher headed for midway . en route , on 3 october , she sighted , tracked , and approached a small trawler . after sunset , thresher surfaced and manned her deck guns . after firing 27 rounds of five-inch ammunition , the boat soon received close return fire which forced her to back off . too dark to see the target , thresher resumed her passage to midway . after fueling at midway on 8 october , thresher sailed for the hawaiian islands and arrived at pearl harbor on 12 october 1944 . following a lengthy refit , thresher got underway on 31 january 1945 for the marianas , in company with , , and . remaining at saipan overnight on 12–13 february , the impromptu wolf pack pushed on toward its assigned patrol areas north of luzon . however , only two of threshers contacts developed into attacks . one failed due to the target 's shallow draft ; and the second contact evaded . thresher did , however , conduct air-sea guard patrols ; and conducted a shore bombardment of basco harbor , batan island , on 28 march . the latter part of this patrol was conducted in company with piranha and . end of active duty . clearing her patrol station , thresher nested alongside for voyage repairs before pushing on for oahu on 4 april 1945 . arriving at pearl harbor 20 days later , thresher ended her active combat service , after fifteen war patrols . undergoing a routine refit and voyage repairs , thresher subsequently rendered target training services out of pearl harbor and eniwetok . she was operating out of the latter base on 15 august 1945 when the war in the pacific ended . thresher cleared eniwetok on 15 september , arrived at pearl harbor on 22 september , and stood out to sea on 26 september . making port at san francisco , on 4 october , the boat subsequently left the west coast on 31 october . she transited the panama canal on 10 november and arrived at portsmouth , new hampshire , on 18 november . she was decommissioned there on 13 december 1945 . thresher was recommissioned on 6 february 1946 to be used as a target during atomic bomb test at bikini atoll in the pacific . however , during the refurbishing , it was decided she had deteriorated beyond economical repair , and work was stopped . thresher was decommissioned for the final time on 12 july 1946 . she was stricken from the naval vessel register on 23 december 1947 , and on 18 march 1948 sold for scrap to max siegel of everett , massachusetts . thresher received 15 battle stars and a navy unit commendation for world war ii service , making her the most decorated submarine and amongst the most decorated us ships of world war ii . in culture . thresher is the subject of the third episode of the first season of syndicated television anthology series the silent service . the episode , entitled '' the end of the line , '' aired 5 apr 1957 . it portrayed the japanese attempt to grab thresher with a grappling hook when she was off kwajalein in july 1942 . thresher was also the subject of the sixth episode of the second season of syndicated television anthology series the silent service . the episode , entitled '' the thresher story , '' recounts the events of firing her 3 '' gun on her fifth war patrol and being subsequently refitted with '' an old relic , '' a 5 '' /51 ( which had entered service in 1911 ) . notes .