William Hobson

early life . william hobson was born in waterford , ireland , the son of samuel hobson , a barrister . he grew up in an anglo-irish anglican family . hobson joined the royal navy on 25 august 1803 as a second-class volunteer . he served in the napoleonic wars and was later involved in the suppression of piracy in the caribbean . he became a midshipman in 1806 and some seven years later was a first lieutenant . between march 1823 and may 1824 he commanded the schooner , in which he captured several pirate vessels , earning himself the nickname '' lion hobson '' . he was promoted to commander on 18 march 1824 and commanded between 1826 and 1828 . in december 1834 he obtained a commission from the first lord of the admiralty - george eden , 1st earl of auckland - to the east indies on . australia . in 1836 , he was ordered to australia , arriving at hobart on 5 august 1836 , and at sydney 18 & nbsp ; days later . on 18 september 1836 , left for port phillip district ( later melbourne ) conveying captain william lonsdale and other officials to the new colony . during the next three months , hobson and his officers thoroughly surveyed port phillip , the northern portion of which , by direction of governor sir richard bourke , was named hobsons bay , after him . his ship was involved in the founding of williamstown . he was offered the position of superintendent of the bombay marine at a salary of £2000 a year , but he had taken a liking to australia and was a candidate for the governorship of port phillip , although the salary was not expected to be more than £800 a year . the more recently created city of hobsons bay is also named after william . new zealand . on 26 may 1837 hobson sailed to the bay of islands , new zealand , in response to a request for help from james busby , the british resident , who felt threatened by wars between māori tribes . for three months in 1837 pōmare ii ( whiria ) fought with tītore until a peace agreement was negotiated by tareha . on his return to england in 1838 , hobson submitted a report on new zealand , in which he proposed establishing british sovereignty over the islands in small pockets similar to the hudson 's bay company in canada . . lieutenant-governor . at the time , the british government recognised the sovereignty of the māori people , as represented in the declaration of the independence of new zealand of october 1835 . hobson was appointed lieutenant-governor under the governor of new south wales , sir george gipps—ratified on 30 july 1839 —and british consul to new zealand—confirmed on 13 august 1839 . on 14 august 1839 , constantine henry phipps , 1st marquess of normanby issued hobson with detailed instructions , giving the british government 's reasons for intervention in new zealand and directions for the purchase of land '' by fair and equal contracts '' . the land was later resold to pākehā settlers at a profit to provide for further operations . hobson arrived in the bay of islands aboard on 29 january 1840 with a small group of officials , including an executive council consisting of colonial secretary willoughby shortland , colonial treasurer george cooper and attorney-general francis fisher . the legislative council comprised the above officials and three justice of the peace . hobson appointed as three magistrates , messrs . shortland , johnson , and matthew . . treaty of waitangi . the treaty of waitangi was first proposed by hobson on his return to britain from his first visit to new zealand . upon arrival in new zealand , hobson almost immediately drafted the treaty of waitangi together with his secretary james freeman and james busby . busby had previously drafted the declaration of the independence of new zealand . hobson headed the british signatories . of the 40 or so māori chiefs , the ngapuhi chief hōne heke was the first to sign the treaty . as each chief signed , hobson said '' he iwi tahi tātou '' , meaning '' we are now one people '' . to enhance the authority of the treaty eight further copies were made and sent around the country to gather additional signatures . after obtaining signatures to the treaty at the bay of islands ( 6 february 1840 ) , he travelled to waitematā harbour to obtain more signatures and to survey a suitable location for a new capital ( he also sent the deputy surveyor-general , william cornwallis symonds , to other areas to obtain more signatures ) . after suffering a stroke on 1 march 1840 , he was taken back to the bay of islands , where he recovered sufficiently to continue work . on 21 may 1840 , in response to the creation of a '' republic '' by the new zealand company settlers of port nicholson , who were laying out a new town under the flag of the united tribes of new zealand , hobson asserted british sovereignty over the whole of new zealand , despite the incompleteness of the treaty signing . he sent willoughby shortland and some soldiers to port nicholson on 25 may 1840 , and the council of the settlers was disbanded . their leader , william wakefield , later travelled to the bay of islands to pledge allegiance to the crown . his suggestion to make port nicholson the capital was rejected in favour of hobson 's plan for a new town on waitematā harbour , to be named auckland after the baron auckland . on 11 july 1840 , the french frigate l'aube arrived at the bay of islands on its way to banks peninsula as part of the settlement plan of the nanto-bordelaise company . hobson immediately sent two magistrates to akaroa to establish the british claim to sovereignty by holding courts . near the end of 1840 , the port nicholson settlers sent a petition to queen victoria calling for hobson 's dismissal over his treatment of them . hobson responded on 26 may 1841 to the foreign secretary . governor . in november 1840 , the queen signed a royal charter for new zealand to become a crown colony separate from new south wales . hobson was sworn in by the chief justice as governor of new zealand on 3 may 1841 . on the same day , the general legislative council came into being , with hobson in charge of appointing its membership . hobson travelled to wellington in august 1841 , where he heard the complaints of settlers and selected magistrates . he then visited akaroa to settle the french claims . back in auckland , he had some difficulty with the māori , and his government was ridiculed by journalists in wellington and auckland . he responded by closing down the new zealand herald and auckland gazette . with his government low on funds , he resorted to issuing unauthorised bills on the british treasury in 1842 . hobson faced opposition from the '' senate clique '' radicals who sent a petition to the foreign secretary to have hobson recalled . one of hobson 's last actions was to declare an auckland anniversary day , to mark the anniversary of his arrival in the bay of islands . hobson suffered a second stroke and died on 10 september 1842 , prior to being recalled from office . he was buried in the symonds street cemetery in auckland . the waitakere suburb of hobsonville is named after him . notes . further reading . hobson , w . papers , 1833–1846 . ms papers 46 . wtu lambourn , alan ( 1988 ) the treatymakers of new zealand : heralding the birth of a nation . ( lewes , sussex : book guild ) . scholefield , g . h . captain william hobson . london , 1934 uk parliament . correspondence and other papers relating to new zealand , 1835–1845 . in irish university press series of british parliamentary papers . colonies : new zealand . vols 3 & 4 . shannon , 1970 . external links . e . j . tapp , ' hobson , william ( 1793–1842 ) ' , australian dictionary of biography