Aetolia

geography . the achelous river separates aetolia from acarnania to the west ; on the north it had boundaries with epirus and thessaly ; on the east with the ozolian locrians ; and on the south the entrance to the corinthian gulf defined the limits of aetolia . in classical times aetolia comprised two parts : '' old aetolia '' in the west , from the achelous to the evinos and calydon ; and '' new aetolia '' or '' acquired aetolia '' in the east , from the evenus and calydon to the ozolian locrians . the country has a level and fruitful coastal region , but an unproductive and mountainous interior . the mountains contained many wild beasts , and acquired fame in greek mythology as the scene of the hunt for the calydonian boar . history . ancient era . tribes known as curetes – named after the nearby mountain kourion , or just to stand out from the acarnanians , who were called so because they were unshorn – and leleges originally inhabited the country , but at an early period greeks from elis , led by the mythical eponym aetolus , set up colonies . dionysius of halicarnassus mentions that curetes was the old name of the aetolians and leleges the old name of the locrians . the aetolians took part in the trojan war , under their king thoas . the mountain tribes of aetolia were the ophioneis , john d . grainger , the league of the aitolians , 1999 , p . 33 . the apodotoi , the agraeis , the aperantoi john d . grainger , the league of the aitolians , 1999 , p . 40 . and the eurytanians . the primitive lifestyle of those tribes made an impression on ancient historians . polybius doubted their greek heritage , while livy reports that they spoke a language similar to the macedonians . on the other hand , thucydides claims that eurytanians spoke a very difficult language and ate their food completely raw . they were semi-barbaric , warlike and predatory . they worshiped apollo as god of tame nature and artemis as goddess of wilderness . they also worshiped athena , not as goddess of wisdom , but emphasizing the element of war – i.e . a goddess that was a counterbalance to the god ares . they called apollo and artemis '' laphrios gods , '' i.e . patrons of the spoils and loot of war . in addition , they worshiped hercules , the river achelous and bacchus . in thermos , an area north of trichonis lake , there was after the 7th century a shrine of apollo “ thermios , ” which became a significant religious center during the time of the aetolian league . the aetolians refused to participate in the persian wars . in 426 bc , led by aegitios , they defeated the athenians and their allies , who had turned against apodotia and ophioneia under the general command of demosthenes . istoriai , thoucydides pages 243-246 . however , they failed to regain naupaktos , which had meanwhile been conquered by the corinthians with the aid of the athenians . at the end of the peloponnesian war , the aetolians took part as mercenaries of the athenians in the expedition against syracuse . then the achaeans occupied calydon , but the aetolians recovered it in 361 bc . in 338 bc , naupaktos was again taken by the aetolians , with the help of philip ii . during the lamian war , the aetolians helped the athenian general leosthenes defeat antipater . as a result , they came into conflict with antipater and craterus , taking great risks , but were eventually saved by the disagreement between the two macedonian generals and perdiccas . the acarnanians then attempted to invade their land , but the aetolians were able to force them to flee . the aetolians set up a united league , the aetolian league , in early times . it soon became a powerful confederation ( sympoliteia ) and by c . 340 bc it became one of the leading military powers in ancient greece . it had originally been organized during the reign of philip ii by the cities of aetolia for their mutual benefit and protection and became a formidable rival to the macedonian monarchs and the achaean league . the great courage shown by the aetolians during the fighting against the macedonians increased their glamour and fame , especially after winning the last amphictyonic war and even more after repulsing the gallic invasion under brennus and rescuing the sanctuary of delphi . subsequently , the sotiria games were established by the aetolians , in honour of zeus the saviour . john d . grainger , the league of the aitolians , 1999 , p . 103 - 104 . the aetolians ’ power increasingly magnified with the occupation of the lands of ozoloi , locrians and phocians , as well as boeotia . they then united under the power of their league in the areas of tegea , mantinea , orchomenus , psophida and phigaleia . between 220–217 bc , the social war broke out between the achaean and aetolian leagues . the war was first started by the aetolians with the help of the spartans and eleans . allies of the achaeans were the macedonians , the boeotians , the phocians , the epirotes , the acarnanians and the messenians . the aetolians allied with the romans , while philip destroyed the temple of apollo thermios and allied with the carthaginians . the aetolians continued to fight on the side of the romans even in the battle of cynoscephalae ( 196 bc ) , ignoring the great dangers looming for greece as a result of this alliance . the aetolians took the side of antiochus iii against the roman republic , and on the defeat of that monarch in 189 bc , they became virtually the subjects of rome . following the conquest of the achaeans by lucius mummius achaicus in 146 bc , aetolia became part of the roman province of achaea . when the roman garrisons were withdrawn because of the civil wars in rome , the aetolians , too , began to fight each other . following octavius ’ victory at the battle of actium , the aetolians who had sided with antony disbanded completely . octavius handed calydon over to the achaeans , who devastated it entirely and moved the statue of artemis laphria to patras . there were subsequent invasions by goths , huns , and vandals several centuries later at the end of the roman empire . aetolia 's reputation has suffered from a rather hostile treatment in the sources . polybius is considered now to have a heavy anti-aetolian bias due to his having relied on aetolia 's opponent aratus of achaea , but mainly because of his origin in megalopolis , a major centre of the rival achaean league . middle ages . during the middle ages , aetolia was part of the byzantine empire and later passed to the turks . aetolia was mentioned in francisco baltazar 's florante at laura . list of aetolians . agetas , general aitolos , mythological hero leda , queen of sparta and mother of helen , clytemnestra , and the dioscuri by zeus and tyndareus andraemon , father of thoas thoas , hero of the trojan war titormus , wrestler alexander aetolus , poet damocritus , general dorimachus , general nicolaus of aetolia , general theodotus of aetolia , general pyrrhias , stadion olympic racer in 200 bc chronicon ( eusebius ) 145th olympiad pyrrhias of aetolia , general smith , dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology pyrrhias agelaus of naupactus , leading man of the aetolian league cosmas of aetolia , ( 1714–1779 ) monk dimitrios makris , fighter of the greek war of independence ( 1821 ) . see also . aetolian league list of traditional greek place names aetolia game . references . this article incorporates material from harry thurston peck 's harper 's dictionary of classical antiquities ( 1898 ) .