1970 in literature

events . january 16 – the düsseldorfer schauspielhaus opens with a performance of georg büchner 's dantons tod . march – magdalena mouján 's story '' gu ta gutarrak '' ( '' we and ours '' ) in basque is suppressed by the authorities in francoist spain . june 10 – the english novelist antony burgess delivers an inflammatory lecture , '' obscenity and the arts '' , at the university of malta ; its reception leads to him leaving malta . he has begun a novel that will become earthly powers ( 1980 ) . june 17 – the première of david storey 's play home at the royal court theatre , london , is directed by lindsay anderson and stars sir john gielgud and sir ralph richardson . july 7 – the english publisher sir allen lane dies ( born 1902 ) . on august 21 his paperback imprint penguin books is acquired by pearson . august 27 – england 's royal shakespeare company introduces a revolutionary production of shakespeare 's a midsummer night 's dream directed by peter brook , at the royal shakespeare theatre , stratford-upon-avon . november 20 – the playwright fadil paçrami becomes chairman of the parliament of albania . november 25 – in tokyo , the japanese author and tatenokai militia leader yukio mishima ( 三島由紀夫 , 45 ) and others take over the headquarters of the japan self-defense forces in an attempted coup d'état . mishima 's speech commits seppuku ( public ritual suicide ) when he fails to sway the public to his right-wing politics , which include restoring the powers of the emperor . december 5 – dario fo premières his play accidental death of an anarchist ( morte accidentale di un anarchico ) at varese in italy . unknown dates len deighton 's bomber , set in 1943 , becomes the first published novel to have been written on a word processor , an ibm mt/st . the novel deliverance by the american poet james dickey is published ; it will go on to be named among the 100 best english-language novels of the 20th century by an editorial board of the american modern library . an unexpurgated edition of john cleland 's fanny hill ( memoirs of a woman of pleasure , 1748–1749 ) appears in the u.k . without legal challenge . bohumil hrabal 's books domácí úkoly ( home work ) and poupata ( buds ) are suppressed by the communist authorities in czechoslovakia . new books . fiction . dritëro agolli – komisari memo ( commissar memo ) poul anderson – tau zero thomas berger – vital parts thomas bernhard – the lime works ( das kalkwerk ) pierre berton – the national dream jim bouton – ball four melvyn bragg – a place in england john braine – stay with me till morning wallace breem – eagle in the snow jimmy breslin – the gang that could n't shoot straight taylor caldwell – great lion of god john dickson carr – the ghosts ' high noon agatha christie – passenger to frankfurt robertson davies – fifth business l . sprague de camp the reluctant shaman and other fantastic tales warlocks and warriors ( ed . ) samuel r . delany – the fall of the towers ( trilogy ) michel déon – les poneys sauvages james dickey – deliverance josé donoso – the obscene bird of night ( el obsceno pájaro de la noche ) lawrence durrell – nunquam vincent eri – the crocodile nuruddin farah – from a crooked rib j . g . farrell – troubles juan goytisolo – count julian ( reivindicación del conde don julián ) l.p . hartley – my sisters ' keeper anne hébert – kamouraska ernest hemingway – islands in the stream susan hill – i 'm the king of the castle pamela hansford johnson – the honours board uwe johnson – anniversaries . from the life of gesine cresspahl ( jahrestage : aus dem leben von gesine cresspahl ; begins publication ) anna kavan – julia and the bazooka jaan kross – between three plagues ( part 1 ) halldór laxness – innansveitarkronika ira levin – this perfect day mario levrero – la ciudad h . p . lovecraft – the horror in the museum and other revisions john d . macdonald – the long lavender look eric malpass – oh my darling daughter yukio mishima ( 三島由紀夫 ) – the decay of the angel ( 天人五衰 , tennin gosui ; last in the sea of fertility tetralogy ) brian moore – fergus toni morrison – the bluest eye larry niven – ringworld john jay osborn , jr . – the paper chase mary renault – fire from heaven kurban said – ali and nino erich segal – love story sidney sheldon – the naked face clark ashton smith – other dimensions manuel scorza – drums for rancas muriel spark – the driver 's seat mary stewart – the crystal cave alan sillitoe – a start in life leon uris – qb vii jack vance – the pnume gore vidal – two sisters patrick white – the vivisector venedikt yerofeyev – moscow-petushki ( moscow to the end of the line ; samizdat publication ) roger zelazny – nine princes in amber . children and young people . richard bach – jonathan livingston seagull nina bawden – the birds on the trees judy blume – are you there , god ? it 's me , margaret john burningham – mr gumpy 's outing betsy byars – summer of the swans john christopher ( sam youd ) – the guardians ( science fiction ) roald dahl – fantastic mr fox leon garfield and edward blishen – the god beneath the sea ruth manning-sanders – a book of devils and demons dr . seuss – mr . brown can moo ! can you ? ruth park the muddle-headed wombat in the springtime the muddle-headed wombat on the river bill peet the whingdingdilly the wump world maurice sendak – in the night kitchen isaac bashevis singer – a day of pleasure e . b . white – the trumpet of the swan . drama . ama ata aidoo – anowa robert bolt – vivat ! vivat regina ! dario fo – accidental death of an anarchist michael frayn – the two of us ( 4 1-act plays ) trevor griffiths – occupations christopher hampton – the philanthropist lorraine hansberry – les blancs welcome msomi – umabatha terence rattigan – a bequest to the nation anthony shaffer – sleuth alexander vampilov – duck hunting ( « утиная охота » , utinaya okhota , published ; first performed 1976 ) derek walcott – dream on monkey mountain . poetry . l . sprague de camp – demons and dinosaurs ted hughes – crow . non-fiction . theodor w . adorno ( posthumously ) – aesthetic theory ( asthetische theorie ) hannah arendt – on violence roland barthes – s/z dee brown – bury my heart at wounded knee james macgregor burns – roosevelt : the soldier of freedom henri charrière – papillon elizabeth david – spices , salt and aromatics in the english kitchen edward de bono – lateral thinking : creativity step by step august derleth – thirty years of arkham house , 1939-1969 : a history and bibliography michel foucault – les mots et les choses : une archéologie des sciences humaines ( the order of things : an archaeology of the human sciences ) germaine greer – the female eunuch helene hanff – 84 charing cross road arthur janov – the primal scream christopher lloyd – the well-tempered garden norman mailer – of a fire on the moon dumas malone – jefferson and his time mahathir bin mohamad – the malay dilemma kate millet – sexual politics nancy mitford – frederick the great robin morgan ( ed . ) – sisterhood is powerful : an anthology of writings from the women 's liberation movement harold perkin – the age of the railway j . b . priestley – the edwardians albert speer – inside the third reich alvin toffler – future shock . births . january 25 – stephen chbosky , american novelist and screenwriter march 6 – simona vinci , italian fiction writer march 12 – dave eggers , american writer , editor and publisher march 20 – michele jaffe , american author march 26 – martin mcdonagh , british-born irish playwright may 20 – dorthe nors , danish fiction writer may 26 – alex garland , english novelist june 6 – sarah dessen , american novelist july 22 – doug johnstone , scottish crime fiction writer september 10 – phaswane mpe , south african novelist ( died 2004 ) september 16 – nick sagan , american novelist and screenwriter october 27 – jonathan stroud , english fantasy writer november 7 – chris adrian , american novelist november 24 – marlon james , jamaican novelist november 27 – han kang , south korean novelist unknown dates raja ' a alem , saudi arabian writer roberta dapunt , italian poet nathan englander , american novelist and short story writer neel mukherjee , indian novelist faruk šehić , bosnian poet and fiction writer . deaths . january 10 – charles olson , american modernist poet ( liver cancer , born 1910 ) january 29 – b . h . liddell hart , english military historian ( born 1895 ) february 2 – bertrand russell , english philosopher ( born 1872 ) february 20 – sophie treadwell , american dramatist and journalist ( born 1885 ) march 11 – erle stanley gardner , american writer ( born 1889 ) march 21 – marlen haushofer , austrian novelist ( born 1920 ) march 29 – vera brittain , english novelist , memoirist and poet ( born 1893 ) april 11 – john o'hara , american novelist ( cardiovascular disease , born 1905 ) may 12 – nelly sachs , jewish german poet and dramatist ( born 1891 ) june 2 – giuseppe ungaretti , italian modernism poet and writer ( born 1888 ) june 3 – ruth sawyer , american children 's writer and novelist ( born 1880 ) june 7 – e . m . forster , english novelist ( born 1879 ) june 16 – elsa triolet , french novelist ( born 1896 ) july 15 – eric berne , canadian-born psychiatrist and author ( heart attack , born 1910 ) september 1 – françois mauriac , french novelist ( born 1885 ) september 28 – john dos passos , american novelist ( born 1896 ) october 18 – máirtín ó cadhain , irish language writer ( born 1906 ) november 23 – alf prøysen , norwegian author , musician and children 's writer ( born 1914 ) november 25 – yukio mishima ( 三島 由紀夫 ) , japanese author ( seppuku , born 1925 ) unknown date – racey helps , english children 's author and illustrator ( born 1913 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : aleksandr solzhenitsyn . canada . see 1970 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : michel tournier , le roi des aulnes prix médicis french : camille bourniquel , sélinonte ou la chambre impériale prix médicis international : luigi malerba , saut de la mort . united kingdom . booker prize : bernice rubens , the elected member carnegie medal for children 's literature : leon garfield and edward blishen , the god beneath the sea cholmondeley award : kathleen raine , douglas livingstone , edward brathwaite eric gregory award : helen frye , paul mills , john mole , brian morse , alan perry , richard tibbitts james tait black memorial prize for fiction : lily powell , the bird of paradise james tait black memorial prize for biography : jasper ridley , lord palmerston queen 's gold medal for poetry : roy fuller . united states . hugo award : ursula k . le guin , the left hand of darkness nebula award : larry niven , ringworld newbery medal for children 's literature : william h . armstrong , sounder pulitzer prize for drama : charles gordone , no place to be somebody pulitzer prize for fiction : jean stafford , collected stories pulitzer prize for poetry : richard howard , untitled subjects . elsewhere . miles franklin award : dal stivens , a horse of air alfaguara prize : carlos droguett , todas esas muertes premio nadal : jesús fernández santos , libro de las memorias de las cosas viareggio prize : nello saito , dentro e fuori . references .