Photonics

history . the word 'photonics ' is derived from the greek word '' phos '' meaning light ( which has genitive case '' photos '' and in compound words the root '' photo- '' is used ) ; it appeared in the late 1960s to describe a research field whose goal was to use light to perform functions that traditionally fell within the typical domain of electronics , such as telecommunications , information processing , etc . photonics as a field began with the invention of the laser in 1960 . other developments followed : the laser diode in the 1970s , optical fibers for transmitting information , and the optical amplifier . these inventions formed the basis for the telecommunications revolution of the late 20th century and provided the infrastructure for the internet . though coined earlier , the term photonics came into common use in the 1980s as fiber-optic data transmission was adopted by telecommunications network operators . at that time , the term was used widely at bell laboratories . its use was confirmed when the ieee lasers and electro-optics society established an archival journal named photonics technology letters at the end of the 1980s . during the period leading up to the dot-com crash circa 2001 , photonics as a field focused largely on optical telecommunications . however , photonics covers a huge range of science and technology applications , including laser manufacturing , biological and chemical sensing , medical diagnostics and therapy , display technology , and optical computing . further growth of photonics is likely if current silicon photonics developments are successful . responsive photonic nanostructures : smart nanoscale optical materials , editor : yadong yin rsc cambridge 2013 . relationship to other fields . classical optics . photonics is closely related to optics . classical optics long preceded the discovery that light is quantized , when albert einstein famously explained the photoelectric effect in 1905 . optics tools include the refracting lens , the reflecting mirror , and various optical components and instruments developed throughout the 15th to 19th centuries . key tenets of classical optics , such as huygens principle , developed in the 17th century , maxwell 's equations and the wave equations , developed in the 19th , do not depend on quantum properties of light . modern optics . photonics is related to quantum optics , optomechanics , electro-optics , optoelectronics and quantum electronics . however , each area has slightly different connotations by scientific and government communities and in the marketplace . quantum optics often connotes fundamental research , whereas photonics is used to connote applied research and development . the term photonics more specifically connotes : the particle properties of light , the potential of creating signal processing device technologies using photons , the practical application of optics , and an analogy to electronics . the term optoelectronics connotes devices or circuits that comprise both electrical and optical functions , i.e . , a thin-film semiconductor device . the term electro-optics came into earlier use and specifically encompasses nonlinear electrical-optical interactions applied , e.g . , as bulk crystal modulators such as the pockels cell , but also includes advanced imaging sensors . emerging fields . photonics also relates to the emerging science of quantum information and quantum optics . other emerging fields include : photoacoustic imaging where laser energy delivered into biological tissues will be absorbed and converted into heat , leading to ultrasound emission . optomechanics , which involves the study of the interaction between light and mechanical vibrations of mesoscopic or macroscopic objects ; opto-atomics , in which devices integrate both photonic and atomic devices for applications such as precision timekeeping , navigation , and metrology ; plasmonics , which studies the interaction between light and plasmons in dielectric and metallic structures . plasmons are the quantizations of plasma oscillations ; when coupled to an electromagnetic wave , they manifest as surface plasmon polaritons or localized surface plasmons . polaritonics , which differs from photonics in that the fundamental information carrier is a polariton . polaritons are a mixture of photons and phonons , and operate in the range of frequencies from 300 gigahertz to approximately 10 terahertz . programmable photonics , which studies the development of photonic circuits that can be reprogrammed to implement different functions in the same fashion as an fpga . applications . image : aphrodita aculeata ( sea mouse ) . jpg thumb a sea mouse ( aphrodita aculeata ) , showing colorful spines , a remarkable example of photonic engineering by a living organism applications of photonics are ubiquitous . included are all areas from everyday life to the most advanced science , e.g . light detection , telecommunications , information processing , photonic computing , lighting , metrology , spectroscopy , holography , medicine ( surgery , vision correction , endoscopy , health monitoring ) , biophotonics , military technology , laser material processing , art diagnostics ( involving infrared reflectography , x-ray , ultraviolet fluorescence , xrf ) , agriculture , and robotics . just as applications of electronics have expanded dramatically since the first transistor was invented in 1948 , the unique applications of photonics continue to emerge . economically important applications for semiconductor photonic devices include optical data recording , fiber optic telecommunications , laser printing ( based on xerography ) , displays , and optical pumping of high-power lasers . the potential applications of photonics are virtually unlimited and include chemical synthesis , medical diagnostics , on-chip data communication , sensors , laser defense , and fusion energy , to name several interesting additional examples . consumer equipment : barcode scanner , printer , cd/dvd/blu-ray devices , remote control devices telecommunications : optical fiber communications , optical down converter to microwave medicine : correction of poor eyesight , laser surgery , surgical endoscopy , tattoo removal industrial manufacturing : the use of lasers for welding , drilling , cutting , and various methods of surface modification construction : laser leveling , laser rangefinding , smart structures aviation : photonic gyroscopes lacking mobile parts military : ir sensors , command and control , navigation , search and rescue , mine laying and detection entertainment : laser shows , beam effects , holographic art information processing sensors : lidar , sensors for consumer electronics metrology : time and frequency measurements , rangefinder photonic computing : clock distribution and communication between computers , printed circuit boards , or within optoelectronic integrated circuits ; in the future : quantum computer microphotonics and nanophotonics usually includes photonic crystals and solid state devices . . overview of photonics research . the science of photonics includes investigation of the emission , transmission , amplifier , detection , and modulation of light . light sources . photonics commonly uses semiconductor-based light sources , such as light-emitting diodes ( leds ) , superluminescent diodes , and lasers . other light sources include single photon sources , fluorescent lamps , cathode ray tubes ( crts ) , and plasma screens . note that while crts , plasma screens , and organic light-emitting diode displays generate their own light , liquid crystal displays ( lcds ) like tft screens require a backlight of either cold cathode fluorescent lamps or , more often today , leds . characteristic for research on semiconductor light sources is the frequent use of iii-v semiconductors instead of the classical semiconductors like silicon and germanium . this is due to the special properties of iii-v semiconductors that allow for the implementation of light sources . examples for material systems used are gallium arsenide ( gaas ) and aluminium gallium arsenide ( algaas ) or other compound semiconductors . they are also used in conjunction with silicon to produce hybrid silicon lasers . transmission media . light can be transmitted through any transparent medium . glass fiber or plastic optical fiber can be used to guide the light along a desired path . in optical communications optical fibers allow for transmission distances of more than 100 & nbsp ; km without amplification depending on the bit rate and modulation format used for transmission . a very advanced research topic within photonics is the investigation and fabrication of special structures and '' materials '' with engineered optical properties . these include photonic crystals , photonic crystal fibers and metamaterials . amplifiers . optical amplifiers are used to amplify an optical signal . optical amplifiers used in optical communications are erbium-doped fiber amplifiers , semiconductor optical amplifiers , raman amplifiers and optical parametric amplifiers . a very advanced research topic on optical amplifiers is the research on quantum dot semiconductor optical amplifiers . detection . photodetectors detect light . photodetectors range from very fast photodiodes for communications applications over medium speed charge coupled devices ( ccds ) for digital cameras to very slow solar cells that are used for energy harvesting from sunlight . there are also many other photodetectors based on thermal , chemical , quantum , photoelectric and other effects . modulation . modulation of a light source is used to encode information on a light source . modulation can be achieved by the light source directly . one of the simplest examples is to use a flashlight to send morse code . another method is to take the light from a light source and modulate it in an external optical modulator . an additional topic covered by modulation research is the modulation format . on-off keying has been the commonly used modulation format in optical communications . in the last years more advanced modulation formats like phase-shift keying or even orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing have been investigated to counteract effects like dispersion that degrade the quality of the transmitted signal . photonic systems . photonics also includes research on photonic systems . this term is often used for optical communication systems . this area of research focuses on the implementation of photonic systems like high speed photonic networks . this also includes research on optical regenerators , which improve optical signal quality . photonic integrated circuits . photonic integrated circuits ( pics ) are optically active integrated semiconductor photonic devices . the leading commercial application of pics are optical transceivers for data center optical networks . pics were fabricated on iii-v indium phosphide semiconductor wafer substrates were the first to achieve commercial success ; pics based on silicon wafer substrates are now also a commercialized technology . key applications for integrated photonics include — data center interconnects : data centers continue to grow in scale as companies and institutions store and process more information in the cloud . with the increase in data center compute , the demands on data center networks correspondingly increase . optical cables can support greater lane bandwidth at longer transmission distances than copper cables . for short-reach distances and up to 40 gbps data transmission rates , non-integrated approaches such as vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers can be used for optical transceivers on multi-mode optical fiber networks . beyond this range and bandwidth , photonic integrated circuits are key to enable high-performance , low-cost optical transceivers . analog rf signal applications : using the ghz precision signal processing of photonic integrated circuits , radiofrequency ( rf ) signals can be manipulated with high fidelity to add or drop multiple channels of radio , spread across an ultra-broadband frequency range . in addition , photonic integrated circuits can remove background noise from an rf signal with unprecedented precision , which will increase the signal to noise performance and make possible new benchmarks in low power performance . taken together , this high precision processing enables us to now pack large amounts of information into ultra-long distance radio communications . sensors : photons can also be used to detect and differentiate the optical properties of materials . they can identify chemical or biochemical gases from air pollution , organic produce , and contaminants in the water . they can also be used to detect abnormalities in the blood , such as low glucose levels , and measure biometrics such as pulse rate . photonic integrated circuits are being designed as comprehensive and ubiquitous sensors with glass/silicon , and embedded via high-volume production in various mobile devices . mobile platform sensors are enabling us to more directly engage with practices that better protect the environment , monitor food supply and keep us healthy . lidar and other phased array imaging : arrays of pics can take advantage of phase delays in the light reflected from objects with three-dimensional shapes to reconstruct 3d images , and light imaging , detection and ranging ( lidar ) with laser light can offer a complement to radar by providing precision imaging ( with 3d information ) at close distances . this new form of machine vision is having an immediate application in driverless cars to reduce collisions , and in biomedical imaging . phased arrays can also be used for free-space communications and novel display technologies . current versions of lidar predominantly rely on moving parts , making them large , slow , low resolution , costly , and prone to mechanical vibration and premature failure . integrated photonics can realize lidar within a footprint the size of a postage stamp , scan without moving parts , and be produced in high volume at low cost . biophotonics . biophotonics employs tools from the field of photonics to the study of biology . biophotonics mainly focuses on improving medical diagnostic abilities ( for example for cancer or infectious diseases ) but can also be used for environmental or other applications . the main advantages of this approach are speed of analysis , non-invasive diagnostics , and the ability to work in situ . see also . nano-optics op-tec optronics/optoelectronics organic photonics bio-inspired photonics photonics mast ( on submarines ) european photonics industry consortium . references .