Wood gas

history . the first wood gasifier was apparently built by gustav bischof in 1839 . the first vehicle powered by wood gas was built by thomas hugh parker in 1901 . around 1900 , many cities delivered syngas ( centrally produced , typically from coal ) to residences . natural gas began to be used only in 1930 . wood gas vehicles were used during world war ii as a consequence of the rationing of fossil fuels . in germany alone , around 500,000 '' producer gas '' vehicles were in use at the end of the war . trucks , buses , tractors , motorcycles , ships and trains were equipped with a wood gasification unit . in 1942 , when wood gas had not yet reached the height of its popularity , there were about 73,000 wood gas vehicles in sweden , ekerholm , helena . 'cultural meanings of wood gas as automobile fuel in sweden , 1930-1945 ' . in past and present energy societies : how energy connects politics , technologies and cultures , edited by nina möllers and karin zachmann . bielefeld : transcript verlag , 2012 . 65,000 in france , 10,000 in denmark , and almost 8,000 in switzerland . in 1944 , finland had 43,000 '' woodmobiles '' , of which 30,000 were buses and trucks , 7,000 private vehicles , 4,000 tractors and 600 boats . wood gas vehicles : firewood in the fuel tank low-tech magazine , january 18 , 2010 wood gasifiers are still manufactured in china and russia for automobiles and as power generators for industrial applications . trucks retrofitted with wood gasifiers are used in north korea in rural areas , particularly on the roads of the east coast . usage . internal combustion engine . image : wood gasifier on epa tractor.jpg thumb a wood gas generator fitted to a ford truck converted into a tractor , per larsen tractor museum , sweden , 2003 wood gasifiers can power either spark ignition engines , where all of the normal fuel can be replaced with little change to the carburation , or in a diesel engine , feeding the gas into the air inlet that is modified to have a throttle valve , if it did n't have it already . on diesel engines the diesel fuel is still needed to ignite the gas mixture , so a mechanically regulated diesel engine 's '' stop '' linkage and probably '' throttle '' linkage must be modified to always give the engine a little bit of injected fuel , often under the standard idle per-injection volume . wood can be used to power cars with ordinary internal combustion engines if a wood gasifier is attached . this was quite popular during world war ii in several european , african and asian countries , because the war prevented easy and cost-effective access to oil . in more recent times , wood gas has been suggested as a clean and efficient method to heat and cook in developing countries , or even to produce electricity when combined with an internal combustion engine . compared to world war ii technology , gasifiers have become less dependent on constant attention due to the use of sophisticated electronic control systems , but it remains difficult to get clean gas from them . purification of the gas and feeding it into natural gas pipelines is one variant to link it to the existing refuelling infrastructure . liquefaction by the fischer–tropsch process is another possibility . efficiency of the gasifier system is relatively high . the gasification stage converts about 75 % of fuel energy content into a combustible gas that can be used as a fuel for internal combustion engines . based on long-term practical experiments and over driven with a wood gas-powered car , the energy consumption has been 1.54 times higher compared to the energy demand of the same car on petrol , excluding the energy needed to extract , transport and refine the oil from which petrol is derived , and excluding the energy to harvest , process , and transport the wood to feed the gasifier . this means that of wood combustible matter has been found to be equivalent to of petrol during real transportation in similar driving conditions and with the same , otherwise unmodified , vehicle . this can be considered to be a good result , because no other refining of the fuel is required . this study also considers all possible losses of the wood gas system , like preheating of the system and carrying of the extra weight of the gas-generating system . in power generation , reported demand of fuel is wood combustible matter per kilowatt-hour of electricity . gasifiers have been built for remote asian communities using rice hulls , which in many cases have no other use . one installation in burma uses an 80 & nbsp ; kw modified diesel-powered electric generator for about 500 people who are otherwise without power . burmese village rice husk gasifier the ash can be used as biochar fertilizer , so this can be considered a renewable fuel . exhaust gas emission from an internal combustion engine is significantly lower on wood gas than on petrol . especially the hydrocarbon emissions are low on wood gas . a normal catalytic converter works well with wood gas , but even without it , emission levels less than 20 ppm hc and 0.2 % co can be easily achieved by most automobile engines . combustion of wood gas generates no particulates , and the gas renders thus very little carbon black amongst motor oil . . stoves , cooking and furnaces . certain stove designs are , in effect , gasifiers working on the updraft principle : the air passes up through the fuel , which can be a column of rice hulls , and is combusted , then reduced to carbon monoxide by the residual char on the surface . the resulting gas is then burnt by heated secondary air coming up a concentric tube . such a device behaves very much like a gas stove . this arrangement is also known as a chinese burner . an alternative stove based on the down-draft principle and typically built with nested cylinders also provides high efficiency . combustion from the top creates a gasification zone , with the gas escaping downwards through ports located at the base of the burner chamber . the gas mixes with additional incoming air to provide a secondary burn . most of the co produced by gasification is oxidized to in the secondary combustion cycle ; therefore , gasification stoves carry lower health risks than conventional cooking fires . another application is the use of producer gas to displace light density fuel oil ( ldo ) in industrial furnaces . green hydrogen gas is also extracted from the wood gas which is in turn produced from widely available and carbon neutral biomass . all the products of wood gasifier ( charcoal , hydro carbon liquids , methane and carbon monoxide ) can be converted in to hydrogen by steam reforming process without external heat input . 5 to 6 kg of dry biomass yields 1 kg of hydrogen with minimum 60 % efficiency . production . image : holzvergaser_güssing.jpg thumb fluidized bed gasifier in güssing , austria , operated on wood chips a wood gasifier takes wood chips , sawdust , charcoal , coal , rubber or similar materials as fuel and burns these incompletely in a fire box , producing wood gas , solid ash and soot , the latter of which have to be removed periodically from the gasifier . the wood gas can then be filtered for tars and soot/ash particles , cooled and directed to an engine or fuel cell . electricity from wood through the combination of gasification and solid oxide fuel cells , ph.d . thesis by florian nagel , swiss federal institute of technology zurich , 2008 most of these engines have strict purity requirements of the wood gas , so the gas often has to pass through extensive gas cleaning in order to remove or convert , i.e . , '' crack '' , tars and particles . the removal of tar is often accomplished by using a water scrubber . running wood gas in an unmodified gasoline-burning internal combustion engine may lead to problematic accumulation of unburned compounds . the quality of the gas from different gasifiers varies a great deal . staged gasifiers , where pyrolysis and gasification occur separately , instead of in the same reaction zone as was the case in , e.g . , the world war ii gasifiers , can be engineered to produce essentially tar-free gas ( less than 1 & nbsp ; mg/m 3 ) , while single-reactor fluidized bed gasifiers may exceed 50,000 & nbsp ; mg/m 3 tar . the fluidized bed reactors have the advantage of being much more compact , with more capacity per unit volume and price . depending on the intended use of the gas , tar can be beneficial , as well by increasing the heating value of the gas . the heat of combustion of '' producer gas '' & nbsp ; — a term used in the united states meaning wood gas produced for use in a combustion engine & nbsp ; — is rather low compared to other fuels . taylor reports that producer gas has a lower heat of combustion of 5.7 mj/kg versus 55.9 mj/kg for natural gas and 44.1 mj/kg for gasoline . the heat of combustion of wood is typically 15-18 mj/kg . presumably , these values can vary somewhat from sample to sample . the same source reports the following chemical composition by volume which most likely is also variable : nitrogen n 2 : 50.9 % carbon monoxide co : 27.0 % hydrogen h 2 : 14.0 % carbon dioxide co 2 : 4.5 % methane ch 4 : 3.0 % oxygen o 2 : 0.6 % . it is pointed out that the gas composition is strongly dependent on the gasification process , the gasification medium ( air , oxygen or steam ) and the fuel moisture . steam-gasification processes typically yield high hydrogen contents , downdraft fixed bed gasifiers yield high nitrogen concentrations and low tar loads , while updraft fixed bed gasifiers yield high tar loads . handbook of biomass downdraft gasifier engine systems ( section 5.2 paragraph 2 , pg 30 ) , prepared by the solar energy research institute , u.s . department of energy solar technical information program , solar energy research institute , 1988 during the production of charcoal for blackpowder , the volatile wood gas is vented . extremely-high-surface-area carbon results , suitable for use as a fuel in black powder .