Ribaldry

examples . ribaldry is present to some degree in every culture and has likely been around for all of human history . works like lysistrata by aristophanes , menaechmi by plautus , satyricon by petronius , and the golden ass of apuleius are ribald classics from classical antiquity . geoffrey chaucer 's '' the miller 's tale '' from his canterbury tales and the crabfish , one of the oldest english traditional ballads , are classic examples . the frenchman françois rabelais showed himself to be a master of ribaldry ( technically called grotesque body ) in his gargantua and other works . the life and opinions of tristram shandy , gentleman by laurence sterne and the lady 's dressing room by jonathan swift are also in this genre ; as is mark twain 's long-suppressed 1601 . another example of ribaldry is '' de brevitate vitae '' , a song which in many european-influenced universities is both a student beer-drinking song and an anthem sung by official university choirs at public graduation ceremonies . the private and public versions of the song contain vastly different words . more recent works like candy , barbarella , l'infermiera , the comedic works of russ meyer , little annie fanny and john barth 's the sot-weed factor are probably better classified as ribaldry than as either pornography or erotica . bawdy song . a bawdy song is a humorous song that emphasises sexual themes and is often rich with innuendo . historically these songs tend to be confined to groups of young males , either as students or in an environment where alcohol is flowing freely . an early collection was wit and mirth , or pills to purge melancholy , edited by thomas d'urfey and published between 1698 and 1720 . selected songs from wit and mirth have been recorded by the city waites and other singers . sailor 's songs tend to be quite frank about the exploitative nature of the relationship between men and women . there are many examples of folk songs in which a man encounters a woman in the countryside . this is followed by a short conversation , and then sexual intercourse , e.g . '' the game of all fours '' . neither side demonstrates any shame or regret . if the woman becomes pregnant , the man will not be there anyway . rugby songs are often bawdy . examples of bawdy folk songs are : '' seventeen come sunday '' and '' the ballad of eskimo nell '' . robert burns compiled the merry muses of caledonia ( the title is not burns 's ) , a collection of bawdy lyrics that were popular in the music halls of scotland as late as the 20th century . in modern times hash house harriers have taken on the role of tradition-bearers for this kind of song . the unexpurgated folk songs of men ( arhoolie 4006 ) is a gramophone record containing a collection of american bawdy songs recorded in 1959 . sandberg , l . & weissman , d . ( 1976 ) the folk music sourcebook . new york : knopf ; p . 134 . blue comedy . blue comedy is comedy that is off-colour , risqué , morality or profane , largely about sex . it often contains profanity or sexual imagery that may shock and offend some audience members . '' working blue '' refers to the act of using swear words and discussing things that people do not discuss in '' polite society '' . a '' blue comedian '' or '' blue comic '' is a comedian who usually performs risqué routines layered with curse words . there is a common belief that comedian max miller ( 1894–1963 ) coined the phrase , after his stage act which involved telling jokes from either a white book or a blue book , chosen by audience preference ( the blue book contained ribald jokes ) . this is not so , as the oxford english dictionary contains earlier references to the use of blue to mean ribald : 1890 sporting times 25 jan . 1/1 '' shifter wondered whether the damsel knew any novel blue stories . '' and 1900 bulletin ( sydney ) 20 oct . 12/4 '' let someone propose to celebrate chaucer by publicly reading some of his bluest productions unexpurgated . the reader would probably be locked up . '' private events at show business clubs such as the bob saget club and the masquers often showed this blue side of otherwise clean-cut bob saget ; a recording survives of one masquers roast from the 1950s with jack benny , george jessel , george burns , and art linkletter all using highly risqué material and obscenities . many comedians who are normally family-friendly might choose to work blue when off-camera or in an adult-oriented environment ; bob saget exemplifies this dichotomy . bill cosby 's 1969 record album 8:15 12:15 records both his family-friendly evening standup comedy show , and his blue midnight show , which included a joke about impregnating his wife '' right through the old midnight trampoline '' ( her diaphragm ) and other sexual references . some comedians build their careers on blue comedy . among the best known of these are redd foxx , lawanda page , and the team of leroy and skillet , all of whom later performed on the family-friendly television show sanford and son . page , leroy , and skillet specialised in a particular african american form of blue spoken word recitation called signifyin ' . dave attell has also been described by his peers as one of the greatest modern-day blue comics . on talk radio in the united states and elsewhere , blue comedy is a staple of the shock jock 's repertoire . the use of blue comedy over american radio airwaves is severely restricted due to decency regulations ; the federal communications commission can levy fines against radio stations that air obscene content . blue literature . as a part of english literature , blue literature takes its origins at least from middle english while bawdy laughter is a central element in works of such writers as shakespeare and chaucer . blue literature is a development represented in various cultures , among different social classes , and genders . starting from 1940s blue domain is no more occupied exclusively by men ; it became possible for women to build a commercial career on blue literature . since there is no comparative study yet , it is not possible to state that all cultures have blue literature , but oral literature of the world suggests that blue may be universal . . see also . black comedy clean comedy dirty blues drinking song grotesque body ruth wallis limerick ( verse ) off-color humor . references . further reading . cray , ed . ( 1992 ) the erotic muse : american bawdy songs , university of illinois press , gershon legman , ed . ( 1992 ) roll me in your arms ( bawdy songs and lore collected by vance randolph ) , university of arkansas press , legman , gershon , ed . ( 1992 ) blow the candle out ( bawdy songs and lore collected by vance randolph ) , university of arkansas press , robert burns ( 1982 ) the merry muses of caledonia ; edited by james barke & sydney goodsir smith . loanhead : macdonald , . external links . the ball o ' kirriemuir