Norwegian Forest cat

history . the norwegian forest cat is adapted to survive norway 's cold weather . its ancestors may include black and white shorthair cats brought to norway from great britain some time after 1000 ad by the vikings , and longhaired cats brought to norway by crusaders . these cats could have reproduced with farm and feral stock and may have eventually evolved into the modern-day norwegian forest breed . the siberian and the turkish angora , longhaired cats from russia and turkey , respectively , are also possible ancestors of the breed . norse legends refer to the skogkatt as a '' mountain-dwelling fairy cat with an ability to climb sheer rock faces that other cats could not manage . '' since the norwegian forest cat is a very adept climber , author claire bessant believes that the skogkatt folktale could be about the ancestor of the modern norwegian forest breed . the name norse skogkatt is used by some breeders and fancier organisations for the modern breed . most likely the ancestors of the norwegian forest cat served as ships ' cats ( mousers ) on viking ships . the original landrace lived in the norwegian forests for many centuries , but were later prized for their hunting skills and were used on norwegian farms , until they were discovered in the early twentieth century by cat enthusiasts . in 1938 the first organisation devoted to the breed , the norwegian forest cat club , was formed in oslo , norway . the club 's movement to preserve the breed was interrupted by world war ii . owing to crossbreed with free-ranging domestic cats during the war , the norwegian forest cat became endangered and nearly extinct until the norwegian forest cat club helped the breed make a comeback by developing an official breeding program . in the 1950s , king olav v declared them the official cat of norway . since the cat did not leave norway until the 1970s , it was not registered as a breed in the fédération internationale féline ( fife ) , the pan-european federation of cat registry , until carl-fredrik nordane , a norwegian cat fancier , took notice of the breed , and made efforts to register it . the breed was registered in europe by the 1970s , and in the american cat fanciers association in 1994 . in 1978 , it was recognized in sweden as an official breed , '' kattförbundet sverak '' ( in french ) . sverak . retrieved 2011-03-20 . and in 1989 , they were accepted as a breed in the united kingdom by the norwegian cat club of britain . the norwegian forest breed is very popular in norway and sweden . since 2003 , it has been the fifth most popular cat breed in france , where there are about 400 to 500 births per year . '' le sphynx : haut dans les cœurs du classement cfa '' ( in french ) . aniwa . retrieved 2010-12-06 . '' bienvenue sur le site de l'unité de médecine de l'elevage et du sport de l'ecole nationale vétérinaire d'alfort '' . ( in french ) . umes . retrieved 2011-03-12 . breed description . the norwegian forest cat is strongly built and larger than an average cat . adult females of this breed will typically weigh 3.6 – 8 & nbsp ; kg ( 8 - 18 & nbsp ; lbs ) , while males tend to weigh 4.5 to 9 & nbsp ; kg ( 10 - 20 & nbsp ; lbs ) . the breed has a long , sturdy body , long legs and a bushy tail . the coat consists of a long , glossy , thick and water-repellent top layer and a woolly undercoat and is thickest at the legs , chest and head . the profile of the breed is generally straight . their water-resistant coat with a dense undercoat developed to help the cat survive in the harsh scandinavian climate . left the head is long with an overall shape similar to an equilateral triangle , a strong chin , and a muzzle of medium length ; a square or round-shaped head is considered to be a defect . the eyes are almond shaped and oblique , and may be of any colour . norwegian forest breed standard . the international cat association . published 1 may 2004 . accessed 26 march 2011 . the ears are large , wide at the base , and high set , have a tufted top , are placed in the extension of the triangle formed by the head , and end with a tuft of hair like the ears of the lynx . all coat colors and divisions in the traditional , sepia and mink categories are accepted . since the cats have very strong claws , they are very good climbers , and can even climb rocks . those cats that live primarily outdoors become swift and effective hunters , but the breed can also adapt to indoor life . if bought from a registered breeder in the us , they tend to cost from 800 to 1500 . the cats usually live to be 14 to 16 years old . as they are heavy-boned and tall , they eat more food than most other domestic breeds . . personality . they are friendly , intelligent , and generally good with people . the norwegian forest cat has a lot of energy . they are very interactive cats who enjoy being part of their family environment and love to play games . . health issues . kidney and heart diseases have been reported in the breed . in an experiment directed by john c . fyfea , rebeccah l . kurzhals , and others , it was concluded that a complex rearrangement in the breed 's glycogen branching enzyme ( gbe1 ) can cause both a perinatal hypoglycemic collapse and a late-juvenile-onset neuromuscular degeneration in glycogen storage disease type iv in the breed . '' deficiency of glycogen branching enzyme ( gbe ) activity causes glycogen storage disease type iv ( gsd iv ) , an autosomal recessive error of metabolism . abnormal glycogen accumulates in myocytes , hepatocytes , and neurons , causing variably progressive , benign to lethal organ dysfunctions . a naturally occurring orthologue of human gsd iv was described previously in norwegian forest cats ( nfc ) . '' this disorder , while rare , can prove fatal to cats that have it . there are dna tests available for gsd iv , and it is highly recommended ( some cat associations obligate their norwegian forest cat breeder members ) to carry out the dna test before using such animals for breeding . pawpeds provide a pedigree database which comes together with health programmes , through publishing each single cat 's test result , to provide useful information for breeders to make a well-informed breeding decision . the breed has also been known to suffer from hip dysplasia , which is a rare , partially hereditary disease of the hip joint . luxating patella is found more in the british shorthair , abyssinian and devon rex breeds , but it is recognized in norwegian forest cats as well . it is a condition in which patella moves out of its original physiological position . a pedigree with 871 norwegian forest cats show that familial cardiomyopathy in this breed . there is also high prevalence of eosinophilic granuloma in norwegian forest cats which is suggestive of a genetic background . the main factors causing toxoplasma gondii seropositivity on cats are age , raw meat and outdoor access . a study shows that t . gondii seropositivity varies by cat breeds . norwegian forest cats have a relatively high rate of toxoplasma gondii seropositivity ( 4.66 % ) comparing with other pure-bred cats ( birman : 4.16 % , british shorthair : 3.39 % , korat : 2.03 % , ocicat : 4.26 % , siamese : 2.57 % ) , but slightly lower than persian cats ( 6.99 % ) . glycogen storage disease type iv due to branching enzyme deficiency was found in an inbred family of norwegian forest cats .