Navajo language

sample text . this is the first paragraph of a navajo short story . navajo original : english translation : some crazy boys decided to make some wine to sell , so they each planted grapevines and , working hard on them , they raised them to maturity . then , having made wine , they each filled a goatskin with it . they agreed that at no time would they give each other a drink of it , and they then set out for town lugging the goatskins on their backs ( . ) . see also . indigenous languages of the americas southern athabaskan languages navajo code talkers . notes . references . . further reading . educational . blair , robert w . ; simmons , leon ; & witherspoon , gary . ( 1969 ) . navaho basic course . brigham young university printing services . goossen , irvy w . ( 1967 ) . navajo made easier : a course in conversational navajo . flagstaff , az : northland press . goossen , irvy w . ( 1995 ) . diné bizaad : speak , read , write navajo . flagstaff , az : salina bookshelf . goossen , irvy w . ( 1997 ) . diné bizaad : sprechen , lesen und schreiben sie navajo . loder , p . b . ( transl . ) . flagstaff , az : salina bookshelf . berard haile . ( 1941–1948 ) . learning navaho , ( vols . 1–4 ) . st . michaels , az : st . michael 's mission . platero , paul r . ( 1986 ) . diné bizaad bee naadzo : a conversational navajo text for secondary schools , colleges and adults . farmington , nm : navajo preparatory school . platero , paul r . ; legah , lorene ; & platero , linda s . ( 1985 ) . diné bizaad bee naʼadzo : a navajo language literacy and grammar text . farmington , nm : navajo language institute . luci tapahonso , & schick , eleanor . ( 1995 ) . navajo abc : a diné alphabet book . new york : macmillan books for young readers . witherspoon , gary . ( 1985 ) . diné bizaad bóhooʼaah for secondary schools , colleges , and adults . farmington , nm : navajo language institute . witherspoon , gary . ( 1986 ) . diné bizaad bóhooʼaah i : a conversational navajo text for secondary schools , colleges and adults . farmington , nm : navajo language institute . wilson , alan . ( 1969 ) . breakthrough navajo : an introductory course . gallup , nm : the university of new mexico , gallup branch . wilson , alan . ( 1970 ) . laughter , the navajo way . gallup , nm : the university of new mexico at gallup . wilson , alan . ( 1978 ) . speak navajo : an intermediate text in communication . gallup , nm : university of new mexico , gallup branch . wilson , garth a . ( 1995 ) . conversational navajo workbook : an introductory course for non-native speakers . blanding , ut : conversational navajo publications . yazzie , sheldon a . ( 2005 ) . navajo for beginners and elementary students . chapel hill : the university of north carolina at chapel hill press . yazzie , evangeline parsons , and margaret speas ( 2008 ) . diné bizaad bínáhoo'aah : rediscovering the navajo language . flagstaff , az : salina bookshelf , inc . linguistics and other reference . frishberg , nancy . ( 1972 ) . navajo object markers and the great chain of being . in j . kimball ( ed . ) , syntax and semantics ( vol . 1 , p . & nbsp ; 259–266 ) . new york : seminar press . kenneth l . hale . ( 1973 ) . a note on subject–object inversion in navajo . in b . b . kachru , r . b . lees , y . malkiel , a . pietrangeli , & s . saporta ( eds . ) , issues in linguistics : papers in honor of henry and renée kahane ( p . & nbsp ; 300–309 ) . urbana : university of illinois press . hardy , frank . ( 1979 ) . navajo aspectual verb stem variation . albuquerque : university of new mexico press . harry hoijer ( 1945 ) . navaho phonology . university of new mexico publications in anthropology , ( no . 1 ) . hoijer , harry . ( 1970 ) . a navajo lexicon . university of california publications in linguistics ( no . 78 ) . berkeley : university of california press . kari , james . ( 1976 ) . navajo verb prefix phonology . garland publishing co . gladys reichard . ( 1951 ) . navaho grammar . publications of the american ethnological society ( vol . 21 ) . new york : j . j . augustin . edward sapir , & harry hoijer . ( 1942 ) . navaho texts . william dwight whitney series , linguistic society of america . sapir , edward , & hoijer , harry . ( 1967 ) . phonology and morphology of the navaho language . berkeley : university of california press . speas , margaret . ( 1990 ) . phrase structure in natural language . kluwer academic publishers . wall , c . leon , & morgan , william . ( 1994 ) . navajo-english dictionary . new york : hippocrene books . ( originally published 1958 by u.s . dept . of the interior , branch of education , bureau of indian affairs ) . webster , anthony k . ( 2009 ) . explorations in navajo poetry and poetics . albuquerque : university of new mexico press . witherspoon , gary . ( 1977 ) . language and art in the navajo universe . ann arbor : university of michigan press . ; young , robert w . ( 2000 ) . the navajo verb system : an overview . albuquerque : university of new mexico press . ( hb ) ; ( pbk ) . external links . wikt : appendix : navajo alphabet hózhǫ́ náhásdlį́į́ʼ - language of the holy people ( navajo web site with flash and audio , helps with learning navajo ) , gomyson.com navajo swadesh vocabulary list of basic words ( from wiktionary 's swadesh-list appendix ) contrasts between navajo consonants ( sound files from peter ladefoged ) . humnet.ucla.edu navajo language & bilingual links ( from san juan school district ) . sanjuan.k12.ut.us navajo language academy , navajolanguageacademy.org tuning in to navajo : the role of radio in native language maintenance , jan.ucc.nau.edu an initial exploration of the navajo nation 's language and culture initiative , jan.ucc.nau.edu báʼóltaʼí adoodleełgi bínaʼniltingo bił hazʼą́ ( center for diné teacher education ) , dinecollege.edu languagegeek unicode fonts and navajo keyboard layouts , languagegeek.com navajo fonts , dinecollege.edu the navajo language , library.thinkquest.org reflections on navajo poetry , ou.edu how to count in navajo , languagesandnumbers.com digital public library of america . navajo-language items , various dates . ipad keyboard app android keyboard app android dictionary app . linguistics . navajo reflections of a general theory of lexical argument structure ( ken hale & paul platero ) , museunacional.ufrj.br remarks on the syntax of the navajo verb part i : preliminary observations on the structure of the verb ( ken hale ) , museunacional.ufrj.br the navajo prolongative and lexical structure ( carlota smith ) , cc.utexas.edu a computational analysis of navajo verb stems ( david eddington & jordan lachler ) , linguistics.byu.edu grammaticization of tense in navajo : the evolution of nt'éé ( chee , ashworth , buescher & kubacki ) , linguistics.ucsb.edu a methodology for the investigation of speaker 's knowledge of structure in athabaskan ( joyce mcdonough & rachel sussman ) , urresearch.rochester.edu how to use young and morgan 's the navajo language ( joyce mcdonough ) , bcs.rochester.edu time in navajo : direct and indirect interpretation ( carlota s . smith , ellavina perkins , theodore b . fernald ) , cc.utexas.edu olac resources in and about the navajo language