1958 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1958 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . notable films released in 1958 . united states unless stated . a . amar deep , remake of amara deepam , starring dev anand , vyjayanthimala and padmini – ( india ) ambush at cimarron pass , starring scott brady and clint eastwood and quiet flows the don ( tikhiy don ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) andy hardy comes home , starring mickey rooney another time , another place , starring lana turner and sean connery – ( britain ) apache territory , starring rory calhoun appu chesi pappu koodu , starring n . t . rama rao – ( india ) arms and the man ( helden ) – ( west germany ) ash wednesday ( miércoles de ceniza ) , starring maría félix and arturo de córdova – ( mexico ) ashes and diamonds ( popiół i diament ) , directed by andrzej wajda , starring zbigniew cybulski – ( poland ) attack of the 50 foot woman , starring allison hayes auntie mame , starring rosalind russell , coral browne , forrest tucker , roger smith , peggy cass . b . the ballad of narayama ( narayama bushiko ) – ( japan ) the barbarian and the geisha , starring john wayne and eiko ando le beau serge ( handsome serge ) , directed by claude chabrol – ( france ) bell , book and candle , starring james stewart , kim novak , jack lemmon , ernie kovacs the big country , directed by william wyler , starring gregory peck , charlton heston , jean simmons , carroll baker , burl ives , charles bickford , chuck connors big deal on madonna street ( i soliti ignoti ) , starring vittorio gassman , claudia cardinale , marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) the black orchid , starring sophia loren and anthony quinn the blob , starring steve mcqueen bonjour tristesse , directed by otto preminger , starring david niven , deborah kerr , jean seberg the bonnie parker story , starring dorothy provine the bravados , starring gregory peck and joan collins brink of life ( nära livet ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring eva dahlbeck and ingrid thulin – ( sweden ) the brothers karamazov , directed by richard brooks , starring yul brynner , maria schell , lee j . cobb , claire bloom the buccaneer , directed by anthony quinn , starring yul brynner and claire bloom buchanan rides alone , directed by budd boetticher , starring randolph scott and craig stevens . c . cairo station ( bab el hadid ) , directed by youssef chahine – ( egypt ) carry on sergeant , the first in the carry on film series , directed by gerald thomas , starring william hartnell , kenneth williams , kenneth connor – ( britain ) carve her name with pride , starring virginia mckenna and paul scofield – ( britain ) the castle of the monsters ( el castillo de los monstruos ) – ( mexico ) cat on a hot tin roof , directed by richard brooks , starring elizabeth taylor , paul newman , burl ives , jack carson , judith anderson a certain smile , starring rossano brazzi and joan fontaine chalti ka naam gaadi ( that which runs is a car ) , starring ashok kumar and madhubala – ( india ) chase a crooked shadow , starring richard todd and anne baxter – ( britain ) china doll , starring victor mature the colossus of new york , starring ross martin and mala powers cowboy , starring glenn ford and jack lemmon the crawling eye ( the trollenberg terror ) , directed by quentin lawrence , starring forrest tucker and janet munro – ( britain ) the cry baby killer , directed by roger corman , featuring jack nicholson in his film debut cry terror ! , starring james mason , inger stevens , rod steiger , angie dickinson . d . damn yankees , directed by george abbott and stanley donen , starring tab hunter , gwen verdon , ray walston darby 's rangers , directed by william wellman , starring james garner the deep six , starring alan ladd , dianne foster , efrem zimbalist , jr . the defiant ones , directed by stanley kramer , starring tony curtis and sidney poitier desire ( touha ) – ( czechoslovakia ) desire under the elms , starring sophia loren , anthony perkins , burl ives the doctor 's dilemma , directed by anthony asquith , starring dirk bogarde ( britain ) dracula , starring christopher lee and peter cushing – ( britain ) dunkirk , starring john mills and richard attenborough – ( britain ) . e . édes anna , directed by zoltán fábri – ( hungary ) elevator to the gallows ( ascenseur pour l'échafaud ) , directed by louis malle , starring jeanne moreau – ( france ) enchanted island , starring jane powell endless desire ( hateshinaki yokubo ) , directed by shōhei imamura – ( japan ) equinox flower ( higanbana ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) . f . the fabulous world of jules verne ( aka vynález zkázy ) – ( czechoslovakia ) fanfare – ( netherlands ) flood tide , starring george nader and cornell borchers a flower in hell ( jiokhwa ) – ( south korea ) the fly , starring vincent price fort massacre , starring joel mccrea from hell to texas , starring don murray , diane varsi , dennis hopper from the earth to the moon , starring joseph cotten . g . the geisha boy , starring jerry lewis giants and toys ( kyojin to gangu ) – ( japan ) the gift of love , directed by jean negulesco , starring lauren bacall and robert stack gigi , directed by vincente minnelli , starring leslie caron , louis jourdan , maurice chevalier girl on the run , starring efrem zimbalist , jr . god 's little acre , directed by anthony mann , starring robert ryan , aldo ray , fay spain , tina louise the goddess , starring kim stanley goha , starring omar sharif – ( france/tunisia ) gunman 's walk , starring van heflin , tab hunter , kathryn grant . h . h8 – ( yugoslavia ) the h-man , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) harry black , starring stewart granger and barbara rush – ( uk/us ) hercules ( le fatiche di ercole ) , starring steve reeves – ( italy ) the hidden fortress ( kakushi toride no san akunin ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) high school confidential , starring russ tamblyn , jan sterling , mamie van doren the horse 's mouth , starring alec guinness – ( britain ) houseboat , starring cary grant and sophia loren howrah bridge , starring madhubala and ashok kumar – ( india ) the hunters , starring robert mitchum . i . i accuse ! , directed by and starring josé ferrer – ( britain ) i want to live ! , starring susan hayward ( winner of academy award and golden globe for best actress ) i was monty 's double , starring m . e . clifton james and john mills – ( britain ) ice cold in alex , directed by j . lee thompson , starring john mills and sylvia syms – ( britain ) the idiot – ( ussr ) imitation general , directed by george marshall , starring glenn ford , red buttons , taina elg in case of adversity ( en cas de malheur ) , starring jean gabin and brigitte bardot – ( france ) in the money , starring the bowery boys indiscreet , starring cary grant and ingrid bergman – ( britain ) the inn of the sixth happiness , directed by mark robson , starring ingrid bergman , curd jürgens , robert donat intent to kill , starring richard todd , betsy drake , herbert lom iron flower ( vasvirág ) – ( hungary ) es geschah am hellichten tag ( es geschah am hellichten tag ) – ( west germany ) it ! the terror from beyond space , directed by edward l . cahn , starring marshall thompson , paul langton and ray corrigan as the monster of the title ivan the terrible , part two ( ivan grozniy ) , directed by sergei eisenstein , starring nikolay cherkasov – ( u.s.s.r . ) . j–k . jalsaghar ( the music room ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) kala pani ( life sentence ) , starring dev anand and madhubala – ( india ) the key , starring william holden and sophia loren , based on jan de hartog novel – ( britain ) king creole , directed by michael curtiz , starring elvis presley , dean jagger , vic morrow , walter matthau . l . lafayette escadrille , world war i film starring tab hunter , with an early appearance by clint eastwood lake of the dead ( de dødes tjern ) – ( norway ) the last hurrah , starring spencer tracy , jeffrey hunter , pat o'brien , basil rathbone the law and jake wade , starring robert taylor and richard widmark the law is the law ( la loi , c'est la loi ) , starring totò and fernandel – ( france/italy ) the left handed gun , starring paul newman the light in the forest , starring fess parker the lineup , starring eli wallach lonelyhearts , starring montgomery clift , robert ryan , myrna loy , maureen stapleton the long , hot summer , directed by martin ritt , starring paul newman , joanne woodward , orson welles , tony franciosa , lee remick the lovers ( les amants ) , directed by louis malle , starring jeanne moreau and alain cuny – ( france ) the lovers of montparnasse ( les amants de montparnasse ) , directed by jacques becker and max ophüls – ( france ) . m . machine-gun kelly , starring charles bronson , susan cabot and morey amsterdam mädchen in uniform ( girls in uniform ) , starring lilli palmer and romy schneider ( west germany ) madhumati , directed by bimal roy , starring vyjayanthimala in triple role and dilip kumar – ( india ) the magician ( ansiktet ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring max von sydow – ( sweden ) maigret sets a trap ( film ) ( maigret tend un piège ) , starring jean gabin – ( france ) the man inside , starring jack palance and anita ekberg – ( britain ) a man of straw ( l'uomo di paglia ) , directed by and starring pietro germi – ( italy ) man of the west , directed by anthony mann , starring gary cooper , lee j . cobb , jack lord , julie london marjorie morningstar , starring natalie wood and gene kelly the matchmaker , starring shirley maclaine me and the colonel , starring danny kaye merry andrew , starring danny kaye les misérables , starring jean gabin – ( france ) mon oncle , directed by and starring jacques tati – ( france ) monster on the campus , directed by jack arnold murder by contract , starring vince edwards . n . the naked maja , starring ava gardner and anthony franciosa – ( italy/france/u.s . ) next to no time , starring kenneth more and betsy drake – ( britain ) the night heaven fell ( les bijoutiers du clair de lune ) , directed by roger vadim , starring brigitte bardot – ( france ) a night to remember , directed by roy baker , starring kenneth more – ( britain ) no time for sergeants , directed by mervyn leroy , starring andy griffith , myron mccormick , murray hamilton , nick adams . o . the old man and the sea , based on the novel by ernest hemingway , starring spencer tracy onionhead , starring andy griffith , walter matthau , felicia farr , joey bishop orders to kill , directed by anthony asquith , starring eddie albert – ( britain ) the outlaws ( oi paranomoi ) – ( greece ) . p–q . paris holiday , starring bob hope and anita ekberg party girl , starring cyd charisse and robert taylor the perfect furlough , starring tony curtis and janet leigh phagun , starring madhubala and bharat bhushan – ( india ) police , starring madhubala and pradeep kumar – ( india ) the proud rebel , starring alan ladd and olivia de havilland a question of adultery , directed by don chaffey , starring julie london , anthony steel , basil sydney , donald houston – ( u.k . ) the quiet american , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring audie murphy and michael redgrave . r . raj tilak , remake of vanjikottai valiban , starring gemini ganesan , vyjayanthimala and padmini – ( india ) rally 'round the flag , boys ! , starring paul newman , joanne woodward , joan collins the reluctant debutante , starring rex harrison , kay kendall , sandra dee return of the fly , starring vincent price the revenge of frankenstein , starring peter cushing – ( britain ) the rickshaw man ( muhomatsu no issho ) , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) ride a crooked trail , starring audie murphy , gia scala , walter matthau rock-a-bye baby , starring jerry lewis rosaura at 10 o'clock ( rosaura a las 10 ) – ( argentina ) run silent , run deep , directed by robert wise , starring clark gable and burt lancaster . s . saddle the wind , starring robert taylor , julie london , john cassavetes sadhna , starring vyjayanthimala and sunil dutt – ( india ) screaming mimi , starring anita ekberg separate tables , starring rita hayworth , deborah kerr , burt lancaster , david niven the 7th voyage of sinbad , starring kerwin mathews the sheepman , starring glenn ford and shirley maclaine the sheriff of fractured jaw , starring jayne mansfield and kenneth more – ( britain ) the sign of zorro sing , boy , sing , directed by henry ephron , starring tommy sands solva saal ( sixteenth year ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) some came running , directed by vincente minnelli , starring frank sinatra , dean martin , shirley maclaine south pacific , directed by joshua logan , starring mitzi gaynor , rossano brazzi , john kerr , ray walston stage struck , starring henry fonda and susan strasberg stakeout on dope street , starring abby dalton st . louis blues , featuring nat king cole , eartha kitt , cab calloway , ella fitzgerald st . peter 's umbrella ( szent péter esernyöje ) – ( hungary/czechoslovakia ) summer love , starring john saxon and jill st . john . t . a tale of two cities , starring dirk bogarde – ( britain ) tamango , starring dorothy dandridge the tarnished angels , starring rock hudson and dorothy malone teacher 's pet , starring clark gable , doris day , gig young , mamie van doren ten north frederick , starring gary cooper and suzy parker terror in a texas town , starring sterling hayden this happy feeling , starring debbie reynolds , john saxon , alexis smith thunder road , starring robert mitchum , gene barry , keely smith a time to love and a time to die , starring john gavin the tinder box ( das feuerzeug ) – ( east germany ) tom thumb , starring russ tamblyn and terry-thomas – ( britain/us ) too much , too soon , starring dorothy malone , efrem zimbalist , jr . , errol flynn torpedo run , starring glenn ford and ernest borgnine touch of evil , directed by and starring orson welles , with charlton heston , janet leigh , marlene dietrich tread softly stranger , starring diana dors – ( britain ) the true story of lynn stuart , starring betsy palmer the tunnel of love , starring doris day and richard widmark twilight for the gods , starring rock hudson and cyd charisse . u–z . underworld beauty ( ankokugai no bijo ) – ( japan ) vanjikottai valiban ( the youth from vanji fort ) , starring gemini ganesan , vyjayanthimala and padmini – ( india ) varan the unbelievable ( daikaijū baran ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) vengeance ( la venganza ) , directed by juan antonio bardem , starring raf vallone – ( spain ) vertigo , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring james stewart and kim novak the vikings , starring kirk douglas , tony curtis , janet leigh the village on the river ( dorp aan de rivier ) – ( netherlands ) virgin island , starring john cassavetes , virginia maskell and sidney poitier ( uk ) white wilderness , a disney nature film the young lions , directed by edward dmytryk , starring marlon brando , montgomery clift , dean martin . film series . carry on series ( 1958–1992 ) . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) ending this year droopy ( 1943-1958 ) tom and jerry ( 1940-1958 ) . births . january 4 matt frewer , canadian-american actor , singer and comedian julian sands , english actor january 20 – lorenzo lamas , american actor january 26 – ellen degeneres , american actress and comedian february 13 – pernilla august , swedish actress february 19 – pierre-loup rajot , french actor and director february 21 - denise dowse , american actress and director march 3 – miranda richardson , english actress march 7 - rik mayall , english actor , comedian and writer ( died 2014 ) march 10 – sharon stone , american actress and producer march 20 – holly hunter , american actress march 21 – gary oldman , english actor and filmmaker march 29 – anu lamp , estonian actress march 30 - maurice lamarche , canadian actor and stand-up comedian april 3 alec baldwin , american actor jaan rekkor , estonian actor april 14 – peter capaldi , scottish actor , writer and director april 21 – andie macdowell , american actress april 29 – michelle pfeiffer , american actress may 7 – mayra alejandra , venezuelan actress ( d . 2014 ) may 12 – tony oliver , puerto rican voice actor may 16 - don fullilove , american actor may 23 drew carey , american actor , voice actor , comedian , sports executive and game show host lea delaria , american comedian , actress and jazz singer may 29 – annette bening , american actress june 17 - kerry shale , canadian actor , voice-over artist and writer june 20 – paul poom , estonian actor june 22 – bruce campbell , american actor and director july 4 – tõnu oja , estonian actor july 6 – jennifer saunders , english comedian , screenwriter , singer and actress july 8 – kevin bacon , american actor july 10 - fiona shaw , irish actress and theatre and opera director july 27 - vincenzo nicoli , english-italian actor august 9 – arvo kukumägi , estonian actor ( d . 2017 ) august 3 – lambert wilson , french actor august 16 angela bassett , american actress madonna , american pop singer and actress toby sedgwick , english actor and theatre director august 18 – madeleine stowe , american actress august 24 – steve guttenberg , american actor and comedian august 25 – tim burton , american director , producer and screenwriter august 29 lenny henry , british stand-up comedian , actor , singer , writer and television presenter michael jackson , american pop singer and actor ( d . 2009 ) september 6 – michael winslow , american actor , beatboxer , and comedian september 10 – chris columbus , american director , producer and screenwriter september 16 – jennifer tilly , canadian-american actress october 9 – michael paré , american actor october 16 – tim robbins , american actor , screenwriter , producer and director october 20 – viggo mortensen , danish actor november 5 – robert patrick , american actor november 16 – marg helgenberger , american actress november 17 – mary elizabeth mastrantonio , american actress and singer november 22 – jamie lee curtis , american actress december 30 – pedro costa , portuguese director december 31- bebe neuwirth , american actress . deaths . january 11 – edna purviance , 62 , american actress , the kid , a woman of paris january 13 – jesse l . lasky , 77 , american producer , wings , the cocoanuts february 13 – helen twelvetrees , 49 , american actress , a bedtime story , now i 'll tell february 15 – william berke , 54 , american director , dick tracy , fbi girl february 17 – tala birell , 50 , romanian actress , women in the night , dangerous millions february 27 – harry cohn , 66 , american film executive , co-founder of cbc sales association ( columbia pictures ) , platinum blonde , american madness march 22 mike todd , 48 , american producer , around the world in 80 days , this is cinerama art cohn , 48 , american screenwriter , the set-up , ten thousand bedrooms april 9 – sol m . wurtzel , 67 , american producer , charlie chan in rio , bright eyes april 15 – estelle taylor , 63 , american actress , cimarron , the ten commandments may 2 – henry cornelius , 44 , south african director , genevieve , i am a camera may 19 – ronald colman , 67 , british actor , lost horizon , random harvest june 6 – virginia pearson , 72 , american actress , the phantom of the opera , the wizard of oz june 9 – robert donat , 53 , british actor , the 39 steps , goodbye , mr . chips july 11 – evelyn varden , 65 , american actress , the night of the hunter , ten thousand bedrooms july 20 – franklin pangborn , 69 , american actor , never give a sucker an even break , the bank dick august 1 – albert e . smith , 83 , english director and producer , co-founder of vitagraph studios august 8 – barbara bennett , 51 , american actress , black jack , syncopation august 18 – bonar colleano , 34 , british actor , eight iron men , joe macbeth august 21 – kurt neumann , 50 , german director , the fly , mohawk august 27 – priscilla lawson , 44 , american actress , flash gordon , rose bowl october 4 – ida wüst , 74 , german actress , chamber music november 15 – tyrone power , 44 , american actor , witness for the prosecution , the mark of zorro december 1 – boots mallory , 45 , american actress , sing sing nights , here 's flash casey december 20 – elisabeth risdon , 71 , british actress , florence nightingale , five came back december 21 – h . b . warner , 83 , british actor , lost horizon , it 's a wonderful life . film debuts . claudia cardinale – goha veronica cartwright – in love and war patty duke – country music holiday peter falk – wind across the everglades nigel hawthorne – carve her name with pride ian holm – girls at sea jack nicholson – the cry baby killer suzanne pleshette – the geisha boy christopher plummer – stage struck vanessa redgrave – behind the mask oliver reed – the square peg don rickles – run silent , run deep gena rowlands – the high cost of loving john williams – daddy-o