Neocolonialism

south korean land acquisitions . to ensure a reliable , long-term supply of food , the south korean government and powerful korean multinationals bought farming rights to millions of hectares of agricultural land in under-developed countries . south korea 's rg energy resources asset management ceo park yong-soo stressed that '' the nation does not produce a single drop of crude oil and other key industrial minerals . to power economic growth and support people 's livelihoods , we can not emphasise too much that securing natural resources in foreign countries is a must for our future survival . '' coherent state support key to overseas resources development korea times . the head of the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , jacques diouf , stated that the rise in land deals could create a form of '' neocolonialism '' , with poor states producing food for the rich at the expense of their own hungry people . in 2008 , south korean multinational daewoo logistics secured 1.3 million hectares of farmland in madagascar to grow maize and crops for biofuels . roughly half of the country 's arable land , as well as rainforests were to be converted into palm and corn monocultures , producing food for export from a country where a third of the population and 50 percent of children under 5 are malnourished , using south african workers instead of locals . local residents were not consulted or informed , despite being dependent on the land for food and income . the controversial deal played a major part in prolonged anti-government protests that resulted in over a hundred deaths . this was a source of popular resentment that contributed to the fall of then-president marc ravalomanana . the new president , andry rajoelina , cancelled the deal . madagascar scraps daewoo farm deal financial times . tanzania later announced that south korea was in talks to develop 100,000 hectares for food production and processing for 700 to 800 billion won . scheduled to be completed in 2010 , it was to be the largest single piece of overseas south korean agricultural infrastructure ever built . in 2009 , hyundai heavy industries acquired a majority stake in a company cultivating 10,000 hectares of farmland in the russian far east and a south korean provincial government secured 95,000 hectares of farmland in oriental mindoro , central philippines , to grow corn . the south jeolla province became the first provincial government to benefit from a new central government fund to develop farmland overseas , receiving a loan of 1.9 million . the project was expected to produce 10,000 tonnes of feed in the first year . s . korea leases philippine farmland to grow corn korea times . south korean multinationals and provincial governments purchased land in sulawesi , indonesia , cambodia and bulgan , mongolia . the national south korean government announced its intention to invest 30 billion won in land in paraguay and uruguay . as of 2009 discussions with laos , myanmar and senegal were underway . . catholic church . historically there has been a strong connection between christianity and colonialism . although not always aligned with colonial policy , for example in its opposition to slavery in the americas , modern senior catholic churchmen have been prominent in their pronouncements about the peoples of former colonial territories , especially during the pontificate of pope francis . thus at the 2014 synod on the family , cardinal walter kasper said that african catholics “ should not tell us too much what we have to do . ” during the 2019 synod on the amazon , austrian-born bishop erwin kräutler , a former bishop in brazil , said at the october 9 synod press conference that “ there is no alternative ” to abolishing celibacy in the amazon basin because the apparently primitive natives “ don ’ t understand celibacy . '' . niue . the government of niue has been trying to get back access to its domain name , . nu . already 20 years of discussion for the . nu domain name also affects the dutch , tweakers.net the country signed a deal with a massachusetts-based non-profit in 1999 that gave away rights to the domain name . management of the domain name has since shifted to a swedish organisation . the niue government is currently fighting on two fronts to get back control on its domain name , including with the icann . december 16 , 2020 toke talagi , the long-serving premier of niue who passed away in 2020 , called it a form of neo-colonialism . . cultural approaches . although the concept of neocolonialism was originally developed within a marxist theoretical framework and is generally employed by the political left , the term '' neocolonialism '' is found in other theoretical frameworks . coloniality . '' coloniality '' claims that knowledge production is strongly influenced by the context of the person producing the knowledge and that this has further disadvantaged developing countries with limited knowledge production infrastructure . it originated among critics of subaltern studies , which , although strongly de-colonial , are less concerned with the source of knowledge . . cultural theory . one variant of neocolonialism theory critiques cultural colonialism , the desire of wealthy nations to control other nations ' values and perceptions through cultural means such as media , language , education and religion , ultimately for economic reasons . one impact of this is '' colonial mentality '' , feelings of inferiority that lead post-colonial societies to latch onto physical and cultural differences between the foreigners and themselves . foreign ways become held in higher esteem than indigenous ways . given that colonists and colonisers were generally of different races , the colonised may over time hold that the colonisers ' race was responsible for their superiority . rejections of the colonisers culture , such as the negritude movement , have been employed to overcome these associations . post-colonial importation or continuation of cultural mores or elements may be regarded as a form of neocolonialism . postcolonialism . post-colonialism theories in philosophy , political science , literature and film deal with the cultural legacy of colonial rule . post-colonialism studies examine how once-colonised writers articulate their national identity ; how knowledge about the colonised was generated and applied in service to the interests of the coloniser ; and how colonialist literature justified colonialism by presenting the colonised people as inferior whose society , culture and economy must be managed for them . post-colonial studies incorporate subaltern studies of '' people 's history '' ; post-colonial cultural evolution ; the psychopathology of colonisation ( by frantz fanon ) ; and the cinema of film makers such as the cuban third cinema , e.g . tomás gutiérrez alea , and kidlat tahimik . critical theory . critiques of postcolonialism/neocolonialism are evident in literary theory . international relations theory defined '' postcolonialism '' as a field of study . while the lasting effects of cultural colonialism are of central interest , the intellectual antecedents in cultural critiques of neocolonialism are economic . critical international relations theory references neocolonialism from marxist positions as well as postpositivist positions , including postmodernism , postcolonial and feminism approaches . these differ from both realism and liberalism in their epistemology and ontology premises . the neo-liberalist approach tends to depict modern forms of colonialism as a benevolent imperialism . see also . references . . further reading . opoku agyeman . nkrumah 's ghana and east africa : pan-africanism and african interstate relations ( fairleigh dickinson university press , 1992 ) . bill ashcroft ( ed . , et al . ) the post-colonial studies reader ( routledge , london , 1995 ) . yolamu r barongo . neo-colonialism and african politics : a survey of the impact of neo-colonialism on african political behavior ( vantage press , ny , 1980 ) . mongo beti , main basse sur le cameroun . autopsie d'une décolonisation ( 1972 ) , new edition la découverte , paris 2003 a classical critique of neo-colonialism . raymond marcellin , the french minister of the interior at the time , tried to prohibit the book . it could only be published after fierce legal battles . frédéric turpin . de gaulle , pompidou et l'afrique ( 1958-1974 ) : décoloniser et coopérer ( les indes savantes , paris , 2010 . grounded on foccart 's previously inaccessibles archives kum-kum bhavnani . ( ed . , et al . ) feminist futures : re-imagining women , culture and development ( zed books , ny , 2003 ) . see : ming-yan lai 's '' of rural mothers , urban whores and working daughters : women and the critique of neocolonial development in taiwan 's nativist literature , '' pp . & nbsp ; 209–225 . david birmingham . the decolonisation of africa ( ohio university press , 1995 ) . charles cantalupo ( ed . ) . the world of ngugi wa thiong ' o ( africa world press , 1995 ) . laura chrisman and benita parry ( ed . ) postcolonial theory and criticism ( english association , cambridge , 2000 ) . renato constantino . neocolonial identity and counter-consciousness : essays on cultural decolonisation ( merlin press , london , 1978 ) . george a . w . conway . a responsible complicity : neo/colonial power-knowledge and the work of foucault , said , spivak ( university of western ontario press , 1996 ) . julia v . emberley . thresholds of difference : feminist critique , native women 's writings , postcolonial theory ( university of toronto press , 1993 ) . nikolai aleksandrovich ermolov . trojan horse of neo-colonialism : u.s . policy of training specialists for developing countries ( progress publishers , moscow , 1966 ) . thomas gladwin . slaves of the white myth : the psychology of neo-colonialism ( humanities press , atlantic highlands , nj , 1980 ) . lewis gordon . her majesty 's other children : sketches of racism from a neocolonial age ( rowman & littlefield , 1997 ) . ankie m . m . hoogvelt . globalisation and the postcolonial world : the new political economy of development ( johns hopkins university press , 2001 ) . j . m . hobson , the eastern origins of western civilisation ( cambridge university press , 2004 ) . m . b . hooker . legal pluralism ; an introduction to colonial and neo-colonial laws ( clarendon press , oxford , 1975 ) . e.m . kramer ( ed . ) the emerging monoculture : assimilation and the '' model minority '' ( praeger , westport , conn . , 2003 ) . see : archana j . bhatt 's '' asian indians and the model minority narrative : a neocolonial system , '' pp . & nbsp ; 203–221 . geir lundestad ( ed . ) the fall of great powers : peace , stability , and legitimacy ( scandinavian university press , oslo , 1994 ) . jean-paul sartre . 'colonialism and neo-colonialism . translated by steve brewer , azzedine haddour , terry mcwilliams republished in the 2001 edition by routledge france . peccia , t . , 2014 , '' the theory of the globe scrambled by social networks : a new sphere of influence 2.0 '' , jura gentium - rivista di filosofia del diritto internazionale e della politica globale , sezione '' l'afghanistan contemporaneo '' , the theory of the globe scrambled by social networks stuart j . seborer . u.s . neo-colonialism in africa ( international publishers , ny , 1974 ) . d . simon . cities , capital and development : african cities in the world economy ( halstead , ny , 1992 ) . phillip singer ( ed . ) traditional healing , new science or new colonialism '' : ( essays in critique of medical anthropology ) ( conch magazine , owerri , 1977 ) . jean suret-canale . essays on african history : from the slave trade to neo-colonialism ( hurst , london 1988 ) . ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o . barrel of a pen : resistance to repression in neo-colonial kenya ( africa research & publications project , 1983 ) . carlos alzugaray treto . el ocaso de un régimen neocolonial : estados unidos y la dictadura de batista durante 1958 , ( the twilight of a neocolonial regime : the united states and batista during 1958 ) , in temas : cultura , ideología y sociedad , no.16-17 , october 1998/march 1999 , pp . & nbsp ; 29–41 ( la habana : ministry of culture ) . uzoigw , godfrey n . '' neocolonialism is dead : long live neocolonialism . '' journal of global south studies 36.1 ( 2019 ) : 59–87 . richard werbner ( ed . ) postcolonial identities in africa ( zed books , nj , 1996 ) . external links . mbeki warns on china-africa ties '' neocolonialism '' in encyclopedia of marxism . neo-colonialism : the last stage of imperialism , by kwame nkrumah ( former prime minister and president of ghana ) , originally published 1965 comments by prof . jeffrey sachs - bbc harvard economist jeffrey sachs video ( ram ) - hosted by columbia univ . & mdash ; imf : market reform and corporate globalization , by dr . gloria emeagwali , prof . of history and african studies , conne . state univ . academic course materials . sovereignty in the postcolonial african state , syllabus : joseph hill , university of rochester , 2008 . studying african development history : study guides , lauri siitonen , päivi hasu , wolfgang zeller . helsinki university , 2007 .