Folly

characteristics . it was built by sanderson miller for george , lord lyttelton in the middle of the 18th century to look like a small ruined medieval castle . the concept of the folly is subjective and it has been suggested that the definition of a folly '' lies in the eyes of the beholder '' . typical characteristics include : they have no purpose other than as an ornament . often they have some of the appearance of a building constructed for a particular purpose , such as a castle or tower , but this appearance is a sham . equally , if they have a purpose , it may be disguised . they are buildings , or parts of buildings . thus they are distinguished from other garden ornaments such as sculpture . they are purpose-built . follies are deliberately built as ornaments . they are often eccentric in design or construction . this is not strictly necessary ; however , it is common for these structures to call attention to themselves through unusual details or form . there is often an element of fakery in their construction . the canonical example of this is the sham ruin : a folly which pretends to be the remains of an old building but which was in fact constructed in that state . they were built or commissioned for pleasure . . history . follies began as decorative accents on the great estates of the late 16th century and early 17th century but they flourished especially in the two centuries which followed . many estates had ruins of monastic houses and ( in italy ) roman villas ; others , lacking such buildings , constructed their own sham versions of these romantic structures . however , very few follies are completely without a practical purpose . apart from their decorative aspect , many originally had a use which was lost later , such as hunting towers . follies are misunderstood structures , according to folly fellowship , a charity that exists to celebrate the history and splendour of these often neglected buildings . follies in 18th-century french and english gardens . follies were an important feature of the english garden and french landscape garden in the 18th century , such as stowe and stourhead in england and ermenonville and the gardens of versailles in france . they were usually in the form of roman temples , ruined gothic abbeys , or egyptian pyramids . painshill park in surrey contained almost a full set , with a large gothic tower and various other gothic buildings , a roman temple , a garden hermit , a turkish tent , a shell-encrusted water grotto and other features . in france they sometimes took the form of romantic farmhouses , mills and cottages , as in marie antoinette 's hameau de la reine at versailles . sometimes they were copied from landscape paintings by painters such as claude lorrain and hubert robert . often , they had symbolic importance , illustrating the virtues of ancient rome , or the virtues of country life . the temple of philosophy at ermenonville , left unfinished , symbolised that knowledge would never be complete , while the temple of modern virtues at stowe was deliberately ruined , to show the decay of contemporary morals . later in the 18th century , the follies became more exotic , representing other parts of the world , including chinese pagodas , japanese bridges , and tatar tents . yves-marie allain and janine christiany , l'art des jardins en europe , citadelles & mazenod , paris , 2006 . . famine follies . the great famine of ireland of 1845–49 led to the building of several follies in order to provide relief to the poor without issuing unconditional handouts . however , to hire the needy for work on useful projects would deprive existing workers of their jobs . thus , construction projects termed '' famine follies '' came to be built . these included roads in the middle of nowhere , between two seemingly random points , screen and estate walls , piers in the middle of bogs , etc . howley , james . 1993 . the follies and garden buildings of ireland . new haven : yale university press . . examples . follies are found worldwide , but they are particularly abundant in great britain . . austria . roman ruin and gloriettes , in the park of schönbrunn palace , vienna . canada . dundurn castle in hamilton , ontario . czech republic . series of buildings in lednice–valtice cultural landscape . france . chanteloup pagoda , near amboise désert de retz , folly garden in chambourcy near paris , france ( 18th century ) parc de la villette in paris has a number of modern follies by architect bernard tschumi . ferdinand cheval in châteauneuf-de-galaure , built what he called an ideal palace , seen as an example of naive architecture . hameau de la reine , in the park of the château de versailles the grottoes of ferrand , in saint-hippolyte , gironde . germany . bergpark wilhelmshöhe water features lighthouse in the park of moritzburg castle near dresden mosque in the schwetzingen castle gardens pfaueninsel artificial ruin , berlin ruinenberg near sanssouci park , potsdam . hungary . bory castle at székesfehérvár taródi castle at sopron vajdahunyad vára in the city park of budapest . india . overbury 's folly , thalassery , kerala rock garden of chandigarh . ireland . devil 's bit casino at marino conolly 's folly and the wonderful barn on the same estate killiney hill , with several follies larchill in county kildare , with several follies powerscourt estate , which contains the pepperpot tower saint anne 's park , which contains a number of follies saint enda 's park , former school of patrick pearse , contains several follies the jealous wall at belvedere house near mullingar , co . westmeath . italy . la scarzuola , montegabbione the park of the monsters ( bomarzo gardens ) giardino dei tarocchi near capalbio . jamaica . three follies were built on folly estate , port antonio , in 1905 . they are now in ruins . see photos : '' a seat shaded from the tropic sun '' ( and water tank ) , '' a summer house on the hill '' ( with no walls ) , '' the bridge and pavilion '' . . malta . lija belvedere tower . poland . roman aqueduct , arkadia , łowicz county temple of the sibyl in puławy . romania . iulia hasdeu castle . russia . ruined towers in petergof , tsarskoe selo , gatchina , and tsaritsino creaking pagoda and chinese village in tsarskoe selo dutch admiralty in tsarskoe selo . spain . el capricho , comillas ( cantabria ) . ukraine . ruins in oleksandriia , bila tserkva . united kingdom . image : rushtontriangularlodge.jpg thumb upright rushton triangular lodge , northamptonshire , england , built in the late 16th century to symbolise the holy trinity image : wimpole folly.jpg thumb wimpole 's folly , cambridgeshire , england , built in the 1700s to resemble gothic-era ruins . england . ashton memorial , lancaster beckford 's tower , somerset blaise castle , bristol broadway tower , cotswolds bettison 's folly , hornsea black castle public house , bristol brizlee tower , northumberland the cage at lyme park , cheshire the castle at roundhay park , west yorkshire clavell tower , dorset faringdon folly , faringdon , oxfordshire flounders ' folly , shropshire forbidden corner , north yorkshire freston tower , near ipswich , suffolk garrick 's temple to shakespeare , hampton gothic tower at goldney hall , bristol the great pagoda at the royal botanic gardens , kew , london¨ hadlow tower , hadlow , kent hardwick hall country park , county durham contains several restored follies hawkstone park , follies and gardens in shropshire hiorne 's tower , arundel castle , west sussex horton tower , dorset king alfred 's tower , stourhead , somerset mow cop castle , staffordshire old john , bradgate park , leicestershire painshill , cobham , surrey , an 18th-century landscape garden with several follies , some modern reconstructions penshaw monument , penshaw , sunderland pelham 's pillar , caistor , north lincolnshire perrott 's folly , birmingham pope 's grotto , twickenham , south west london racton monument , west sussex the ruined arch at the royal botanic gardens , kew , london rushton triangular lodge , northamptonshire ( 16th century ) severndroog castle , shooter 's hill , south-east london sham castle , bathwick hill , bath , somerset the sledmere cross takes the form of an eleanor cross and is a true 'folly ' that was 'converted ' to a world war i memorial solomon 's temple , buxton , derbyshire stainborough castle , south yorkshire two of the follies in staunton country park have survived until the present day stowe school has several follies in the grounds sway tower , new forest tattingstone wonder , near ipswich , suffolk wainhouse tower , the tallest folly in the world , halifax , west yorkshire wentworth woodhouse , wentworth , south yorkshire williamson tunnels , probably the largest underground folly in the world , liverpool wilder 's folly , sulham , berkshire . scotland . the caldwell tower , lugton , renfrewshire captain frasers folly ( uig tower ) isle of skye dunmore pineapple , falkirk hume castle , berwickshire kinnoull hill , perth mccaig 's tower , oban , argyll and bute national monument , edinburgh the temple near castle semple loch , renfrewshire . wales . castell coch , cardiff clytha castle , monmouthshire folly tower at pontypool paxton 's tower , carmarthenshire portmeirion gwrych castle , conwy county borough . united states . bancroft tower , worcester , massachusetts belvedere castle , new york city bishop castle , outside of pueblo , colorado chateau laroche , loveland , ohio italian barge , villa vizcaya , miami , florida kingfisher tower , otsego lake ( new york ) lawson tower , scituate , massachusetts coral castle , homestead , florida summersville lake lighthouse , mount nebo , west virginia the parthenon in nashville , tennessee hofmann tower in lyons , illinois vessel , new york , new york watts towers , watts , los angeles . see also . list of garden features english garden folly fellowship french landscape garden garden hermit goat tower grotto novelty architecture ruin value . references . bibliography . barlow , nick et al . follies of europe , garden art press , 2009 , barton , stuart monumental follies lyle publications , 1972 folly fellowship , the follies magazine , published quarterly folly fellowship , the follies journal , published annually folly fellowship , the foll-e , an electronic bulletin published monthly and available free to all hatt , e . m . follies national benzole , london 1963 headley , gwyn architectural follies in america , john wiley & sons , new york 1996 headley , gwyn & meulenkamp , wim , follies — a guide to rogue architecture , jonathan cape , london 1990 headley , gwyn & meulenkamp , wim , follies — a national trust guide , jonathan cape , london 1986 headley , gwyn & meulenkamp , wim , follies grottoes & garden buildings , aurum press , london 1999 howley , james the follies and garden buildings of ireland yale university press , new haven & london , 1993 jackson , hazelle shellhouses and grottoes , shire books , england , 2001 jones , barbara follies & grottoes constable , london 1953 & 1974 meulenkamp , wim follies — bizarre bouwwerken in nederland en belgië , arbeiderpers , amsterdam , 1995 . external links .