Paul Hester

early years . hester was the older of two children ( his younger sister is carolyn ) from melbourne , australia born to a bushman father and jazz drummer mother . at an early age he was encouraged by his mother to play drums . his extrovert personality did not impress his teachers , and he left school early and attempted various jobs before starting a musical career . he spent most of his teen years living in the dandenong ranges , the family home being on the edge of sherbrooke forest at the sherbrooke/kallista boundary . some of the melbourne bands he played in from 1976 to 1978 included thunder and edges . in 1979 he co-founded a melbourne-based band called cheks ( renamed deckchairs overboard when they moved to sydney in 1982 ) . he lived with deborah conway of do-ré-mi during the early 1980s , while playing regularly in love party . hester later worked with conway in rose amongst thorns ( 1990–1991 ) and ultrasound ( 1995 ) . . split enz and crowded house . split enz . at the departure of drummer mal green from split enz in 1981 , their percussionist noel crombie took up the role of drummer . after the release of the enz album time and tide in 1982 , the band took a break to focus on other projects . according to the radio documentary enzology , when they reformed in mid-1983 , both finn brothers returned somewhat distracted . tim finn had just released the very successful solo album escapade , while younger brother neil finn had a child on the way . the reunion resulted in conflicting emotions ( november 1983 ) , an album which marked the beginning of the end for the band . before the tour to support the album it was decided that crombie would return to percussion ( something he says he enjoyed more than drumming ) , and the band would find a new drummer . hester was auditioned on the advice of rob hirst of midnight oil and got the job . in june 1984 , founder tim finn left split enz , and they released see ya 'round in november which included '' this is massive '' which was written by hester . when split enz disbanded in december , hester and neil finn decided to start a new group . crowded house . initially , the new band formed by hester and neil finn was named '' the mullanes '' and then underwent a few name changes . they recruited nick seymour to play bass guitar and craig hooper on guitar , hooper left as they secured a recording contract with capitol records in the us . however , capitol disliked the name and the band changed to crowded house to record their debut eponymous album , crowded house in 1986 . other records by crowded house with hester are : temple of low men ( 1988 ) , woodface ( 1991 ) , together alone ( 1993 ) , and the best-of collection recurring dream ( 1996 ) . by 1993 hester was frustrated by the demands of his career and suffered a phobia about leaving to go on tour . on his return to australia that year he started to see a psychiatrist . paul hester profile , smh.com.au , 28 march 2005 ; accessed 8 january 2016 . he remained with crowded house until 1994 , when the pressure of touring and the birth of his first daughter made him want to stay home , rather than remain on the road . hester left mid-way through a 1994 tour of america , forcing the band to recruit british drummer peter jones for the rest of the tour . hester performed with crowded house at the band 's farewell concert on the forecourt of the sydney opera house in 1996 . . after crowded house . towards the end of his time with crowded house , paul produced the holy toledos ' second album , '' blood '' , and played drums on its first single . it was on his recommendation the band was picked up by sony . after leaving crowded house , hester appeared on many tv and radio shows in australia and opened a cafe/restaurant named beach house cafe with fellow melbourne musician joe camilleri in elwood beach in melbourne . from 1995 until 1998 , hester appeared regularly on the popular australian radio show martin/molloy . he played drums as a session musician for producer richard pleasance . one of his final recordings was sophie koh 's debut album all the pretty boys . hester also had a recurring role as '' paul the cook '' with the popular australian children 's music group , the wiggles , including his appearance in their 1998 music video fruit salad ( yummy yummy ) taken from their 1998 yummy yummy video . . largest living things . hester later became involved in a new band called largest living things ( 1997–2000 ) , with kevin garant on guitar and barry stockley on bass , performing with members of rock groups crowded house , split enz , midnight oil , and others . largest living things released a few eps in australia featuring songs written and sung by hester ; in contrast to his previous work in crowded house , hester played guitar as well as drums . the largest living things featured on mick molloy 's controversial 1999 tv show the mick molloy show , with hester as bandleader . hester formed tarmac adam with crowded house 's nick seymour and matt o'donnell , sean mcvitty and steve paix in 2001 . . hessie 's shed . in 1998 , hester hosted his own 10-part tv series hessie 's shed on australian broadcasting corporation ( abc ) . hessie 's shed details , imdb.com ; accessed 8 january 2016 . this show gave hester the room to explore his humorous presenter skills , showcase some friends , reunite with friends from crowded house , and play with the house band and his own band , largest living things , with hester now performing from behind the drums instead of guitar . . the max sessions . hester went on to host the intimate concerts the max sessions . broadcast on max , these intimate concerts , which were mainly recorded at the sydney opera house , featured a variety of local and international acts . a highlight of the show 's concerts saw hester reunite with former bandmates neil finn and tim finn for a few songs , backing them on drums , while they were promoting their album everyone is here . personal life . hester was in a relationship with deborah conway from do-re-mi in the early 1980s . he later formed a relationship with photographer mardi sommerfeld and they had two daughters olive and sunday . they lived in the suburb of elwood in melbourne , victoria . . death . on 26 march 2005 , aged 46 , hester committed suicide by hanging himself in elsternwick park near his home . four years earlier he had split from mardi sommerfeld . his two daughters , olive and sunday , were aged 5 and 10 at the time of his death . it was known to family and close friends that he had been suffering from depression for a number of years , and was prone to extreme mood swings . hester was buried at blackwood in the central highlands region of victoria . his life was commemorated at the 2005 aria awards , with neil finn singing the staple crowded house anthem solo '' better be home soon '' along with a mini-biography and footage from his life and achievements . in october 2005 , in memory of hester and to acknowledge his long links with the area , the local port phillip council agreed to name a path alongside the elwood canal , the paul hester walk , after him . hester 's girlfriend at the time of his death was new zealand-based singer kashan vincent . in july 2006 , vincent sued his estate , claiming a third of his net worth . vincent claimed the pair had a relationship for 32 months and , while not cohabiting , were engaged , but had called off their wedding . by may 2007 , the lawsuit was resolved out of court , with vincent receiving a payout , and hester 's two daughters named as the sole beneficiaries of their father 's estate . . references . further reading . chunn , mike , stranger than fiction : the life and times of split enz , gp publications , 1992 . chunn , mike , stranger than fiction : the life and times of split enz , ( revised , ebook edition ) , hurricane press , 2013 . bourke , chris , something so strong , macmillan australia , 1997 , twomey , chris & doole , kerry , crowded house : private universe , omnibus pr , 1998 , dix , john , stranded in paradise : new zealand rock and roll , 1955 to the modern era , penguin books , 2005 , . external links . '' vale paul hester '' from the age