André Masséna

early life . masséna was born in nice , which was part of the kingdom of sardinia at the time , on 16 may 1758 . he was the son of shopkeeper jules masséna ( giulio massena ) , who became a wine merchant , and his wife marguerite fabre . his father died in 1764 , and after his mother remarried , he was sent to live with his father 's relatives . at the age of thirteen , masséna became a cabin boy aboard a merchant ship . while aboard , he sailed in the mediterranean sea and on two extended voyages to french guiana . in 1775 , after four years at sea , he returned to nice and enlisted in the french army as a private in the royal italian regiment . by the time he left in 1789 , masséna had risen to the rank of warrant officer , the highest rank achievable by non-noblemen . on 10 august that year , he married anne marie rosalie lamare , daughter of a surgeon in antibes , and lived with her in her hometown . after a brief stint as a smuggler in northern italy , he rejoined the army in 1791 and was made an officer , rising to the rank of colonel by 1792 . revolutionary wars . when the french revolutionary wars broke out in april 1792 , masséna and his battalion were deployed along the border to piedmont . masséna prepared his battalion for battle in the hope that it would be incorporated into the regular army . that october , a month after the occupation of nice , the battalion was one of four volunteer battalions that became part of the french armée d'italie . masséna distinguished himself in battle and was quickly promoted , attaining the rank of brigadier general in august 1793 and divisional general that december . he was prominent in every campaign on the italian riviera over the next two years , including the attack on saorgio in 1794 and the battle of loano in 1795 . when napoleon bonaparte took command in march 1796 , masséna was commanding the two divisions of the army 's advance guard . during the campaign in italy from 1796-1797 , masséna became one of bonaparte 's most important subordinates . he played a significant role in the battles of montenotte and dego in the spring , and took a leading role at the battles of lonato , castiglione , bassano , caldiero and arcola in the summer and fall , as well as the battle of rivoli and the fall of mantua that winter . when an austrian relief army was sent to aid mantua in january 1797 , the french forces were overrun near rivoli , while other enemy columns advanced on verona and mantua . at 5:00 p.m . on 13 january , masséna was ordered to march from verona to rivoli , fifteen miles away . following a forced night march across the snow-covered roads , the first of his troops reached the battlefield at 6:00 a.m . bonaparte deployed them on the left flank when the battle began . they were shifted to strengthen the sagging center and then deployed to crush an austrian flanking maneuver . masséna 's troops played a decisive role in the victory . the next day , with very little rest , masséna and his troops marched 39 miles in 24 hours to intercept a second austrian army advancing to relieve mantua . at la favorita , he closed the pincer on the austrian army , forcing their surrender . in the space of five days , masséna 's division played a major role in an operation that left over 35,000 austrian soldiers either dead or captured . two weeks later , the 30,000-man garrison at mantua surrendered . with his final victory complete , napoleon praised masséna with the name l'enfant chéri de la victoire . the president of the directory in paris , jean rewbell , was also congratulatory : '' the executive directory congratulates you , citizen general , for the new success that you have obtained against the enemies of the republic . the brave division that you command has covered itself with glory in the three consecutive days that forced mantua to capitulate , and the directory is obliged to regard you among the most capable and useful generals of the republic . '' rewbell to masséna , 14 february 1797 , koch , mémories de masséna i , lxxxix . in 1799 , masséna was granted an important command in switzerland , replacing general charles edward jennings . as russian reinforcements marched to support the austrian armies in italy and switzerland , the directory consolidated the remnants of the french armies under masséna 's command . with a force totaling approximately 90,000 men , masséna was ordered to defend the entire frontier . he repulsed archduke charles 's advance on zurich in june , but retired from the city and took up positions in the surrounding mountains . marshall-cornwall , massena , 72-74 . he triumphed over the russians under general alexander korsakov at the second battle of zurich in september , then , aware of the advance of russian general alexander suvorov toward st . gotthard , quickly shifted his troops southward . general claude lecourbe 's division delayed the russians ' entrance into switzerland at gotthard pass , and when suvorov finally forced his way through , he was met by units of general jean-de-dieu soult 's french division blocking the route at altdorf . unable to break through the french lines and aware of korsakov 's disastrous defeat , the russian general turned east through the high and difficult pragel pass to glarus where he was dismayed to find other french troops awaiting him on 4 october . in waist-deep snow , his troops attempted six times to break through the french lines along the linth river , but each attack was beaten back . suvorov had no alternative but to make his escape across the treacherous panix pass , abandoning his baggage and artillery and losing as many as 5,000 men . édouard gachot , histoire militaire de masséna , la campagne d'helvétie ( 1799 ) ( paris , 1904 ) , 182-473 . this , among other events , led to russia 's withdrawal from the second coalition . in 1800 , masséna was besieged at genoa in italy by the austrians , while bonaparte marched with the army of the reserve to milan . by the end of may , plague had spread throughout genoa and the civilian population was in revolt . negotiations were begun for the exchange of prisoners early in june , but the citizens and some of the garrison clamored for capitulation . unknown to masséna , the austrian general peter ott had been ordered to raise the siege because bonaparte had crossed great st bernard pass and was now threatening the main austrian army . describing the situation at genoa , ott requested and received permission to continue the siege . on 4 june , with one day 's rations remaining , masséna 's negotiator finally agreed to evacuate the french army from genoa . however , '' if the word capitulation was mentioned or written , '' masséna threatened to end all negotiations . masséna to ott , 2 june 1800 , gachot , le siège de gênes , 241 . two days later , a few of the french left the city by sea , but the bulk of masséna 's starving and exhausted troops marched out of the city with all their equipment and followed the road along the coast toward france , ending the siege of almost 60 days . the siege was an astonishing demonstration of tenacity , ingenuity , courage , and daring that garnered additional laurels for masséna and placed him in a category previously reserved for bonaparte alone . by forcing the austrians to deploy vast forces against him at genoa , masséna made it possible for bonaparte to cross great st bernard pass , surprise the austrians , and ultimately defeat general michael von melas 's austrian army at marengo before sufficient reinforcements could be transferred from the siege site . less than three weeks after the evacuation , bonaparte wrote to masséna , '' i am not able to give you a greater mark of the confidence i have in you than by giving you command of the first army of the republic army of italy . '' bonaparte to masséna , 25 june 1800 , correspondance de napoléon ier , no . 4951 , vi , 489-90 . even the austrians recognized the significance of masséna 's defense ; the austrian chief of staff declared firmly , '' you won the battle , not in front of alessandria but in front of genoa . '' james marshall-cornwall , marshal massena , 115 . masséna was made commander of french forces in italy , though he was later dismissed by napoleon . despite the praise , napoleon also criticized massena for capitulating too early in his memoirs , contrasting his actions with those of the gauls under vercingetorix when besieged by julius caesar in the battle of alesia . . napoleonic wars . not until 1804 did masséna regain napoleon 's trust . that year , he was made a marshal of the empire in may . he led an independent army that captured verona and fought the austrians at verona and later , on 30 october 1805 , caldiero . masséna was given control of operations against the kingdom of naples , and commanded the right wing of the grand army in poland in 1807 . he was granted his first ducal victory title as chief of rivoli on 24 august 1808 . in 1804 , he participated in the reorganization of french freemasonry and became , in november , '' grand representative of the grand master of the supreme council '' ; in this capacity , he is one of the negotiators of the concordat established between the grand orient de france and the supreme council . under the empire , he was a member of the sainte caroline lodge in paris . dictionnaire de la franc-maçonnerie - daniel ligou ( presses universitaires de france , 1998 ) . he is also '' worshipful of honor '' in various masonic lodges , such as '' les frères réunis '' in paris , '' la parfaite amitié '' in toulon , '' l'étroite union '' in thouars or '' les vrais amis réunis '' in nice . in 1808 , masséna was accidentally shot during a hunting expedition with the imperial suite . it is unclear as to whether he was shot by napoleon himself or by marshal louis-alexandre berthier , but he lost the use of one eye as a result . it was n't until 1809 that he was in active service , this time against the forces of the fifth coalition . at the beginning of the campaign , masséna led the iv corps at the battles of eckmühl and ebersberg . later in the war , when napoleon tried to cross to the north bank of the danube at the battle of aspern-essling , masséna 's troops hung onto the village of aspern through two days of savage fighting . he was rewarded on 31 january 1810 with a second , now princely , victory title , prince of essling , for his efforts there and in the battle of wagram . during the peninsular war , napoleon appointed masséna as commander of the army of portugal in 1810 . masséna captured ciudad rodrigo and almeida after successful sieges , but suffered a setback at the hands of the duke of wellington 's anglo-portuguese army at buçaco on 27 september . pressing on , he forced the allies to retreat into the lines of torres vedras , where a stalemate ensued for several months . finally forced to retreat due to lack of food and supplies , masséna withdrew to the spanish frontier , allegedly prompting napoleon to comment , '' so , prince of essling , you are no longer masséna . '' napoleon 's peninsular marshals : a reassessment . richard humble , 1972 . after suffering defeats at the battles of sabugal and fuentes de oñoro , he was replaced by marshal auguste de marmont and did not serve again , becoming a local commander at marseille . retirement . masséna retained briefly his command after the restoration of king louis xviii until he was removed for his background . elting , swords around a throne , 141 . when napoleon returned from exile the following year , masséna rallied to commit to napoleon side once again , and was awarded as a peer of france but remained as a local commander . the day after napoleon 's second abdication on 22 june 1815 , he was named head of the national guard in paris by the provisional government , but was soon replaced upon the return of the bourbons . thibaudeau , memoires , 1799 - 1815 , 519 . he was disinclined to prove his royalist loyalties after the defeat of napoleon , and was also a member of the court-martial that refused to try marshal michel ney . masséna died in paris in 1817 and was buried at père lachaise cemetery , in a tomb he shares with his son-in-law honoré charles reille . monuments and memorials of the napoleonic era . honoré charles reille . family . masséna 's wife stayed at their home in antibes during his campaigns . their first child , marie anne elisabeth , was born on 8 july 1790 , but died only four years later . their first son jacques prosper , born 25 june 1793 , inherited his father 's title as 2nd prince of essling on 3 july 1818 . victoire thècle was born on 28 september 1794 and married honoré charles reille on 12 september 1814 . françois victor , born on 2 april 1799 , became 2nd duke of rivoli , 3rd prince of essling , and married anne debelle on 19 april 1823 . legacy . masséna is the namesake of one of the boulevards of the marshals that circle paris , having also a bridge named after him . the village of massena in new york was settled by french lumbermen in the early 19th century and named in masséna 's honor . massena , iowa , also in the united states and in turn named for the community in new york , honors masséna with a portrait of him in centennial park . his birthplace , nice , is the location of place masséna , also named after him . in literature . masséna is mentioned and/or appears in several of arthur conan doyle 's brigadier gerard stories , including how the brigadier saved the army ( 1902 ) . masséna appears as a minor character in bernard cornwell 's novels sharpe 's escape , detailing france 's failed attempt to re-invade portugal in 1810 , including the battle of bussaco , and sharpe 's battle , detailing the battle of fuentes de onoro .