James LaBrie

early life . kevin james labrie was born in penetanguishene , ontario , canada and started playing drums at age five . by his mid-teens , he was a member of several bands as a front man that attempted singing and/or drumming . he stopped playing drums at age 17 and in 1981 , at age 18 , he moved to toronto . career . coney hatch . labrie joined coney hatch in 1986 when they were attempting a new lineup . the band recorded a number of demonstration tapes in their rehearsal studio and performed live in ontario clubs for several months . when their record company ( anthem ) expressed their disapproval of the lineup , the band replaced labrie with phil naro in one last ditched attempt at forging ahead without carl dixon . that lineup was to be short lived as well . winter rose . soon after parting ways with coney hatch , labrie became the vocalist for the glam metal band winter rose . the group also included richard chycki on guitar and bass , randy cooke on drums , and sebastian bach on vocals . '' dream theater brings it on ! '' . huffington post , 04/23/2014 . by bill_robinson chycki had also worked with bach under the band names sebastian and hope . the band recorded a series of demos through 1988 and 1989 with guest musicians bruce dies and rob laidlaw . the tracks were commercially released in 1989 as a self-titled album by inside out music . all the songs on the album were written by richard chycki and james labrie , except two which richard chycki wrote alone . dream theater . left in 1990 , labrie learned that american progressive metal band dream theater was looking for a new singer , so he submitted a tape and was quickly flown to new york for a full audition . the trial went well , and he was chosen ahead of 200 other hopefuls to fill the full-time vocalist position in that band . labrie has since had a significant impact on the vocal melodies on each dream theater album , but until recently has had little input on the instrumentation of dream theater 's music ; 2011 's a dramatic turn of events features labrie in the music credits on three songs . to date he has written or co-written lyrics for at least one song on nine of the thirteen albums dream theater has released with him in the band , images and words , black clouds & silver linings , dream theater and the astonishing containing none of them . asked by prog-sphere.com what is his favorite dream theater song to play live , james says '' the favorite song for me is scarred , i love performing that live . and . well , octavarium , that whole freakin ’ thing . '' . solo . with matt guillory , labrie has released five solo albums under various names ( mullmuzzler , james labrie 's mullmuzzler , and simply james labrie ) . in an interview from beyond the dark horizon on june 12 , 2010 , james labrie stated that his next solo album entitled static impulse , is in the mixing stages and will contain 12 tracks . james stated '' it 's very heavy and i 'm really excited . '' on july 27 , 2010 it was announced on dream theater 's website that static impulse would be released on september 27 , 2010 through inside out music . it features longtime collaborator matt guillory on keyboards , marco sfogli ( who also played on labrie 's earlier album elements of persuasion ) on guitars , peter wildoer of the swedish melodic death metal band darkane on drums and screaming vocals , and ray riendeau on bass . james labrie stated '' the release of static impulse is one that the whole band is psyched about . this is modern metal and as heavy and relevant as any other band out there going in a similar musical direction . there are riffs that will blow your head off and melodies both musically and vocally that are hypnotic . get in the driver 's seat and let the ears bleed . enjoy and see you out there with a tour to follow up and support this release . '' in 2011 's interview for prog-sphere.com , labrie stated that the us tour got cancelled , saying '' because it was so disorganized last time . that 's why i basically said , 'you do n't have the visas yet . where we 're at this point , by the time you get the visas processed , we 're gon na have one rehearsal and then we 're gon na go out . ' and i said , ' i 'm not doing that . ' '' in july 2013 , labrie 's album impermanent resonance was released by inside out music . other projects . throughout his career with dream theater , labrie has lent his voice to many other artists ' records as well as tribute albums . in 1991 , not long after joining dream theater ( and before ever appearing on a dream theater recording ) , he sang background vocals on the song '' life in still water '' on fates warning 's parallels album . he has appeared on many trent gardner releases ( including leonardo : the absolute man and explorer 's club ) , as well as appearing on albums by such artists as shadow gallery , tim donahue and frameshift . labrie provided the lead vocals for the main character in the rock opera album the human equation by ayreon ; in 2015 , he reprised his role for a live version , the theater equation . he was also featured as the character '' the historian '' in the album the source . labrie is also a featured vocalist on henning pauly 's '' babysteps '' project released in 2006 ; labrie plays the role of the arrogant doctor . since 2004 , labrie has been working with the true symphonic rockestra project , along with thomas dewald , vladimir grishko , dirk ulrich , christoph wansleben , sandro martinez , paul mayland , marvin philippi , and igor marin . their album , concerto in true minor - 3 rock tenors was released on itunes and for download on amazon on march 28 , 2008 , by brainworx and marinsound . in 2016 labrie was the special guest on the last union debut album firstly meant to be named '' most beautiful day '' . he sang in three songs : '' president evil '' , '' taken '' and '' a place in heaven '' . eventually the album was called '' twelve '' and finally released on december 21 , 2018 . '' twelve '' was written and pieced together over a -year period . . personal life . labrie had said in many older interviews that he was christian , and actively practiced the religion . however , in 2005 he revealed that he 's since strayed from organized religion , and now considers himself '' a more spiritual-directed person . '' . singing . influences . his musical inspiration comes from many different genres , including such artists as sebastian bach , aerosmith , don dokken , metallica , the doors , ludwig van beethoven , nat king cole , queen , sting , and muse whose inspiration , according to labrie , is shown on dream theater 's album , octavarium . labrie lists freddie mercury as his '' all-time favorite '' singer , and also admires such singers as steve perry , lou gramm , rob halford , steven tyler , robert plant , and jeff buckley , among others . . reception . labrie is widely known for his lyric tenor style singing voice . he was voted by fans to 16 on musicradar 's '' the greatest vocalists of all time '' in 2010 . during his career with dream theater , labrie 's singing voice has received both praise and criticism . in response to detractors of his vocal abilities , labrie has said , '' these people are pathetic and need to move on . i say get a life and maybe work on making your life a better one instead of thinking the answer lies in cutting someone else up to raise your miserable spirit . '' '' frameshift , a new progressive super group is born '' . dutch progressive rock page . retrieved july 26 , 2010 . . food poisoning incident . on december 29 , 1994 , while vacationing in cuba , labrie was stricken with a severe case of food poisoning from contaminated shrimp and while vomiting , he ruptured his vocal cords . he saw three throat specialists who all said there was nothing they could do except have him rest his voice as much as possible . however , on january 12 , 1995 , against doctor 's orders , he was on the waking up the world tour in japan promoting dream theater 's awake album with his voice far from normal . labrie has said he did not feel vocally '' normal '' until at least 2002 . he has also said that this era was a very hard time for him as a singer , and depression as a result caused him to consider departing from the band , although his bandmates supported him and urged him to stay . after the world tourbulence tour , he discovered that his voice had fully returned . he said that his voice was fully healed by time and training . however , while speaking to greg prato of songfacts in 2019 , labrie explained how the incident affected his vocal range . '' so , instead of hitting d 's and e 's and f-sharps and all that stuff , i was able to hit c , c-sharp , and d . but i had to really watch it . i have hit f notes here and there , but i have to really watch it . but that was probably the darkest moment in my life , for sure . '' . discography . winter rose winter rose ( 1989 ) dream theater images and words ( 1992 ) awake ( 1994 ) falling into infinity ( 1997 ) metropolis pt . 2 : scenes from a memory ( 1999 ) six degrees of inner turbulence ( 2002 ) train of thought ( 2003 ) octavarium ( 2005 ) systematic chaos ( 2007 ) black clouds & silver linings ( 2009 ) a dramatic turn of events ( 2011 ) dream theater ( 2013 ) the astonishing ( 2016 ) distance over time ( 2019 ) mullmuzzler keep it to yourself ( 1999 ) mullmuzzler 2 ( 2001 ) solo elements of persuasion ( 2005 ) static impulse ( 2010 ) impermanent resonance ( 2013 ) others fates warning - parallels ( 1991 ) explorers club – age of impact ( 1998 ) various artists ( a tribute to rush ) – working man – a tribute to rush ( 1996 ) various artists ( a tribute to queen ) – dragon attack ( 1997 ) shadow gallery - tyranny ( 1998 ) various artists ( a tribute to emerson , lake & palmer ) – encores , legends & paradox ( 1999 ) explorers club – raising the mammoth ( 2002 ) frameshift - unweaving the rainbow ( 2003 ) tim donahue - madmen & sinners ( 2004 ) ayreon - the human equation ( 2004 ) true symphonic rockestra - concerto in true minor ( 2008 ) redemption - snowfall on judgment day ( 2009 ) eden 's curse - trinity ( 2011 ) rik emmett & resolution9 - res9 ( 2016 ) ayreon - the source ( 2017 ) last union - twelve ( 2018 ) symphony north - the bell ringer ( 2019 ) evergrey - escape of the phoenix ( 2021 ) . references . external links . james labrie official web site 2011 interview with james labrie on prog sphere