Paul de Chomedey, Sieur de Maisonneuve

early life . maisonneuve was born into the aristocracy in neuville-sur-vannes in champagne , france . he was the son of louis de chomedey , seigneur of chavane , germenoy-en-brie , and his second wife marie de thomelin , the daughter of jean de thomelin , a king ’ s counsellor and a treasurer of france in the generality of champagne , and of ambroise d ’ aulquoy . paul de chomedey grew up in the manor-house at neuville-sur-vanne , not far from the maisonneuve fief , which his father acquired in 1614 . he had two sisters and one brother . he began his military career at 13 in holland , where he also learned to play the lute . he had a successful career in which he was noted for his ability and his honesty . at 30 , he was hired by jérome le royer de la dauversiere , who was head of the société notre-dame de montréal . the latter had a vision that inspired him to build a society mission on montreal island in new france . maisonneuve was hired to lead the colonists and ensure their safety in the new land . governor of montreal . in 1642 ville-marie was founded on the southern shore of the island of montreal , where a chapel and a small settlement were built . a hospital , under the command of jeanne mance , was also established . maisonneuve was the first governor of montreal . the settlers maintained peaceful relations with the algonquin people , one of the indigenous tribes of the area . the first year of the colony 's existence was peaceful . in 1643 a flood threatened the city . maisonneuve prayed to the virgin mary to stop the inundation and when it abated , he erected a cross atop mount royal . a cross has been maintained there to the current day . of the local first nations tribes with whom these french settlers had contact with , the mohawk , who were already trading with the dutch and english in new amsterdam ( modern new york city ) , resented french efforts to interrupt the trade . the mohawk were based in present-day new york state , south of montreal , and severely threatened the new colony . the algonquin , in contrast , maintained peaceful relations with the newly arrived europeans . nevertheless , they were often at war with the haudenosaunee ( iroquois ) , who discovered the existence of the new french settlement of montreal , whose defence maisonneuve commanded using his military training , only in 1643 . already familiar with the terrain , the haudenosaunee would often observe and engage the french settlers from the safety of the woods . that devastating strategy was the beginning of a long conflict between the groups as they were competing with each other for game and other resources . on 30 march 1644 , the situation came to a head . warned by their guard dogs as to the nearby presence of their enemies , a band of 30 settlers went into the forest to face their foes . once in the woods , the french encountered 250 haudenosaunee people in ambush , waiting for them . retreating in the face of such uneven odds , maisonneuve remained last so that the others could make it safely back to the fort , resulting in him being set upon by a haudenosaunee chief . in this decisive moment , maisonneuve fired twice on the chief , thus '' killing him with his bare hands , '' as is sometimes quoted about the event , before returning to the safety of the fort amid much fanfare . in 1645 , maisonneuve received news that his father had died , and he returned to france . there , he was offered the position of governor of new france but turned it down , wanting to continue his leadership of ville-marie . maisonneuve returned to montreal in 1647 , and the wars with the iroquois continued . in 1649 , maisonneuve stood as godfather for the first white child baptized in the colony . she was pauline hébert , the daughter of the fur-trader augustin hébert and his wife adrienne du vivier , who had come to montreal in 1648 with maisonneuve and their elder daughter jeanne . in the spring of 1651 , the haudenosaunee attacks became so frequent and so violent that ville-marie thought that its end had come . maisonneuve made all the settlers take refuge in the fort . by 1652 , the colony at montreal had been so reduced that he was forced to return to france to raise 100 volunteers to go with him to the colony the following year . if the effort had failed , montreal would have been abandoned and the survivors relocated downriver to quebec city . when the 100 arrived in the fall of 1653 , the population of montreal was barely 50 people . they included jacques archambault , who dug the first water well of the island in 1657 , at the request of maisonneuve . over time , the colony grew in size and eventually was large enough to be secure from the haudenosaunee threat . control of the colony was taken from the missionary society and taken up by the crown in 1663 . maisonneuve had not enjoyed the favour of the new governor-general , augustin de saffray de mésy . in september 1665 , alexandre de prouville , the lieutenant-general of montreal , ordered maisonneuve to return to france on indefinite leave . after 24 years as head of the colony , he left montreal for good . later life . settling in paris , maisonneuve lived in relative obscurity . in 1671 , he welcomed marguerite bourgeoys at his home in paris . with his encouragement , in 1657 she had established the congregation of notre dame of montreal , an order of teaching nuns that educated french and indigenous children . maisonneuve died in 1676 ; at his bedside were his young friend , philippe de turmenys , and his devoted servant , louis fin . on september 10 , his funeral took place at the church of the fathers of the christian doctrine , near the abbey of saint-étienne-du-mont ; he was also buried there . honours . after his death , saint-paul street in montreal was named after maisonneuve , who had built his home in 1650 on the early street . nuns ' island was once called île saint-paul in honour of the founder of montreal . the current name of the island appears starting from the 19th century and was exclusively used from the 1950s on . the maisonneuve monument was erected in 1895 on place d'armes in old montreal , to his memory . it is the work of louis-philippe hébert ( 1850–1917 ) . an imaginary model was used to represent maisonneuve , as no authentic portrait exists of the first governor of montreal . de maisonneuve boulevard and rue chomedey in downtown montreal are named for him , as are maisonneuve park , the collège de maisonneuve , the neighbourhood of chomedey in laval , and the maisonneuve pavilion , a dormitory at the royal military college saint-jean . gallery . image : mount-royal-cross.jpg mount royal cross . the first was erected by paul de chomdey de maisonneuve on january 6 , 1643 image : montreal 1647.jpg montreal in 1647 image : projet monument maisonneuve montreal.jpg projet maisonneuve monument , canadian illustrated news , 12 april 1879 image : monument à maisonneuve.jpg maisonneuve monument at the place d'armes image : monument maisonneuve.jpg maisonneuve monument . see also . french colonization of the americas timeline of montreal history . external links . la pratique du luth en nouvelle-france par paul chomedey de maisonneuve ( 1612-1676 ) premier gouverneur de montréal . , web robert derome , professeur honoraire d'histoire de l'art , université du québec à montréal . novels . lise baucher-morency / gaëtane breton , la périlleuse fondation de ville-marie , ( book with musical cd ) éditions planète rebelle ( link 2017 . references .