Jozef Tiso

slovak secession . in february 1939 tiso entered into negotiations with germany for a fully independent slovakia , separated from czechoslovakia . he held direct meetings with the german representative arthur seyss-inquart , in which tiso initially expressed doubts as to whether an independent slovakia would be a viable entity . czech military units subsequently occupied slovakia and forced tiso out of office on 9 march . ward ( 2013 ) pp . 178-9 . however the rusyns , also resentful of the inclusion of their lands in czechoslovakia , and the oppressions of the prague government , now also sought autonomy . tiso 's catholic-conservative feelings initially inhibited him from what appeared to be revolutionary moves . however , within a few days hitler invited tiso to berlin , and offered assistance for slovak nationhood . ian kershaw ; hitler a biography ; 2008 edn ; w.w . norton & co ; london ; p . 476 hitler suggested that slovakia should declare independence under german protection ( i.e . : protectorate status ) , and that if not hungary might annex the remaining territory of slovakia . without making an agreement , tiso now requested the czecho-slovak president to call a meeting of the slovak diet for 14 march . during that session tiso made a speech informing the diet of his conversation with hitler , confirming that he reserved any move for an independence decision to come from the slovak diet . on the initiative of the president of the assembly , martin sokol ( himself previously a strong proponent of the czecho-slovak state with guaranteed autonomy for slovakia ) , endorsed a declaration of independence . ward ( 2013 ) pp . 181-2 . on march 15 , after czech president hacha requested german assistance , germany occupied the remaining rump of czechoslovakia . slovakia became the slovak republic , an independent state ( under german protection ) which was formally recognised by the soviet union and germany , with de facto recognition by great britain and france ( but not by the united states who were largely responsible , in 1919 , for the new artificial state of czechoslovakia ) . czech émigrés and the united states considered slovakia a puppet state of germany . after the later recognition of the czechoslovak government-in-exile by great britain , the british foreign office notified the czech foreign ministry that britain did not recognise any territorial claims of czechoslovakia , nor could they commit to any fixed boundaries for the state , nor recognise the legal continuation of czechoslovakia . tiso was initially prime minister from 14 march 1939 until 26 october 1939 . on 1 october 1939 tiso became official president of the slovak people 's party . on 26 october he became president of slovakia , and appointed tuka as prime minister . after 1942 , tiso was also styled vodca ( '' leader '' ) , an imitation in the national language of führer . evans ( 2009 ) p . 395 . anti-semitism and deportation of jews . at the salzburg conference on 28 july 1940 , an agreement was reached to establish a national socialist regime in slovakia . tuka attended the conference , as did hitler , tiso , joachim von ribbentrop , alexander mach ( head of the hlinka guards ) , and franz karmasin , head of the local german minority . as a result of the conference , two state agencies were created to deal with '' jewish affairs '' . bartl ( 2002 ) p . 142 the '' salzburg summit '' resulted in closer collaboration with germany , and in tuka and other political leaders increasing their powers at the expense of tiso 's original concept of a catholic corporate state . the agreement called for dual command by the slovak people 's party and the hlinka guard ( hsľs ) , and also an acceleration in slovakia 's anti-jewish policies . the reich appointed sturmabteilung leader manfred von killinger as the german representative in slovakia . tiso however accepted these changes in subsequent conversation with hitler . ward ( 2013 ) pp . 211-213 . ss officer dieter wisliceny was dispatched to slovakia to act as an '' adviser '' on jewish issues . evans ( 2009 ) p . 396 the party under tiso and tuka 's leadership aligned itself with nazi policy by implementing antisemitism legislation in slovakia . the main act was the jewish code , under which jews in slovakia could not own any real estate or luxury goods , were excluded from public office and free occupations , could not participate in sport or cultural events , were excluded from secondary schools and universities , and were required to wear the star of david in public . tiso himself had anti-semitic views ( as his earlier journalism made clear ) which were widespread in slovakia . although there are dissenting opinions by modern politicians on his role in the jewish deportations from slovakia , see e.g . ward ( 2013 ) , pp . 271-280 . it is clear that , in line with german policy and '' suggestions '' as well as his earlier anti-semitism , he encouraged these actions , despite condemnation of the deportations from some slovak bishops . in february 1942 , slovakia became the first nazi ally to agree to deportations . the nazis had asked for 20,000 young able-bodied jews for labour duties . tiso had hoped that compliance would aid in the return of 120,000 slovak workers from germany . mazower ( 2008 ) p . 394 . in august 1942 , after the majority of slovak jews had been sent to german-occupied poland and it became clear that the deportees were being systematically murdered , tiso gave a speech in holič in which he called for slovaks to '' cast off your parasite the jews '' and justified continuing deportations of jews from slovakia . on 30 august , hitler commented '' it is interesting how this little catholic priest tiso is sending us the jews ! '' . ward ( 2013 ) p . 8 and pp . 234-7 . vatican undersecretary domenico tardini complained : '' everyone understands that the holy see can not stop hitler . but who can understand that it does not know how to rein in a priest ? '' later in 1942 , amid vatican protests as news of the fate of the deportees filtered back , and the german advance into russia was halted , slovakia then became the first of hitler 's puppet states to shut down the deportations . mazower ( 2008 ) p . 395 mazower wrote : '' when the vatican protested , the government responded with defiance : 'there is no foreign intervention which would stop us on the road to the liberation of slovakia from jewry ' , insisted president tiso '' . mazower ( 2008 ) p . 396 distressing scenes at railway yards of deportees being beaten by hlinka guards had brought protests , including from leading churchmen such as bishop pavol jantausch . evans ( 2009 ) pp . & nbsp ; 396–397 the vatican called in the slovak ambassador twice to enquire as to what was happening in slovakia . according to british historian richard evans , these interventions '' caused tiso , who after all was still a priest in holy orders , to have second thoughts about the programme '' . giuseppe burzio and others reported to tiso that the germans were murdering the deported jews . tiso hesitated and then refused to deport slovakia 's 24,000 remaining jews . according to mazower , '' church pressure and public anger resulted in perhaps 20,000 jews being granted exemptions , effectively bringing the deportations there to an end '' . when in 1943 rumours of further deportations emerged , the papal nuncio in istanbul , msgr . angelo roncalli ( later pope john xxiii ) and burzio helped galvanize the holy see into intervening in vigorous terms . on 7 april 1943 , burzio challenged tuka over the rumours of extermination of slovak jews . the vatican then condemned the renewal of the deportations on 5 may and the slovakian episcopate issued a pastoral letter condemning totalitarianism and antisemitism on 8 may 1943 . according to evans , tuka was '' forced to backtrack by public protests , especially from the church , which by this time had been convinced of the fate that awaited the deportees . pressure from the germans , including a direct confrontation between hitler and tiso on 22 april 1943 , remained without effect . '' evans ( 2009 ) p . 397 in august 1944 , the slovak national uprising broke out against the tiso government . german troops were sent to quell this and with them came einsatzgruppen and security police charged with rounding up or murdering slovakia 's remaining jews . during the german occupation , another 13,500 jews were deported , most of them to auschwitz , and 5,000 imprisoned . some were murdered in slovakia itself , in particular at kremnička and nemecká . ivan kamenec , on the trail of tragedy : the holocaust in slovakia . bratislava : h & h . 2007 . tiso remained in office during the german army 's occupation , but his presidency was relegated to a mostly titular role as slovakia lost whatever de facto independence it had . burzio begged tiso directly to at least spare catholics of jewish ancestry from deportation and delivered an admonition from the pope : '' the injustice wrought by his government is harmful to the prestige of his country and enemies will exploit it to discredit clergy and the church the world over '' . by the end of the holocaust , more than two-thirds of the jews living in slovakia had been murdered . us holocaust museum : holocaust in slovakia . conviction and execution . tiso lost all remnants of power when the soviet army conquered the last parts of western slovakia in april 1945 . he fled first to austria , then to a capuchin monastery in altötting , bavaria . in june 1945 , he was arrested by the americans and extradited to the reconstituted czechoslovakia to stand trial in october 1945 . ward ( 2013 ) pp . 258-9 . on 15 april 1947 , the czechoslovak national court ( národný súd ) found him guilty of many ( but not all ) of the allegations against him , and sentenced him to death for '' state treason , betrayal of the antifascist partisan insurrection and collaboration with nazism '' . the court concluded that tiso 's government had been responsible for the break-up of the czechoslovak republic ; and found tiso guilty of : administering a more radical '' solution '' of the jewish question establishing a totalitarian fascist regime under the slogan '' one god , one nation , one organisation '' by founding the fascist organisations hsľs ( hlinka 's slovak people 's party ) , hlinkova garda ( hlinka guard ) , and hlinkova mládež ( hlinka youth ) , the last two with compulsory membership destroying democracy awarding karl hermann frank the grand cross following frank 's involvement in czech students ' murders and the lidice massacre allowing the military occupation of the western part of slovakia by military forces of the third reich which seized state military assets valued 2 billion ks and transported them to the third reich persecuting and terrorizing the regime 's 3,000 opponents , who were imprisoned , tortured , and , for some , slaughtered in the ilava concentration camp expropriating the assets of the czechs and the jews by the hlinka guard damaging the state finances in the amount of 8.6 billions ks due to clearing for the third reich , another 3-4 billion ks by supplying the wehrmacht , and 7 billion ks by secretly supplying the german occupational forces inciting of hatred against the jews , excluding them from public life and economy , and restricting their personal freedom approving the jewish code , under which jews in slovakia were deprived of human rights , and were deported to the sereď concentration camp and nováky concentration camp , while tiso sold some jews under exceptions to the code approving deportation of 57,837 jews to german concentration camps in 1942 who subsequently died there , and paying for it with 100 million ks to the third reich delivering pows to the german occupation forces knowing they would be put to death allowing the gestapo and sicherheitsdienst to imprison , torture , and abduct people , including slovaks , before the slovak national uprising ordering the hlinka guard and other fascist organisations to help the german occupational forces catch , imprison , torture , and slaughter 4,316 people suspected of involvement in the uprising and abduct 30,000 people to german concentration camps tolerating destruction of numerous villages ( e.g . kľak or nemecká ) by german occupational forces ( e.g . edelweiss ( anti-partisan unit ) ) and the hlinka guard mobilising for german occupation forces allowing german occupational forces to abduct slovaks for forced labour in the third reich ordering civilians to take part in military fortification work for german occupational forces approving an eastern part of slovakia to be declared operational territory of german forces and subjecting the slovak army to the german military leadership and many other crimes tiso was sentenced to death , to deprivation of his civil rights , and to confiscation of all of his property . tiso appealed to the czech president edvard beneš and expected a reprieve ; his prosecutor had recommended clemency . however no reprieve was forthcoming . ward ( 2013 ) pp . 264-5 . wearing his clerical outfit , tiso was hanged in bratislava on 18 april 1947 . the czechoslovak government buried him secretly to avoid having his grave become a shrine , ward ( 2013 ) , p . 266 . but far-right followers of tiso soon identified the grave in the st martin cemetery in bratislava as his . decades later , after the dna test in april 2008 that confirmed it , the body of tiso was exhumed and buried in a canonical tomb in cathedral of st emeram in nitra . . reputation . under communism , tiso was formulaically denounced as a clerical fascism . with the fall of communism in 1989 , and the subsequent independence of slovakia , heated debate began again on his role . james mace ward writes : '' at its worst , the debate was fuel for an ultranationalist attempt to reconstruct slovak society , helping to destabilize czechoslovakia . at its best , the debate inspired a thoughtful reassessment of tiso and encouraged slovaks to grapple with the legacy of collaboration . '' ward ( 2013 ) p . 267 . far-right admirers of tiso created a highly controversial memorial grave in martin cemetery that is mainly ignored by society ; only a handful of ultranationalists or elderly people commemorate tiso . ultranationalist propaganda proclaims tiso as a '' martyr '' who '' sacrificed his life for his belief and nation '' , and so tries to paint him as an innocent victim of communism and a saint . . references . notes . . sources . ward , james mace ( 2013 ) . priest , politician , collaborator : jozef tiso and the making of fascist slovakia . ithaca and london : cornell university press . piahanau , aliaksandr ( 2017 ) . a priest at the front . jozef tiso changing social identities during the first world war , revue des études slaves 88/4 ( 2017 ) : 721–741 . . external links . the tiso plaque controversy slovak jews fear campaign to make fascism respectable jozef tiso - slovak statehood at the bitter price of allegiance to nazi germany