Chart

features . a chart can take a large variety of forms , however there are common features that provide the chart with its ability to extract meaning from data . typically the data in a chart is represented graphically , since humans are generally able to infer meaning from pictures more quickly than from text . text is generally used only to annotate the data . one of the most important uses of text in a graph is the title . a graph 's title usually appears above the main graphic and provides a succinct description of what the data in the graph refers to . dimensions in the data are often displayed on axes . if a horizontal and a vertical axis are used , they are usually referred to as the x-axis and y-axis respectively . each axis will have a scale , denoted by periodic graduations and usually accompanied by numerical or categorical indications . each axis will typically also have a label displayed outside or beside it , briefly describing the dimension represented . if the scale is numerical , the label will often be suffixed with the unit of that scale in parentheses . for example , '' distance traveled ( m ) '' is a typical x-axis label and would mean that the distance traveled , in units of meters , is related to the horizontal position of the data within the chart . within the graph a grid of lines may appear to aid in the visual alignment of data . the grid can be enhanced by visually emphasizing the lines at regular or significant graduations . the emphasized lines are then called major grid lines and the remainder are minor grid lines . the data of a chart can appear in all manner of formats , and may include individual textual labels describing the datum associated with the indicated position in the chart . the data may appear as dots or shapes , connected or unconnected , and in any combination of colors and patterns . inferences or points of interest can be overlaid directly on the graph to further aid information extraction . when the data appearing in a chart contains multiple variables , the chart may include a legend ( also known as a key ) . a legend contains a list of the variables appearing in the chart and an example of their appearance . this information allows the data from each variable to be identified in the chart . types . common charts . four of the most common charts are : file : black cherry tree histogram.svg histogram file : försäljningsstatistik för blanddrycker.png bar chart file : actionnariatlibe2007-fr.svg pie chart file : us trade balance from 1960.svg line chart this gallery shows : a histogram consists of tabular frequencies , shown as adjacent rectangles , erected over discrete intervals ( bins ) , with an area equal to the frequency of the observations in the interval ; first introduced by karl pearson . a bar chart is a chart with rectangular bars with lengths proportional to the values that they represent . the bars can be plotted vertically or horizontally . the first known bar charts are usually attributed to nicole oresme , joseph priestley , and william playfair . a pie chart shows percentage values as a slice of a pie ; first introduced by william playfair . a line chart is a two-dimensional scatterplot of ordered observations where the observations are connected following their order . the first known line charts are usually credited to francis hauksbee , nicolaus samuel cruquius , johann heinrich lambert and william playfair . other common charts are : file : bttftimelines.png timeline chart file : organigram of the united states department of the navy.gif organizational chart file : abb.svg tree chart file : flussdiagramm ( programmablaufplan ) . png flow chart file : mlb slugging history.svg area chart file : cartlinearlarge.png cartogram file : autosomal dominant pedigree chart.svg pedigree chart file : sunburst chart.jpg sunburst chart . less-common charts . examples of less common charts are : file:3variable_bubblechart.svg bubble chart file : nightingale-mortality.jpg polar area diagram file : waterfall-chart.jpg waterfall chart file : fuentes de consumo de energía diaria 2001-2003 ( fao ) . svg radar chart file : heatmap incito.png tree map file : lastgraph example.svg streamgraph file : gapchart-top14-2013-2014.png gapchart this gallery shows : a bubble chart is a two-dimensional scatterplot where a third variable is represented by the size of the points . a polar area diagram , sometimes called a coxcomb chart , is an enhanced form of pie chart developed by florence nightingale . a radar chart or '' spider chart '' or '' doi '' is a two-dimensional chart of three or more quantitative variables represented on axes starting from the same point . a waterfall chart also known as a '' walk '' chart , is a special type of floating-column chart . a tree map where the areas of the rectangles correspond to values . other dimensions can be represented with colour or hue . a streamgraph , a stacked , curvilinear area graph displaced around a central axis a gapchart , a time series chart showing evolving gaps and equalities between series . other dimensions can be represented with colour or hue . field-specific charts . some types of charts have specific uses in a certain field file : bollinger bands example , 2 stddevs.png open-high-low-close chart file : candlestick-chart.png candlestick chart file : kagisample2chart echarts.gif kagi chart file : sparkline dowjones.svg sparkline this gallery shows : stock market prices are often depicted with an open-high-low-close chart with a traditional bar chart of volume at the bottom . candlestick charts are another type of bar chart used to describe price movements of an equity over time . a kagi chart is a time-independent stock tracking chart that attempts to minimise noise . alternatively , where less detail is required , and chart size is paramount , a sparkline may be used . other examples : interest rates , temperatures , etc . , at the close of the period are plotted with a line chart . project planners use a gantt chart to show the timing of tasks as they occur over time . well-known named charts . some of the better-known named charts are : file : gantt przyklad 2.png gantt chart file : nolan-chart.svg nolan chart file:5n pert graph with critical path.svg pert chart file : smith chart bmd.gif smith chart some specific charts have become well known by effectively explaining a phenomenon or idea . an allele chart is a chart originating from the study of genetics to show the interaction of two data points in a grid . a gantt chart helps in scheduling complex projects . the nolan chart and the pournelle chart classify political philosophies according to two axes of variation . a pert chart is often used in project management . the smith chart serves in radio electronics . other charts . there are dozens of other types of charts . here are some of them : file : controlchart.svg control chart file : greningerchart.png greninger chart file : heatmap.png heatmap file : horoscope-christ.jpg natal chart file : ts-wasserdampf . neu.png nomogram file:800px-pareto fr.png pareto chart file : simplerunchart.jpg run chart file : example strip chart.png strip chart file : configuration system structure chart.jpg structure chart file : amharic vowel chart.svg vowel chart one more example : bernal chart . common plots . file : michelsonmorley-boxplot.svg box plot file : dotplot of random values 2.png dot plot ( statistics ) file : probability plot.gif probability plot file : oldfaithful3.png scatterplot file : spectramap biplot iris flower data set full.jpg biplot . chart software . while charts can be drawn by hand , computer software is often used to automatically produce a chart based on entered data . for examples of commonly used software tools , see list of charting software . see also . comparison of adobe flex charts diagram table ( information ) drakon exploratory data analysis graphic organizer information graphics mathematical diagram official statistics plot ( graphics ) edward tufte misleading graph