Notebook

history . early history . during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries , notebooks were often made by hand at home by drawing on them into gatherings that were then bound at a later date . the pages were blank and every notekeeper had to make ruled lines across the paper . making and keeping notebooks was such an important information management technique that children learned how to do in school . . legal pad . according to a legend , thomas w . holley of holyoke , massachusetts , invented the legal pad around the year 1888 when he innovated the idea to collect all the sortings , various sorts of sub-standard paper scraps from various factories , and stitch them together in order to sell them as pads at an affordable and fair price . in about 1900 , the latter then evolved into the modern , traditionally yellow legal pad when a local judge requested for a margin to be drawn on the left side of the paper . this was the first legal pad . the only technical requirement for this type of stationery to be considered a true '' legal pad '' is that it must have margins of 1.25 & nbsp ; inches ( 3.17 centimeters ) from the left edge . here , the margin , also known as down lines , david pescovitz , 19 september 2006 . inventing the yellow legal pad '' the legal pad 's margins , also called down lines , are drawn 1.25 inches from the left edge of the page . ( this is the only requirement for a pad to qualify as a legal pad , though the iconic version has yellow paper , blue lines , and a red gummed top . ) holley added the ruling that defined the legal pad in the early 1900s at the request of a local judge who was looking for space to comment on his own notes '' , retrieved 9 november 2010 . is room used to write notes or comments . legal pads usually have a gum binding at the top instead of a spiral or stitched binding . in 1902 , j.a . birchall of birchalls , a launceston , tasmania , australia-based stationery shop , decided that the cumbersome method of selling writing paper in folded stacks of '' quires '' ( four sheets of paper or parchment folded to form eight leaves ) was inefficient . as a solution , he glued together a stack of halved sheets of paper , supported by a sheet of cardboard , creating what he called the '' silver city writing tablet '' . . binding and cover . principal types of binding are padding , perfect , spiral , comb , sewn , clasp , disc , and pressure , some of which can be combined . binding methods can affect whether a notebook can lie flat when open and whether the pages are likely to remain attached . the cover material is usually distinct from the writing surface material , more durable , more decorative , and more firmly attached . it also is stiffer than the pages , even taken together . cover materials should not contribute to damage or discomfort . it is frequently cheaper to purchase notebooks that are spiral-bound , meaning that a spiral of wire is looped through large perforations at the top or side of the page . other bound notebooks are available that use glue to hold the pages together ; this process is '' padding . '' adhesive binding today , it is common for pages in such notebooks to include a thin line of perforations that make it easier to tear out the page . spiral-bound pages can be torn out , but frequently leave thin scraggly strips from the small amount of paper that is within the spiral , as well as an uneven rip along the top of the torn-out page . hard-bound notebooks include a sewn spine , and the pages are not easily removed . some styles of sewn bindings allow pages to open flat , while others cause the pages to drape . variations of notebooks that allow pages to be added , removed , and replaced are bound by rings , rods , or discs . in each of these systems , the pages are modified with perforations that facilitate the specific binding mechanism 's ability to secure them . ring-bound and rod-bound notebooks secure their contents by threading perforated pages around straight or curved prongs . in the open position , the pages can be removed and rearranged . in the closed position , the pages are kept in order . disc-bound notebooks remove the open or closed operation by modifying the pages themselves . a page perforated for a disc-bound binding system contains a row of teeth along the side edge of the page that grip onto the outside raised perimeter of individual discs . preprinting . notebooks used for drawing and scrapbooking are usually blank . notebooks for writing usually have some kind of printing on the writing material , if only lines to align writing or facilitate certain kinds of drawing . inventor 's notebooks have page numbers preprinted to support priority claims . they may be considered as grey literature . [ many notebooks have graphic decorations . personal organizers can have various kinds of preprinted pages . uses . artists often use large notebooks , which include wide spaces of blank paper appropriate for drawing . similarly composers utilize notebooks for writing their '' lyrics '' . lawyers use rather large notebooks known as legal pads that contain lined paper ( often yellow ) and are appropriate for use on tables and desks . these horizontal lines or '' rules '' are sometimes classified according to their space apart with '' wide rule '' the farthest , '' college rule '' closer , '' legal rule '' slightly closer and '' narrow rule '' closest , allowing more lines of text per page . when sewn into a pasteboard backing , these may be called composition books , or in smaller signatures may be called '' blue books '' or exam books and used for essay exams . in contrast , journalists prefer small , hand-held notebooks for portability ( reporters ' notebooks ) , and sometimes use shorthand when taking notes . scientists and other researchers use lab notebooks to document their experiments . the pages in lab notebooks are sometimes graph paper to plot data . police officers are required to write notes on what they observe , using a police notebook . surveying commonly record field notes in durable , hard-bound notebooks called '' field books . '' coloring enthusiasts use coloring notebooks for stress relief . the pages in coloring notebooks contain different adult coloring pages . students take notes in notebooks , and studies suggest that the act of writing ( as opposed to typing ) improves learning . notebook pages can be recycled via standard paper recycling . recycled notebooks are available , differing in recycled percentage and paper quality . electronic successors . since the late 20th century , many attempts have been made to integrate the simplicity of a notebook with the editing , searching , and communication capacities of computers through the development of note taking software . laptop computers began to be called notebooks when they reached a small size in the mid 1990s , but they did not have any special note-taking ability . most notably personal digital assistants ( pdas ) came next , integrating small liquid crystal displays with a touch-sensitive layer to input graphics and written text . later on , this role was taken over by smartphones and tablets . digital paper combines the simplicity of a traditional pen and notebook with digital storage and interactivity . by printing an invisible dot pattern on the notebook paper and using a pen with a built in infrared camera the written text can be transferred to a laptop , mobile phone or backoffice for storage and processing .