Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden

history . in 1872 , three years before the zoo 's creation , andrew erkenbrecher and several other residents created the society for the acclimatization of birds in cincinnati to acquire insect-eating birds to control a severe outbreak of caterpillars . a collection of approximately 1,000 birds imported from europe in 1872 was housed in burnet woods before being released . in 1873 , members of the society of acclimatization began discussing the idea of starting a zoo and founded the zoological society of cincinnati . one year later , the zoological society of cincinnati purchased a 99-year lease on sixty-five acres in the cow pasture known as blakely woods . the cincinnati zoological gardens officially opened its doors on september 18 , 1875 . architect james w . mclaughlin , who constructed the zoo 's first buildings , designed the earliest completed zoological exhibits in the united states . the zoo began with eight monkeys , two grizzly bears , three white-tailed deer , six raccoons , two elk , a buffalo , a laughing hyena , a tiger , an american alligator , a circus elephant , and over four hundred birds , including a talking crow . the first guide book about the cincinnati zoo was written in 1876 in german . the founders of the zoo , including its first general manager , were german immigrants and the city had quite a large german-speaking population . the first english-language edition ( illustrated ) was published in 1893 . in its first 20 years , the zoo experienced many financial difficulties , and despite selling 22 acres ( 8.9 ha ) to pay off debt in 1886 , it went into receivership in 1898 . in order to prevent the zoo from being liquidated , the stockholders chose to give up their interests of the 225,000 they originally invested . for the next two years , the zoo was run under the cincinnati zoological company as a business . in 1901 , the cincinnati traction company , purchased the zoo , hoping to use it as a way to market itself to potential customers . they operated the zoo until 1917 , when the cincinnati zoological park association , funded by donations from philanthropists mary emery and anna sinton taft and a wave of public desire to purchase the increasing popular zoo , took over management . in 1932 , the city purchased the zoo and started to run it through the board of park commissioners . this marked the zoo 's transition from its period of financial insecurity to its modern state of stable growth and fiscal stability . in addition to its live animal exhibits , the zoo houses refreshments stands , a dance hall , roads , walkways , and picnic grounds . between 1920 and 1972 , the cincinnati summer opera performed in an open-air pavilion and were broadcast by nbc radio . in 1987 , parts of the zoo were designated as a national historic landmark , the cincinnati zoo historic structures , due to their significant architecture featured in the elephant house , the reptile house , and the passenger pigeon memorial . animals and exhibits . animals on exhibit marge schott/unnewehr elephant reserve indian elephant african bush elephant p & g discovery forest two toed sloth blue and gold macaw scarlet macaw boa constrictor cane toad amazon river dolphin atlantic bottlenose dolphin lilacine amazon blue-throated macaw military macaw great green macaw red-and-green macaw red-fronted macaw chestnut-fronted macaw great hornbill toco toucan keel-billed toucan rhinoceros hornbill wildlife canyon ( formerly ) sumatran rhinoceros capybara emu white-tailed deer elk wild yak domestic yak dall sheep sichuan takin red river hog visayan warty pig przewalski 's horse bactrian camel eagle eyrie steller 's sea eagle andean condor california condor cinereous vulture golden eagle white-rumped vulture griffon vulture white-headed vulture red-tailed hawk harris 's hawk common raven american crow greater yellow-headed vulture lesser yellow-headed vulture turkey vulture black vulture reptile house chinese alligator saltwater crocodile galápagos tortoise king cobra rainbow boa gaboon viper gorilla world western lowland gorilla black-and-white colobus crested mona monkey bonobo long-wattled umbrellabird night hunters eurasian eagle owl ( formerly ) spectacled owl fossa aardwolf potto pygmy slow loris vampire bat aardvark northern greater galago giant fruit bat pallas cat clouded leopard eurasian lynx ocelot sand cat black-footed cat bobcat fishing cat caracal bearcat tayra bat eared fox fennec fox cape genet banded palm civet burmese python cat canyon cougar white tiger ( formerly ) snow leopard malayan tiger jaguar monkey island ( formerly ) japanese macaque bald eagle world of the insect leafcutter ant eurycantha calcarata dragons komodo dragon green tree monitor spiny-tailed monitor quince monitor lemur lookout ring tailed lemur red ruffed lemur otto m . buddig manatee springs florida manatee gray whale orca commerson 's dolphin hourglass dolphin alligator snapping turtle alligator gar american alligator american crocodile siegfried and roy 's white lions and george 's aviary white lion blue iguana african sacred ibis wood stork blue-footed booby masked booby brown booby northern gannet common kingfisher milky stork yellow-billed stork painted stork jabiru lesser adjutant greater adjutant rhino reserve eastern black rhinoceros indian rhinoceros plains zebra okapi bongo yellow-backed duiker greater flamingo abdim 's stork bar-headed goose spaulding children 's zoo gopher tortoise radiated tortoise red-footed tortoise southern three-banded armadillo six-banded armadillo nine-banded armadillo common warthog indian peafowl green peafowl parma wallaby gibbon islands yellow-cheeked gibbon siamang swan lake red-crowned crane trumpeter swan mute swan black swan black-necked swan wolf woods mexican wolf grey fox california sea lion ( formerly ) harbor seal ( formerly ) north american river otter lords of the arctic polar bear arctic fox american black bear ( formerly ) spectacled bear jungle trails sumatran orangutan pileated woodpecker coquerel 's sifaka müller 's gibbon aye-aye angola colobus white-faced saki grey bamboo lemur laughing kookaburra victoria crowned pigeon greater rhea koala common wombat southern cassowary darwin 's rhea green iguana dobsa giraffe ridge masai giraffe grey crowned crane saddle-billed stork black-necked stork african leopard africa lion impala thomson 's gazelle lesser kudu blue wildebeest crested guineafowl american flamingo lesser flamingo helmeted guineafowl vulturine guineafowl brown pelican peruvian pelican australian pelican pink-backed pelican dalmatian pelican spot-billed pelican ostrich southern white rhinoceros southern ground hornbill abyssinian ground hornbill rüppell ’ s vulture lappet-faced vulture painted dog valley african wild dog spotted hyena grévy 's zebra hippo cove hippopotamus nile crocodile king eider american white pelican marabou stork animals at the zoo have held several records , including the longest living american alligator in captivity at the time ( at about 70 years of age ) , the fastest cheetah in captivity , and the largest komodo dragon . the zoo was the first in the united states to put an aye-aye on display , and after losing its last aye-aye in 1993 , it finally acquired another in 2011 – a six-year old transferred from the duke lemur center in north carolina . the zoo is one of only a dozen in north america to house and breed bonobos ( also known as pygmy chimpanzees ) , an endangered species of the great apes . on january 6 and 7 , the zoo celebrated the birth of its first babies of 2020 . two penguin chicks hatched , one each day . in august 2020 , the cincinnati zoo finished the first part of their master plan '' more home to roam '' . they turned their old wildlife canyon exhibit into an exhibit called roo valley , which has a new beer garden and restaurant , a big rope course over the habitat , and provides a new bigger home for their little blue penguins . roo valley adds five new species to the zoo as well , including the red kangaroos , western grey kangaroos , australian wood ducks , new zealand scaups and freckled ducks , the latter three species living side by side with the zoo 's penguins . in september 2020 , the cincinnati zoo finished the second part of the master plan . they turned their old sea lion habitat sometimes referred to as '' seal falls '' and the home of duke the california sea lion , into a bigger exhibit for their african penguins , increasing their breeding success rate , while at the same time including some other african sea birds like the eastern white pelicans , white-breasted cormorants , and yellow-billed ducks . center for conservation and research of endangered wildlife ( crew ) . the cincinnati zoo has been active in breeding animals to help save species , starting as early as 1880 with the first hatching of a trumpeter swan in a zoo , as well as four passenger pigeons . this was followed in 1882 with the first american bison born in captivity . in 1986 , the zoo established the carl h . lindner jr . family center for conservation and research of endangered wildlife for the purpose of using science and technology to understand , preserve , and propagate endangered flora and fauna and facilitate the conservation of global biodiversity . its frozen zoo plays a major role . in it are stored over 2,500 specimens representing approximately 60 animal and 65 plant species . terri roth is crew 's director . . africa exhibit . in the 2010s the zoo built a africa exhibit , the largest animal exhibit in its history . africa exhibit website phases i and ii , completed in 2010 , added an exhibit for cranes and expanded the cheetah encounter yard so that the cheetahs had a 40 % larger running space . phase iii opened on june 29 , 2013 , and included a wider vista that offers visitors an opportunity to see lions , white lions , servals , a bat-eared fox , african wild dogs , and a new cheetah exhibit . a new base camp café , said to be the greenest restaurant in the us , was also added in the 2013 season . phase iv , the largest phase of the africa expansion , opened on june 28 , 2014 . it introduced a wide savanna with some of africa 's most spectacular hoofstock , such as zebras , gazelles , lesser kudu , impala and giant eland , along with some of the world 's largest birds like ostriches , marabou storks , pink-backed pelican , rüppell 's vultures , crested guineafowl , ruddy shelducks , lappet-faced vultures , and gray crowned cranes . phase v , the final phase of the expansion , opened on july 23 , 2016 , adding an area for nile hippos , hippo cove , which provides both above and below-water viewing . a 34-year-old male named henry from the dickerson park zoo and a 17-year-old female named bibi from the st . louis zoo joined the zoo . on the morning of january 24 , 2017 , bibi gave birth to a six-weeks premature calf . the baby female hippo , named fiona by zoo staff , is the first hippo to be born at the zoo in 75 years . fiona was also the first nile hippo to ever be captured on an ultrasound image . after intensive care from zoo keepers , veterinarians , and nicu specialists at cincinnati children 's hospital , fiona survived . the story of her trials and success made her an internet celebrity and city hero , and has dramatically increased zoo attendance . henry 's health declined later in 2017 and he was euthanized on october 31 . on july 17 , 2017 , an eastern black rhino baby , kendi , was born to parents faru and seyia . kendi 's birth was captured on camera and can be viewed on the zoo 's website . curator of mammals at the zoo , christina gorsuch states , '' this calf is only the fifth eastern black rhino born in the last two years in north america . '' she goes on to say '' every rhino calf born is incredibly important for the population , which includes fewer than 60 in north america . calves will stay with their mothers for 3-4 years which means that the average female can only have one calf every 5 years . '' in 2015 , aza and species survival plan ( ssp ) determined that parents faru and seyia were a good genetic match and recommended that they breed . faru came to cincinnati from atlanta in the summer of 2015 and was introduced to seyia . gorilla world was further expanded in 2016–2017 , including the addition of a large indoor building to allow visitors to see the gorillas throughout the year , and mshindi , a silverback gorilla , came to the zoo from the louisville zoo . . susie . in 1931 , robert j . sullivan permanently loaned the zoo a female eastern gorilla named susie . joy w . kraft , the cincinnati zoo and botanical garden , ( charleston , sc : arcadia pub , 2010 ) , 72 . captured in the belgian congo , susie was first sold to a group of french explorers who sent her to france . in august 1929 , susie was transported from europe to the united states aboard the airship graf zeppelin accompanied by william dressman . after susie completed a tour through the united states and canada with ringling bros . and barnum & bailey circus , “ susie , cincy zoo ’ s gorilla , near death , ” the billboard 59 , no . 43 ( november 1 , 1947 ) : 57 . sullivan purchased susie for 4,500 '' cincy zoo ’ s susie dies ; local paper plans replacement , '' the billboard 59 , no . 44 ( november 8 , 1947 ) : 53 . and loaned her to the zoo . joy w . kraft , the cincinnati zoo and botanical garden , ( charleston , sc : arcadia pub , 2010 ) , 72-74 . dressman , who stayed on as susie 's trainer after she was loaned to the zoo , taught her how eat with a knife and fork and orchestrated two performances every day . ohio writers ' program , cincinnati ; a guide to the queen city and its neighbors , ( cincinnati : wiesen-hart press , 1943 ) , 350 . susie was so popular that on her birthday on august 7 , 1936 , more than 16,000 visitors flocked to the zoo . ” 8,000 at cincinnati attend party for susie , the gorilla , ” the milwaukee journal , august 3 , 1936 : 8 . susie remained one of the most popular animals at the zoo until her death on october 29 , 1947 . joy w . kraft , the cincinnati zoo and botanical garden , ( charleston , sc : arcadia pub , 2010 ) , 72-75 . her body was donated to the university of cincinnati , where her skeleton remained on display until it was destroyed in a fire in 1974 . joy w . kraft , the cincinnati zoo and botanical garden , ( charleston , sc : arcadia pub , 2010 ) , 76 . . 2016 gorilla incident . on may 28 , 2016 , harambe , a 17-year-old , male western lowland gorilla , was fatally shot by zoo officials after a three-year-old boy climbed into harambe 's enclosure . the incident was recorded by a bystander and uploaded to youtube , where the video went viral . zoo director thane maynard stated , '' the child was being dragged around . his head was banging on concrete . this was not a gentle thing . the child was at risk . '' the shooting was controversial , with some observers stating that it was not clear whether or not harambe was likely to harm the child . others called for the boy 's parents and/or the zoo to be held accountable for the gorilla 's death . the boy was transported to the hospital with non-life-threatening injuries after being rescued . police are investigating possible criminal charges , while the parents of the boy defended the zoo 's actions . the incident received global publicity ; comedian and actor ricky gervais , rock guitarist and astrophysicist brian may , and journalist and television personality piers morgan criticized the shooting , while real estate developer and presidential candidate donald trump and zoo director and notable animal expert jack hanna both lamented the shooting but defended the zoo 's decision to prioritize the boy 's safety . primatologist frans de waal neither defended nor condemned the zoo 's decision , but described it as a horrible dilemma . . fiona . in january 2017 , the zoo had its first birth of a hippopotamus in 75 years . named fiona , she was born six weeks prematurely and her survival was in doubt . the zoo 's efforts to save her and her subsequent improvement to good health provided a viral sensation on the internet . . '' more home to roam '' expansion campaign . in 2018 the zoo launched an expansion campaign named '' more home to roam '' with the goal of raising 150 million to be used on developing new attractions and infrastructure . the zoo plans to open roo valley and a beer garden in 2020 , rhino reserve and a 1,800 vehicle parking garage in 2023 , and elephant trek ( jabiru junction ) in 2025 for their jabirus and black-necked storks and a pool for california sea lions , grey seals , walruses , and harbor seals . the plan also includes a new entrance to facilitate traffic into the zoo . the additions are also aimed at making the zoo net-zero in terms of waste , water , and energy , making the facilities waste free . philanthropists harry and linda fath contributed 50 million to the campaign in june 2018 . previous expansion efforts , such as the africa exhibit and gorilla exhibit , cost 34 million and 18 million respectively .