John de Gray

early life . some describe de gray as a native of norfolk ; he was likely descended from the norman knight anchetil de greye . haines '' gray , john de '' oxford dictionary of national biography de gray was the uncle of walter de gray , later archbishop of york . the elder de gray was instrumental in securing the selection of his nephew as lord chancellor , as he was a surety for walter 's payment of a fine of 5000 & nbsp ; marks to acquire the position . harding england in the thirteenth century p . 236 by 1196 , de gray was in the service of king richard i 's brother john , and was keeper of john 's seal by 1198 . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 6 : york : archdeacons of cleveland john ascended the throne of england in 1199 , with de gray becoming archdeacon of cleveland in march 1200 , and archdeacon of gloucester before april that year . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : worcester : archdeacons of gloucester he also served as john 's secretary , warren king john pp . 160–162 and frequently as a deputy for the lord chancellor , hubert walter . young hubert walter p . 149 shortly after john became king , de gray began travelling between england and the continent on royal business , and for the first two years of john 's reign was active in the royal chancery , sealing royal charters . de gray was elected bishop of norwich on about 7 september 1200 , although the election was purely pro forma , as acknowledged by a contemporary writer roger of howden , who stated that the new bishop '' succeeded to the bishopric of norwich by the gift of king john '' . quoted in warren king john p . 160 de gray was consecrated on 24 september . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 261 his consecration took place together with that of the new bishop of hereford giles de braose at westminster , at the conclusion of a provincial church council held by archbishop walter , which de gray had been attending . cheney hubert walter p . 65 walter performed the ceremony in a chapel of westminster abbey . . bishop of norwich . while bishop , de gray often lent the king money , and on one occasion held the regalia as security for the repayment of a loan ; he also served as a royal justice . in 1203 de gray accompanied archbishop hubert walter and several papal legates on an unsuccessful diplomatic mission to king philip ii of france . philip had demanded that john 's niece eleanor of brittany or his nephew arthur of brittany be surrendered to him together with all of john 's lands on the continent , none of which john was prepared to concede . philip invaded normandy after the bishops returned to england . powicke loss of normandy p . 260 in 1203 some of de gray 's knights were part of the garrison at the castle of vaudreuil in normandy , serving under the command of robert fitzwalter . although they had provisions and john was moving in support of the troops , in the summer of 1203 the garrison surrendered to philip , shortly after a siege had begun . powicke loss of normandy p . 162 when john abandoned normandy in late 1203 , effectively relinquishing control of the duchy to philip , de gray was one of his companions on the journey to the port of barfleur , and went on to england with the king . powicke loss of normandy p . 169 and footnote 251 . archbishop-elect . john 's attempt to impose de gray 's election as archbishop of canterbury in 1205 was the beginning of the king 's long quarrel with pope innocent & nbsp ; iii . after hubert walter 's death in july 1205 , the selection of a successor was hindered by doubts about what the proper procedure should be , something that commonly happened with elections to canterbury . john postponed a decision while delegations from the bishops of england and the monks of the cathedral chapter went to rome to seek guidance from the pope . the bishops of the province of canterbury claimed the right to a say in who was elected , as whoever was chosen would be their superior , harding england in the thirteenth century p . 266 but according to canon law the monks of the cathedral chapter had the right to elect the new archbishop . the king also had a say in the election , lyon constitutional and legal history pp . 306–307 as the archbishop was a major tenant-in-chief and was traditionally one of the principal royal advisers . huscroft ruling england pp . 195–196 while the delegations from the various parties were in rome , the monks of canterbury secretly elected one of their own , reginald , as archbishop , and subsequently sent him to rome to join the delegation . when john discovered that reginald had been elected without any royal input he forced the monks to elect de gray as archbishop . some stories have reginald 's election taking place before the despatch of the first delegation to the roman curia . another source , gervase of canterbury , has the king telling the chapter they could choose their own nominee after six months , while the king secretly sent envoys to rome to secure de gray 's election . jones king john and magna carta pp . 35–37 a further story , from roger of wendover , states that the monks elected reginald before walter was even buried , and that only a few members of the cathedral chapter & nbsp ; – the younger ones & nbsp ; – participated in the election . wendover wrote in the 1230s and was not a monk of canterbury , therefore it is unlikely he has recorded a true account . knowles '' canterbury election '' english historical review pp . 212–215 de gray was postulated , or nominated , to canterbury on 11 december 1205 , which presented innocent with two candidates for the office . in an effort to reach a compromise , lyon constitutional and legal history p . 240 the pope quashed both nominations on about 30 march 1206 ; fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 232 innocent 's reason for invalidating de gray 's candidacy was that any election was invalid if an earlier one was still under appeal to the papacy . turner king john p . 116 the monks then elected stephen langton , with innocent 's approval . john did not accept langton 's candidacy however , and innocent 's consecration of langton in 1207 led to an eight-year struggle between john and the pope over the rights of the king to secure the election of his choice as archbishop . john refused to allow langton to enter england and exiled the canterbury monks . innocent placed an interdict on england in 1207 , which john countered by confiscating the income and estates of any clergy who enforced it . innocent went on to excommunicate john in 1209 , in a dispute that led to the exile of many of the english clergy and john 's imposition of heavy financial demands on the church in england ; by 1209 de gray and peter des roches , the bishop of winchester , were the only living english bishops not in exile . but it was not until 1213 , when innocent began to support john 's deposition , that the king became concerned and reached a settlement with the papacy . huscroft ruling england pp . 196–197 . in ireland . by 1209 de gray was in ireland serving as the king 's governor , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 161 an office sometimes referred to as justiciar for ireland . wood '' office of chief governor '' proceedings of the royal irish academy p . 219 one possible reason for his appointment was to save him from being accused of ignoring the interdict on england . as a bishop , it was de gray 's ecclesiastical duty to enforce the interdict , but by going to ireland , which was not under interdict , he could continue to serve the king without provoking the papacy . warren king john pp . 195–196 de gray 's chief policy in ireland was to extend english rule , to which end he was involved in battles on the river shannon and in fermanagh . otway-ruthven history of medieval ireland p . 83 he also replaced the irish coinage with english , and attempted unsuccessfully to make english laws applicable in ireland . barlow feudal kingdom pp . 408–409 de gray 's term of office in ireland coincided with a time of change in irish governmental practices . gillingham angevin empire p . 55 during john 's persecution of william de braose in 1209 , william marshal gave de braose shelter on his irish lands . de gray demanded that marshal surrender de braose to him as a traitor , but marshal refused , claiming that since he held some lands from de braose , it would be an act of treason to surrender his lord to an outside authority . powicke loss of normandy p . 295 marshal 's refusal does not seem to have embittered de gray however , as three years later the bishop was praising him in a letter to john . warren king john p . 201 john led an expedition to ireland in 1210 in an effort to bring the anglo-norman barons under control . he opened talks with the native irish kings , and some accounts state that his negotiations were so successful that the native irish submitted to him . in contrast , the historian seán duffy has argued that the native irish nobility were just as resistant to john as the anglo-norman barons . after john 's return to england he ordered de gray to build three new castles in connacht , one of them at athlone . orpen '' athlone castle '' journal of the royal society of antiquaries p . 261 associated with the castle building were two military invasions of connacht by the royal government & nbsp ; – one from meath and leinster and the other from munster . duffy '' john and ireland '' king john pp . 241–242 de gray left ireland in 1211 to lead a military campaign against the welsh , leaving his deputy richard de tuit in charge of the country . de gray also faced resistance from the northern irish . in 1212 he led a campaign against áed méith , in the promotion of which he constructed castles at cáel uisce , belleek , and clones , bases for raids against the ua néill territory in the north . a naval campaign was also launched , but to no avail . de gray suffered a defeat at the hands of cormac o'melaghlin in 1212 at fircal , offaly , and left ireland the following year . turner king john p . 108 he continued to hold the office of governor for a time , but by july 1213 he had been replaced by henry de loundres , the archbishop of dublin . one of de gray 's final acts as justiciar was to take a force of irish knights to england to help repel a threatened invasion by the french king philip ii . . episcopal affairs and later career . as bishop , de gray settled a long-running dispute between the monks of his cathedral chapter and his predecessors as bishop . harper-bill '' john and the church '' king john p . 294 he also allowed the monks of his cathedral chapter the right to appoint and replace the clergy of the dependent churches of the cathedral . cheney from becket to langton p . 121 footnote 7 de gray received a 1203 missive from innocent & nbsp ; iii decrying the marriages of some secular clergy , in contravention of canon law . cheney from becket to langton p . 137 in more secular matters , he granted the town of bishop 's lynn ( now king 's lynn ) the right to hold a weekly market and two fairs per year . he also built a palace at gaywood . de gray 's ability to raise money made him useful to john . in 1213 de gray mustered 500 & nbsp ; knights during a period when philip ii was threatening to invade england , bringing this force over from ireland along with mounted men-at-arms to support the king in england . warren king john p . 204 in may 1213 , john and innocent finally resolved the dispute over langton 's election to canterbury , and part of the settlement was that john gave ireland and england to innocent and received them back from the pope , making john a papal vassal . the settlement was sealed with a treaty , to which de gray was one of the witnesses . powell and wallis house of lords p . 121 after john settled with the papacy , de gray was not included in the general pardon , and had to go to rome to be pardoned . while in that city the bishop was named as one of the guarantors of a new financial arrangement between the king and the pope dealing with feudal payments from england , which lowered the lump sum that had to be paid before innocent would lift the interdict . vincent peter des roches p . 92 after innocent pardoned de gray , the pope recommended his election as bishop of durham in 1213 ; warren king john p . 212 greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : durham : bishops but de gray died during his journey back to england on 18 october 1214 , at saint-jean-d'angély in poitou . he was buried in norwich cathedral , but his tomb has not survived . as well as encouraging his nephew 's career , de gray took into his household two of hubert walter 's household clerks : david , and robert of ruddeby . young hubert walter p . 58 another clerk employed by de gray , robert de bingham , was in the bishop 's household during the papal interdict on england ; he went on to become a tutor in theology at oxford , and bishop of salisbury in 1228 . vincent peter des roches p . 83 and footnote 203 de gray remained close to john for most of the bishop 's life , turner king john p . 46 and one of the king 's chief fundraisers . sidney painter , a historian and biographer of john , said of de gray that he was '' probably the only man whom john trusted absolutely and without reservation for the whole period of their association '' . quoted in turner king john p . 46 the medievalist ralph turner called de gray '' one of john 's greatest favourites '' , turner king john p . 61 and another of john 's biographers , , described de gray as '' one of the best brains of the royal administration '' . matthew paris , a medieval writer , called him an '' evil counsellor '' , quoted in haines '' gray , john de '' oxford dictionary of national biography and blamed many of the difficulties of john 's later reign on de gray 's failed election to canterbury . . notes . citations . references .