1967 in film

highest-grossing films . north america . the top ten 1967 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : blowup , directed by michelangelo antonioni , italy golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : belle de jour , directed by luis buñuel , france / italy golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : le départ , directed by jerzy skolimowski , belgium . 1967 film releases . us unless stated . january–march . january 1967 5 january a countess from hong kong 18 january born losers come spy with me the venetian affair warning shot 19 january hotel 25 january first to fight 26 january the deadly affair 27 january hot rods to hell february 1967 1 february the ballad of josie 7 february tobruk 8 february monkeys , go home ! 9 february accident hurry sundown 10 february the night of the generals 12 february deadlier than the male 15 february a covenant with death oh dad , poor dad , mamma 's hung you in the closet and i 'm feelin ' so sad 18 february good morning and . goodbye ! 22 february marat/sade 25 february enter laughing 28 february privilege march 1967 1 march the happening 8 march the adventures of bullwhip griffin mad monster party ? the taming of the shrew ( italy/u.s . ) the young girls of rochefort ( france ) 9 march how to succeed in business without really trying 12 march the busy body 13 march the house of 1,000 dolls 14 march ulysses 15 march frankenstein created woman ( u.k . ) in like flint 18 march riot on sunset strip 21 march hombre thoroughly modern millie 22 march easy come , easy go thunder alley 26 march the desperate ones 31 march the champagne murders . april–june . april 1967 1 april kidnapping , caucasian style ( u.s.s.r ) 5 april double trouble 12 april the cool ones 13 april casino royale ( u.k./u.s . ) 14 april it 's a bikini world 18 april caprice 24 april a stranger in town ( italy/u.s . ) 28 april devil 's angels doctor , you 've got to be kidding ! 29 april eight on the lam may 1967 1 may 40 guns to apache pass they came from beyond space welcome to hard times 3 may bikini paradise the vulture ( u.k . ) 12 may good times 15 may the jokers ( u.k . ) 17 may dont look back the million eyes of sumuru 22 may the honey pot 24 may belle de jour ( france ) the caper of the golden bulls double trouble three bites of the apple the way west 25 may barefoot in the park a guide for the married man the vengeance of fu manchu ( u.k . ) 26 may catalina caper 27 may samurai rebellion ( japan ) the war wagon june 1967 9 june do n't make waves 11 june snow white and the seven dwarfs ( re-release ) 13 june you only live twice ( u.k./u.s . ) 14 june to sir , with love 15 june branded to kill ( japan ) the dirty dozen 16 june the reluctant astronaut 18 june the mummy 's shroud 21 june divorce american style 23 june the happiest millionaire 27 june the shuttered room ( u.k . ) woman times seven 28 june gunn 30 june the st . valentine 's day massacre . july–september . july 1967 6 july the sorcerers 12 july the big mouth common law cabin the gnome-mobile 13 july jules verne 's rocket to the moon ( u.k . ) 19 july the naked runner up the down staircase 21 july war and peace part iii ( u.s.s.r ) 22 july king kong escapes ( japan ) 23 july chuka 26 july the love-ins luv 27 july the long duel august 1967 1 august rough night in jericho 2 august in the heat of the night the perils of pauline 3 august beach red 13 august bonnie and clyde 18 august the tiger makes out 22 august the flim-flam man 23 august the thief of paris ( france ) the whisperers ( u.k . ) 30 august point blank 31 august the trip september 1967 1 september the fastest guitar alive tarzan and the great river 8 september fort utah 14 september our mother 's house ( u.k . ) 17 september games 20 september two for the road 22 september robbery 26 september who 's minding the mint ? 28 september the bobo . october–december . october 1967 1 october fathom 3 october titicut follies 9 october i am curious ( sweden ) 13 october reflections in a golden eye 16 october far from the madding crowd hamraaz ( india ) 18 october charlie , the lonesome cougar clambake the jungle book 19 october doctor faustus 23 october how i won the war 25 october camelot 26 october wait until dark 31 october the comedians november 1967 1 november cool hand luke hour of the gun a time for killing 4 november war and peace part iv ( u.s.s.r ) 5 november the incident 9 november custer of the west quatermass and the pit ( u.k . ) 10 november berserk ! jack of diamonds tony rome 13 november the fearless vampire killers 15 november gentle giant who 's that knocking at my door 22 november the producers rosie ! december 1967 1 december hells angels on wheels 5 december festival poor cow 6 december kill a dragon 10 december bedazzled 12 december guess who 's coming to dinner 13 december the fox 14 december follow that camel in cold blood 15 december carry on doctor valley of the dolls 16 december playtime ( france/italy ) son of godzilla ( japan ) 17 december banning 18 december i 'll never forget what's'isname ( u.k . ) 19 december doctor dolittle 20 december billion dollar brain ( u.k . ) / ( u.s ) fitzwilly 21 december the graduate the president 's analyst 26 december magical mystery tour ( u.k . ) 27 december the last challenge smashing time 29 december weekend ( france ) . notable films released in 1967 . u.s . unless stated . . 40 guns to apache pass , starring audie murphy two or three things i know about her ( 2 ou 3 choses que je sais d'elle ) , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) the 25th hour , starring anthony quinn and virna lisi – ( france/italy/romania ) . a . accident , directed by joseph losey , starring dirk bogarde and stanley baker – ( u.k . ) the adventures of bullwhip griffin , starring roddy mcdowall , suzanne pleshette , and karl malden the ambushers , starring dean martin ( as matt helm ) the andromeda nebula – ( ussr ) anna karenina – ( ussr ) . b . the ballad of josie , starring doris day banning , starring robert wagner , jill st . john , susan clark , gene hackman barefoot in the park , starring robert redford and jane fonda battle beneath the earth , starring kerwin mathews and peter arne – ( u.k . ) beach red , starring cornel wilde and rip torn bedazzled , directed by stanley donen , starring peter cook , dudley moore , raquel welch – ( u.k . ) belle de jour , directed by luis buñuel , starring catherine deneuve - winner of golden lion – ( france ) berserk ! , starring joan crawford – ( u.k . ) bewitched love ( el amor brujo ) – ( spain ) the big mouth , directed by and starring jerry lewis billion dollar brain , directed by ken russell , starring michael caine – ( u.k . ) the birch tree ( breza ) , directed by ante babaja – ( yugoslavia ) the blood demon ( die schlangengrube und das pendel , a.k.a . the torture chamber of dr . sadism ) , directed by harald reinl – ( west germany ) the bobo , starring peter sellers , britt ekland , adolfo celi , rossano brazzi , al lettieri – ( u.k . ) bonnie and clyde , directed by arthur penn , starring warren beatty , faye dunaway , gene hackman , estelle parsons , michael j . pollard born losers , directed by and starring tom laughlin branded to kill ( koroshi no rakuin ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) the busy body , starring sid caesar , robert ryan , jan murray , arlene golonka , richard pryor . c . camelot , a musical directed by joshua logan , starring richard harris , vanessa redgrave , franco nero , with songs by lerner and loewe the cape town affair , starring james brolin and jacqueline bisset caprice , starring doris day and richard harris carry on doctor , starring frankie howerd and sid james – ( u.k . ) case of the naves brothers ( o caso dos irmãos naves ) – ( brazil ) casino royale , starring david niven , peter sellers , ursula andress , woody allen , daliah lavi , barbara bouchet – ( u.k . ) catalina caper , starring tommy kirk cervantes , starring horst buchholz and gina lollobrigida – ( spain/france/italy ) the champagne murders ( le scandale ) , directed by claude chabrol and starring anthony perkins – ( france ) charlie bubbles , directed by and starring albert finney with billie whitelaw and liza minnelli – ( u.k . ) china is near ( la cina è vicina ) – ( italy ) la chinoise , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) chuka , starring rod taylor , ernest borgnine , john mills clambake , starring elvis presley and shelley fabares the collector ( la collectionneuse ) , directed by éric rohmer – ( france ) the monk with the whip ( der mönch mit der peitsche , a.k.a . the monk with the whip ) , directed by alfred vohrer – ( west germany ) a colt is my passport ( koruto wa ore no pasupoto ) , starring joe shishido – ( japan ) come spy with me , starring troy donahue the comedians , starring richard burton , elizabeth taylor , alec guinness commissar – ( ussr ) cool hand luke , directed by stuart rosenberg , starring paul newman and george kennedy counterpoint , starring charlton heston a countess from hong kong , directed by charlie chaplin , starring marlon brando and sophia loren – ( u.k . ) custer of the west , starring robert shaw , mary ure and robert ryan . d . day of anger ( i giorni dell'ira ) , starring lee van cleef – ( italy ) a degree of murder ( mord und totschlag ) , directed by volker schlöndorff , starring anita pallenberg – ( west germany ) le départ ( le départ ) , directed by jerzy skolimowski , starring jean-pierre léaud – ( belgium ) deadlier than the male , starring richard johnson and elke sommer – ( u.k . ) the deadly affair , directed by sidney lumet , starring james mason and simone signoret – ( u.k . ) death rides a horse ( da uomo a uomo ) , starring lee van cleef and john phillip law – ( italy ) diabolically yours ( diaboliquement vôtre ) , starring alain delon and senta berger – ( france/italy/west germany ) the dirty dozen , directed by robert aldrich , starring lee marvin and an ensemble cast divorce american style , starring dick van dyke , debbie reynolds , jason robards , jean simmons doctor dolittle , a musical directed by richard fleischer , starring rex harrison , samantha eggar , anthony newley doctor faustus , directed by richard burton and nevill coghill – ( u.k . ) doctor , you 've got to be kidding ! , starring sandra dee and george hamilton dont look back , a documentary by d . a . pennebaker , featuring bob dylan do n't make waves , starring tony curtis , claudia cardinale , sharon tate double trouble , starring elvis presley dragon gate inn ( lóng mén kè zhàn ) ( international release ) , directed by king hu – ( taiwan ) . e . easy come , easy go , starring elvis presley eight on the lam , starring bob hope , jonathan winters , shirley eaton , jill st . john elvira madigan , directed by bo widerberg – ( sweden ) entranced earth ( terra em transe ) , directed by glauber rocha – ( brazil ) an evening in paris , starring shammi kapoor – ( india ) the exchange student ( les grandes vacances ) , directed by jean girault – ( france/italy ) . f . faccia a faccia ( face to face ) , starring gian maria volonté – ( italy ) far from the madding crowd , directed by john schlesinger , starring julie christie , terence stamp , peter finch , alan bates – ( u.k . ) the fastest guitar alive , starring roy orbison fathom , starring raquel welch – ( u.k . ) the fearless vampire killers , directed by roman polanski , starring sharon tate – ( u.k./u.s . ) festival , a documentary about newport folk festival the firemen 's ball ( hoří , má panenko ) , directed by miloš forman – ( czechoslovakia ) fitzwilly , starring dick van dyke and barbara feldon the flim-flam man , starring george c . scott , michael sarrazin follow that camel ( a.k.a . carry on.follow that camel ) , starring phil silvers and kenneth williams – ( u.k . ) fort utah , starring john ireland and virginia mayo the fox , starring sandy dennis , anne heywood , keir dullea frankenstein created woman , starring peter cushing – ( u.k . ) the frozen dead , starring dana andrews , anna palk . g . games , starring simone signoret , katharine ross and james caan the good , the bad and the ugly , directed by sergio leone , starring clint eastwood , lee van cleef and eli wallach – ( italy ) good times , starring sonny & cher the graduate , directed by mike nichols , starring dustin hoffman , anne bancroft and katharine ross grand slam , starring janet leigh and edward g . robinson – ( italy/spain/west germany ) guess who 's coming to dinner , directed by stanley kramer , starring spencer tracy , katharine hepburn and sidney poitier a guide for the married man , directed by gene kelly , starring walter matthau , inger stevens and robert morse gunfight in abilene , starring bobby darin gunn , starring craig stevens . h . half a sixpence , starring tommy steele – ( u.k . ) hatey bazarey ( the market place ) , starring ashok kumar and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) hamraaz , starring sunil dutt and raaj kumar – ( india ) the happening , starring anthony quinn , michael parks , faye dunaway the happiest millionaire , starring fred macmurray , greer garson , tommy steele , lesley ann warren , john davidson the heathens of kummerow ( die heiden von kummerow und ihre lustigen streiche ) , the first co-production between east germany and west germany hell on wheels , starring marty robbins hells angels on wheels , starring jack nicholson herostratus , directed by don levy – ( australia/u.k . ) hombre , directed by martin ritt , starring paul newman , fredric march , diane cilento , richard boone , martin balsam , barbara rush the honey pot , starring rex harrison , cliff robertson , susan hayward , edie adams hotel , directed by richard quine , starring rod taylor , melvyn douglas , karl malden , catherine spaak , merle oberon hour of the gun , directed by john sturges , starring james garner , jason robards , robert ryan the house of 1,000 dolls , starring vincent price – ( spain/west germany ) how i won the war , directed by richard lester , starring michael crawford , john lennon michael hordern – ( u.k . ) how to succeed in business without really trying , starring robert morse , michele lee , rudy vallée , maureen arthur hurry sundown , directed by otto preminger , starring jane fonda , michael caine , diahann carroll , beah richards , faye dunaway . i . i , a man , directed by andy warhol i am curious ( yellow ) ( jag är nyfiken – en film i gult ) – ( sweden ) i even met happy gypsies ( skupljači perja ) – ( yugoslavia ) in cold blood , directed by richard brooks , starring robert blake , scott wilson , paul stewart , john forsythe i 'll never forget what's'isname , directed by michael winner , starring oliver reed and orson welles – ( u.k . ) in like flint , starring james coburn , lee j . cobb , jean hale in the heat of the night , directed by norman jewison , starring sidney poitier and rod steiger—winner of 5 academy awards including best picture the incident , starring martin sheen and beau bridges it 's a bikini world , starring deborah walley and tommy kirk . j . jewel thief , starring dev anand , vyjayanthimala and ashok kumar – ( india ) the jokers , directed by michael winner , starring oliver reed and michael crawford – ( u.k . ) journey to the center of time , directed by david l . hewitt jules verne 's rocket to the moon , directed by don sharp – ( u.k . ) the jungle book , an animated musical by walt disney pictures . k . kidnapping , caucasian style ( kavkazskaya plennitsa , ili novie priklucheniya shurika ) – ( ussr ) king kong escapes ( kingu kongu no gyakushû ) – ( japan/u.s . ) the king 's pirate , starring doug mcclure and jill st . john kinoautomat – ( czechoslovakia ) kyu-chan no dekkai yume – ( japan ) . l . the last adventure ( les aventuriers ) , directed by robert enrico – ( france/italy ) the last killer ( l'ultimo killer , a.k.a . django the last killer ) , starring george eastman and anthony ghidra largo viaje ( largo viaje ) – ( chile ) the long duel , starring yul brynner , trevor howard , harry andrews and charlotte rampling – ( u.k . ) love affair , or the case of the missing switchboard operator ( ljubavni slučaj ili tragedija službenice p.t.t . ) – ( yugoslavia ) . m . mad monster party ? , animated film featuring boris karloff magical mystery tour - tv film with the beatles – ( u.k . ) maneater of hydra , directed by mel welles – ( spain/west germany ) a man vanishes ( ningen johatsu ) , directed by shohei imamura – ( japan ) marat/sade , directed by peter brook – ( u.k . ) marketa lazarová , directed by františek vláčil – ( czechoslovakia ) the million eyes of sumuru , starring george nader , frankie avalon and shirley eaton – ( u.k . ) the mitten ( varezhka ) , directed by roman kachanov – ( ussr ) more than a miracle ( c'era una volta ) , starring sophia loren , omar sharif and dolores del río – ( italy/france ) mouchette , directed by robert bresson – ( france ) the mummy 's shroud , starring andré morell and john phillips – ( u.k . ) . n . the naked runner , directed by sidney j . furie , starring frank sinatra – ( u.k . ) the night of the generals , starring peter o'toole , omar sharif , tom courtenay – ( u.k./france ) . o . oedipus rex ( edipo re ) , directed by pier paolo pasolini , starring silvana mangano – ( italy ) oh dad , poor dad , mamma 's hung you in the closet and i 'm feelin ' so sad , starring rosalind russell and robert morse one-armed swordsman ( dubei dao ) , directed by chang cheh – ( hong kong ) oscar , directed by édouard molinaro – ( france ) our mother 's house , starring dirk bogarde – ( u.k . ) . p . paranoia – ( netherlands ) pedro páramo , starring john gavin – ( mexico ) peppermint frappé , directed by carlos saura – ( spain ) the plank , directed by and starring eric sykes with tommy cooper – ( u.k . ) playing soldiers ( mali vojnici ) – ( yugoslavia ) playtime , directed by and starring jacques tati – ( france ) point blank , directed by john boorman , starring lee marvin and angie dickinson poor cow , directed by ken loach , starring terence stamp and carol white – ( u.k . ) the president 's analyst , starring james coburn privilege , directed by peter watkins , starring paul jones and jean shrimpton – ( u.k . ) . q . quatermass and the pit , starring james donald – ( u.k . ) . r . ram aur shyam ( ram and shyam ) , starring dilip kumar – ( india ) the rats woke up ( buđenje pacova ) – ( yugoslavia ) the red and the white ( csillagosok , katonak ) , directed by miklós jancsó – ( hungary ) reflections in a golden eye , directed by john huston , starring marlon brando and elizabeth taylor the reluctant astronaut , starring don knotts the ride to hangman 's tree , directed by alan rafkin robbery , directed by peter yates , starring stanley baker – ( u.k . ) rosie ! , starring rosalind russell rough night in jericho , starring dean martin and george peppard . s . the sailor from gibraltar , starring ian bannen , jeanne moreau , vanessa redgrave , orson welles – ( u.k . ) the st . valentine 's day massacre , starring jason robards , george segal , ralph meeker and jean hale le samouraï ( the samurai ) , starring alain delon – ( france ) samurai rebellion ( jōi-uchi : hairyō tsuma shimatsu ) , directed by masaki kobayashi , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) the shooting , starring warren oates , millie perkins and jack nicholson the shuttered room , starring gig young , carol lynley and oliver reed – ( u.k . ) slave girls , starring martine beswick and michael latimer – ( u.k . ) smashing time , starring rita tushingham , lynn redgrave and michael york – ( u.k . ) soleil o , written and directed by med hondo ( mauritania/france ) the sorcerers , directed by michael reeves , starring boris karloff and ian ogilvy – ( u.k . ) son of godzilla , directed by jun fukuda – ( japan ) stimulantia , anthology film by nine directors – ( sweden ) the stolen airship ( ukradená vzducholoď ) , directed by karel zeman – ( czechoslovakia/italy ) the stranger ( lo straniero ) , directed by luchino visconti , starring marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) stranger in the house , starring james mason , geraldine chaplin and bobby darin – ( u.k . ) a stranger in town ( un dollaro tra i denti ) , directed by luigi vanzi – ( italy/u.s . ) sweet love , bitter , starring dick gregory . t . the taming of the shrew , directed by franco zeffirelli , starring richard burton and elizabeth taylor – ( italy/u.s . ) ten thousand days ( tízezer nap ) – ( hungary ) the thief of paris , directed by louis malle and starring jean-paul belmondo and geneviève bujold – ( france ) they came from beyond space , directed by freddie francis – ( u.k . ) this night i 'll possess your corpse ( esta noite encarnarei no teu cadáver ) – ( brazil ) thoroughly modern millie , directed by george roy hill , starring julie andrews , mary tyler moore , carol channing thunder alley , directed by richard rush , starring annette funicello the tied up balloon , directed by binka zhelyazkova and starring georgi partsalev , grigor vachkov , georgi kaloyanchev , konstantin kotsev – ( bulgaria ) the tiger makes out , starring eli wallach and anne jackson the tiger and the pussycat , starring vittorio gassman , ann-margret , eleanor parker – ( italy ) titicut follies , a documentary by frederick wiseman to sir , with love , starring sidney poitier – ( u.k . ) tobruk , starring rock hudson and george peppard tony rome , directed by gordon douglas , starring frank sinatra , jill st . john , gena rowlands , richard conte , sue lyon torture garden , starring burgess meredith , michael bryant , beverly adams , peter cushing , jack palance – ( u.k . ) the trip , directed by roger corman , starring peter fonda and susan strasberg two for the road , directed by stanley donen , starring audrey hepburn and albert finney – ( u.k . ) the two of us ( le vieil homme et l'enfant ) , directed by claude berri – ( france ) . u . ultraman – ( japan ) ulysses , starring milo o'shea – ( u.k./u.s . ) untamable angelique ( indomptable angélique ) , directed by bernard borderie – ( france/italy/west germany ) up the down staircase , starring sandy dennis upkar , directed by and starring manoj kumar – ( india ) . v . valley of the dolls , directed by mark robson , starring barbara parkins , patty duke , sharon tate , susan hayward , paul burke the venetian affair , starring elke sommer , robert vaughn , felicia farr the vengeance of fu manchu , starring christopher lee and tony ferrer – ( u.k . ) violated angels ( okasareta hakui ) – ( japan ) viy ( aka spirit of evil ) – ( ussr ) the vulture , starring robert hutton and diane clare – ( u.k . ) . w . wait until dark , directed by terence young , starring audrey hepburn , alan arkin , richard crenna , jack weston and efrem zimbalist , jr . war and peace ( voyna i mir ) , directed by sergei bondarchuk – ( ussr ) the war wagon , directed by burt kennedy , starring john wayne and kirk douglas warning shot , starring david janssen , stefanie powers , joan collins , eleanor parker , lillian gish and george sanders waterhole no . 3 , starring james coburn , carroll o'connor and margaret blye the way west , starring kirk douglas , richard widmark , robert mitchum , lola albright and sally field we still kill the old way ( a ciascuno il suo ) , starring gian maria volonté and irene papas – ( italy ) weekend ( week-end ) , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) welcome to hard times , starring henry fonda , aldo ray , janice rule and warren oates the whisperers , starring edith evans and nanette newman – ( u.k . ) the white bus , a short film by lindsay anderson – ( u.k . ) who 's minding the mint ? starring jim hutton , dorothy provine , walter brennan and milton berle who 's that knocking at my door , directed by martin scorsese the witches ( le streghe ) , produced by dino de laurentiis – ( italy/france ) . y . you only live twice , starring sean connery as james bond – ( u.k . ) the young girls of rochefort , directed by jacques demy , starring catherine deneuve and françoise dorléac – ( france ) . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930 & ndash ; 1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931 & ndash ; 1969 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953 & ndash ; 1968 ) daffy duck ( 1937 & ndash ; 1968 ) cool cat ( 1967 & ndash ; 1969 ) merlin the magic mouse ( 1967 & ndash ; 1969 ) . births . january 2 - tia carrere , american actress january 7 - irrfan khan , indian actor ( d . 2020 ) january 14 - emily watson , english actress january 17 - song kang-ho , south korean actor january 24 - phil lamarr , american actor , voice actor , comedian and writer february 5 - chris parnell , american actor , voice artist and comedian february 10 - laura dern , american actress february 13 – carolyn lawrence , american actress and voice actress february 19 - benicio del toro , puerto rican actor march 1 - rosyam nor , malaysian actor march 4 - sam taylor-johnson , born samantha taylor-wood , english-born director march 15 - pierre coffin , french voice actor , animator and film director , best known for voicing the minions . march 16 - lauren graham , american actress april 6 – kathleen barr , canadian voice , stage and television actress april 17 - kimberly elise , american actress april 18 - maria bello , american actress april 22 - sherri shepherd , american actress , comedian , author and television personality may 1 - scott coffey , american actor/director may 15 - madhuri dixit , indian actress may 31 - sandrine bonnaire , french actress june 5 - ron livingston , american actor june 6 - paul giamatti , american actor june 15 - fred tatasciore , american voice actor june 19 - mia sara , american actress june 20 - nicole kidman , australian actress july 1 - pamela anderson , american actress july 9 - indrek taalmaa , estonian actor july 16 - will ferrell , american actor july 18 - vin diesel , american actor july 22 – rhys ifans , welsh actor and singer july 23 - philip seymour hoffman , american actor ( d . 2014 ) july 25 - matt leblanc , american actor august 13 - quinn cummings , american former child actress august 22 - ty burrell , american actor august 25 - tom hollander , english actor september 7 - leslie jones , american comedian and actress september 11 - harry connick , jr . , american actor and singer september 12 – louis c.k . , american stand-up comedian , writer , actor and filmmaker september 28 - mira sorvino , american actress october 3 - tiara jacquelina , malaysian actress october 4 - liev schreiber , american actor october 5 - guy pearce , australian actor october 28 - julia roberts , american actress october 29 - rufus sewell , english thespian november 13 juhi chawla , indian actress steve zahn , american actor november 22 - mark ruffalo , american actor november 28 - anna nicole smith , american model and actress ( d . 2007 ) december 11 - mo'nique , american actress december 13 - jamie foxx , american actor december 16 - miranda otto , australian actress . deaths . january 8 – zbigniew cybulski , 39 , polish actor , ashes and diamonds , the saragossa manuscript january 21 – ann sheridan , 51 , american actress , angels with dirty faces , kings row january 22 – jobyna ralston , 67 , american actress , wings , the freshman january 28 ruut tarmo , 70 , estonian actor , noored kotkad václav wasserman , 68 , czech actor , screenwriter and director , the undertaker , saturday february 1 - richard l . breen , 48 , american screenwriter , captain newman , m.d . , titanic february 6 – martine carol , 46 , french actress , lola montes , around the world in 80 days february 10 - ralph murphy , 71 , american director , i want a divorce , 70,000 witnesses february 14 – sig ruman , 82 , german actor , stalag 17 , ninotchka february 15 – antonio moreno , 79 , spanish-american actor and director , the searchers , creature from the black lagoon february 16 smiley burnette , 55 , american actor , king of the cowboys , ridin ' on a rainbow amund rydland , ( 79 ) , norwegian actor february 17 - louise henry , 55 , american actress , there goes the groom , 45 fathers february 21 - charles beaumont , 38 , american television and film writer , brain dead , the intruder february 24 – franz waxman , 60 , german film composer , stalag 17 , mister roberts march 5 – mischa auer , 61 , russian actor , you ca n't take it with you , destry rides again march 6 – nelson eddy , 65 , american singer and actor , make mine music , the chocolate soldier march 11 – geraldine farrar , 85 , american singer and actress , carmen , joan the woman april 10 - aage winther-jørgensen , 66 , danish actor , the rector of veilbye , bussen april 15 – totò , 69 , italian actor and writer , big deal on madonna street , the hawks and the sparrows april 22 - tom conway , 62 , russian-american actor , the falcon 's brother , cat people april 24 fred c . newmeyer , 78 , american director , safety last ! , they never come back frank overton , 49 , american actor , to kill a mockingbird , fail-safe april 29 - anthony mann , 60 , american director , el cid , winchester '73 may 7 - judith evelyn , 58 , american actress , rear window , giant may 8 laverne andrews , 55 , american singer and actress ( andrews sisters ) , road to rio , follow the boys barbara payton , 39 , american actress , bride of the gorilla , kiss tomorrow goodbye may 14 - james tinling , 78 , american director , charlie chan in shanghai , 45 fathers may 30 – claude rains , 77 , british actor , casablanca , notorious , mr . smith goes to washington , the invisible man june 7 - dorothy parker , 73 , american writer , a star is born , saboteur june 10 spencer tracy , 67 , american actor , boys town , judgment at nuremberg , guess who 's coming to dinner , it 's a mad , mad , mad , mad world frank butler , 76 , british-american screenwriter , going my way , road to morocco june 16 – reginald denny , 75 , british actor , rebecca , mr . blandings builds his dream house june 26 – françoise dorléac , 25 , french actress , the soft skin , cul-de-sac june 29 – jayne mansfield , 34 , american actress , the wayward bus , the girl ca n't help it july 8 – vivien leigh , 53 , british actress , gone with the wind , a streetcar named desire july 17 – enzo petito , 69 , italian actor , the good , the bad and the ugly july 21 basil rathbone , 75 , british actor , the adventures of robin hood , the adventures of sherlock holmes david weisbart , 52 , american film editor and producer , rebel without a cause , them ! august 9 – anton walbrook , 70 , austrian actor , la ronde , the life and death of colonel blimp august 13 – jane darwell , 87 , american actress , the grapes of wrath , gone with the wind august 25 – paul muni , 71 , ukrainian-american actor , scarface , i am a fugitive from a chain gang august 28 – maurice elvey , 79 , english director and producer , the life story of david lloyd george , the hound of the baskervilles september 1 - james dunn , 65 , american actor , a tree grows in brooklyn , bright eyes october 12 - nat pendleton , 72 , american actor , former olympic swimmer , the thin man , the great ziegfeld october 29 - julien duvivier , 71 , french director , tales of manhattan , flesh and fantasy october 30 - charles trowbridge , 85 , american actor , sergeant york , strange alibi november 1 - benita hume , 61 , british actress , the worst woman in paris ? , the private life of don juan november 4 - june thorburn , 36 , british actress , the scarlet blade , the 3 worlds of gulliver november 9 - charles bickford , 76 , american actor , days of wine and roses , the song of bernadette november 21 - florence reed , 84 , american actress , the eternal mother , great expectations november 29 - theo marcuse , 47 , american actor , the cincinnati kid , harum scarum december 4 bert lahr , 72 , american actor , the wizard of oz , sing your worries away sarah padden , 86 , american actress , women wo n't tell , the midnight lady december 21 - stuart erwin , 64 , american actor , pigskin parade , going hollywood december 23 - kaaren verne , 49 , german actress , all through the night , sherlock holmes and the secret weapon december 29 - paul whiteman , 77 , american bandleader , king of jazz , thanks a million . film debuts . robby benson - wait until dark eileen brennan - divorce american style richard dreyfuss - valley of the dolls faye dunaway - hurry sundown robert forster - reflections in a golden eye dustin hoffman - the tiger makes out anthony hopkins - the white bus anjelica huston - casino royale harvey keitel - who 's that knocking at my door tim matheson - divorce american style pat morita - thoroughly modern millie richard pryor - the busy body rob reiner - enter laughing martin sheen - the incident jon voight - fearless frank lesley ann warren - the happiest millionaire gene wilder - bonnie and clyde fred willard - teenage mother paul winfield - the perils of pauline michael york - the taming of the shrew . notes . references .