Red Nichols

biography . early life and career . nichols was born on may 8 , 1905 in ogden , utah , united states . his father was a college music professor , and nichols was something of a child prodigy , playing difficult set pieces for his father 's brass band by the age of 12 . young nichols heard the early recordings of the original dixieland jass band and later those of bix beiderbecke , and these had a strong influence on him . his style became polished , clean , and incisive . in the early 1920s , nichols moved to the midwest and joined a band called the syncopating seven . when that band broke up , he joined the johnny johnson orchestra and went with it to new york city in 1923 . in new york , he met trombonist miff mole , and the two were inseparable for the next decade . before signing with brunswick , nichols and mole recorded for pathé-perfect under the name the red heads . brunswick records era . nichols could read music and easily gained studio work . in 1926 , he and mole began recording with a variety of bands as red nichols and his five pennies . few of these groups were quintets ; the name was a pun on '' nickel '' . with the five pennies , he recorded more than 100 sides for brunswick . he also recorded as the arkansas travelers , the california red heads , the louisiana rhythm kings , the charleston chasers , red and miff 's stompers , and miff mole and his little molers . during some weeks in this period , nichols and his bands were recording 10 to 12 2-sided records . nichols ' band started with mole on trombone and jimmy dorsey on alto saxophone and clarinet . other musicians in his bands in the following decade included benny goodman ( clarinet ) , glenn miller ( trombone ) , jack teagarden ( trombone ) , pee wee russell ( clarinet ) , joe venuti ( violin ) , eddie lang ( banjo and guitar ) , and gene krupa ( drums ) . the five pennies ' version of '' ida , sweet as apple cider '' was a surprise hit record . it sold over a million copies and was awarded a gold disc by the recording industry association of america . his composition '' nervous charlie stomp '' was recorded by one of the top jazz bands of the 1920s , fletcher henderson 's orchestra , and released as a 78 single . in the next decade , more structured swing eclipsed the improvisational dixieland jazz nichols loved to play . he tried to follow the changes and formed a swing band , but his recording career seemed to stall in 1932 . music critic michael brooks wrote , what went wrong ? part of it was too much , too soon . much of his vast recorded output was released in europe , where he was regarded by early jazz critics as the equal , if not the superior , of louis armstrong and bix beiderbecke . people who make fools of themselves usually find a scapegoat , and when the critics were exposed to the music of duke ellington , benny carter , coleman hawkins and others they turned on nichols and savaged him , trashing him as unfairly as they had revered him . nichols ' chief fault was an overly stiff , academic approach to jazz trumpet , but he did recognize merit as far as other jazz musicians were concerned and made some wonderful small group recordings . michael brooks , liner notes to swing time ! the fabulous big band era 1925–1955 . other labels nichols recorded for included edison 1926 , victor 1927 , 1928 , 1930 , 1931 ( individual sessions ) , bluebird 1934 , 1939 , back to brunswick for a session in 1934 , variety 1937 , and okeh in 1940 . later career . nichols survived the great depression by playing in show bands and pit orchestras . he led bob hope 's orchestra for a while , moving to california . nichols married willa stutsman , a '' stunning '' george white 's scandals dancer , and they had a daughter . in 1942 their daughter contracted polio , which was misdiagnosed at first as spinal meningitis , and nichols left glen gray and the casa loma orchestra to work in the wartime shipyards . on may 2 , 1942 , nichols left his band to take an army commission after completing an engagement at lantz 's merry-go-round in dayton , ohio . billboard , may 9 , 1942 drawn back to music after the war , nichols formed another five pennies band and began playing in small clubs in los angeles . club dates turned into performances at bigger venues , such as the zebra room , the tudor room of the palace hotel in san francisco , and the shearton in pasadena , california . he toured europe as a goodwill ambassador for the state department . nichols and his band performed in the 1950 film quicksand starring mickey rooney . in 1956 , he was the subject of an episode of the television program this is your life in which he reunited with miff mole , phil harris , and jimmy dorsey , who praised nichols as a bandleader who ensured everyone was paid . in 1965 , nichols took his five pennies band to the mint hotel in las vegas . on june 28 , 1965 , a few days after he began performing , he had chest pains while he was sleeping . he phoned the front desk . but when the ambulance arrived he was dead . the band performed as scheduled with a spotlight on nichols ' empty chair . . biographical film and film career . the 1959 hollywood film the five pennies , the film biography of red nichols , starring danny kaye as red nichols , was loosely based on nichols ' life and career . nichols played his own cornet parts for the film and appeared briefly as one of the '' clicquot club eskimos '' on screen . the paramount pictures movie received four academy award nominations . jazz contemporary louis armstrong also appeared in the film . the five pennies movie theme song and other songs for the film were composed by sylvia fine , danny kaye 's wife . nichols also made a cameo appearance in the 1950 film quicksand , the 1951 film disc jockey with tommy dorsey , and the gene krupa story in 1959 . in 1929 , he appeared in the vitaphone film short ( reel 870 ) with his band the five pennies along with eddie condon and pee wee russell . in 1935 , he appeared in the paramount pictures film short the parade of the maestros along with ferde grofe performing '' in the middle of a kiss '' . his performance of '' poor butterfly '' appears in the 1994 woody allen film bullets over broadway and '' ( back home again in ) indiana '' in the 1999 film sweet and lowdown . red nichols performed in and is also mentioned in the 1950 mickey rooney and jeanne cagney film quicksand when rooney 's character asks out jean cagney , he asks if she likes '' red nichols and his outfit ? '' and she responds '' i think they 're great ! '' they then go to the club to watch red nichols and his band perform . awards and honors . in 1986 , red nichols was inducted into the big band and jazz hall of fame . compositions . he wrote or co-wrote the following songs : '' hurricane '' with paul mertz , '' you 're breakin ' me down '' with glenn miller , '' five pennies '' , '' bug-a-boo '' , '' the parade of the 'pennies ' '' , '' the king kong '' , '' trumpet sobs '' , '' get cannibal '' , '' junk man 's blues '' , '' delta roll '' , '' corky '' , '' bugler 's lament '' , '' nervous charlie stomp '' ( recorded by fletcher henderson ) , '' last dollar '' , '' that 's no bargain '' , and '' blues at midnight '' . discography . red nichols classics . volume one ( brunswick , 1943 ) red nichols classics . volume two ( brunswick , 1946 ) jazz time ( capitol , 1950 ) hot pennies ( capitol , 1956 ) in love with red ( capitol , 1956 ) red nichols and his five pennies ( tops , 1957 ) parade of the pennies ( capitol , 1958 ) meet the five pennies ( capitol , 1959 ) dixieland supper club ( capitol , 1962 ) sessions , live ( calliope , 1976 )