Quorum sensing

discovery . quorum sensing was first reported in 1970 , by kenneth nealson , terry platt , and j . woodland hastings , who observed what they described as a conditioning of the medium in which they had grown the photoluminescent marine bacterium aliivibrio fischeri . these bacteria did not synthesize luciferase—and therefore did not luminesce—in freshly inoculated culture but only after the bacterial population had increased significantly . because they attributed this conditioning of the medium to the growing population of cells itself , they referred to the phenomenon as autoinducer . . bacteria . some of the best-known examples of quorum sensing come from studies of bacteria . bacteria use quorum sensing to regulate certain phenotype expressions , which in turn , coordinate their behaviours . some common phenotypes include biofilm formation , virulence factor expression , and motility . certain bacteria are able to use quorum sensing to regulate bioluminescence , nitrogen fixation and spore . the quorum-sensing function is based on the local density of the bacterial population in the immediate environment . it can occur within a single bacterial species , as well as between diverse species . both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria use quorum sensing , but there are some major differences in their mechanisms . . mechanism . for the bacteria to use quorum sensing constitutively , they must possess three characteristics : to secrete a signaling molecule , an autoinducer , to detect the change in concentration of signaling molecules , and to regulate gene transcription as a response . this process is highly dependent on the diffusion mechanism of the signaling molecules . qs signaling molecules are usually secreted at a low level by individual bacteria . at low cell density , the molecules may just diffuse away . at high cell density , the local concentration of signaling molecules may exceed its threshold level , and trigger changes in gene expression . . gram-positive bacteria . gram-positive bacteria use autoinducing peptides ( aip ) as their autoinducers . when gram-positive bacteria detect high concentration of aips in their environment , that happens by way of aips binding to a receptor to activate a kinase . the kinase phosphorylates a transcription factor , which regulates gene transcription . this is called a two-component system . another possible mechanism is that aip is transported into the cytosol , and binds directly to a transcription factor to initiate or inhibit transcription . . gram-negative bacteria . gram-negative bacteria produce n-acyl homoserine lactone ( ahl ) as their signaling molecule . usually ahls do not need additional processing , and bind directly to transcription factors to regulate gene expression . some gram-negative bacteria may use the two-component system as well . . examples . . aliivibrio fischeri . the bioluminescent bacterium a . fischeri is the first organism in which qs was observed . it lives as a mutualistic symbiont in the photophore ( or light-producing organ ) of the hawaiian bobtail squid . when a . fischeri cells are free-living ( or planktonic ) , the autoinducer is at low concentration , and , thus , cells do not show luminescence . however , when the population reaches the threshold in the photophore ( about cells/ml ) , transcription of luciferase is induced , leading to bioluminescence . in a . fischeri bioluminescence is regulated by ahls ( n-acyl-homoserine lactones ) which is a product of the luxi gene whose transcription is regulated by the luxr activator . luxr works only when ahls binds to the luxr . curvibacter sp . curvibacter is a gram-negative curved rod-formed bacterium which is the main colonizer of the epithelial cell surfaces of the early branching metazoan hydra vulgaris . sequencing the complete genome uncovered a circular chromosome ( 4.37 mb ) , a plasmid ( 16.5 kb ) , and two operons coding each for an ahl ( n-acyl-homoserine lactone ) synthase ( curi1 and curi2 ) and an ahl receptor ( curr1 and curr2 ) . moreover , a study showed that these host associated curvibacter bacteria produce a broad spectrum of ahl , explaining the presence of those operons . as mentioned before , ahl are the quorum sensing molecules of gram-negative bacteria , which means curvibacter has a quorum sensing activity . even though their function in host-microbe interaction is largely unknown , curvibacter quorum-sensing signals are relevant for host-microbe interactions . indeed , due to the oxidoreductase activity of hydra , there is a modification of ahl signalling molecules ( 3-oxo-homoserine lactone into 3-hydroxy-homoserine lactone ) which leads to a different host-microbe interaction . on one hand , a phenotypic switch of the colonizer curvibacter takes place . the most likely explanation is that the binding of 3-oxo-hsl and 3-hydroxy-hsl causes different conformational changes in the ahl receptors curr1 and curr2 . as a result , there is a different dna-binding motif affinity and thereby different target genes are activated . on the other hand , this switch modifies its ability to colonize the epithelial cell surfaces of hydra vulgaris . indeed , one explanation is that with a 3-oxo-hsl quorum-sensing signal , there is an up-regulation of flagellar assembly . yet , flagellin , the main protein component of flagella , can act as an immunomodulator and activate the innate immune response in hydra . therefore , bacteria have less chance to evade the immune system and to colonize host tissues . another explanation is that 3-hydroxy-hsl induces carbon metabolism and fatty acid degradation genes in hydra . this allows the bacterial metabolism to adjust itself to the host growth conditions , which is essential for the colonization of the ectodermal mucus layer of hydrae . . escherichia coli . in the gram-negative bacterium escherichia coli ( e . coli ) , cell division may be partially regulated by ai-2-mediated quorum sensing . this species uses ai-2 , which is produced and processed by the lsr operon . part of it encodes an abc transporter , which imports ai-2 into the cells during the early stationery ( latent ) phase of growth . ai-2 is then phosphorylated by the lsrk kinase , and the newly produced phospho-ai-2 can be either internalized or used to suppress lsrr , a repressor of the lsr operon ( thereby activating the operon ) . transcription of the lsr operon is also thought to be inhibited by dihydroxyacetone phosphate ( dhap ) through its competitive binding to lsrr . glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate has also been shown to inhibit the lsr operon through camp-capk-mediated inhibition . this explains why , when grown with glucose , e . coli will lose the ability to internalize ai-2 ( because of catabolite repression ) . when grown normally , ai-2 presence is transient . e . coli and salmonella enterica do not produce ahl signals commonly found in other gram-negative bacteria . however , they have a receptor that detects ahls from other bacteria and change their gene expression in accordance with the presence of other '' quorate '' populations of gram-negative bacteria . . salmonella enterica . salmonella encodes a luxr homolog , sdia , but does not encode an ahl synthase . sdia detects ahls produced by other species of bacteria including aeromonas hydrophila , hafnia alvei , and yersinia enterocolitica . when ahl is detected , sdia regulates the rck operon on the salmonella virulence plasmid ( pefi-srgd-srga-srgb-rck-srgc ) and a single gene horizontal acquisition in the chromosome srge . salmonella does not detect ahl when passing through the gastrointestinal tracts of several animal species , suggesting that the normal microbiota does not produce ahls . however , sdia does become activated when salmonella transits through turtles colonized with aeromonas hydrophila or mice infected with yersinia enterocolitica . therefore , salmonella appears to use sdia to detect the ahl production of other pathogens rather than the normal gut flora . pseudomonas aeruginosa . the opportunistic pathogen pseudomonas aeruginosa uses quorum sensing to coordinate the formation of biofilm , swarming motility , exopolysaccharide production , virulence , and cell aggregation . these bacteria can grow within a host without harming it until they reach a threshold concentration . then they become aggressive , developing to the point at which their numbers are sufficient to overcome the host 's immune system , and form a biofilm , leading to disease within the host as the biofilm is a protective layer encasing the bacterial population . another form of gene regulation that allows the bacteria to rapidly adapt to surrounding changes is through environmental signaling . recent studies have discovered that anaerobiosis can significantly impact the major regulatory circuit of quorum sensing . this important link between quorum sensing and anaerobiosis has a significant impact on the production of virulence factors of this organism . it is hoped that the therapeutic enzymatic degradation of the signaling molecules will prevent the formation of such biofilms and possibly weaken established biofilms . disrupting the signaling process in this way is called quorum sensing inhibition . acinetobacter sp . it has recently been found that acinetobacter sp . also show quorum sensing activity . this bacterium , an emerging pathogen , produces ahls . acinetobacter sp . shows both quorum sensing and quorum quenching activity . it produces ahls and also , it can degrade the ahl molecules as well . . aeromonas sp . this bacterium was previously considered a fish pathogen , but it has recently emerged as a human pathogen . aeromonas sp . have been isolated from various infected sites from patients ( bile , blood , peritoneal fluid , pus , stool and urine ) . all isolates produced the two principal ahls , n-butanoylhomoserine lactone ( c4-hsl ) and n-hexanoyl homoserine lactone ( c6-hsl ) . it has been documented that aeromonas sobria has produced c6-hsl and two additional ahls with n-acyl side chain longer than c6 . . yersinia . the yenr and yeni proteins produced by the gammaproteobacterium yersinia enterocolitica are similar to aliivibrio fischeri luxr and luxi . yenr activates the expression of a bacterial small rna , yens . yens inhibits yeni expression and acylhomoserine lactone production . yenr/yeni/yens are involved in the control of swimming and swarming motility . . molecules involved . three-dimensional structures of proteins involved in quorum sensing were first published in 2001 , when the crystal structures of three luxs orthologs were determined by x-ray crystallography . in 2002 , the crystal structure of the receptor luxp of vibrio harveyi with its inducer ai-2 ( which is one of the few biomolecules containing boron ) bound to it was also determined . many bacterial species , including e . coli , an enteric bacterium and model organism for gram-negative bacteria , produce ai-2 . a comparative genomic and phylogenetic analysis of 138 genomes of bacteria , archaea , and eukaryotes found that '' the luxs enzyme required for ai-2 synthesis is widespread in bacteria , while the periplasmic binding protein luxp is present only in vibrio strains , '' leading to the conclusion that either '' other organisms may use components different from the ai-2 signal transduction system of vibrio strains to sense the signal of ai-2 or they do not have such a quorum sensing system at all . '' farnesol is used by the fungus candida albicans as a quorum sensing molecule that inhibits filamentation . a database of quorum-sensing peptides is available under the name quorumpeps . certain bacteria can produce enzymes called lactonases that can target and inactivate ahls . researchers have developed novel molecules which block the signalling receptors of bacteria ( '' quorum quenching '' ) . mbtl is a compound that has been shown to inhibit quorum sensing and decrease the amount of cell death by a significant amount . additionally , researchers are also examining the role of natural compounds ( such as caffeine ) as potential quorum sensing inhibitors . research in this area has been promising and could lead to the development of natural compounds as effective therapeutics . evolution . . sequence analysis . the majority of quorum sensing systems that fall under the '' two-gene '' ( an autoinducer synthase coupled with a receptor molecule ) paradigm as defined by the vibrio fischeri system occur in the gram-negative proteobacteria . a comparison between the proteobacteria phylogeny as generated by 16s ribosomal rna sequences and phylogenies of luxi- , luxr- , or luxs-homologs shows a notably high level of global similarity . overall , the quorum sensing genes seem to have diverged along with the proteobacteria phylum as a whole . this indicates that these quorum sensing systems are quite ancient , and arose very early in the proteobacteria lineage . although examples of horizontal gene transfer are apparent in luxi , luxr , and luxs phylogenies , they are relatively rare . this result is in line with the observation that quorum sensing genes tend to control the expression of a wide array of genes scattered throughout the bacterial chromosome . a recent acquisition by horizontal gene transfer would be unlikely to have integrated itself to this degree . given that the majority of autoinducer–synthase/receptor pairs occur in tandem in bacterial genomes , it is also rare that they switch partners and so pairs tend to co-evolve . in quorum sensing genes of gammaproteobacteria , which includes pseudomonas aeruginosa and escherichia coli , the luxi/luxr genes form a functional pair , with luxi as the auto-inducer synthase and luxr as the receptor . gamma proteobacteria are unique in possessing quorum sensing genes , which , although functionally similar to the luxi/luxr genes , have a markedly divergent sequence . this family of quorum-sensing homologs may have arisen in the gamma proteobacteria ancestor , although the cause of their extreme sequence divergence yet maintenance of functional similarity has yet to be explained . in addition , species that employ multiple discrete quorum sensing systems are almost all members of the gamma proteobacteria , and evidence of horizontal transfer of quorum sensing genes is most evident in this class . . interaction of quorum-sensing molecules with mammalian cells and its medical applications . next to the potential antimicrobial functionality , quorum-sensing derived molecules , especially the peptides , are being investigated for their use in other therapeutic domains as well , including immunology , central nervous system disorders and oncology . quorum-sensing peptides have been demonstrated to interact with cancer cells , as well as to permeate the blood-brain barrier reaching the brain parenchyma . . viruses . a mechanism involving arbitrium has recently been described in bacteriophages infecting several bacillus species . stokar-avihail a , tal n , erez z , lopatina a , sorek r . widespread utilization of peptide communication in phages infecting soil and pathogenic bacteria . cell host & microbe . 2019 may 8 ; 25 ( 5 ) :746-55 . the viruses communicate with each other to ascertain their own density compared to potential hosts . they use this information to decide whether to enter a lytic or lysogenic life-cycle . . archaea . examples . . methanosaeta harundinacea 6ac . methanosaeta harundinacea 6ac , a methanogenic archaeon , produces carboxylated acyl homoserine lactone compounds that facilitate the transition from growth as short cells to growth as filaments . . plants . qs is important to plant-pathogen interactions , and their study has also contributed to the qs field more generally . the first x-ray crystallography results for some of the key proteins were those of pantoea stewartii subsp . stewartii in maize and agrobacterium tumefaciens , a crop pathogen with wider range of hosts . these interactions are facilitated by quorum-sensing molecules and play a major role in maintaining the pathogenicity of bacteria towards other hosts , such as humans . this mechanism can be understood by looking at the effects of n-acyl homoserine lactone ( ahl ) , one of the quorum sensing-signaling molecules in gram-negative bacteria , on plants . the model organism used is arabidopsis thaliana . the role of ahls having long carbon-chains ( c12 , c14 ) , which have an unknown receptor mechanism , is less well understood than ahls having short carbon-chains ( c4 , c6 , c8 ) , which are perceived by the g protein-coupled receptor . a phenomenon called '' ahl priming '' , which is a dependent signalling pathway , enhanced our knowledge of long-chain ahls . the role of quorum-sensing molecules was better explained according to three categories : host physiology–based impact of quorum sensing molecules ; ecological effects ; and cellular signaling . calcium signalling and calmodulin have a large role in short-chain ahls ' response in arabidopsis . research was also conducted on barley and the crop called yam bean ( pachyrhizus erosus ) that reveals the ahls determining the detoxification enzymes called gst were found less in yam bean . quorum sensing-based regulatory systems are necessary to plant-disease-causing bacteria . looking towards developing new strategies based on plant-associated microbiomes , the aim of further study is to improve the quantity and quality of the food supply . further research into this inter-kingdom communication also enhances the possibility of learning about quorum sensing in humans . . quorum quenching . quorum quenching is the process of preventing quorum sensing by disrupting signalling . this is achieved by inactivating signalling enzymes , by introducing molecules that mimic signalling molecules and block their receptors , by degrading signalling molecules themselves , or by a modification of the quorum sensing signals due to an enzyme activity . . inhibition of signalling molecules . closantel and triclosan are known inhibitors of quorum sensing enzymes . closantel induces aggregation of the histidine kinase sensor in two-component signalling . the latter disrupts the synthesis of a class of signalling molecules known as n-acyl homoserine lactone ( ahls ) by blocking the enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase . . mimicking of signalling molecules . two groups of well-known mimicking molecules include halogenated furanones , which mimic ahl molecules , and synthetic al peptides ( aips ) , which mimic naturally occurring aips . & nbsp ; these groups inhibit receptors from binding substrate or decrease the concentration of receptors in the cell . furanones have also been found to act on ahl-dependant transcriptional activity , whereby the half life of the autoinducer-binding luxr protein is significantly shortened . . degradation of signalling molecules . recently , a well-studied quorum quenching bacterial strain ( km1s ) was isolated and its ahl was studied using rapid resolution liquid chromatography ( rrlc ) . rrlc efficiently separates components of a mixture to a high degree of sensitivity , based on their affinities for different liquid phases . it was found that the genome of this strain encoded an inactivation enzyme with distinct motifs targeting the degradation of ahls . . modification of signalling molecules . as mentioned before , n-acyl-homoserine lactones ( ahl ) are the quorum sensing signaling molecules of the gram-negative bacteria . however , these molecules may have different functional groups on their acyl chain , and also a different length of acyl chain . therefore , there exist many different ahl signaling molecules , for example , 3-oxododecanoyl-l-homoserine lactone ( 3oc12-hsl ) or 3-hydroxydodecanoyl-l-homoserine lactone ( 3ohc12-hsl ) . the modification of those quorum sensing ( qs ) signaling molecules is another sort of quorum quenching . this can be carried out by an oxidoreductase activity . as an example , we will discuss the interaction between a host , hydra vulgaris , and the main colonizer of its epithelial cell surfaces , curvibacter spp . those bacteria produce 3-oxo-hsl quorum sensing molecules . however , the oxidoreductase activity of the polyp hydra is able to modify the 3-oxo-hsl into their 3-hydroxy-hsl counterparts . we can characterize this as quorum quenching since there is an interference with quorum sensing molecules . in this case , the outcomes are different than just qs inactivation . indeed , the host modification results in a phenotypic switch of curvibacter , which modifies its ability to colonize the epithelial cell surfaces of h . vulgaris . . applications . applications of quorum quenching that have been exploited by humans include the use of ahl-degrading bacteria in aquacultures to limit the spread of diseases in aquatic populations of fish , mollusks and crustaceans . this technique has also been translated to agriculture , to restrict the spread of pathogenic bacteria that use quorum sensing in plants . anti-biofouling is another process that exploits quorum quenching bacteria to mediate the dissociation of unwanted biofilms aggregating on wet surfaces , such as medical devices , transportation infrastructure and water systems . quorum quenching is recently studied for the control of fouling and emerging contaminants in electro membrane bioreactors ( embrs ) for the advanced treatment of wastewater . . social insects . social insect colonies are an excellent example of a decentralized system , because no individual is in charge of directing or making decisions for the colony . several groups of social insects have been shown to use quorum sensing in a process that resembles collective decision-making . examples . . ants . colonies of the ant temnothorax albipennis nest in small crevices between rocks . when the rocks shift and the nest is broken up , these ants must quickly choose a new nest to move into . during the first phase of the decision-making process , a small portion of the workers leave the destroyed nest and search for new crevices . when one of these scout ants finds a potential nest , she assesses the quality of the crevice based on a variety of factors including the size of the interior , the number of openings ( based on light level ) , and the presence or absence of dead ants . the worker then returns to the destroyed nest , where she waits for a short period before recruiting other workers to follow her to the nest that she has found , using a process called tandem running . the waiting period is inversely related to the quality of the site ; for instance , a worker that has found a poor site will wait longer than a worker that encountered a good site . as the new recruits visit the potential nest site and make their own assessment of its quality , the number of ants visiting the crevice increases . during this stage , ants may be visiting many different potential nests . however , because of the differences in the waiting period , the number of ants in the best nest will tend to increase at the greatest rate . eventually , the ants in this nest will sense that the rate at which they encounter other ants has exceeded a particular threshold , indicating that the quorum number has been reached . once the ants sense a quorum , they return to the destroyed nest and begin rapidly carrying the brood , queen , and fellow workers to the new nest . scouts that are still tandem-running to other potential sites are also recruited to the new nest , and the entire colony moves . thus , although no single worker may have visited and compared all of the available options , quorum sensing enables the colony as a whole to quickly make good decisions about where to move . honey bees . honey bees ( apis mellifera ) also use quorum sensing to make decisions about new nest sites . large colonies reproduce through a process called swarming , in which the queen leaves the hive with a portion of the workers to form a new nest elsewhere . after leaving the nest , the workers form a swarm that hangs from a branch or overhanging structure . this swarm persists during the decision-making phase until a new nest site is chosen . the quorum sensing process in honey bees is similar to the method used by temnothorax ants in several ways . a small portion of the workers leave the swarm to search out new nest sites , and each worker assesses the quality of the cavity it finds . the worker then returns to the swarm and recruits other workers to her cavity using the honey bee waggle dance . however , instead of using a time delay , the number of dance repetitions the worker performs is dependent on the quality of the site . workers that found poor nests stop dancing sooner , and can , therefore , be recruited to the better sites . once the visitors to a new site sense that a quorum number ( usually 10–20 bees ) has been reached , they return to the swarm and begin using a new recruitment method called piping . this vibration signal causes the swarm to take off and fly to the new nest location . in an experimental test , this decision-making process enabled honey bee swarms to choose the best nest site in four out of five trials . . synthetic biology . quorum sensing has been engineered using synthetic biological circuits in different systems . examples include rewiring the ahl components to toxic genes to control population size in bacteria ; and constructing an auxin-based system to control population density in mammalian cells . synthetic quorum sensing circuits have been proposed to enable applications like controlling biofilms or enabling drug delivery . . computing and robotics . quorum sensing can be a useful tool for improving the function of self-organizing networks such as the secoas ( self-organizing collegiate sensor ) environmental monitoring system . in this system , individual nodes sense that there is a population of other nodes with similar data to report . the population then nominates just one node to report the data , resulting in power savings . ad-hoc wireless networks can also benefit from quorum sensing , by allowing the system to detect and respond to network conditions . quorum sensing can also be used to coordinate the behavior of autonomous robot swarms . using a process similar to that used by temnothorax ants , robots can make rapid group decisions without the direction of a controller . . see also . cell signaling collective behavior interspecies quorum sensing microbial intelligence pheromone signal transduction swarm intelligence . references . further reading . dedicated issue of philosophical transactions b on quorum sensing ( 2007 ) . some articles are freely available . high citation review : . external links . the quorum sensing website cell-to-cell communication in bacteria the secoas project—development of a self-organising , wireless sensor network for environmental monitoring measurement of space : from ants to robots instant insight into quorum sensing from the royal society of chemistry bonnie bassler : discovering bacteria 's amazing communication system bonnie bassler 's seminar : '' cell-cell communication in bacteria ''