Seyyed Hossein Nasr

biography . origins . nasr was born in 1933 in south-central tehran to seyyed valiallah , who was a physician to the persian royal family , and one of the founders of modern education in iran . he wrote many essays which still remain in manuscript form , some of which have been assembled by nasr into a book called danish wa akhlaq ( ‘ ‘ knowledge and ethics ’ ’ ) . ramin jahanbegloo , in search of the sacred : a conversation with seyyed hossein nasr on his life and thought , abc-clio ( 2010 ) , p . 4 his parents were originally from kashan . he is a descendant of sheikh fazlollah nouri from his mother 's side , through him is related to the communist noureddin kianouri , is the cousin of iranian philosopher ramin jahanbegloo as well as the father of american academic vali nasr . education . nasr went to firuz bahram high school in tehran جهانبگلو . رامین . در جستجوی امر قدسی ( مصاحبه با دکتر نصر ) . نشر نی . 1385 interview with ramin jahanbegloo in : dar jostejooye amr e qodsi . p.229 before being sent to the united states for education at thirteen . in the us , nasr first attended peddie school in hightstown , new jersey , graduating in 1950 as the valedictorian of his class and also winner of the wyclifte award . sheikh , nadia . '' islamic scholar calls gw home '' , the gw hatchet , february 20 , 2007 . accessed february 5 , 2011 . '' as a 12-year-old , nasr came to the united states to study at the peddie school , a new jersey boarding school where he graduated in 1950 as valedictorian . '' a scholarship offered by mit in physics made him the first iranian undergraduate to attend that university . there , he also began studying under giorgio de santillana and others in various other branches such as metaphysics and philosophy . during his studies there he became acquainted with the works of the traditionalist authority frithjof schuon . this school of thought has shaped nasr 's life and thinking ever since . nasr had been a disciple of frithjof schuon for over fifty years and his works are based on the doctrine and the viewpoints of the perennial philosophy . after receiving an mit sb degree in physics in 1954 , nasr obtained a master 's degree in geology and geophysics in 1956 , and went on to pursue his phd degree in the history of science and learning at harvard university . he planned to write his dissertation under the supervision of george sarton , but sarton died before he could begin his dissertation work and so he wrote his dissertation under the direction of i . bernard cohen , hamilton gibb , and harry wolfson . at the age of twenty-five , nasr graduated with a phd from harvard and completed his first book , science and civilization in islam , the title being a direct tribute to science and civilization in china , the work by joseph needham which had for task to present to westerners the complex developments of the history of science and technology in china , a mission nasr was himself following for the muslim world , '' although i was working single-handedly , a twenty-five-year-old scholar , and he had a whole group working with him at cambridge '' . ramin jahanbegloo , in search of the sacred : a conversation with seyyed hossein nasr on his life and thought , abc-clio ( 2010 ) , p . 53 his doctoral dissertation entitled '' conceptions of nature in islamic thought '' was published in 1964 by harvard university press as an introduction to islamic cosmological doctrines . apart from mastering arabic he was initially taught in his childhood , during his student years , nasr also learned different languages , namely french ( he could read guénon and schuon in the text ) , greek , latin , italian , spanish and german ( mainly to work on hegel for his phd thesis ) . ramin jahanbegloo , in search of the sacred : a conversation with seyyed hossein nasr on his life and thought , abc-clio ( 2010 ) , p . 47 . back to iran . nasr began his teaching career in 1955 when he was still a young doctoral student at harvard university . after harvard , nasr returned to iran as a professor at the university of tehran , and also served as the president of aryamehr university ( now sharif university of technology ) from 1972 to 1975 . nasr also learned islamic philosophy from the philosophers muhammad husayn tabataba ' i , allameh sayyed abul hasan rafiee qazvini and sayyid muhammad kazim assar during the period leading up to the revolution . nasr was appointed personal secretary to farah pahlavi , empress of iran , as head of the empress 's private bureau . knight , michael m . william s . burroughs vs . the qur'an , soft skull press , berkley 2012 , p61 in 1974 she commissioned him to establish and lead the imperial iranian academy of philosophy ( now the institute for research in philosophy ) , the first academic institution to be conducted in accordance with the intellectual principles of the traditionalist school . during that time , nasr , tabataba ' i , william chittick , peter lamborn wilson , kenneth morgan , sachiko murata , toshihiko izutsu , and henry corbin held various philosophical discourses . the book shi'ite islam was one product of this period . return to the west . upon his return to the west , nasr took up positions at university of edinburgh , temple university , and since 1984 has been at the george washington university where he is now a full-time university professor of islamic studies . nasr helped with the planning and expansion of islamic and iranian studies academic programs in several universities such as princeton , the university of utah , and the university of southern california . he was an advisor for the award-winning , pbs-broadcast documentary muhammad : legacy of a prophet ( 2002 ) , produced by unity productions foundation . . views on evolution . nasr rejects the evolution , claiming that it is '' an ideology , it is not ordinary science '' and '' more a pseudo-religion than a scientific theory . '' the sociologist farzin vahdat sees this as part of nasr 's rejection of secular reason and secular science , and more broadly of the modern world . . awards and honors . in year 2000 , a volume was devoted to him in the library of living philosophers . lewis edwin hahn ( ed ) , the philosophy of seyyed hossein nasr , library of living philosophers , volume xxviii , open court , 2001 , . templeton religion and science award ( 1999 ) first muslim and first non-western scholar to deliver the prestigious gifford lectures . honorary doctor from the faculty of theology of uppsala university , sweden ( 1977 ) . works . nasr is the author of over fifty books and five hundred articles ( a number of which can be found in the journal , studies in comparative religion ) on topics such as traditionalist metaphysics , islamic science , religion and the environment , sufism , and islamic philosophy . he has written works in persian , english , french , arabic and indonesian . jawad , haifaa '' seyyed hossein nasr and the study of religion in contemporary society '' in american journal of islamic social sciences vol . 22 no . 2 ( 2005 ) listed below are most of nasr 's works in english ( in chronological order ) , including translations , edited volumes , and festschriften in his honor : ; as author an introduction to islamic cosmological doctrines : conceptions of nature and methods used for its study by the ikhwan al-safa , al-biruni , and ibn sina ( 1964 ) three muslim sages : avicenna—suhrawardi—ibn arabi ( 1964 ) ideals and realities of islam ( 1966 ) science and civilization in islam , with a preface by giorgio de santillana ( 1968 ) islamic studies : essays on law and society , the sciences , and philosophy and sufism ( 1967 ) the encounter of man and nature : the spiritual crisis of modern man ( 1968 ) sufi essays ( 1972 ) islam and the plight of modern man ( 1975 ) islamic science : an illustrated study , with photographs by roland michaud ( 1976 ) sadr al-din shirazi and his transcendent theosophy : background , life and works , 2nd edition ( 1977 ) knowledge and the sacred : the gifford lectures , free download in several formats ( 1981 ) islamic life and thought ( 1981 ) islamic art and spirituality ( 1986 ) traditional islam in the modern world ( 1987 ) a young muslim 's guide to the modern world ( 1993 ) the need for a sacred science ( 1993 ) the islamic intellectual tradition in persia , edited by mehdi aminrazavi ( 1994 ) muhammad : man of god ( 1995 ) religion and the order of nature : the 1994 cadbury lectures at the university of birmingham ( 1996 ) poems of the way ; put to music by sami yusuf in songs of the way ( vol . 1 ) ( 1999 ) islam : religion , history , and civilization ( 2001 ) the heart of islam : enduring values for humanity ( 2002 ) free download islamic philosophy from its origin to the present : philosophy in the land of prophecy ( 2006 ) the pilgrimage of life and the wisdom of rumi : poems and translations ( 2007 ) the garden of truth : the vision and promise of sufism , islam 's mystical tradition ( 2007 ) islam , science , muslims , and technology : seyyed hossein nasr in conversation with muzaffar iqbal ( 2007 ) the essential seyyed hossein nasr , edited by william chittick ( 2007 ) islam in the modern world ( 2012 ) ; as editor an annotated bibliography of islamic science , edited with william chittick and peter zirnis ( 3 vols . , 1975 ) isma'ili contributions to islamic culture ( 1977 ) the essential frithjof schuon ( 1986 ) shi'ism : doctrines , thought , and spirituality , edited with seyyed vali reza nasr and hamid dabashi ( 1988 ) expectation of the millennium : shi'ism in history , edited with seyyed vali reza nasr and hamid dabashi ( 1989 ) islamic spirituality ( vol . 1 : foundations , 1987 ; vol . 2 : manifestations , 1990 ) religion of the heart : essays presented to frithjof schuon on his eightieth birthday , edited with william stoddart ( 1991 ) in quest of the sacred : the modern world in the light of tradition , edited with katherine o'brien ( 1994 ) history of islamic philosophy , edited with oliver leaman ( 1995 ) mecca the blessed , medina the radiant : the holiest cities of islam , photographs by kazuyoshi nomachi ; essay by seyyed hossein nasr ( 1997 ) an anthology of philosophy in persia , edited with mehdi aminrazavi ( 5 vols . , 1st in 1999 ) the essential sophia , edited with katherine o'brien ( 2006 ) the study quran ( editor-in-chief ) ; caner dagli , maria dakake , and joseph lumbard ( general editors ) ; mohammed rustom ( assistant editor ) ( 2015 ) ; as translator shi'ite islam by sayyid muhammad husayn tabataba ' i the book of metaphysical penetrations by mulla sadra ( edited , introduced , and annotated by i̇brahim kalın ) ; works about nasr the works of seyyed hossein nasr through his fortieth birthday , edited by william chittick knowledge is light : essays in honor of seyyed hossein nasr , edited by zailan moris beacon of knowledge - essays in honor of seyyed hossein nasr , edited by mohammad faghfoory islam , modernity , and the human sciences ( second part of the book ) , by ali zaidi religious pluralism in christian and islamic philosophy : the thought of john hick and seyyed hossein nasr , by adnan aslan in search of the sacred with ramin jahanbegloo from the pen of seyyed hossein nasr : a bibliography of his works through his eightieth year , edited by nicholas boylston , oludamini ogunnaike , and syed a.h . zaidi islam and modernity : dissecting the thought of seyyed hossein nasr : a discourse on the compatibility or incompatibility of islam with modernity ( lap lambert academic publishing , 2011 ) by musa yusuf owoyemi traditional islamic environmentalism : the vision of seyyed hossein nasr ( university press of america , 2013 ) by tarik m . quadir . see also .