Dionysius I of Syracuse

early life of dionysius the elder . dionysius began his working life as a clerk in a public office . because of his achievements in the war against carthage that began in 409 bc , he was elected supreme military commander in 406 bc . in the following year he seized total power and became tyrant . he was married to aristomache , and had a daughter by her , arete . he was married at the same time to doris of locris , who bore him his son , dionysius ii of syracuse . mercenaries and autocracy . dionysius ' rise to tyranny began when he was granted 600 mercenaries to guard his person after he staged a false attack on his own life . he managed to increase this guard to one thousand , and after gradually consolidating his power , he established himself as a tyrant . he employed a group of ancient mercenaries that most likely were sileraioi . he imposed his mercenaries on all parts of the polis community . this act made it clear that democracy had ended in syracuse . his rule was '' unconstitutional and illegitimate and could not fail to provoke rebellions among the partisans of democratic government '' . yalichev , serge . ( 1997 ) mercenaries of the ancient world , london : constable , page 210 dionysius ' position at home was threatened as early as 403 by those philosophically opposed to tyranny . sparta , which had in the past deposed tyrants from corinth to athens , did not damn dionysius and his autocracy . in fact , according to the historian diodorus siculus , relations between the two were very positive : when the lacedaemonians spartans had settled the affairs of greece to their own taste , they dispatched aristus , one of their distinguished men , to syracuse , ostensibly pretending that they would overthrow the government , but in truth with intent to increase the power of the tyranny ; for they hoped that by helping to establish the rule of dionysius they would obtain his ready service because of their benefactions to him . diodorus siculus 14.10.2 dionysius even received the privilege of conscripting mercenaries from lands under spartan authority . the demise of such a prominent democratic polis and the subsequent actions of dionysius represented a recurring norm in fourth-century greek states , thanks to the prevalence of mercenaries . the mercenary and the tyrant went hand in hand ; for example , polybius noted that '' the security of despots rests entirely on the loyalty and power of mercenaries '' . polybius 11.13 aristotle wrote that some form of '' guard '' ( i.e . , a personal army ) is needed for absolute kingship , aristotle politics 1286b28-40 and for an elected tyrant an optimum number of professional soldiers should be employed . too few would undermine the tyrant 's power , while too many would threaten the polis itself . the philosopher also notes that the people of syracuse were warned not to let dionysius conscript too many '' guards '' during his regime . . conquests . he fought a sicilian wars from 397 bc to 392 bc with mixed success ; his attempts to drive the carthaginians entirely out of the island of sicily failed , and at his death they were masters of at least a third of it . he also carried on an expedition against rhegium , capturing it and attacking its allied cities in magna graecia . in one campaign , in which he was joined by the lucanians , he devastated the territories of thurii and croton in an attempt to defend locri . thumb after a protracted siege , he took rhegium in 386 and sold the inhabitants as slaves . he also pillaged the temple of caere ( then allied with rome ) on the etruscan coast . in the adriatic , to facilitate trade , dionysius founded ancona , adria and issa . pseudoskylax , periplus after him , the adriatic became a sea of syracuse . in the corinthian war , he joined the side of the spartans and assisted them with mercenaries and ships ( which contributed in blocking the athenians ' supplies from the black sea forcing them to peace ) . in 385 bc , alcetas of epirus was a refugee in dionysius ' court . dionysius wanted a friendly monarch in epirus , so he sent 2,000 greek hoplites and 500 suits of greek armour to help the illyrians under bardyllis in attacking the molossians of epirus . they ravaged the region and killed 15,000 molossians , and alcetas regained his throne . a history of greece to 322 b.c . , by n . g . l . hammond . , 1986 , page 479 : '' . molossi , alcetas , who was a refugee at his court , dionysius sent a supply of arms and 2,000 troops to the illyrians , who burst into epirus and slaughtered 15,000 molossians . sparta intervened as soon as they had learned of the events and expelled the illyrians , but alcetas had regained his . '' he joined the illyrians in an attempt to plunder the temple of delphi . sparta intervened a history of greece to 322 b.c . , by n . g . l . hammond . , 1986 , page 470 , '' sparta had the alliance of thessaly , macedonia , and molossia in epirus , which she had helped to stave off an illyrian invasion . '' under agesilaus , however , and with aid from thessaly , macedonia , and the molossians themselves , the spartans expelled diodorus siculus , library , book 15.13.1 , fifteenth book of diodorus the illyrians . the cambridge ancient history , by john boardman , , 1923 , page 428 : '' bardyllis who seized power and set himself up as king of the dardani '' . '' forming an alliance with dionysius tyrant of syracuse he killed 15,000 molossians '' . death . according to some sources , after gaining a prize for one of his tragedies , “ the ransom of hector ” ( see intellectual tastes below ) , at a competition at the lenaia festival at athens , he was so elated that he drank himself to death . others report that he died of natural causes shortly after learning of his play 's victory in 367 bc . according to others , he was given an overdose of a sleeping potion by his physicians at the instigation of his son , dionysius the younger , who succeeded him as ruler of syracuse . a similar theory , proposed by justin , stated that dionysius '' was defeated and broken by constant warfare , and finally murdered by a conspiracy of his own kin '' . his life was written by philistus , but the work is not extant . . intellectual tastes . like pisistratus , tyrant of athens , dionysius was fond of having literary men about him , such as the historian philistus , the poet philoxenus , and the philosopher plato , but treated them in a most arbitrary manner . diodorus siculus relates in his bibliotheca historica that dionysius once had philoxenus arrested and sent to the quarries for voicing a bad opinion about his poetry . the next day , he released philoxenus because of his friends ' requests , and brought the poet before him for another poetry reading . dionysius read his own work and the audience applauded . when he asked philoxenus how he liked it , the poet turned to the guards and said '' take me back to the quarries . '' the library of history of diodorus siculus , book xv , chapter 6 . loeb classical library ( 1935 ) plutarch relates a version of this story in his moralia . on the fortune of alexander , second oration , chapter 1 . loeb classical library ( 1935 ) he also posed as an author and patron of literature ; his poems , severely criticized by philoxenus , were hissed at the olympic games , but having gained a prize for a tragedy on the ransom of hector at the lenaea at athens , he was so elated that he engaged in a debauch which , according to some sources , proved fatal . his name is also known for the legend of damon and pythias , and he features indirectly ( via his son ) in the legend of the sword of damocles . the ear of dionysius in syracuse is an artificial limestone cave named after dionysius . . historical significance and legacy . dionysius was one of the major figures in greek and european history . he was a champion of the struggle between europe and carthage for sicily , and was the first to bring the war into the enemy 's territory . he transformed syracuse into the most powerful city in the greek world , and made it the seat of an empire stretching from sicily across to italy . although this empire was technically a constitutional republic , in fact it was the first greek empire which was in effect a monarchy ; in this , dionysius foreshadowed the accomplishments of alexander the great and beyond him of augustus . he also foreshadowed these later rulers in being one of the first greek rulers to be given divine honors during his lifetime , and he made innovations in military technique , such as siege engines , which became a standard feature of warfare under alexander the great and later generals . it has been theorized that brennus was working in concert with dionysius , who sought to control all of sicily . rome had strong allegiances with messana , a small city state in north east sicily , which dionysius wanted to control . rome 's army being pinned down by brennus ' efforts would have assisted dionysius 's campaign . . walls of syracuse . in 402 bc dionysius i began building the circuit walls of syracuse , which included an impressive citadel , the euryalus fortress , protecting the plateau to the northwest of syracuse , the remains of which are still visible today . the walls were completed in 397 bc and had the following characteristics : length : 27 kilometers width at base : 3.3 m to 5.35 m number of known towers on circuit : 14 ( including euryalos ) largest tower : 8.5 m x 8.5 m deepest ditch ( at euryalos fortress ) : 9 m building so big a fortress would have involved installing well over 300 tons of stone every day for 5 years . . fictional references . dionysius i is mentioned in dante 's inferno ( of the divine comedy ) ( 1308–21 ) as a tyrant who indulged in blood and rapine and suffers in a river of boiling blood . a fictional version of dionysius is a character in mary renault 's historical novel the mask of apollo ( 1966 ) . he also features prominently in l . sprague de camp 's historical novel the arrows of hercules ( 1965 ) as a patron of inventors on the island of ortygia near syracuse . he is the main character in valerio massimo manfredi 's novel tyrant ( 2003 ) . he is also featured in the 1962 film damon and pythias . he also features in friedrich schiller 's '' die bürgschaft '' , as well as osamu dazai 's reworked version '' run , melos ! '' . see also . archimedes pyrrhus of epirus . notes . further reading . '' tyrant '' a novel by valerio massimo manfredi , lionel j . sanders : dionysius i of syracuse and greek tyranny . croom helm , london 1987 , lionel j . sanders : dionisio i di siracusa e la tirannide greca . translation of alessandro michelucci , eoti , sutri 2015 , karl friedrich stroheker : dionysios i . gestalt und geschichte des tyrannen von syrakus . franz steiner , wiesbaden 1958 karl friedrich stroheker : dionisio i . immagine e storia del tiranno di siracusa . translation of alessandro michelucci , eoti , sutri 2014 , . external links . style '' width:25 % ; text-align : center ; '' preceded by : democracy position previously held by thrasybulus in 465 bc style '' width:25 % ; text-align : center ; '' tyrant of syracuse 405 bc367 bc style '' width:25 % ; text-align : center ; '' succeeded by : dionysius the younger -