Battle of Varna

background . the hungarian kingdom fell into crisis after the death of king sigismund in 1437 . his son-in-law and successor , king albert , ruled for only two years and died in 1439 , leaving his widow elizabeth with an unborn child , ladislaus the posthumous . the hungarian noblemen then called the young władysław iii of poland to the throne of hungary , expecting his aid in defense against the ottomans . after his hungarian coronation , he never went back to his homeland again , assuming rule of the hungarian kingdom next to the influential nobleman john hunyadi . after failed expeditions in 1440–42 against belgrade and transylvania , and the defeats of the '' long campaign '' of hunyadi in 1442–43 , the ottoman sultan murad ii signed a ten-year truce with hungary . after he had made peace with the karaman emirate in anatolia in august 1444 , he resigned the throne to his twelve-year-old son mehmed ii . anticipating an ottoman invasion encouraged by the young and inexperienced new ottoman sultan , hungary co-operated with venice and pope eugene iv to organize a new crusader army led by hunyadi and władysław iii . on receipt of this news , mehmet ii understood that he was too young and inexperienced to successfully fight the coalition . he recalled murad ii to the throne to lead the army into battle , but murad ii refused . angry at his father , who had long since retired to a contemplative life in southwestern anatolia , mehmed ii wrote , '' if you are the sultan , come and lead your armies . if i am the sultan i hereby order you to come and lead my armies . '' it was only after receiving this letter that murad ii agreed to lead the ottoman army . preparations . the mixed papal army was composed mainly of hungarian , polish , bohemian ( whose combined armies numbered 16,000 ) and wallachian ( 7,000 ) forces , with smaller detachments of czechs , papal knights , teutonic knights , bosnians , croats , bulgarians , lithuanians and ruthenians . magyarország hadtörténete ( 1984 ) , 102.-103 . pg . papal , venetian and burgundian ships under alvise loredan had blockaded the dardanelles as the hungarian army was to advance on varna , while a second flotilla comprising six ships ( two burgundian , two ragusan and two byzantine ) blockaded the bosphorus . both failed , and the main ottoman force from asia , including the sultan , crossed the bosphorus on 18 october 1444 . , 437.-438 . pg . the hungarian advance was rapid , ottoman fortresses were bypassed , while local bulgarians from vidin , oryahovo , and nicopolis joined the army ( fruzhin , son of ivan shishman , also participated in the campaign with his own guard ) . on october 10 near nicopolis , some 7,000 wallachian cavalrymen under mircea ii , one of vlad dracul 's sons , also joined . armenians in hungary also took part in the wars of their new country against the ottomans as early as the battle of varna in 1444 , when some armenians were seen amongst the christian forces . . . deployment . late on november 9 , a large ottoman army of around 60,000 men approached varna from the west . at a supreme military council called by hunyadi during the night , the papal legate , cardinal julian cesarini , insisted on a quick withdrawal . however , the christians were caught between the black sea , lake varna , the steep wooded slopes of the franga plateau ( 356 m high ) , and the enemy . cesarini then proposed a defense using the wagenburg of the hussites until the arrival of the christian fleet . the hungarian magnates and the croatian and czech commanders backed him , but the young ( 20-year-old ) władysław and hunyadi rejected the defensive tactics . hunyadi declared : '' to escape is impossible , to surrender is unthinkable . let us fight with bravery and honor our arms . '' władysław accepted this position and gave him the command . andreas del palatio states that hunyadi commanded the '' wallachian army '' indicating a large romanian component in hunyadi 's personal army . istoria romaniei , vol ii , p . 440 , 1960 in the morning of november 10 , hunyadi deployed the army of some 20,000 crusaders as an arc between lake varna and the franga plateau ; the line was about 3.5 & nbsp ; km long . two banners with a total of 3,500 men from the king 's polish and hungarian bodyguards , hungarian royal mercenaries , and banners of hungarian nobles held the center . the wallachian cavalry was left in reserve behind the center . the right flank that lined up the hill towards the village of kamenar numbered 6,500 men in 5 banners . bishop jan dominek of varadin with his personal banner led the force ; cesarini commanded a banner of german mercenaries and a bosnian one . the bishop of eger led his own banner , and the military governor of slavonia , ban franco talotsi , commanded one croatian banner . the left flank , a total of 5,000 men in 5 banners , was led by michael szilágyi , hunyadi 's brother in law , and was made up of hunyadi 's transylvanians , bulgarians , german mercenaries and banners of hungarian magnates . behind the hungarians , closer to the black sea and the lake , was the wagenburg , defended by 300 or 600 czech and ruthenian mercenaries under hetman ceyka , along with poles , lithuanians and wallachians . every wagon was manned by 7 to 10 soldiers and the wagenburg was equipped with bombards . the ottoman center included the janissaries and levies from rumelia deployed around two thracian burial mounds . murad observed and directed the battle from one of them . the janissaries dug in behind ditches and two palisades . the right wing consisted of kapikulus and sipahis from rumelia , and the left wing was made up by akıncıs , sipahis from anatolia , and other forces . janissary archers and akıncı light cavalry were deployed on the franga plateau . battle . the light ottoman cavalry assaulted the croats of ban franco talotsi . christians from the left riposted with bombards and firearms and stopped the attack . christian soldiers chased the ottomans in a disorderly pursuit . the anatolian cavalry ambushed them from the flank . the christian right wing attempted to flee to the small fortress of galata on the other side of varna bay , but most of them were slain in the marshland around varna lake and the river devnya , where cesarini also met his end . only ban talotsi 's troops managed to withdraw behind the wagenburg . the other ottoman flank assaulted the hungarians and bulgarians of michael szilagyi . their push was stopped and turned back ; then sipahis attacked again . hunyadi decided to help and advised władysław to wait until he returned ; then advanced with two cavalry companies . the young king , ignoring hunyadi 's advice , rushed 500 of his polish knights against the ottoman center . they attempted to overrun the janissary infantry and take murad prisoner , and almost succeeded , but in front of murad 's tent władysław 's horse either fell into a trap or was stabbed , and the king was slain by mercenary kodja hazar , who beheaded him while doing so . the remaining coalition cavalry were demoralized and defeated by the ottomans . on his return , hunyadi tried frantically to salvage the king 's body , but all he could accomplish was to organize the retreat of the remains of his army ; it suffered thousands of casualties in the chaos , and was virtually annihilated . neither the head nor body of the king were ever found . the minnesang michael beheim wrote a song based on the story of hans mergest who spent 16 years in ottoman captivity after the battle . aftermath . the death of władysław left hungary in the hands of the four-year-old ladislas the posthumous . he was succeeded in poland by casimir iv jagiellon after a three-year interregnum . murad 's casualties at varna were so heavy , it was not until three days later that he realized he was victorious . kenneth meyer setton , the papacy and the levant , 1204-1571 : the fifteenth century , vol . ii , ( american philosophical society , 1978 ) , 90 . nevertheless , the ottoman victory in varna , followed by the ottoman victory in the battle of kosovo ( 1448 ) in 1448 , deterred the european states from sending any substantial military assistance to the byzantines during the ottoman fall of constantinople in 1453 . legacy . in the aftermath , the ottomans had removed a significant opposition to their expansion into central and eastern europe ; subsequent battles forced a large number of europeans to become ottoman subjects . the fallen polish king was named władysław iii warneńczyk in memory of the battle . the battle of varna is commemorated on the tomb of the unknown soldier , warsaw , with the inscription '' warna 10 xi 1444 '' . references . external links . oszk.hu : battle map of the battle of varna— — ervin liptai ( 1984 ) , magyarország hadtörténete i . zrínyi katonai kiadó , budapest . —