Last Judgment

in the baha ' i faith . the bab and baha ' u'llah taught that there is one unfolding religion of one god and that once in about every 1,000 years a new messenger prophet , rasul al-nabii , or as baha'is call them , manifestation of god , comes to mankind to renew the kingdom of god on earth and establish a new covenant between humanity and god . each time a new manifestation of god comes it is considered the day of judgment , day of resurrection , or 'the last hour ' for the believers and unbelievers of the previous manifestation of god . the bab told of the judgment : the eastern orthodox and catholic teachings of the last judgment differ only on the exact nature of the in-between state of purgatory/abraham 's bosom . these differences may only be apparent and not actual due to differing theological terminology and evolving tradition . eastern orthodoxy . the eastern orthodox church teaches that there are two judgments : the first , or '' particular '' judgment , is that experienced by each individual at the time of his or her death , at which time god will decide where the orthodox do not have an understanding of '' purgatory . '' rather , they believe that the souls of the departed will await the final judgment either in heaven or hell – but that there are different levels of heaven and different levels of hell – and they believe that the prayers of the church can help to ease the sufferings of the souls , but do not dogmatize as to how exactly this is accomplished . one is to spend the time until the second coming of christ ( see hades in christianity ) . this judgment is generally believed to occur on the fortieth day after death . the second , '' general '' or '' final '' judgment will occur after the second coming . although in modern times some have attempted to introduce the concept of soul sleep into orthodox thought about life after death , it has never been a part of traditional orthodox teaching , and it even contradicts the orthodox understanding of the intercession of the saints . eastern orthodoxy teaches that salvation is bestowed by god as a free gift of divine grace , which can not be earned , and by which forgiveness of sins is available to all . however , the deeds done by each person are believed to affect how he will be judged , following the parable of the sheep and the goats . how forgiveness is to be balanced against behavior is not well-defined in scripture , judgment in the matter being solely christ 's . similarly , although orthodoxy teaches that salvation is obtained only through christ and his church , the fate of those outside the church at the last judgment is left to the mercy of god and is not declared . image : vasnetsov last judgment.jpg thumb viktor vasnetsov 's the last judgment , 1904 . icons . the theme of the last judgment is extremely important in orthodoxy . traditionally , an orthodox church will have a fresco or mosaic of the last judgment on the back ( western ) wall so that the faithful , as they leave the services , are reminded that they will be judged by what they do during this earthly life . the icon of the last judgment traditionally depicts christ pantokrator , enthroned in glory on a white throne , surrounded by the theotokos ( virgin mary ) , john the baptist , apostles , saints and angels . beneath the throne the scene is divided in half with the '' mansions of the righteous '' , i.e . , those who have been saved , to jesus ' right ( the viewer 's left ) , and the torments of those who have been damned to his left . separating the two is the lake of fire which proceeds from jesus ' left foot . for more detail , see below . hymnography . the theme of the last judgment is found in the funeral and pannikhida of the church , and is a major theme in the services during great lent . the second sunday before the beginning of great lent is dedicated to the last judgment . it is also found in the hymns of the octoechos used on saturdays throughout the year . lutheranism . lutherans do not believe in any sort of earthly millennial kingdom of christ either before or after his second coming on the last day . on the last day , , all the dead will be resurrected . , , , , their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies they had before dying . , , , , , , , the bodies will then be changed , those of the wicked to a state of everlasting shame and torment , , , those of the righteous to an everlasting state of celestial glory . , , , , , , , after the resurrection of all the dead , , , and the change of those still living , , all nations shall be gathered before christ , , , , , and he will separate the righteous from the wicked . , christ will publicly judge , , , all people by the testimony of their faith , , , – the good works , , of the righteous in evidence of their faith , , , , , , and the sin of the wicked in evidence of their unbelief . , , , he will judge in righteousness , , in the presence of all and men and angels , , and his final judgement will be just damnation to everlasting punishment for the wicked and a gracious gift of life everlasting to the righteous . , , , . esoteric christian tradition . although the last judgment is preached by a great part of christian mainstream churches ; the esoteric christian traditions like the essenes and rosicrucians , the spiritualist movement , and some liberal theologies reject the traditional conception of the last judgment , as inconsistent with an all-just and loving god , in favor of some form of universal salvation . max heindel , a danish-american astrologer and mystic , taught that when the day of christ comes , marking the end of the current fifth or aryan epoch , the human race will have to pass a final examination or last judgment , where , as in the days of noah , max heindel , the days of noah and of christ in teachings of an initiate ( posthumous publication of collected works ) , . the chosen ones or pioneers , the sheep , will be separated from the goats or stragglers , cf . by being carried forward into the next evolutionary period , inheriting the ethereal conditions of the new galilee in the making . nevertheless , it is emphasized that all beings of the human evolution will ultimately be saved in a distant future as they acquire a superior grade of consciousness and altruism . at the present period , the process of human evolution is conducted by means of successive rebirths in the physical world max heindel , the rosicrucian christianity lectures ( the riddle of life and death ) , 1908 , and the salvation is seen as being mentioned in revelation 3:12 ( kjv ) , which states '' him that overcometh will i make a pillar in the temple of my god and he shall go no more out '' . however , this western esoteric tradition states – like those who have had a near-death experience – that after the death of the physical body , at the end of each physical lifetime and after the life review period ( which occurs before the silver cord is broken ) , a judgment occurs , more akin to a final review or end report over one 's life , where the life of the subject is fully evaluated and scrutinized . max heindel , death and life in purgatory – life and activity in heaven this judgment is seen as being mentioned in hebrews 9:27 , which states that '' it is appointed unto men once to die , but after this the judgment '' . artistic representations . image : northleigh doom1.jpg thumb doom painting , st mary 's church , north leigh , oxfordshire , 15th century thumb in art , the last judgment is a common theme in medieval and renaissance religious iconography . like most early iconographic innovations , its origins stem from byzantine art , although it was a much less common subject than in the west during the middle ages . remarkably , only three byzantine icons of the subject survive , all at st catherine 's monastery . daly , 252 in western christianity , it is often the subject depicted in medieval cathedrals and churches , either outside on the central pediment of the entrance or inside on the ( rear ) west wall , so that the congregation attending church saw the image on either entering of leaving . in the 15th century it also appeared as the central section of a triptych on altarpieces , with the side panels showing heaven and hell , as in the beaune altarpiece or a triptych by hans memling . the usual composition has christ seated high in the centre , flanked by angels , the virgin mary , and john the evangelist who are supplicating on behalf of those being judged ( in what is called a deesis group in orthodoxy ) . saint michael is often shown , either weighing the deceased on scales or directing matters , and there might be a large crowd of saints , angels , and the saved around the central group . at the bottom of the composition a crowd of the deceased are shown , often with some rising from their graves . these are being sorted and directed by angels into the saved and the damned . almost always the saved are on the viewer 's left ( so on the right hand of christ ) , and the damned on the right . the saved are led up to heaven , often shown as a fortified gateway , while the damned are handed over to devils who herd them down into hell on the right ; the composition therefore has a circular pattern of movement . often the damned disappear into a hellmouth , the mouth of a huge monster , an image of anglo-saxon origin . the damned often include figures of high rank , wearing crowns , mitres , and often the papal tiara during the lengthy periods when there were antipopes , or in protestant depictions . there may be detailed depictions of the torments of the damned . the most famous renaissance depiction is michelangelo buonarroti 's the last judgment in the sistine chapel . included in this fresco is his self-portrait , as bartholomew 's flayed skin . the image in eastern orthodox icons has a similar composition , but usually less space is devoted to hell , and there are often a larger number of scenes ; the orthodox readiness to label figures with inscriptions often allows more complex compositions . there is more often a large group of saints around christ ( which may include animals ) , and the hetoimasia or '' empty throne '' , containing a cross , is usually shown below christ , often guarded by archangels ; figures representing adam and eve may kneel below it or below christ . a distinctive feature of the orthodox composition , especially in russian icons , is a large band leading like a chute from the feet of christ down to hell ; this may resemble a striped snake or be a '' river of fire '' coloured flame red . if it is shown as a snake , it attempts to bite adam on the heel but , as he is protected by christ , is unsuccessful . thumb . swedenborgian . emanuel swedenborg ( 1688-1772 ) had a revelation that the church has gone through a series of last judgments . first , during noah 's flood , then moses on mount sinai , jesus ' crucifixion , and finally in 1757 , which is the final last judgment . these occur in a realm outside earth and heaven , and are spiritual in nature . in islam . according to islamic eschatology , the day of resurrection ( yawm al-qiyāmah ) aka '' the day of judgment '' ( yawm ad-din ) is believed to be god 's final assessment of humanity . the sequence of events ( according to the most commonly held belief ) is the annihilation of all creatures , resurrection of the body , and the judgment of all sentient creatures . it is a time where everyone would be shown his or her deeds and actions with justice . the exact time when these events will occur is unknown , however there are said to be major and minor signs which are to occur near the time of qiyammah ( end time ) . it is believed that prior to the time of qiyammah , two dangerous , evil tribes called yajooj and majooj are released from a dam-resembling wall that allah makes stronger everyday . other signs are mentioned like the blowing of the first trumpet by an archangel israfil , and the coming of rain of mercy that will cause humans to grow from a tiny part of their tailbone , which was said to never degenerate , even in the grave , despite the decay of the human body . how is it possible that the coccyx does not decay at all ? what if the body was cremated ? islam stack exchange many verses of the quran , especially the earlier ones , are dominated by the idea of the nearing of the day of resurrection . isaac hasson , last judgment , encyclopaedia of the qur'an l . gardet , qiyama , encyclopaedia of the qur'an belief in judgment day is considered a fundamental tenet of faith by all muslims . it is one of the six articles of faith . the trials and tribulations associated with it are detailed in both the quran and the hadith , sayings of muhammad . hence they were added in the commentaries of the islamic expositors and scholarly authorities such as al-ghazali , ibn kathir , ibn majah , muhammad al-bukhari , and ibn khuzaymah who explain them in detail . every human , muslim and non-muslim alike , is believed to be held accountable for their deeds and are believed to be judged by god accordingly . in judaism . in judaism , beliefs vary about a last day of judgment for all mankind . some rabbis hold that there will be such a day following the resurrection of the dead . others hold that this accounting and judgment happens when one dies . still others hold that the last judgment only applies to the gentiles and not the jewish people . . in zoroastrianism . frashokereti is the zoroastrian doctrine of a final renovation of the universe , when evil will be destroyed , and everything else will be then in perfect unity with god ( ahura mazda ) . the doctrinal premises are ( 1 ) good will eventually prevail over evil ; ( 2 ) creation was initially perfectly good , but was subsequently corrupted by evil ; ( 3 ) the world will ultimately be restored to the perfection it had at the time of creation ; ( 4 ) the '' salvation for the individual depended on the sum of that person 's thoughts , words and deeds , and there could be no intervention , whether compassionate or capricious , by any divine being to alter this . '' thus , each human bears responsibility for their own fate , and simultaneously shares in the responsibility for the fate of the world . . . crack of doom . in english , crack of doom is an old term used for the day of judgement , referring in particular to the blast of trumpets signalling the end of the world in chapter 8 of the book of revelation . a '' crack '' had the sense of any loud noise , preserved in the phrase '' crack of thunder '' , oed , '' crack '' and '' doom '' was a term for the last judgement , as end time still is . the phrase is famously used by william shakespeare in macbeth , where on the heath the three witches show macbeth the line of kings that will issue from banquo : : '' why do you show me this ? a fourth ! start , eyes ! : what , will the line stretch out to the crack of doom ? : another yet ! a seventh ! i 'll see no more . '' ( act 4 , scene 1 , 112–117 ) the meaning was that banquo 's line will endure until the judgement day , flattery for king james i , who claimed descent from banquo . music . marc-antoine charpentier , extremum dei judicium h.401 , oratorio for soloists , chorus , 2 treble instruments , and continuo . ( 1680 ) giacomo carissimi , extremum dei judicium , for 3 chorus , 2 violins and organ . . see also . apocatastasis atonement in christianity kingdom of god ( christianity ) list of dates predicted for apocalyptic events new jerusalem new world order ( conspiracy ) plan of salvation ( latter day saints ) mormon view problem of evil ragnarök yom kippur . references . notes . external links . catholic encyclopedia '' general judgment '' judgment day past and future – slideshow by life magazine swedenborg , e . the last judgment and babylon destroyed . all the predictions in the apocalypse are at this day fulfilled ( swedenborg foundation 1951 )