Book of Jubilees

manuscripts . until the discovery of extensive fragments among the dead sea scrolls ( dss ) , the only surviving manuscripts of jubilees were four complete ge'ez texts dating to the 15th and 16th centuries , and several quotations by the church fathers such as epiphanius , justin martyr , origen as well as diodorus of tarsus , isidore of alexandria , isidore of seville , eutychius of alexandria , john malalas , george syncellus , and george kedrenos . there is also a preserved fragment of a latin translation of the greek that contains about a quarter of the whole work . the ethiopic texts , now numbering twenty-seven , are the primary basis for translations into english . passages in the texts of jubilees that are directly parallel to verses in genesis do not directly reproduce either of the two surviving manuscript traditions . consequently , even before the qumran discoveries , r.h . charles had deduced that the hebrew original had used an otherwise unrecorded text for genesis and for the early chapters of exodus , one independent either of the masoretic text or of the hebrew text that was the basis for the septuagint . according to one historian , the variation among parallel manuscript traditions that are exhibited by the septuagint compared with the masoretic text , and which are embodied in the further variants among the dead sea scrolls , demonstrates that even canonical hebrew texts did not possess any single '' authorized '' manuscript tradition in the first centuries bc . robin lane fox , a classicist and historian , discusses these multifarious sources of old and new testaments in layman 's terms in unauthorized version ( 1992 ) . others write about the existence of three main textual manuscript traditions ( namely the babylonian , samarian and pre-masoretic '' proto '' textual traditions ) . although the pre-masoretic text may have indeed been authoritative back then , arguments can be made for and against this concept . hershel shanks , an historian and archaeological scholar , provides various articles that explore this issue in great depth , from various experts in the field of dead sea scrolls research , in his book understanding the dead sea scrolls : a reader from the biblical archaeology review , june 29 , 1993 '' between 1947 and 1956 , approximately 15 jubilees scrolls were found in five caves at qumran , all written in hebrew . the large number of manuscripts ( more than for any biblical books except for psalms , deuteronomy , isaiah , exodus , and genesis , in descending order ) indicates that jubilees was widely used at qumran . a comparison of the qumran texts with the ethiopic version , performed by james vanderkam , found that the ethiopic was in most respects an accurate and literalistic translation . vanderkam , '' the book of jubilees '' in l . h . schiffman and j . c . vanderkam ( eds . ) , encyclopedia of the dead sea scrolls , oxford university press ( 2000 ) , vol . i , p . 435 . . origins . robert henry charles ( 1855–1931 ) became the first biblical scholar to propose an origin for jubilees . charles suggested that the author of jubilees may have been a pharisee and that jubilees was the product of the midrash which had already been worked on in the tanakh/old testament books of chronicles . with the discovery of the dead sea scrolls ( dss ) at qumran in 1947 , charles ' pharisaic hypothesis of the origin of jubilees has been almost completely abandoned . the dating of jubilees has been problematic for biblical scholars . while the oldest extant copies of jubilees can be assigned on the basis of the handwriting to about 100 bc , there is much evidence to suggest jubilees was written prior to this date . vanderkam ( 1989 , 2001 ) , p.18 ; , 86f . jubilees could not have been written very long prior . jubilees at 4:17-25 records that enoch '' saw in a vision what has happened and what will occur '' , and the book contains many points of information otherwise found earliest in the enochian '' animal apocalypse '' ( 1 enoch chapters 83-90 ) , such as enoch 's wife being edna . , 156 . the animal apocalypse claims to predict the maccabean revolt ( which occurred 167-160 bc ) and is commonly dated to that time . boccaccini , 81f . independently of one another . the direction of dependence has been controversial , kugel , 252 , n.37 ; hanneken , 143 . but the consensus since 2008 has been that the animal apocalypse came first and jubilees after . as a result , general reference works such as the oxford annotated bible and the mercer bible dictionary conclude the work can be dated to 160–150 bc . vanderkam ( 1989 , 2001 ) , pp . 17–21 . . subsequent use . the hasmoneans adopted jubilees immediately , and it became a source for the aramaic levi document . kugel , 167 jubilees remained a point of reference for priestly circles ( although they disputed its calendric proposal ) , and the temple scroll and '' epistle of enoch '' ( 1 enoch 91:1–10 , 92:3–93:10 , 91:11–92:2 , 93:11–105:3 ) are based on jubilees . boccacini 99–101 , 104–113 respectively it is the source for certain of the testaments of the twelve patriarchs , for instance that of reuben . kugel , 110 there is no official record of it in pharisaic or rabbinic sources . it was among several books that the sanhedrin left out when the bible was canonized . sub rosa , many of the traditions which jubilees includes for the first time , are echoed in later jewish sources , including some 12th-century midrashim which may have had access to a hebrew copy . the sole exception within judaism , the beta israel jews formerly of ethiopia , regard the ge'ez text as canonical . wolf leslau , falasha anthology ( yale 1951 ) , xxvii , xxxviii , xlii , 9 it appears that early church fathers held the book of jubilees in high regard , as many of them cited and alluded to jubilees in their writing . jan van reeth argues that the book of jubilees had great influence on the formation of islam . jubilees insists ( in chapter & nbsp ; 6 ) on a 364 & nbsp ; day yearly calendar , made up of four quarters of 13 weeks each , rather than a year of 12 & nbsp ; lunar months , which it says is off by 10 & nbsp ; days per year ( the actual number being about 11¼ & nbsp ; days ) . it also insists on a '' double sabbath '' each year being counted as only one day to arrive at this computation . jubilees 7:20–29 is possibly an early reference to the noahide laws . . sources . jubilees bases its take on enoch on the '' book of watchers '' , 1 enoch 1–36 . gabriele boccacini , beyond the essene hypothesis ( eerdmans : 1998 ) its sequence of events leading to the flood match those of the '' dream visions '' , 1 enoch 83–90 .