Queensway tunnel

history . image : liverpool queensway tunnel ventilation tower and offices pierhead.jpg thumb left george 's dock building , pier head the first tunnel under the river mersey was for the mersey railway in 1886 . the first tunnel crossing was proposed in 1825 , and again in 1827 . a report in 1830 rejected the road tunnel due to concerns about building damage . during the 1920s there were concerns about the long queues of cars and lorries at the mersey ferry terminal , so once royal assent to a parliamentary bill was received , construction of the first mersey road tunnel started in 1925 , to a design by consulting engineer sir basil mott . mott supervised the construction in association with john brodie , who , as city engineer of liverpool , had co-ordinated the feasibility studies made by consultant engineers mott , hay and anderson . the main contractor was edmund nuttall . in 1928 the two pilot tunnels met to within less than . the tunnel entrances , toll booths and ventilation building exteriors were designed by architect herbert james rowse , who is frequently but incorrectly credited with the whole civil engineering project . their decoration is by edmund thompson . these are grade ii listed buildings . more than 1.2 & nbsp ; million tons of rock , gravel , and clay were excavated ; some of it was used to build otterspool promenade . of the 1,700 & nbsp ; men who worked on the tunnel during the nine years of its construction , 17 were killed . at the time of its opening it was the longest road tunnel in the world , a title it held for 14 & nbsp ; years until the opening of the vielha tunnel in catalonia , spain in 1948 , though it remained the longest underwater tunnel as of 1955 . the tunnel , which cost a total of £8 & nbsp ; million , was opened on 18 & nbsp ; july 1934 by king george v ; the opening ceremony was watched by 200,000 & nbsp ; people . at the time it was known as the eighth wonder of the world . by the 1960s , traffic volume had increased , and , in 1971 , the kingsway tunnel opened to relieve congestion . description . the tunnel is long . it contains a single carriageway of four lanes , two in each direction . different height restrictions apply to the nearside and offside lanes in each direction , because of the curvature of the tunnel . these are and respectively , and there is a 3.5 & nbsp ; t weight limit for goods vehicles . all buses are required to use the offside lane , regardless of their height . lane signals ( consisting of an illuminated green arrow or red cross ) are displayed at regular intervals , although in normal circumstances none of the lanes are currently used bidirectionally . this is in contrast to the kingsway tunnel , where lanes in toll concourse are alternated to prioritise higher traffic in one direction during peak hours . the tunnel has two branches leading off the main tunnel to the dock areas on both sides of the river . the birkenhead branch tunnel ( known as the rendel street branch , or dock exit ) was closed in 1965 . when travelling in the birkenhead direction , the branch can still be seen inside the tunnel on the right just before the left hand bend towards the birkenhead exit . the exit of this branch can also be seen on the outside from rendel street near the junction with marcus street , just north of cleveland street in birkenhead . this branch also carried 2 way traffic , single lane each way . it was also controlled by traffic lights inside the tunnel . this branch mainly served birkenhead docks and for people travelling to the wirral resort of new brighton . these are now best served by the kingsway tunnel . the liverpool branch tunnel remains in use , in the exit direction only . it emerges opposite the liver building , next to the atlantic tower hotel and church of our lady and saint nicholas . originally , it carried two-way traffic and the junction inside the tunnel was controlled by traffic lights , but this arrangement was discontinued to reduce the delays brought on by increasing traffic levels . the lighting inside the tunnel was updated in 1981 to replace the amber fluorescent tubes on the walls of the tunnel . the reason given for the change was that the old lighting was ineffective and inefficient . it also caused a flicker effect on vehicle windscreens , which could induce epileptic reactions in susceptible people . tolls . tolls have been a feature of tunnel use since the queensway tunnel opened in 1934 . although residents were originally told tolls would be removed when debts were repaid , this position was dropped long ago . debts and tolls were increased when the kingsway tunnel was built in 1971 to relieve congestion in the first tunnel . the county of merseyside act 1980 enshrined in law the right to continue collecting tolls once the debts were repaid . the later 2004 act created a legal position where tolls charged must rise in line with the retail price index ( rpi ) as published in november . david bartlett ( 10 january 2013 ) '' mersey tunnels still owe £58m but tolls income is being used elsewhere '' liverpool echo : retrieved 6 december 2019 . ventilation . as a roadway the tunnel requires ventilation to clear vehicle exhaust fumes . as originally designed the tunnel would have used forced air for ventilation ; fumes and noxious gases were simply to be expelled through the tunnel exits . however in an incident in the liberty tunnel in pittsburgh in may 1924 , inadequate ventilation led to a number of drivers being overcome by carbon monoxide poisoning , though there were no fatalities ; this led the queensway engineers to re-examine the issue and to conduct experiments in a completed section under hamilton square . this led to the installation of extractors in the planned ventilation stations , adding to their size and complexity , and also adding considerably to the budget . ian jackson , simon pepper , peter richmond herbert rowse , p46 ( 2019 ) historic england the tunnel currently has six ventilation shafts , three on each side of the river . on the wirral side the main shaft is at woodside , with another ( before the main exit ) in sidney street , while the dock exit branch is served by the tower in taylor street . on the liverpool side the main shaft is at the pier head , in the george 's dock building , with another ( before the main exit ) in north john street , and the strand exit branch is served by the tower in fazakerley street . the georges dock building also houses offices of the tunnels authority and of the tunnels police force . all the ventilation buildings were designed by herbert rowse , chief architect for the queensway tunnel exteriors , and all are grade ii listed . file : queensway tunnel ventilator , taylor street 4.jpg taylor street ventilator , wirral file : queensway tunnel ventilator , sidney street 1.jpg sidney street ventilator , wirral file : birkenhead tower seen from liverpool - panoramio.jpg woodside main ventilator , wirral file : george 's dock ventilation and control station 2018-1.jpg georges dock main ventilator , liverpool file : ventilation station , north john street.jpg north john street ventilator , liverpool file : queensway tunnel ventilator , fazakerley street.jpg fazakerley street ventilator , liverpool . today . in april 2004 construction began on seven emergency refuges below the road deck , each capable of holding 180 people , as part of a £9 million project to bring the tunnel into line with the highest european safety standards . each refuge is long and wide , accessible from the main tunnel walls . the refuges have fire resistant doors , ramps for wheelchair access , a supply of bottled water , a toilet , and a video link to the mersey tunnels police control room . all seven refuges are linked by a walkway below the road surface , with exits at the liverpool and birkenhead ends . in 2012 the tunnel was refurbished , with 5999 added panels & ndash ; ceramic steel cladding replacing the old plastic corrugated wall cladding to improve lighting and to give the tunnel a 21st century look . as of april 2018 the toll is £1.80 per journey for a single passenger car of typical size , with progressively higher tolls for larger vehicles ; solo motorcycles are free . average daily traffic through the tunnel currently stands at 35,000 vehicles , which equates to just under 12.8 million per year . . use in film . in september 2009 , a scene from harry potter and the deathly hallows – part 1 set in the dartford crossing was filmed in queensway tunnel , where harry skips on a bus while on hagrid 's enchanted motorbike was filmed in the tunnel . in 2012 the tunnel was used for the filming of a chase scene for fast & furious 6 . in march 2018 , the tunnel was used for the filming of yesterday , directed by danny boyle . the two main characters are frolicking in an empty tunnel when the bright yellow words '' hello goodbye '' are rolling through the tunnel . also in 2018 the tunnel was a location for the bbc tv series the city and the city , where it served as the gateway between the two cities . in popular culture . the dubliners popularised the song '' i wish i was back in liverpool '' which includes a verse about the building of the queensway tunnel . see also . architecture of liverpool listed buildings in birkenhead . references . further reading . moore , jim ( 1998 ) underground liverpool , liverpool : bluecoat press , ian jackson , simon pepper , peter richmond : herbert rowse ( 2019 ) historic england . external links . official website of the mersey tunnels