Agape feast

history . early christianity . the earliest reference to a meal of the type referred to as agape is in paul the apostle 's first epistle to the corinthians , although the term can only be inferred vaguely from its prominence in 1 cor 13 . many new testament scholars hold that the christians of corinth met in the evening and had a common meal including sacramental action over bread and wine . indicates that the rite was associated with participation in a meal of a more general character . it apparently involved a full meal , with the participants bringing their own food but eating in a common room . perhaps predictably enough , it could at times deteriorate into merely an occasion for eating and drinking , or for ostentatious displays by the wealthier members of the community , as happened in corinth , drawing the criticisms of paul : '' i hear that when you come together as a church , there are divisions among you , and to some extent i believe it . no doubt there have to be differences among you to show which of you have god 's approval . when you come together , it is not the lord 's supper you eat , for as you eat , each of you goes ahead without waiting for anybody else . one remains hungry , another gets drunk . do n't you have homes to eat and drink in ? or do you despise the church of god and humiliate those who have nothing ? '' the term agape ( ἀγάπη ) is also used in reference to meals in and according to a few manuscripts of soon after the year 100 , ignatius of antioch refers to the agape feast . in letter 97 to trajan , pliny the younger perhaps indicates , in about 112 , that such a meal was normally taken separately from the eucharistic celebration ( although he is silent about its nomenclature ) : he speaks of the christians separating after having offered prayer , on the morning of a fixed day , to christ as god , and reassembling later for a common meal . '' they met on a stated day before it was light , and addressed a form of prayer to christ , as to a divinity , binding themselves by a solemn oath , not for the purposes of any wicked design , but never to commit any fraud , theft , or adultery , never to falsify their word , nor deny a trust when they should be called upon to deliver it up ; after which it was their custom to separate , and then reassemble , to eat in common a harmless meal '' . the rescheduling of the agape meal was triggered by corinthian selfishness and gluttony . tertullian too seems to write of these meals , though what he describes is not quite clear . clement of alexandria ( c . 150–211/216 ) distinguished so-called agape meals of luxurious character from the agape ( love ) '' which the food that comes from christ shows that we ought to partake of '' . accusations of gross indecency were sometimes made against the form that more indulgent banquets took . reiterated the prohibition of feasting in churches , and the trullan council of 692 decreed that honey and milk were not to be offered on the altar ( canon 57 ) , and that those who held love feasts in churches should be excommunicated ( canon 74 ) . the ancient saint thomas christians of india continued to celebrate their agapa feasts , using their typical dish called appam . . medieval georgia . in the medieval georgian orthodox church , the term agapi referred to a commemorative meal or distribution of victuals , offered to clergymen , the poor , or passers-by , accompanying the funeral service on the anniversary of the deceased . the permanent celebration of these meals was assured by legacies and foundations . . reformation . after the protestant reformation there was a move amongst some groups of christians to try to return to the practices of the apostolic age . one such group was the schwarzenau brethren ( 1708 ) who counted a lovefeast consisting of feet-washing , the agape meal , and the eucharist among their '' outward yet sacred '' ordinances . another was the moravians led by count zinzendorf who adopted a form consisting of the sharing of a simple meal , and then testimony or a devotional address were given and letters from missionaries read . john wesley , the founder of methodism , travelled to america in the company of moravians and greatly admired their faith and practice . after his conversion in 1738 he introduced the love feast to what became known as the methodist movement . due to the lack of ordained ministers within methodism , the love feast took on a life of its own , as there were very few opportunities to take eucharist . as such , the primitive methodists celebrated the love feast , before it lessened in the nineteenth century as the revival cooled . practice by denomination . oriental orthodox . at least some of the oriental orthodox churches continue the tradition of this meal , including the saint thomas christians of india . their lovefeasts are attended by individuals who travel great distances for it , and are presided over by a priest . they are often held when a new priest is ordained and those in attendance bring gifts for him . the ethiopian orthodox church has also continued to celebrate the agape feast , which is held every saturday , and many coptic orthodox churches celebrate it as well . . brethren . the schwarzenau brethren groups ( the largest being the church of the brethren ) regularly practice agape feasts ( called '' love feast '' ) , which include feetwashing , a supper , and communion , with hymns and brief scriptural meditations interspersed throughout the worship service . groups that descend from the schwarzenau brethren such as the church of the brethren , brethren church , old german baptist brethren , and dunkard brethren regularly practice a lovefeast based on new testament descriptions of the last supper . the brethren combine the agape meal ( often consisting of lamb or beef and a bowl of soup ) with a service of feetwashing before the meal and communion afterward . the term '' lovefeast '' in this case generally refers to all three ordinances , not just the meal . influenced by german pietists during the early 18th century , the lovefeast was instituted among brethren before moravians adopted the practice . moravian . the lovefeast of the moravian church is based on the agape feast and the meals of the early churches described in the bible in the acts of the apostles , which were partaken in unity and love . traditionally for european , canadian , and american lovefeasts , a sweetened bun and coffee ( sweetened milky tea in germany , the netherlands , and england ) is served to the congregation in the pews by dieners ( from the german for 'servers ' ) ; before partaking , a simple table grace is said . the foods and drinks consumed from congregation may vary , adapted from what the congregations have available . services in some colonial-era lovefeasts , for example , used plain bread and water ; some in salem were known to have served beer . the moravian lovefeast also concentrates on the singing of hymns and listening to music which may come from the organ or choir . the songs and hymns chosen usually describe love and harmony . the congregation can talk quietly with their fellow brothers and sisters in christ about their spiritual walk with god . christmas eve lovefeasts can become particularly spectacular in the congregation 's choice of music and instrumentation . many churches have trombone choirs or church bands play before a lovefeast as a call to service . a moravian congregation may hold a lovefeast on any special occasion , such as the date their church was founded , but there are certain established dates that lovefeasts are regularly observed . some of these notable dates include watch night , good friday , the festival of 13 august ( the 1727 date on which the moravian church was renewed or reborn ) , and christmas eve , where each member of the congregation receives a lighted candle at the end of the service in addition to the bun and coffee . methodist . methodists also practice lovefeasts , often quarterly , as well as on the evenings of major feast days . they are also held during camp meetings . in methodist theology , lovefeasts are a '' means of grace '' and '' converting ordinance '' that john wesley believed to be an apostolic institution . one account from july 1776 expounded on attendees ' experiences of new birth and entire sanctification at a lovefeast : the liturgy for a lovefeast traditionally includes the following elements : in the wesleyan methodist church , lovefeasts consisted of bread and water that filled the loving-cup . these lovefeasts were said to '' promote piety , mutual affection and zeal '' . unlike the eucharist in the methodist tradition , lovefeasts are traditionally fenced , being only for members of methodist churches , though non-members are permitted to attend once . several methodist hymns were written for this christian ritual , including charles wesley 's '' the love-feast '' , penned in 1740 : the christian liturgical books of the african methodist episcopal church , african methodist episcopal zion church , christian methodist episcopal church , and united methodist church all have services for the lovefeast . congregations of the primitive methodist church hold lovefeasts in the form of large potluck-style meals among members of their congregations . ¶108 of the discipline of the evangelical wesleyan church states that '' a love feast shall be held on each circuit at least once in three months . it shall ordinarily consist of bread-breaking , praise , and testimony . '' ¶244 of the discipline of the allegheny wesleyan methodist connection stipulates that one of the duties of pastors is '' to hold love-feasts '' . . eastern orthodox . a number of eastern orthodox christian parishes will have an agape meal ( turkish : sevgi ziyafeti ) , commonly known as coffee hour ( spanish : café comunitario ) , on sundays and feast days following the divine liturgy , and especially at the conclusion of the paschal vigil . roman catholic . the agape is a common feature used by the catholic neocatechumenal way in which members of the way participate in a light feast after the celebration of the eucharist on certain occasions . . adventist . the creation seventh day adventists partake of an agape feast as a part of their new moon observances , taking the form of a formal , all-natural meal held after the communion supper . notes . references . bibliography . bowman , carl f . brethren society : the cultural transformation of a peculiar people . baltimore : johns hopkins university press . stutzman , paul fike . recovering the love feast : broadening our eucharistic celebrations . eugene , oregon : wipf and stock , 2011 . . external links .