Mireille Mathieu

biography and career . early years . mireille mathieu was born on 22 july 1946 in avignon , france , the eldest daughter of a family of fourteen children ; the youngest brother was born after she moved to paris . her father roger and his family were native to avignon , while her mother marcelle-sophie ( née poirier ) was from dunkirk . she arrived in avignon in 1944 as a refugee from world war ii after her grandmother had died , and her mother went missing . roger , with his father arcade , ran the family stonemason shop just outside the saint-véran cemetery main gate . the mathieu family have been stonemasons for four generations . today the shop is named pompes funèbres mathieu-mardoyan , owned and managed by her sister réjane 's family . mathieu , mireille ; cartier , jacqueline . oui je crois q'une vie ca commence avec un mot d'amour . paris : robert laffont , 1988 . the mathieu family lived in poverty , with a huge improvement in their living conditions in 1954 , when subsidized housing was built in the malpeigné quarter near the cemetery . then again in 1961 they moved to a large tenement in the croix des oiseaux quarter southeast of the city . roger had once dreamed of becoming a singer , but his father arcade disapproved , inspiring him to have one of his children learn to sing with him in church . mireille included her father 's operatic voice on her 1968 christmas album , where it was mixed in with the o holy night song . mireille 's first paid performance before an audience , at age four , was rewarded with a lollipop when she sang on christmas eve 1950 during midnight mass . a defining moment was seeing édith piaf sing on television . mireille performed poorly in elementary school because of dyslexia , requiring an extra year to graduate . she was born left-handed , and her teachers used a ruler to strike her hand each time she was caught writing with it . she became right-handed , although her left hand remains quite animated while singing . she has a fantastic memory , and never uses a prompter on stage . abandoning higher education , at age 14 ( 1961 ) , and after moving to croix des oiseaux , she began work in a local factory in montfavet ( a suburb southeast of town ) where she helped with the family income and paid for her singing lessons . popular at work , she often sang songs at lunch , or while working . like her parents , she is a short woman at 1.52 m ( 5 feet ) in height . her sister monique , born on 8 july 1947 , began work at the same factory a few months later . both were given bicycles on credit to commute with , making for very long days , and many bad memories of riding against the mistral winds . the factory went out of business , so mireille and two sisters ( monique , and christiane ) became youth counselors at a summer camp before her rise to fame , a summer where she had her fortune told by tarot cards by an old gypsy woman , saying she would soon mingle with kings and queens . mireille is roman catholic , and her adopted patron saint is saint rita , the saint for the impossible . mireille 's paternal grandmother germaine née charreton , assured her that saint rita was the one to intercede to god for hopeless cases . beyond religion , like many artists , she is unabashed about superstition and luck . when asked to reveal some of her superstitions , she said : '' the most important one is to never mention any of them . '' she has stage fright , and can often be seen making the sign of the cross before moving out on stage . . debut ( 1962–1965 ) . mathieu began her career by participating in an annual singing contest in avignon called on chante dans mon quartier ( we sing in my neighborhood ) . photos depict the affair as rather drab with a cheap curtain and one projector light . the stage was only twenty feet square , and the singer had to share it with a large piano and musicians . one can not help but notice the large , boisterous , and mostly young audience . the judges sat at a table in front of and below the elevated stage . anyone who signed the contract in the weeks before the show was allowed to sing . talent scouts made this a worthwhile event for singers within hundreds of kilometers to participate in . mireille 's private singing lessons were by madame laure collière , who was also a piano teacher in avignon . self-described as very stubborn in her autobiography , she wrote about singing love songs that the audience thought were inappropriate for a young girl , thus losing to michèle torr in 1962 when she sang '' les cloches de lisbonne '' at the first contest , and losing again in 1963 singing édith piaf 's '' l'hymne à l'amour . '' in 1964 , though , she won the event with another piaf song : '' la vie en rose . '' her win was rewarded with a free trip to paris , and a audition for the televised talent show jeu de la chance ( game of luck ) , where amateur singers competed for audience and telephone votes . her participation and train fare were arranged by raoul colombe , the deputy mayor of avignon . accompanied by a pianist at the studio , and dressed in black like piaf , she sang two piaf songs to the audition judges and left dispirited . non-french can not hear it , but parisians at the studio made fun of her provençal accent , and her dyslexia scrambled words . for example , her sister and current manager monique , is called '' matite '' because mireille could n't pronounce '' petite '' as a child . during a 1965 summer gala , added to the enrico macias concert by raoul colombe ( her first manager ) , she met her future manager johnny stark . mireille and her father both thought he was an american based on his name and manner , and nicknamed him l'américain . stark had worked with singers such as yves montand , and the relationship between him and mathieu is often described as resembling that between colonel tom parker and elvis presley . stark is credited with making her a star and the successor to piaf . by 1968 , under his careful management , she was france 's most popular singer . . breakthrough ( 1965–1967 ) . mireille was invited to paris by the impresario régis durcourt to sing on the '' song parade '' television program , on 19 november 1965 . stark promised to write to her , but after months of waiting she gave up on him , and accepted durcourt 's offer . the truth has never been revealed how , but mireille was suddenly moved up to compete live on the sunday 21 november 1965 episode of '' jeu de la chance , '' a talent segment of the popular french program '' télé-dimanche . '' stark 's ex-wife nanou taddéi worked at studio 102 , and probably recognized mireille , as she participated in her earlier pre-audition . mathieu explained that '' song parade '' offered only one chance to sing , while '' jeu de la chance '' offered many chances to sing , but only if she won , and she intended to win . both the studio audience and telephone voters gave her a slight lead over five-time winner georgette lemaire , so the producers called it a tie . johnny stark officially became her manager that night , and with his longtime assistant nadine joubert , helped prepare mireille to win the contest the following week and bury georgette . stark and lemaire had a mutual dislike . in a short film called la guerre des piaf ( war of the sparrows ) georgette and mireille are interviewed separately , both small and the same height . mireille is surrounded by her sisters monique and christiane , with johnny hovering in the background as she is interviewed for the first time on camera . she appears to be uncomfortable , staring at the floor during many of the questions , even looking dumbfounded once , like a deer in the headlights . johnny finally comes to her rescue . in a later interview , she underscored the importance of the event , stating , '' for me , paris was the end of the world . i never took a train or saw a camera before . i did not know what the outcome of the adventure would be . '' in the middle of her seven consecutive performances on télé-dimanche she performed a concert at the paris olympia , which propelled her to stardom . she signed with bruno coquatrix , the owner of the olympia , on 20 december , and performed the only three piaf songs she had memorized , two days later . she was hailed in the press , in france and abroad , as the piaf d'avignon ( sparrow from avignon ) , in reference to piaf 's nickname '' sparrow of the streets . '' all was not going well at this point . mathieu said '' i was managed to such mimicry of my idol that i thought i was not able to do anything else . it was instantly one of the biggest disappointments of my life . '' page , christian . mireille mathieu . paris : bréa , 1983 . stark then abandoned the piaf direction he was taking her . the olympia performance convinced a skeptical paul mauriat to work with mireille , and songwriter andré pascal joined forces to develop her into a successful act . together they wrote new modern material for her : mon crédo , viens dans ma rue , la première étoile and many other hit songs . her first album en direct de l'olympia , on the barclay label , was released in 1966 . highly acclaimed , along with the singles and ep 's from it , the album made her a star outside france . a regular early contributor of material was francis lai , who wrote two songs : c'est ton nom , and un homme et une femme for her first album , and often accompanied her with his accordion on television . her first record was recorded in the emi studios , with paul mauriat 's band . mathieu 's success led her record company , barclay , to claim that they controlled 40 % of the french pop disk market . mireille spent all of 1966 and 1967 touring . it was then , during a car ride to another concert , that stark advised mireille that she was finally debt free , and worth more than a million francs ( 200k usd in 1967 ) . she had always prayed that she could get her family out of poverty , but the touring and singing were much more important at the time . in her autobiography , she stated her first major purchases were a vehicle for her father 's business and a large home for her parents and siblings . most importantly , she had a telephone installed for the family , so her parents no longer had to go to the pharmacy to talk to her while she was in paris . her one regret , was that she was unable to see her grandmother germaine in the hospital before she died because of all the tour contracts . mireille arrived in paris with two dresses and a change of underwear , and johnny set her up in style , sent for mireille 's two oldest sisters , and let them go shopping for a week . he then rented her a home and a maid in upscale neuilly after she had won , and made sure she only had her singing to worry about . johnny recorded all the expenses though , and he was fully compensated before a franc was ever put in mireille 's account . mireille sang twice at the london palladium during royal performances ( before the queen and her family ) . once in 1967 , and again in 1969 . following her second performance , her french cover of engelbert humperdinck 's '' the last waltz '' ( la dernière valse ) generated much publicity in great britain and became a hit record even though the original had been number one only a few months previously . she also toured canada and the united states , where she appeared on the ed sullivan show and the danny kaye . while on a visit to hollywood , she met elvis presley , and in las vegas , nevada sang with dean martin and frank sinatra . . career in the 20th century ( 1967–2000 ) . although the popularity of mathieu 's genre has suffered , given the domination of rock and roll and the global lack of interest in non-english popular music during her most profitable years , she remained a popular artist in france and europe . many thousands of fans have met her before and after performances for autographs and well wishes over the years , and the common refrain is how well she treats her fans . she easily interacts with the public . while the mathieu sisters are quite wealthy , they have also made their songwriters extremely wealthy . most of the record profits go to the authors , whereas mireille had to tour and perform concerts live and on television . while on tour in february 1968 , mathieu was in a car accident in which she fractured one of her vertebrae ; the injury sidelined her for three months . she writes in her book , that they received a note which said '' we will get you next time '' but it was not proved to be anything but an accident . in 1971 , barclay was unable to meet the demands for records . johnny stark then made a contract for philips records to issue all the singles , and eps , resulting in a us 1 & nbsp ; million lawsuit from barclay for breach of contract . barclay 's contract was scheduled to run until 1972 . in 1972 , mathieu toured canada and produced a live album . johnny stark suffered his first heart attack while making arrangements for this concert . in 1974 , mathieu formed her own publishing company abilene music . today this company is involved in publishing , printing of music material . in 1983 , mathieu formed another publishing company abilene disc . this is the company used to publish recordings , and her management agency run by her sisters monique and christiane . in 1985 , mathieu joined plácido domingo in performing a children 's show called the tales of cri-cri . this television special used puppets along with fifty-years of traditional mexican songs , producing popular versions in spanish , french , and english . mireille 's father roger died this same year . in 1986 , mathieu performed a concert in beijing , china . in her autobiography , she states she was the first western performer to give a concert in the city , but this was in error , as at least two other western performances preceded hers . for mireille . the final lyric : '' when i think of all i have given france . and she has forgotten me '' was truly how the singer felt as she was made a caricature by the communists in power . she used her fists in punching the air while singing the song . on the accusations of being docile , mathieu writes in her autobiography that she and johnny stark understood each other . she wanted to be a singer , and he was tired of people who just wanted to be famous . they were both hard workers , and he kept her schedule filled with lucrative contracts . she also writes that she was forbidden to read the press , and , having peeked at some of it , was content to follow that rule . stark , of course , had a heavy hand in manipulating the press . mireille writes that her mother was often surprised to read on the front page that she was engaged to someone famous , or was going to be in a movie by some famous director . her guiding principle was just to sing , and never have her family return to the tenements of croix des oiseaux . many photographs and films from the early years show the life around johnny stark 's villa in roquefort-la-bédoule ( south of france ) . the villa , also named la bédoule , allowed everyone to escape from paris and relax . the home supported johnny 's telephone addiction with 28 telephones , with each car also having a phone . mathieu lived here with her aunt irène , and brothers and sisters would often visit . the pool was designed to be shallow all around , and deep in the center , as mireille has a fear of drowning , and never learned to swim . the property was sold after johnny 's divorce . bonini , emmanuel . la véritable mireille mathieu . paris : pygmalion , 2005 . in 1989 , president françois mitterrand invited mathieu to sing a tribute to general charles de gaulle . johnny stark died the same year after his second heart attack . divorced and estranged from his family , johnny was entombed in the mausoleum mathieu in avignon . upon stark 's death , everyone said that no one could replace him , and it proved true , but by then the entertainment press had also matured . johnny stark left behind a legal '' bloody mess . '' it took mathieu and her lawyers years to close out and process his estate . '' i was severely depressed , but i got out without needing analysis . '' the most controversial event of mathieu 's career , according to the media of the time , occurred when she took over stark 's office , and ended her business relationship with nadine joubert . she lost confidence in nadine who tried to modernize her act after mathieu 's l'américain album failed miserably , with the strain of stark 's legal affairs having set her back financially . her sister monique stepped in to become her business manager , and the two women have remained profitable in the industry ever since . in december 1990 , she gave a series of concerts at the palais des congrès de paris . many videos of the concert are available , and it shows her back on top , with a huge production . a large cast of musicians and singers was meant to take the concert to a level even a rock and roll audience could appreciate . in 1993 , she released two albums devoted to her idol , édith piaf , essentially retracing her roots . one album was in french ; the other , in german . in january 1996 , vous lui direz was released . mathieu did not perform live in france to promote the album , preferring rather to go to los angeles , where she gave a tribute to judy garland . she was dressed by christian lacroix . in 1999 , mathieu released a german album alles nur ein spiel , with francis lai on accordion . career in the 21st century ( 2001–present ) . in 2002 , mathieu released her thirty-seventh french album : de tes mains , followed by a series of concerts at the paris olympia in november . mathieu celebrated the fortieth anniversary of her career at the paris olympia on 24 november 2005 , and released her thirty-eighth french album : mireille mathieu 2005 . the performance , and an interview , were recorded and released in wide-screen dvd format in 2006 ; however , the dvd was in european video format only . mathieu joined with jean claudric and his orchestra for this concert , and has worked with him ever since . in 2007 , mathieu supported presidential candidate nicolas sarkozy , the mayor of neuilly , where she has resided since coming to paris in 1965 . sarkozy was elected president of france and , ex officio , co-prince of andorra . in 2012 she did not support any candidate publicly . on 1 november 2008 , she was a guest of prime minister vladimir putin in moscow , and performed a concert in his honor . the two visited the tent of visiting libyan leader muammar gaddafi . in november 2010 , she was awarded the russian medal of friendship by president dmitry medvedev at a state dinner . she was in russia and the baltic states throughout november , returning to paris after a concert in warsaw , poland on 28 november . in january 2011 , mireille was promoted from chevalier ( 9 december 1999 ) to officier of the légion d'honneur . in november 2011 , mathieu cancelled her concert in israel for the second time in 2011 . the promoter again failed to meet the required ticket sales . in march 2012 mireille , with jean claudric and his orchestra , were in siberia , russia visiting three cities : perm ( 21 march ) , tyumen ( 24 march ) , and yekaterinburg ( 26 march ) . during an interview in moscow , mathieu mentioned that the group pussy riot had committed a sacrilege in the church by having a political demonstration against president putin . french television program '' on n'est pas couché '' edited out the second half of her statement , and called her a tool of president putin . her lawyer andré schmidt sued the station for defamation . the suit was dismissed at trial in july 2014 . the part that was edited out was '' as a woman artist and a christian , i beg the indulgence of these three girls . '' the group of three women were convicted and sentenced to two years in prison for being hooligans , and inciting religious hatred . in october 2012 mathieu announced on her web page that she is re-releasing her chante piaf , with two new recordings added , in celebration of her 50th year as a singer , and the 50th year of piaf 's death . also that month , she had to cancel some of her shows in russia ( rostov , volgograd , samara , and ufa ) . she had contracted these shows through a yekaterinburg company called mix art , through her malta agent foresa investment ltd . she stated that mix art '' acted in a highly unprofessional and even fraudulent way . '' she was able to salvage the tours on 3 november 2012 in moscow , 5 november 2012 in saint petersburg and 7 november 2012 in krasnodar . she also performed the rescheduled concert in ufa on 7 march 2013 . in december 2013 , her lawyers won a lawsuit against mgm home entertainment for failing to compensate her production company abilene disc for the 1967 song les yeux de l'amour ( the eyes of love ) , used in the german version of the movie casino royale . since 2009 , she has been the main guest star of the spasskaya tower military music festival and tattoo , held on moscow 's red square . on 5 september 2013 , during her concert event of the festival , she sang in a light dress under an icy rain and a gusty wind , refusing to take an offer for a coat as disrespectful to the people freezing in the stands . russian tv 's culture channel praised her performance on that day as a feat . mathieu had an active tour schedule for 2014 , celebrating her 50th year in show business ( she dates her career from the year she won her first singing contest in avignon ) . her first concert was going to be in kiev , and she held out hope it would go on , but finally cancelled it seven days before '' due to the instability . '' her france 50th anniversary tour ran from october to november 2014 . mathieu performed her 50th anniversary tour in germany and austria from 1 to 16 march 2015 , singing in twelve different cities to sellout crowds . she credits her sister-manager monique for keeping the general audience ticket prices reasonable . in march 2015 she announced on her web page that all the concerts in russia were cancelled '' due to the economic situation . '' on the concert web site , it states that the russian currency had collapsed , and it was no longer possible to finance the concert and travel arrangements . on 26 may 2015 , mathieu sang at the '' culture without borders '' ( culture sans frontière ) project at the unesco headquarters in paris . a concert titled the allies of the great victory : a musical story . with the participation of : jazz band of igor butman ( russia-usa ) , other soloists are : allan harris ( usa ) , sanya kroitor ( israel ) , yakov yavno ( usa ) , igor butman , mikhail gluz ( russia ) , polina zizak ( russia ) and other celebrities . on 30 july 2015 , she returned , after 41 years , to byblos , lebanon for the byblos international festival . her sisters ( manager ) monique , and marie france accompanied her mother on the trip , who then made a brief appearance with her on stage , escorted by the family servant hervé-marc . on 20 march 2016 , mathieu 's mother died at the age of 94 from a pulmonary embolism . she was entombed in the mausoleum mathieu at the saint-véran cemetery in avignon . . personal life . mathieu has never been married and has no children . unlike many celebrities , she does not have a publicist , or feel the need to expound on her private life . she is a devout catholic and still attends catholic mass with her family . . discography . list of songs recorded by mireille mathieu . bibliography . oui , je crois ( yes , i believe ) , with jacqueline cartier , paris , robert laffont , 1987 моя судьба . история любви ( my destiny . love story ) , google books , translation by jacob zalmanovich , moscow , litres , 1991 . references . external links .