William Lloyd Webber

prolific years . lloyd webber 's earliest known composition is the '' remarkably assured '' fantasy trio in b minor for violin , cello and piano of 1936 ( which did n't receive its premiere until 1995 ) . william lloyd webber : piano music , chamber music and song . hyperion cda67008 ( 1998 ) in 1938 , he was appointed organist and head of the choir school at all saints , margaret street , in marylebone district of london later becoming musical director at westminster central hall , london , the headquarters of the methodist church in the united kingdom . his first compositions developed in the 1930s . in 1942 he married the pianist and violinist jean hermione johnstone ( 1921–1993 ) . the marriage , which lasted until his death , produced two sons : composer andrew ( born 1948 ) and cellist julian ( born 1951 ) . from 1945 until the mid-1950s , webber composed vocal and instrumental music , choral and organ works , chamber music and orchestral works . works from this period include the oratorio st . francis of assisi , the orchestral tone-poem aurora , the sonatinas for viola and flute , numerous songs , organ pieces and choral works . but webber 's roots were firmly embedded in the romanticism of such composers as sergei rachmaninov , jean sibelius and césar franck , and he became increasingly convinced that his own music was 'out of step ' with the prevailing climate of the time . rather than compromise his style , he turned to the academic side of british musical life . he taught at the royal college of music , directed the choir of methodist central hall , westminster and in 1964 was appointed director of the london college of music , a post which he held until his death in 1982 . . selected works . orchestra . lento in e major for string orchestra ( 1939 ) waltz in e minor for orchestra ( 1939 ) aurora , tone poem for orchestra ( 1948 ) three spring miniatures for small orchestra ( 1952 ) ; orchestration of original piano work : gossamer ( a little waltz ) : willow song ( a lament ) : tree tops ( a toccatina ) serenade for strings for string orchestra : : i . barcarolle ( 1951 ) : : ii . romance ( 1980 ) : : iii . elegy ( 1960 ) invocation for harp , timpani and string orchestra ( 1957 ) . brass band . little suite for brass : : i . prelude : : ii . adagio : : iii . festival march . chamber music . three pieces for cello and piano : in the half-light ( 1951 ) : air varié ( adapted from tantum ergo by césar franck ) : slumber song fantasy trio in b minor for violin , cello and piano ( 1936 ) sonatina for flute and piano ( 1941 ) benedictus for violin and organ ( 1942 ) nocturne for cello and piano or harp ( 1948 ) ; from the oratorio st . francis of assisi sonatina for viola and piano ( 1951 ) air and variations for clarinet and piano ( 1952 ) country impressions ( 1960 ) : mulberry cottage for flute and piano ( 1960 ) : on frensham pond , aquarelle for clarinet and piano ( 1960 ) a lyric suite for cello and piano ( 1964 ) summer pastures for horn and piano suite in b for trumpet and piano the gardens at eastwell , a late summer impression for violin and piano or harp ( 1982 ) . choral . missa sanctae mariae magdalenae for choir and organ ( 1979 ) missa princeps pacis ( the prince of peace ) , mass for chorus and organ ( 1962 ) , a meditation upon the death of christ for chorus and organ the divine compassion , sacred cantata for tenor , baritone , chorus and organ st . francis of assisi , oratorio for soprano , tenor , baritone , chorus , string orchestra and harp ( 1948 ) born a king , a christmas cantata for soloists , chorus and organ songs of spring , cantata for female chorus and piano o lord , spread thy wings o'er me , anthem for soprano ( or treble voice ) , chorus and accompaniment spirit of god , anthem for chorus and organ dominus firmamentum meum , anthem for chorus and organ lo ! my shepherd is divine , anthem for soprano , alto , chorus and organ lo , god is here , anthem for chorus and organ seven anthems : sing the life , easter carol for chorus and accompaniment : a hymn of thanksgiving for unison voices and organ : o love , i give myself to thee for female chorus and organ : o for a closer walk with god for chorus and organ : then come , all ye people , carol for chorus and accompaniment : the lord is my shepherd for chorus and organ : love divine , all loves excelling for chorus and organ ( 1964 ) ; from the good samaritan tantum ergo , anthem for bass solo , chorus and organ jesus , dear jesus , carol for boy treble , children 's choir and organ the stable where the oxen stood most glorious lord of lyfe , anthem suitable for easter for chorus ; words by edmund spenser meeting place , a meditation upon the birth of christ for baritone , chorus and piano or organ ( 1964 ) jamie brown , a happy story in song for two-part chorus and piano ( published 1962 ) magnificat and nunc dimmitis in e minor partsongs april for female chorus and piano corinna 's lute for female chorus and piano sun-gold for female chorus and piano ; words by may sarson moon silver for female chorus and piano lament for female chorus and piano i heard a rush of wings for female ( or children 's ) chorus and piano the moon for unaccompanied chorus a magic morn for female chorus and piano the heather hills for female chorus and piano . vocal . the call of the morning ( 1950 ) ; words by george darley love , like a drop of dew ( 1950 ) ; words by w . h . davies i looked out into the morning ( 1951 ) ; words by james thomson ( b.v . ) over the bridge ( 1951 ) ; words by james thomson ( b.v . ) how do i love thee ? the forest of wild thyme ( 1951 ) the pretty washer-maiden ; words by william ernest henley to the wicklow hills ( 1954 ) ; words by r.g . leigh a rent for love ( 1982 ) ; words by irvonwy morgan so lovely the rose ; words by joseph murrells eutopia ; words by francis turner palgrave the cottage of dreams lullaby spring is the time for love three arias for tenor and organ : and i saw a new heaven : the king of love ( from the saviour ) : thou art the king ( from the divine compassion ) . piano . three spring miniatures ( 1952 ) ; also orchestrated : gossamer ( a little waltz ) : willow song ( a lament ) : tree tops ( a toccatina ) italian idyll , 3 piano duets ( 1954 ) : mattinata : siesta : napolitana six pieces : a song for the morning ( 1957 ) ; composed under the pseudonym clive chapel : scherzo in g minor : arabesque : romantic evening : explanation ; composed under the pseudonym clive chapel : song without words three pieces : presto for perseus : autumn elf : badinage de noël scenes from childhood : cake walk : sentimental waltz : air : scherzo : evening hymn : china doll a short tone-study river song for piano 4-hands danse macabre for 2 pianos . organ . chorale , cantilena and finale three recital pieces ( 1952 ) : prelude : barcarolle : nuptial march aria , 13 pieces : prelude on st cross : choral march : communion : solemn procession : prelude on passion chorale : prelude on rockingham : festal march : prelude on gerontius : aria : verset : prelude on winchester new : vesper hymn : meditation on stracathro reflections , 7 pieces : prelude : slumber song : summer pastures : romance : intermezzo : christ in the tomb ( from the divine compassion ) : postlude eight varied pieces : arietta in a major : minuet : recessional : andantino alla cantilena : introit : dedication march : pastorale : epilogue songs without words , 6 pieces : noel nouvelet : song without words : trumpet minuet : god rest you merry , gentlemen : the coventry carol : good king wenceslas five portraits for home organs elegy six interludes on christmas carols : interlude on 'the holly and the ivy' : interlude on 'whence is this goodly fragrance ? ' : interlude on 'noël nouvelet' : interlude on 'good king wenceslas' : interlude on 'coventry carol' : interlude on 'god rest you merry , gentlemen' rhapsody on '' helmsley '' . discography . music of william lloyd webber , ( asv digital , cd dca 961 , 1996 ) organ works of william lloyd webber , ( priory , prcd 616 , 1998 ) william lloyd webber piano music , chamber music and songs , ( hyperion , cda67008 , 1998 ) sacred choral music of william lloyd webber , ( priory prcd677 , 1999 ) invocation , ( chandos chan 9595 , 1998 ) . references . external links . william lloyd webber 's biography william lloyd webber 's facebook page and by william lloyd webber played by his son , julian lloyd webber by the london philharmonic orchestra conducted by lorin maazel guardian article written by julian lloyd webber about his father , 16 april 2004 william lloyd webber : an impressionistic view by john france review of william lloyd webber centenary concert .