Algebraic number theory

history of algebraic number theory . diophantus . the beginnings of algebraic number theory can be traced to diophantine equations , stark , pp . 145–146 . named after the 3rd-century alexandrian mathematician , diophantus , who studied them and developed methods for the solution of some kinds of diophantine equations . a typical diophantine problem is to find two integers x and y such that their sum , and the sum of their squares , equal two given numbers a and b , respectively : : a x + y\ : b x^2 + y^2.\ diophantine equations have been studied for thousands of years . for example , the solutions to the quadratic diophantine equation x 2 + y 2 z 2 are given by the pythagorean triples , originally solved by the babylonians ( c . 1800 bc ) . aczel , pp . 14–15 . solutions to linear diophantine equations , such as 26x + 65y 13 , may be found using the euclidean algorithm ( c . 5th century bc ) . stark , pp . 44–47 . diophantus ' major work was the arithmetica , of which only a portion has survived . fermat . fermat 's last theorem was first conjectured by pierre de fermat in 1637 , famously in the margin of a copy of arithmetica where he claimed he had a proof that was too large to fit in the margin . no successful proof was published until 1995 despite the efforts of countless mathematicians during the 358 intervening years . the unsolved problem stimulated the development of algebraic number theory in the 19th century and the proof of the modularity theorem in the 20th century . gauss . one of the founding works of algebraic number theory , the disquisitiones arithmeticae ( latin : arithmetical investigations ) is a textbook of number theory written in latin by carl friedrich gauss in 1798 when gauss was 21 and first published in 1801 when he was 24 . in this book gauss brings together results in number theory obtained by mathematicians such as fermat , euler , lagrange and legendre and adds important new results of his own . before the disquisitiones was published , number theory consisted of a collection of isolated theorems and conjectures . gauss brought the work of his predecessors together with his own original work into a systematic framework , filled in gaps , corrected unsound proofs , and extended the subject in numerous ways . the disquisitiones was the starting point for the work of other nineteenth century european mathematicians including ernst kummer , peter gustav lejeune dirichlet and richard dedekind . many of the annotations given by gauss are in effect announcements of further research of his own , some of which remained unpublished . they must have appeared particularly cryptic to his contemporaries ; we can now read them as containing the germs of the theories of l-functions and complex multiplication , in particular . dirichlet . in a couple of papers in 1838 and 1839 peter gustav lejeune dirichlet proved the first class number formula , for quadratic forms ( later refined by his student leopold kronecker ) . the formula , which jacobi called a result '' touching the utmost of human acumen '' , opened the way for similar results regarding more general number fields . based on his research of the structure of the unit group of quadratic fields , he proved the dirichlet unit theorem , a fundamental result in algebraic number theory . he first used the pigeonhole principle , a basic counting argument , in the proof of a theorem in diophantine approximation , later named after him dirichlet 's approximation theorem . he published important contributions to fermat 's last theorem , for which he proved the cases n & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 5 and n & nbsp ; & nbsp ; 14 , and to the quartic reciprocity . the dirichlet divisor problem , for which he found the first results , is still an unsolved problem in number theory despite later contributions by other researchers . dedekind . richard dedekind 's study of lejeune dirichlet 's work was what led him to his later study of algebraic number fields and ideals . in 1863 , he published lejeune dirichlet 's lectures on number theory as vorlesungen über zahlentheorie ( '' lectures on number theory '' ) about which it has been written that : '' although the book is assuredly based on dirichlet 's lectures , and although dedekind himself referred to the book throughout his life as dirichlet 's , the book itself was entirely written by dedekind , for the most part after dirichlet 's death . '' ( edwards 1983 ) 1879 and 1894 editions of the vorlesungen included supplements introducing the notion of an ideal , fundamental to ring theory . ( the word '' ring '' , introduced later by hilbert , does not appear in dedekind 's work . ) dedekind defined an ideal as a subset of a set of numbers , composed of algebraic integers that satisfy polynomial equations with integer coefficients . the concept underwent further development in the hands of hilbert and , especially , of emmy noether . ideals generalize ernst eduard kummer 's ideal numbers , devised as part of kummer 's 1843 attempt to prove fermat 's last theorem . hilbert . david hilbert unified the field of algebraic number theory with his 1897 treatise zahlbericht ( literally '' report on numbers '' ) . he also resolved a significant number-theory waring 's problem in 1770 . as with the finiteness theorem , he used an existence proof that shows there must be solutions for the problem rather than providing a mechanism to produce the answers . he then had little more to publish on the subject ; but the emergence of hilbert modular forms in the dissertation of a student means his name is further attached to a major area . he made a series of conjectures on class field theory . the concepts were highly influential , and his own contribution lives on in the names of the hilbert class field and of the hilbert symbol of local class field theory . results were mostly proved by 1930 , after work by teiji takagi . this work established takagi as japan 's first mathematician of international stature . . artin . emil artin established the artin reciprocity law in a series of papers ( 1924 ; 1927 ; 1930 ) . this law is a general theorem in number theory that forms a central part of global class field theory . . a reciprocity law is a generalization of the law of quadratic reciprocity . there are several different ways to express reciprocity laws . the early reciprocity laws found in the 19th century were usually expressed in terms of a power residue symbol ( p/q ) generalizing the legendre symbol , that describes when a prime number is an nth power residue modulo another prime , and gave a relation between ( p/q ) and ( q/p ) . hilbert reformulated the reciprocity laws as saying that a product over p of hilbert symbols ( a , b/p ) , taking values in roots of unity , is equal to 1 . artin 's reformulated reciprocity law states that the artin symbol from ideals ( or ideles ) to elements of a galois group is trivial on a certain subgroup . several more recent generalizations express reciprocity laws using cohomology of groups or representations of adelic groups or algebraic k-groups , and their relationship with the original quadratic reciprocity law can be hard to see . class number formula . the class number formula relates many important invariants of a number field to a special value of its dedekind zeta function . related areas . algebraic number theory interacts with many other mathematical disciplines . it uses tools from homological algebra . via the analogy of function fields vs . number fields , it relies on techniques and ideas from algebraic geometry . moreover , the study of higher-dimensional schemes over z instead of number rings is referred to as arithmetic geometry . algebraic number theory is also used in the study of arithmetic hyperbolic 3-manifolds . see also . tamagawa number kummer theory . notes . . further reading . introductory texts . . intermediate texts . . graduate level texts . . external links .