Religious persecution

definition . david t . smith , in religious persecution and political order in the united states , defines religious persecution as '' violence or discrimination against members of a religious minority because of their religious affiliation , '' referring to '' actions that are intended to deprive individuals of their political rights and to force minorities to assimilate , leave , or live as second-class citizens . in the aspect of a state 's policy , it may be defined as violations of freedom of thought , conscience and belief which are spread in accordance with a systematic and active state policy which encourages actions such as harassment , intimidation and the imposition of punishments in order to infringe or threaten the targeted minority 's right to life , integrity or liberty . the distinction between religious persecution and religious intolerance lies in the fact that in most cases , the latter is motivated by the sentiment of the population , which may be tolerated or encouraged by the state . the denial of people 's civil rights on the basis of their religion is most often described as religious discrimination , rather than religious persecution . examples of persecution include the confiscation or destruction of property , incitement of hatred , arrests , imprisonment , beatings , torture , murder , and executions . religious persecution can be considered the opposite of freedom of religion . bateman has differentiated different degrees of persecution . '' it must be personally costly . it must be unjust and undeserved . it must be a direct result of one 's faith . '' bateman , j . keith . 2013 . do n't call it persecution when it 's not . evangelical missions quarterly 49.1 : 54-56 , also p . 57-62 . . sociological view . from a sociological perspective , the identity formation of strong social groups such as those generated by nationalism , ethnicity , or religion , is a causal aspect of practices of persecution . says it is these communities , who can be a majority or a minority , that generate violence . since the development of identity involves 'what we are not ' as much as 'what we are ' , there are grounds for the fear that tolerance of 'what we are not ' can contribute to the erosion of identity . jinkins , & nbsp ; michael . & nbsp ; christianity , tolerance and pluralism : a theological engagement with isaiah berlin 's social theory . & nbsp ; united kingdom , & nbsp ; taylor & francis , & nbsp ; 2004 . chapter 3 . no page s available brian j . grim and roger finke say it is this perception of plurality as dangerous that leads to persecution . both the state , and any dominant religion , share the concern that to '' leave religion unchecked and without adequate controls will result in the uprising of religions that are dangerous to both state and citizenry , '' and this concern gives both the dominant religion and the state motives for restricting religious activity . grim and finke say it is specifically this religious regulation that leads to religious persecution . r.i . moore says that persecution during the middle ages '' provides a striking illustration of the classic deviance theory , which is based on identity formation , as it was propounded by the father of sociology , emile durkheim '' . persecution is also , often , part of a larger conflict involving emerging states as well as established states in the process of redefining their national identity . james l.gibson adds that the greater the attitudes of loyalty and solidarity to the group identity , and the more the benefits to belonging there are perceived to be , the more likely a social identity will become intolerant of challenges . gibson , & nbsp ; james l . , & nbsp ; and & nbsp ; gouws , & nbsp ; amanda . & nbsp ; overcoming intolerance in south africa : experiments in democratic persuasion . & nbsp ; united kingdom , & nbsp ; cambridge university press , & nbsp ; 2005 . heisig , & nbsp ; james w . & nbsp ; philosophers of nothingness : an essay on the kyoto school . & nbsp ; united states , & nbsp ; university of hawai ' i press , & nbsp ; 2001 . combining a strong social identity with the state , increases the benefits , therefore it is likely persecution from that social group will increase . legal restriction from the state relies on social cooperation , so the state in its turn must protect the social group which supports it , increasing the likelihood of persecution from the state as well . grim and finke say their studies indicate that the higher the degree of religious freedom , the lower the degree of violent religious persecution . '' when religious freedoms are denied through the regulation of religious profession or practice , violent religious persecution and conflict increase . '' perez zagorin writes that , '' according to some philosophers , tolerance is a moral virtue ; if this is the case , it would follow that intolerance is a vice . but virtue and vice are qualities solely of individuals , and intolerance and persecution in the christian middle ages were social and collective phenomena sanctioned by society and hardly questioned by anyone . religious intolerance and persecution , therefore , were not seen as vices , but as necessary and salutary for the preservation of religious truth and orthodoxy and all that was seen to depend upon them . '' this view of persecution is not limited to the middle ages . as christian r . raschle and jitse h . f . dijkstra , say : '' religious violence is a complex phenomenon that exists in all places and times . '' in the ancient societies of egypt , greece and rome , torture was an accepted aspect of the legal system . gillian clark says violence was taken for granted in the fourth century as part of both war and punishment ; torture from the carnifex , the professional torturer of the roman legal system , was an accepted part of that system . except for a few rare exceptions , such as the persian empire under cyrus and darius , denis lacorne says that examples of religious tolerance in ancient societies , '' from ancient greece to the roman empire , medieval spain to the ottoman empire and the venetian republic '' , are not examples of tolerance in the modern sense of the term . the sociological view indicates religious intolerance and persecution are largely social processes that are determined more by the context the social community exists within than anything else . dees , & nbsp ; richard h . & nbsp ; trust and toleration . & nbsp ; n.p . , & nbsp ; taylor & francis , & nbsp ; 2004 . chapter 4 . no page s available when governments insure equal freedom for all , there is less persecution . . statistics . the following statistics from pew research center show that jews , hindus and muslims are '' most likely to live in countries where their groups experience harassment '' : according to a 2019 report , government restrictions and social hostilities toward religion have risen in 187 countries . such as the umayyad caliphate , h . patrick glenn , legal traditions of the world . oxford university press , 2007 , p . 219 . abbasid caliphate , fatimid caliphate , robert ousterhout , '' rebuilding the temple : constantine monomachus and the holy sepulchre '' in the journal of the society of architectural historians , vol . 48 , no . 1 ( march , 1989 ) , pp.66–78 mamluk sultanate , and ottoman empire ; the persecution of coptic christians included closing and demolishing churches and forced conversion to islam . ha-mizraḥit ha-yiśreʼelit , ḥevrah ( 1988 ) . asian and african studies , volume 22 . jerusalem academic press . muslim historians note the destruction of dozens of churches and the forced conversion of dozens of people to islam under al-hakim bi-amr allah in egypt . these events also reflect the muslim attitude toward forced conversion and toward converts . since 2011 hundreds of egyptian copts have been killed in sectarian clashes , and many homes , churches and businesses have been destroyed . in just one province ( minya ) , 77 cases of sectarian attacks on copts between 2011 and 2016 have been documented by the egyptian initiative for personal rights . the abduction and disappearance of coptic christian women and girls also remains a serious ongoing problem . . persecution of dogons . for almost 1000 years , the dogon people , an ancient tribe of mali the independent , caught in the crossfire of mali 's war ( 25 january 2013 ) by kim sengupta ( retrieved march 14 , 2020 ) had faced religious and ethnic persecution—through jihads by dominant muslim communities . marcel griaule ; germaine dieterlen ; ( 1965 ) . le mythe cosmologique . le renard pâle . , 1 . paris : institut d'ethnologie musée de l'homme , p . 17 these jihadic expeditions were to forced the dogon to abandon dogon religion for islam . such jihads caused the dogon to abandon their original villages and moved up to the cliffs of bandiagara for better defense and to escape persecution—often building their dwellings in little nooks and crannies . africa today , volume 7 , afro media ( 2001 ) , p . 126 in the early era of french colonialism in mali , the french authorities appointed muslim relatives of el hadj umar tall as chiefs of the bandiagara—despite the fact that the area has been a dogon area for centuries . christopher wise , sorcery , totem , and jihad in african philosophy , bloomsbury publishing ( 2017 ) , p . 68 , ( retrieved march 14 , 2020 ) in 1864 , tidiani tall , nephew and successor of the 19th century senegambian jihadist and muslim leader—el hadj umar tall , chose bandiagara as the capital of the toucouleur empire thereby exacerbating the inter-religious and inter-ethnic conflict . in recent years , the dogon accused the fulanis of supporting and sheltering islamic terrorism groups like al-qaeda in dogon country , leading to the creation of the dogon militia dan na ambassagou in 2016—whose aim is to defend the dogon from systematic attacks . that resulted in the ogossagou massacre of fulanis in march 2019 , and a fula retaliation with the sobane da massacre in june of that year . in the wake of the ogossagou massacre , the president of mali , ibrahim boubacar keïta and his government ordered the dissolution of dan na ambassagou—whom they hold partly responsible for the attacks . the dogon militia group denied any involvement in the massacre and rejected calls to disband . world politics , what explains the rise of communal violence in mali , nigeria and ethiopia ? ( sept . 11 , 2019 ) by hilary matfess . . persecution of pagans & heathens . . persecution of philosophers . philosophers throughout the history of philosophy have been held in courts and tribunals for various offenses , often as a result of their philosophical activity , and some have even been put to death . the most famous example of a philosopher being put on trial is the case of socrates , who was tried for , amongst other charges , corrupting the youth and impiety . '' what was the charge against socrates ? '' retrieved september 1 , 2009 others include : giordano bruno - pantheist philosopher who was burned at the stake by the roman inquisition for his heretical religious views michael j . crowe , the extraterrestrial life debate 1750–1900 , cambridge university press , 1986 , p . 10 , '' bruno 's sources . seem to have been more numerous than his followers , at least until the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century revival of interest in bruno as a supposed 'martyr for science . ' it is true that he was burned at the stake in rome in 1600 , but the church authorities guilty of this action were almost certainly more distressed at his denial of christ 's divinity and alleged diabolism than at his cosmological doctrines . '' adam frank ( 2009 ) . the constant fire : beyond the science vs . religion debate , university of california press , p . 24 , '' though bruno may have been a brilliant thinker whose work stands as a bridge between ancient and modern thought , his persecution can not be seen solely in light of the war between science and religion . '' white , michael ( 2002 ) . the pope and the heretic : the true story of giordano bruno , the man who dared to defy the roman inquisition , p . 7 . perennial , new york . '' this was perhaps the most dangerous notion of all . if other worlds existed with intelligent beings living there , did they too have their visitations ? the idea was quite unthinkable . '' '' yet the fact remains that cosmological matters , notably the plurality of worlds , were an identifiable concern all along and appear in the summary document : bruno was repeatedly questioned on these matters , and he apparently refused to recant them at the end.14 so , bruno probably was burned alive for resolutely maintaining a series of heresies , among which his teaching of the plurality of worlds was prominent but by no means singular . '' and/or his cosmological views ; tommaso campanella - confined to a convent for his heretical views , namely , an opposition to the authority of aristotle , and later imprisoned in a castle for 27 years during which he wrote his most famous works , including the city of the sun ; '' tommaso campanella '' - first published wed aug 31 , 2005 '' at the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy retrieved september 1 , 2009 baruch spinoza - jewish philosopher who , at age 23 , was put in cherem ( similar to excommunication ) by jewish religious authorities for heresies such as his controversial ideas regarding the authenticity of the hebrew bible , which formed the foundations of modern biblical criticism , and the pantheistic nature of the divine . prior to that , he had been attacked on the steps of the community synagogue by a knife-wielding assailant shouting '' heretic ! '' , and later his books were added to the catholic church 's index of forbidden books . persecution of yazidis . the persecution of yazidis has been ongoing since at least the 10th century . the yazidism is regarded as devil worship by islamists . yazidis have been persecuted by muslim kurds tribes since the 10th century , and by the ottoman empire from the 17th to the 20th centuries . evliya çelebi , the intimate life of an ottoman statesman : melek ahmed pasha ( 1588–1662 ) , translated by robert dankoff , 304 pp . , suny press , 1991 ; , pp . 169–171 after the 2014 sinjar massacre of thousands of yazidis by the islamic state of iraq and the levant , yazidis still face violence from the turkish armed forces and its ally the syrian national army , as well as discrimination from the kurdistan regional government . according to yazidi tradition ( based on oral traditions and folk songs ) , estimated that 74 genocides against the yazidis have been carried out in the past 800 years . . see also . christian privilege cultural genocide discrimination freedom of religion human rights abuses islamic religious police conversion of non-islamic places of worship into mosques list of christian women of the patristic age oppression persecution prejudice price tag policy religious abuse religious discrimination religious fanaticism religious intolerance religious pluralism religious segregation religious violence . notes . references . further reading . john coffey ( 2000 ) , persecution and toleration in protestant england 1558-1689 , studies in modern history , pearson education . external links . united nations - special rapporteur of the commission on human rights on freedom of religion or belief united states commission on international religious freedom special rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief concerned about treatment of followers of baháʼí faith in iran about.com section on religious intolerance u.s . state department 2006 annual report on international religious freedom xtome : news and information on religious freedom