Sweet and Lowdown

plot summary . emmet ray ( sean penn ) is a jazz guitarist who achieved some acclaim in the 1930s with a handful of recordings for rca victor , but who faded from public view under mysterious circumstances . though a talented musician , ray 's personal life is a shambles . he is a spendthrift , womanizer and pimp who believes that falling in love will ruin his musical career . due to his heavy drinking , he 's often late or even absent for performances with his quintet . after music , his favorite hobby is shooting rats at garbage dumps . ray idolizes famed guitarist django reinhardt , and is said to have fainted in his presence and to have fled a nightclub performance with severe stage fright upon hearing a false rumor that reinhardt was in the audience . on a double date with his drummer , ray meets hattie ( samantha morton ) , a shy , mute laundress . after overcoming some initial frustration due to the difficulties of communication , ray and hattie form an affectionate and close relationship . she accompanies him on a cross-country trip to hollywood , where he plays in a short film ; hattie is spotted by a director and enjoys a brief screen career . however ray is convinced that a musician of his stature should never settle down with one woman . on a whim , ray marries socialite blanche williams ( uma thurman ) . however , blanche sees ray mainly as a colorful example of lower-class life and a source of inspiration for her literary writings . she reports that ray is tormented by nightmares and shouts out hattie 's name in his sleep . when blanche cheats with mobster al torrio ( anthony lapaglia ) , ray leaves her and locates hattie . he assumes that she will take him back , but discovers that she is happily married and raising a family . afterwards , on a date with a new woman , a despondent ray plays a melody that hattie adored and then smashes his guitar and forlornly repeats the phrase '' i made a mistake ! '' as his date leaves him . woody allen and the rest of the documentary experts remarked that ray 's final compositions were legendary , finally reaching the quality of reinhardt 's . cast . production . hot off his 1969 directing debut take the money and run , allen signed a contract to direct a series of films with united artists . told to '' write what you want to write , '' allen ( a clarinetist and avid jazz enthusiast ) wrote the jazz baby , a dramatic screenplay about a jazz musician set in the 1930s . allen said later that the united artists executives were '' stunned . because they had expected a comedy . they were very worried and told me , 'we realize that we signed a contract with you and you can do anything you want . but we want to tell you that we really do n't like this . ' '' bjorkman , stig , ed . woody allen on woody allen : revised edition . london : faber and faber , 1995 , 2004 . p . 36-7 . allen went along with united artists , writing and directing bananas instead . in 1995 , he dismissed the jazz baby as having been '' probably too ambitious . '' in 1998 , allen returned to the project , rewriting the script and dubbing it sweet and lowdown . in the role of emmet ray , a jazz guitarist whom allen had originally planned to play himself , the director cast sean penn ; allen also considered johnny depp , but the actor was busy at the time . bjorkman , stig , ed . woody allen on woody allen : revised edition . london : faber and faber , 1995 , 2004 . p . 347-56 . in regard to working with sean penn , who had a reputation for being difficult to work with , allen later said , '' i had no problem with him whatsoever . he gave it his all and took direction and made contributions himself . a tremendous actor . '' in an october 26 , 2009 , appearance on howard stern 's radio program , rosie o'donnell claimed that allen offered her the role of hattie , despite the fact that she had been vocal in her disgust over allen 's relationship with soon-yi previn . when stern asked if she were at all tempted to take the role despite her personal feelings , she replied that she was '' not for one minute tempted . '' the role went to samantha morton . sweet and lowdown was nominated for academy awards for academy award for best actor ( penn ) and best actress in a supporting role ( morton ) . morton 's nomination was especially notable given that she does not utter a single word of dialogue in the film . allen has said that he told morton to '' play the part like harpo marx . and she said , 'who is harpo marx ? ' and i realized how young she was . then i told her about him and she went back and saw the films . '' in addition to her oscar nomination , morton 's performance was met with critical acclaim , with salon.com critic stephanie zacharek saying that she '' quietly explodes the film . her performance is like nothing i 've seen in recent years . '' sweet and lowdown was filmed entirely in new york and new jersey davis , tom . a place for troops , troupes , hoops : teaneck armory still vital , copy of article from the record ( bergen county ) , january 2 , 2002 . accessed june 6 , 2007 . but set in the chicago area and california . the film was the first of allen 's that was edited by alisa lepselter , who has edited all of allen 's films since . lepselter succeeded susan e . morse , who edited allen 's films for the previous twenty years . it was the first of three films where allen collaborated with chinese cinematographer zhao fei . allen had first noticed zhao with his award-winning work on raise the red lantern , some years earlier . music . the music for the film was arranged and conducted by dick hyman . all of the guitar solos are played by guitarist howard alden . alden also coached sean penn on playing the guitar for his role in the film . additional rhythm guitarists were bucky pizzarelli and james chirillo . chirillo played rhythm guitar on the sweet georgia brown track where the lunar phase cable breaks while sean penn is riding it . pizzarelli did all other rhythm tracks . soundtrack . when day is done ( 1926 ) - written by robert katscher – performed by django reinhardt clarinet marmalade ( 1918 ) – written by larry shields and henry ragas – performed by ted lewis and his orchestra parlez-moi d'amour ( 1930 ) – written by jean lenoir – performed by howard alden mystery pacific ( 1936–7 ) – written by django reinhardt and stéphane grappelli – performed by howard alden , bucky pizzarelli and [ kelly friesen limehouse blues ( 1922 ) – lyrics by philip braham – written by douglas furber – arranged by dick hyman it do n't mean a thing ( 1931 ) – lyrics by irving mills – written by duke ellington out of nowhere ( 1931 ) – lyrics by edward heyman – written by johnny green i 'll see you in my dreams ( 1924 ) – lyrics by gus kahn – written by isham jones sweet georgia brown ( 1925 ) – music by ben bernie and maceo pinkard – lyrics by kenneth casey unfaithful woman ( 1999 ) – written by dick hyman shine ( 1910 ) – lyrics by cecil mack , lew brown – music by ford dabney after you 've gone ( 1918 ) – lyrics by henry creamer – written by turner layton i 'm forever blowing bubbles ( 1919 ) – lyrics by james brockman , nat vincent , james kendis – music by john w . kellette there 'll be some changes made ( 1921 ) – lyrics by billy higgins – music by w . benton overstreet viper mad ( 1937 ) – written by clarence williams ( musician ) and sidney bechet – performed by sidney bechet indiana ( 1917 ) – written by ballard macdonald and james f . hanley – performed by red nichols aloha oe ( 1908 ) – written by queen liliuokalani – performed by dick monday abide with me ( 1847 ) – lyrics by henry f . lyte – music by william h . monk 12th street rag ( 1919 ) – written by euday l . bowman – performed by howard alden the peanut vendor ( 1927 ) – written by moïse simons – english lyrics by l . wolfe gilbert and marion sunshine all of me ( 1931 ) – written by gerald marks and seymour simons caravan ( 1936 ) – written by duke ellington , juan tizol and irving mills – performed by bunny berigan and his orchestra old fashioned love ( 1923 ) – music by james p . johnson – lyrics by cecil mack just a gigolo ( 1929 ) – written by irving caesar – written by leonello casucci and julius brammer nevertheless ( i 'm in love with you ) ( 1931 ) – lyrics by bert kalmar – music by harry ruby 3:00 am blues ( 1999 ) – written by dick hyman liebestraum no . 3 ( 1850 ) – written by franz liszt – performed by django reinhardt since my best gal turned me down ( 1927 ) – written by ray ludwig and howdy quicksell – performed by bix beiderbecke wrap your troubles in dreams ( 1931 ) – lyrics by ted koehler , billy moll – music by harry barris hot lips ( 1922 ) – written by henry busse , henry lange and lou davis – performed by henry busse and his orchestra you were meant for me ( 1929 ) – lyrics by arthur freed – music by nacio herb brown avalon ( 1920 ) – written by buddy g . desylva , al jolson and vincent rose – performed by django reinhardt lulu 's back in town ( 1935 ) – music by harry warren – lyrics by al dubin sweet sue , just you ( 1928 ) – lyrics by will j . harris – music by victor young – performed by howard alden . reception . sweet and lowdown received generally positive reviews ; it currently holds a 77 % 'fresh ' rating on rotten tomatoes from 61 reviews , with the consensus , '' critics praise woody allen 's sweet and lowdown for its charming , light-hearted comedy and quality acting . '' the film carries a 70 on metacritic indicating generally favorable reviews . . references . external links .