Jean Talon

weak and destitute new france . prior to jean talon 's arrival to the french colony in 1665 , the colony , founded by samuel de champlain and situated along st . lawrence river , was in a state of weakness and destitution despite its existence for more than half a century . its failure in progress had been due to several key factors , including poor governance of the colony by trading companies , forgetfulness on the part of france , and the horrors caused by the wars between the haudenosaunee and the wendat clans . the progress of the colony had been stifled by trading companies , because the companies valued money and profit rather than the survival of the colony , which did not really matter because most of the residents were coureur des bois and could fend for themselves . the french minister in charge of new france 's affairs back in france was cardinal richelieu . at first he was involved in improving the colony 's situation through attempts to increase the population of the colony , but he had been unsuccessful . later on , his attention shifted to european politics , and new france 's affairs were left ignored . for 25 years , the colonists had been living with the effects of engaging in a violent war against the native inhabitants of the land , the iroquois . in new france , no adequate military force existed to battle the haudenosaunee . other situations added to the degrading of the colony , included internal strife among the leaders in new france over questions of liquor traffic , lack of immigration from france , dying fur trade , and poor agriculture . the colonists of new france , the governor and the bishop petitioned to france for assistance . talon 's life before new france . jean talon was born in châlons-en-champagne to philippe talon and anne marie de bury , where he was baptized on january 8 , 1626 . his family was related to the parisian talons , who held in succession the high office of attorney-general of france . after studying at the jesuits ' college of clermont , talon was employed in a commissariat . his abilities soon became apparent and when he was thirty , he was promoted to the position of intendant for new france . when an intendant was needed for the task of bringing the dying new france back to life , colbert , an administrator of france , thought immediately of jean talon and recommended him to the king . talon 's commission is dated march 23 , 1665 . rescue of new france . louis and his minister decided in 1663 to give new france a new constitution . the charter of the company of one hundred associates was cancelled and the old council of quebec , which was formed in 1647 , reorganized and became the sovereign council . the sovereign council was composed of the governor , the bishop , the intendant , an attorney-general , a secretary , and five councilors . its functions included general jurisdiction for the administration of justice in civil and criminal matters , and the questions of police , roads , finance , and trade . in 1665 , the king sent a regiment of trained soldiers , a viceroy , a new governor , a new intendant , settlers and labourers , and supplies to new france . on september 12 , 1665 , the ship saint sebastien arrived in new france with prouville de tracy , the commander-in-chief of the troops , sieur de courcelle , the governor , and jean talon , the intendant of justice , police and finance . a long letter of instructions was drafted by colbert to guide jean talon in his mission to new france . the instructions dealt with mutual relations of church and state , discussed the question of assistance to the recently created west india company , and contemplated the war against the iroquois and how it could be carried out successfully . other instructions included the following : the establishment of the sovereign council and the administration of justice ; the settlement of the colony and the advisability of concentrating the population ; the importance of fostering trade and industry ; the question of tithes for the maintenance of the church ; the establishment of shipbuilding yards ; and the encouragement of agriculture . promoting colonization , agriculture , shipbuilding and commerce . it was up to tracy and courcelle to protect the colony from iroquois attacks . once talon arrived in new france , his first task was to organize transportation of provisions , ammunition , tool , and supplies for the maintenance of the troops and to take care of incoming soldiers and laborers , making sure that those who contracted disease , received proper nursing and medical attention . tracy had led a successful attack against the iroquois and won peace for the colony , restoring order and harmony . he left canada on august 28 , 1667 ; courcelle became the governor and talon remained as the intendant . now that peace was restored , talon could carry out his works of colonization . in 1665 , he had taken back the land granted to the jesuits to establish about forty dwellings in preparation for new settlers , who would arrive the following year . these dwellings were to be grouped in three adjacent villages named bourg-royal , bourg-la-reine , and bour-talon . one of the most important historical documents of this period was carried out by talon . a general census of new france was taken during the winter of 1666-67 to gather information about the colony . this the first canadian census of which we have any record . it did not include the king ’ s troops , which formed a body of 1200 men . talon was highly organized in his establishment of settlements . new villages were established as close as possible to the capital and the settlers were grouped around a central point to encourage mutual help and defense . proper dwellings were made ready to receive the newcomers . talon proceeded to fill these dwellings with settlers , trying to have some skilled artisans , such as carpenters , shoemakers , and masons in each village . talon ’ s colonization policy was to give grants of settlements to soldiers and habitants . they took possession of the land and received an ample supply of food and tools required . they would receive payment in clearing and tilling the first two acres . in return , they had to clear and prepare another two acres in three or four years so that the two acres could be given to the next round of incoming settlers . under talon ’ s successful colonization policy , the settlement of the country progressed rapidly . a census taken in 1668 gave very satisfactory figures . while in 1667 there had been under cultivation , in 1668 were now under cultivation , and wheat production amounted to 130,978 bushels . talon 's activity showed great zeal for the public good . in terms of promoting agriculture , he erected a brewery near the st . charles river in 1668 to support cultivation of wheat . furthermore , hemp was highly needed in the colony for making coarse cloth . to promote the production of hemp , he created a monopoly of thread . he seized all the thread on the shops , and gave notice that to acquire thread , they had to exchange it with hemp . talon promoted commerce through his introduction of the shipbuilding industry . through encouragement of shipbuilding , he had in mind the extension of the colony 's trade with the west indies and france . he also encouraged the development of the fishing industry along st.lawrence river . to further encourage the growth of the colony , talon established various policies to promote marriage and bearing of children . to young women who married , the intendant gave 50 livres in household supplies and some provisions . according to the king ’ s decree , each youth who married at or before the age of twenty was entitled to 20 livres , called '' the king ’ s gift . '' during the years 1665-68 , 6000 livres were used to support the marriage of young gentlewomen without means , and another 6000 livres for settlement and marriage of four captains , three lieutenants , five ensigns and a few minor officers . furthermore , families having ten children in their household were entitled to a pension of three hundred livres annually and four hundred livres were given to family with twelve children . to balance the number of men and women living in the colony and to promote further marriage , girls were carefully selected from france to be taken to canada . some of them were orphans , who grew up under the king 's protection in charitable institutions . they were called les filles du roi . the rest of the girls belonged to honest families , whose parents were willing to send them to a new country where they would be well provided for . when these young women arrived in canada , they immediately married or were placed for a time in good families . strenuous efforts of talon gave great impulse to population . in 1665 , there were 3,215 settlers , and 533 families . three years later , the population now contained 6,282 settlers and 1,139 families . jean talon was hard at work in laying the foundation of an economic and political system and making commercial , industrial progresses . providing administration and internal order . talon designed the main government buildings , especially the palace , paying special attention to the administration of justice . under his commission , talon had the right to '' judge alone and with full jurisdiction in civil matters , '' to '' hear all cases of crimes and misdemeanours , abuse and malversation , by whomsoever committed '' to '' proceed against all persons guilty of any crime , whatever might be their quality or condition , to pursue the proceedings until final completion , judgment and execution thereof . '' talon wished to make justice speedy , accessible to all and inexpensive . he proposed a three level system . in each parish , judges would be established to hear all civil cases involving not more than ten livres . appeals for decisions given by the local judges could be taken to four judges based in quebec . final appeal was made to the sovereign council , which acted as a court . in 1669 talon wrote a memorandum in which we find these words : '' justice is administered in the first instance by judges in the seigneuries ; then by a lieutenant civil and criminal appointed by the company in each of the jurisdictions of quebec and three rivers ; and above all by the sovereign council , which is the last instance decides all cases where an appeal lies '' talon attempted to establish a method of settlement out of court . he also introduced an equitable system of land registration . at that time , the sovereign council functioned as the legislature , the executive , the courts of justice and various commissions . one of the most important laws established by the sovereign council under talon ’ s guidance was that concerning the importation of liquor and the establishment of the brewing industry . the decree stated that immoral self-indulgence was caused by importation of great quantity of liquor from france . talon thought that establishment of breweries in the colony would solve the problem of immoderate use of alcohol . the breweries would also support colony 's agriculture in wheat . in 1667 , the sovereign council inspired by talon discussed the formation of a company of canadians to secure the exclusive privilege of trading . the charter granted the commercial monopoly to the west india company . in 1668 , the council sent a letter asking for freedom of trade to colbert . the colonists had suffered from high prices and lack of availability in necessary goods . this was detrimental to the colony . the sale of liquor to the native americans had always been prohibited in the colony . in 1657 , the prohibition had been renewed and ratified under a decree of the king ’ s state council . in 1663 , the sovereign council established a law prohibiting indirect or direct selling or giving of brandy to native americans . jean talon supported the sovereign council 's decisions in the beginning . however , he was becoming more and more impressed by the material benefits and less convinced of its moral danger . he came to consider prohibition of the liquor traffic as a mistake , damaging to the trade and progress of the colony and to french influence over the native americans tribes . his earnest desire for the prosperity of the colony misled him to make the wrong judgment and brandy trafficking was accepted and approved . the climate was severe and talon 's health was deteriorating . talon asked twice for his recall back to france . he had family matters to take care of and he wanted relief from his difficulties with the governor and the spiritual authorities . louis xiv gave him leave to return to france and claude de bouteroue was appointed to take over his duties . talon left quebec in november 1668 . return to new france . back in france , jean talon continued to support the canadian colony . the king and colbert readily approved his plans for strengthening the canadian colony . troops , laborers , women , settlers , and supplies were sent in response to talon 's requests . talon 's stay in france was only brief . on may 10 , 1669 , the king signed talon ’ s new commission to return to canada . on august 18 , after an absence from new france for a year and nine months , he landed once more at quebec . during his second term as the intendant of new france , he focused on external affairs of the colony . he wanted to extend french influence to the north , south and west . on october 10 , 1670 , he wrote to the king : '' since my arrival , i have sent resolute men to explore farther than has ever been done in canada , some to the west , and north-west , others to the south-west and south . '' his policy of exploration and discovery was directed towards increasing france 's reputation , developing trade ; and therefore , preparing the way for the future greatness of canada . furthermore , through promotion of the development of acadia , he tried to strengthen canada on the border with new england and the alliance with the northern tribes opened up trade opportunities with the wide area extending from lake st . john to lake mistassini and to hudson bay . under authority of a decree of the king ’ s council of state , talon gave large number of seigneuries as grants . from october 10 to november 8 he granted about sixty seigneuries to officers and others settlements . on november 3 alone , he made 31 grants . it is true , seigneurial grants had been made in canada before , but it was made without any preconceived plan or well-defined object . talon organized the system of seigneuries with a well-defined object , which was to protect and to colonize the country . legacy . jean talon had saved the colony from destitution through the implementation of policies that cultivated agriculture , colonization , trade , industry and naval construction . he strengthened the foundation on which justice and government was placed . with strong outlook into the future , he prepared the way for the future extension and growth of new france . jean talon left canada in november 1672 . the king had made a barony of his estate in recognition of his services and created him baron des islets . later on he became count d ’ orsainville and was appointed captain of the mariemont castle . after a time , he became premier valet de la garde-robe du roi ( first valet of the king ’ s wardrobe ) . finally , he attained the coveted office of secretary of the king 's cabinet . jean talon died on november 24 , 1694 , at the age of sixty-eight . honours . several sites and landmarks were named to honour jean talon . they include : rue jean-talon ( jean talon street ) , located in shawinigan , quebec , canada the jean talon building ( building 5 ) in tunney 's pasture , ottawa , ontario ( a statistics canada building , so named because jean talon conducted the first census in what is now canada ) the provincial electoral district of jean-talon , quebec rue jean-talon ( jean-talon street ) , an important street of going east-west in the city of montreal , quebec metro jean-talon ( jean talon subway station ) , the intersection of the orange and the blue subway lines in montreal , quebec marché jean-talon , a farmer 's market in montreal rue jean talon in châlons en champagne statue jean-talon in châlons en champagne . see also . canadian hereditary peers . notes . references . . external links .