Martti Ahtisaari

youth and early career . martti ahtisaari was born in viipuri , finland ( now vyborg , russia ) . his father , oiva ahtisaari ( whose grandfather julius marenius adolfsen had emigrated with his parents to finland in 1872 from tistedalen in southern norway ) took finnish citizenship in 1929 and finnicized his surname from adolfsen in 1936 . the continuation war ( world war ii ) took martti 's father to the front as an nco army mechanic , while his mother , tyyne , moved to kuopio with her son to escape immediate danger from the war . president ahtisaari 's ancestors a study by suomen sukututkimusseura ( the finnish genealogy society ) . kuopio was where ahtisaari spent most of his childhood , eventually attending kuopion lyseo high school . in 1952 , martti ahtisaari moved to oulu with his family to seek employment . there he continued his education in high school , graduating in 1956 . he also joined the local ymca . after completing his military service ( ahtisaari holds the rank of captain in the finnish army reserve ) , he began to study through a distance-learning course at oulu teachers ' college . he was able to live at home while attending the two-year course which enabled him to qualify as a primary-school teacher in 1959 . besides his native language , finnish , ahtisaari speaks swedish , french , english , and german . in 1960 , he moved to karachi , pakistan , to lead the swedish pakistani institute 's physical education training establishment , where he became accustomed to a more international environment . in addition to managing the students ' home , ahtisaari 's job involved training teachers . he returned to finland in 1963 , and became active in non-governmental organizations responsible for aid to developing countries . he joined the international students ' organisation aiesec , where he discovered new passions about diversity and diplomacy . in 1965 , he joined the ministry for foreign affairs in its bureau for international development aid , eventually becoming the assistant head of the department . in 1968 , he married eeva ahtisaari . the couple has one son , marko ahtisaari , a technology entrepreneur and musician . diplomatic career . ahtisaari spent several years as a diplomatic representative from finland . he served as finland 's ambassador to tanzania from 1973 to 1977 . as un deputy secretary-general 1977–1981 and as united nations commissioner for namibia from 1976 to 1981 , working to secure the independence of namibia from the republic of south africa . between 1987 and 1991 ahtisaari was the under-secretary-general of the united nations for administration and management . following the death of a later un commissioner for namibia , bernt carlsson , on pan am flight 103 on 21 december 1988 & nbsp ; – on the eve of the signing of the tripartite accord at un headquarters & nbsp ; – ahtisaari was sent to namibia in april 1989 as the un special representative to head the united nations transition assistance group ( untag ) . because of the illegal incursion of swapo troops from angola , the south african appointed administrator-general ( ag ) , louis pienaar , sought ahtisaari 's agreement to the deployment of sadf troops to stabilize the situation . ahtisaari took advice from british prime minister margaret thatcher , who was visiting the region at the time , and approved the sadf deployment . a period of intense fighting ensued when at least 375 swapo insurgents were killed . history of namibia independence in july 1989 , glenys kinnock and tessa blackstone of the british council of churches visited namibia and reported : '' there is a widespread feeling that too many concessions were made to south african personnel and preferences and that martti ahtisaari was not forceful enough in his dealings with the south africans . '' perhaps because of his reluctance to authorise this sadf deployment , ahtisaari was alleged to have been targeted by the south african civil cooperation bureau ( ccb ) . according to a hearing in september 2000 of the south african truth and reconciliation commission , two ccb operatives ( kobus le roux and ferdinand barnard ) were tasked not to kill ahtisaari , but to give him '' a good hiding '' . to carry out the assault , barnard had planned to use the grip handle of a metal saw as a knuckleduster . in the event , ahtisaari did not attend the meeting at the keetmanshoop hotel , where le roux and barnard lay in wait for him , and thus ahtisaari escaped injury . after the independence elections of 1989 , ahtisaari was appointed an honorary namibian citizen . south africa gave him the o r tambo award for '' his outstanding achievement as a diplomat and commitment to the cause of freedom in africa and peace in the world '' . ahtisaari served as un undersecretary general for administration and management from 1987 to 1991 causing mixed feelings inside the organisation during an internal investigation of massive fraud . when ahtisaari revealed in 1990 that he had secretly lengthened the grace period allowing un officials to return misappropriated taxpayer money from the original three months to three years , the investigators were furious . the 340 officials found guilty of fraud were able to return money even after their crime had been proven . the harshest punishment was the firing of twenty corrupt officials . sainio , pentti : operaatio ahtisaari . art house , 1993 . the independent on sunday , 1991 may 19 . . president of finland . ahtisaari 's presidential campaign in finland began when he was still a member of the council dealing with bosnia . finland 's ongoing recession caused established political figures to lose public support , and the presidential elections were now direct , instead of being conducted through an electoral college . in 1993 , ahtisaari accepted the candidacy of the social democratic party . his politically untarnished image was a major factor in the election , as was his vision of finland as an active participant in international affairs . ahtisaari narrowly won over his second round opponent , elisabeth rehn of the swedish people 's party . during the campaign , there were rumours spread by some political opponents of ahtisaari that he had a drinking problem or that he had knowingly accepted a double salary from the finnish foreign ministry and from the united nations while trying to negotiate an end to the bosnian war . ahtisaari denied both allegations and no firm proof of them has emerged . during the three-week campaign between the two rounds of presidential elections , ahtisaari was praised by his supporters for being more compassionate towards the many unemployed finns than rehn , who as defence minister had to officially support the aho government 's strict economic policies . a minor controversy arose during a town hall-style presidential debate in lappeenranta , southeastern finland , when an apparently born-again christian woman in the audience asked rehn what her relationship with jesus was . rehn replied that she had personally no proof that jesus had been a historical person . ahtisaari ducked a precise answer by stating that he trusted the lutheran confession even on this issue . mitä missä milloin & nbsp ; — kansalaisen vuosikirja 1995 ( '' what where when & nbsp ; — citizen 's yearbook 1995 '' ) , helsinki : otava publications ltd . , 1994 . anja snellman and saska saarikoski , '' the third round '' / kolmas kierros , published in finland in 1994 . pertti sainio , '' secret operation ahtisaari '' / operaatio salainen ahtisaari , published in finland in 1993 . his term as president began with a schism within the centre party government led by prime minister esko aho , who did not approve of ahtisaari 's being actively involved in foreign policy . there was also some controversy over ahtisaari 's speaking out on domestic issues such as unemployment . he travelled extensively in finland and abroad , and was nicknamed '' matka-mara '' ( '' travel-mara '' , mara being a common diminutive form of martti ) . his monthly travels throughout the country and his meetings with ordinary citizens ( the so-called maakuntamatkat or '' provincial trips '' ) nonetheless greatly enhanced his political popularity . ahtisaari kept his campaign promise to visit one finnish historical province every month during his presidency . he also donated some thousands of finnish marks per month to the unemployed people 's organisations , and a few thousand finnish marks to the christian social organisation of the late lay preacher and social worker veikko hursti . mitä missä milloin & nbsp ; — kansalaisen vuosikirjat 1995 , 2000 , 2001 ( '' what where when & nbsp ; — citizen 's yearbooks 1995 , 2000 , 2001 '' ) veikko hursti , '' for i was hungry . '' / sillä minun oli nälkä . ( autobiography ) , published in finland in 1997 . ahtisaari favoured pluralism and religious tolerance publicly . privately , he and his wife practise their christian faith . contrary to some of his predecessors and his successor as the finnish president , ahtisaari ended all of his new year 's speeches by wishing the finnish people god 's blessing . the speeches are available in electronic form from finnish broadcasting company yle 's living archives , in january 1998 ahtisaari was criticized by some ngos , politicians and notable cultural figures because he awarded medals of honour to the forest minister of indonesia and to the main owner of the indonesian rgm company , a parent company of the april company . the april company was criticized by non-governmental organisations for destroying rain forests , and indonesia itself was criticized heavily for human right violations , especially in east timor . ahtisaari 's party chairman erkki tuomioja said that giving medals was questionable since he feared the act may tarnish the public image of finnish human rights policy . students of the arts had demonstrations in helsinki against the decision to give medals . helsingin sanomat , kotimaa , 1998 january 15 , p . 1 , '' mielenosoitus : kunniamerkit takaisin indonesiasta '' . helsingin sanomat , talous , 2000 march 21 , p . 3 . , '' ahtisaari saanee vastaehdokkaan upm : n hallitus-vaaliin '' ( tässä jutussa on vain luontoliiton osuus ) . president ahtisaari supported finland 's entry into the european union , and in a 1994 referendum , 57 percent of finnish voters were in favour of eu membership . mitä missä milloin & nbsp ; — kansalaisen vuosikirja 1996 ( '' what where when & nbsp ; — citizen 's yearbook 1996 '' ) , helsinki : otava publications ltd . , 1995 . he later stated that if finland had not voted to join the eu he would have resigned . during ahtisaari 's term as president , boris yeltsin and bill clinton met in helsinki . he also negotiated alongside viktor chernomyrdin with slobodan milošević to end the fighting in the yugoslav province of kosovo in 1999 . often encountering resistance from the finnish parliament , which preferred a more cautious foreign policy , as well as from within his own party , ahtisaari did not seek re-election in 2000 . he wanted the social democrats to re-nominate him for the presidency without opposition , but two opponents signed up for the party 's presidential primary . mitä missä milloin & nbsp ; — kansalaisen vuosikirja 2000 ( '' what where when & nbsp ; — citizen 's yearbook 2000 '' ) , helsinki : otava publications ltd . , 1999 . ahtisaari was the last '' strong president '' , before the 2000 constitution reduced the president 's powers . he was succeeded by the foreign minister tarja halonen . post-presidential career . in finnish politics , ahtisaari has stressed how important it is for finland to join nato . martti ahtisaari wants finland in nato . yle . 2008-10-11 ahtisaari has argued that finland should be a full member of nato and the eu in order '' to shrug off once and for all the burden of finlandization '' . he believes politicians should file application and make finland a member . he says that the way finnish politicians avoid expressing their opinion is disturbing . ahtisaari nato-kansanäänestystä vastaan . mtv3 he has noted that the so-called '' nato option '' ( acquiring membership when finland is threatened ) is an illusion , making an analogy to trying to obtain fire insurance when the fire has already started . since leaving office , ahtisaari has held positions in various international organisations . in 2000 , he became chairman of the brussels-based international crisis group , an ngo to which he committed 100,000 in government funding in 1994 one month after becoming elected president of finland . he remains chairman emeritus . ahtisaari also founded the independent crisis management initiative ( cmi ) with the goal of developing and sustaining peace in troubled areas . on 1 december 2000 , ahtisaari was awarded the j . william fulbright prize for international understanding by the fulbright association in recognition of his work as peacemaker in some of the world 's most troubled areas . in may 2017 ahtisaari suggested as new cmi leader alexander stubb a finnish politician representing finnish conservatives i.e . the national coalition party . ahtisaari luopuu perustamansa cmi-järjestön puheenjohtajuudesta – ehdottaa seuraajakseen alexander stubbia yle 9.5.2017 in 2000–01 , ahtisaari and cyril ramaphosa inspected ira weapons dumps for the independent international commission on decommissioning , as part of the northern ireland peace process . in 2005 , ahtisaari successfully led peace negotiations between the free aceh movement ( gam ) and the indonesian government through his non-governmental organization cmi . the negotiations ended on 15 august 2005 with the signing of the helsinki mou on disarmament of gam rebels , the dropping of gam demands for an independent aceh , and a withdrawal of indonesian forces . in november 2005 , un secretary-general kofi annan appointed ahtisaari as special envoy for the kosovo status process which was to determine whether kosovo , having been administered by the united nations since 1999 , should become independent or remain a province of serbia . in early 2006 , ahtisaari opened the un office of the special envoy for kosovo ( unosek ) in vienna , austria , from where he conducted the kosovo status negotiations . those opposed to ahtisaari 's settlement proposal , which involved an internationally monitored independence for kosovo , sought to discredit him . allegations made by balkan media sources of corruption and improper conduct by ahtisaari were described by us state department spokesman tom casey as '' spurious '' , adding that ahtisaari 's plan is the '' best solution possible '' and has the '' full endorsement of the united states '' . the new york times suggested that this criticism of ahtisaari on the part of the serbs had led to the '' bogging down '' of the kosovo status talks . the new york times & nbsp ; – serbs criticize un mediator , further bogging down kosovo talks . in november 2008 , serbian media reported pierre mirel , director of the eu enlargement commission 's western balkans division as saying : '' the eu has accepted that the deployment of eulex has to be approved by the united nations security council , and that the mission has to be neutral and will not be related to the ahtisaari plan , '' mirel said , following his meeting with serbia 's vice-president bozidar djelic . in july 2007 , however , when the eu , russia and the united states agreed to find a new format for the talks , ahtisaari announced that he regarded his mission as over . since neither the un nor the troika had asked him to continue mediations in the face of russia 's persistent refusal to support independence for kosovo , he said he would nonetheless be willing to take on '' a role as consultant '' , if requested . after a period of uncertainty and mounting tension , kosovo unilaterally declared its independence from serbia in february 2008 . in his work , he has emphasised the importance of the united states in the peace process , stating that '' there can be no peace without america . '' ahtisaari was chairman of the interpeace governing council from 2000 to 2009 . john a . kufuor foundation '' interpeace '' retrieved on 27 january 2012 idrc '' idrc partner awarded nobel peace prize '' retrieved on 3 february 2012 imagine nations '' martti ahtisaari '' retrieved on 3 february 2012 since 2009 , ahtisaari has been chairman emeritus and a special advisor . interpeace '' governing council '' retrieved on 27 january 2012 ahtisaari is board director of the imaginenations group . in 2008 ahtisaari was awarded an honorary degree by university college , london . that same year he received the 2007 unesco félix houphouët-boigny peace prize , for '' his lifetime contribution to world peace '' . in september 2009 ahtisaari joined the elders , a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues . he travelled to the korean peninsula with fellow elders gro harlem brundtland , jimmy carter and mary robinson in april 2011 , and to south sudan with robinson and archbishop desmond tutu in july 2012 . ahtisaari is a member of the mo ibrahim foundation 's ibrahim prize committee . he is also a member of the board of the european council on foreign relations . . syria conflict . in august 2012 , ahtisaari opined on the sectarian violence in syria and was mentioned as a possible replacement as joint envoy there to succeed former secretary-general kofi annan . '' general assembly adopts resolution on syria '' , transcript of uk ambassador sir mark lyall grant 's remarks at the 'stakeout ' after adoption of the resolution , british un mission website , 3 august 2012 . ahtisaari 's name only mentioned in a media question . no comment from grant . retrieved 2012-08-03 . '' ‘ crazy ’ enough to take on syria ? '' , the new york times , 3 august 2012 . posted 2012-08-03 . however , ahtisaari then told the finnish state broadcaster yle that '' he wished the mission would fall on someone else '' which it ultimately did in the person of lakhdar brahimi , a former algerian foreign minister and longtime u.n . diplomat . '' un : algeria ’ s brahimi will replace annan in syria '' , ap via new york daily news , 17 august 2012 . retrieved 2012-08-23 . in late 2015 , martti ahtisaari reiterated charges he already had made in an interview with german broadcaster deutsche welle in early 2013 against members of the un security council on the obstruction of a political solution to the escalating conflict in syria . ahtisaari : '' sicherheitsrat ist schuld '' , dw.com , 11 february 2013 ( in german ) ahtisaari said in an interview in september 2015 that he held talks about syria with envoys from the five permanent members of the un security council in february 2012 . according to ahtisaari , vitaly churkin , russian ambassador to the united nations , laid out three points during a meeting with him , which included not arming the syrian opposition , commencing talks between syrian president assad and the opposition and finding '' an elegant way for assad to step aside '' . but the us , britain and france subsequently ignored the proposal . ahtisaari said in the interview : '' nothing happened because i think all these , and many others , were convinced that assad would be thrown out of office in a few weeks so there was no need to do anything . '' west 'ignored russian offer in 2012 to have syria 's assad step aside ' , theguardian.com , 15 september 2015 . contraction of covid-19 . on 24 march 2020 , amid the large-scale outbreak of covid-19 , it was announced that ahtisaari had tested positive for the disease . his spouse , eeva ahtisaari , was diagnosed with the same virus on 21 march . eeva ahtisaari attended the international women 's day concert on 8 march at the helsinki music centre while infected . on 14 april 2020 it was announced that martti and eeva ahtisaari are recovering from the coronavirus infection . uusitalo , kaisa : presidenttipari parantumassa koronaviruksesta – martti ja eeva ahtisaaren uusimmat koronavirusnäytteet negatiivisia , yle 14 april 2020 . accessed on 16 april 2020 . . nobel peace prize . on 10 october 2008 ahtisaari was announced as that year 's recipient of the nobel peace prize . ahtisaari received the prize on 10 december 2008 at oslo city hall in norway . ahtisaari twice worked to find a solution in kosovo & nbsp ; – first in 1999 and again between 2005 and 2007 . he also worked with others this year to find a peaceful solution to the problems in iraq , the committee said . according to the committee , ahtisaari and his group , crisis management initiative ( cmi ) , also contributed to resolving other conflicts in northern ireland , central asia , and the horn of africa . ahtisaari invited prime minister matti vanhanen , foreign affairs minister alexander stubb and others to his nobel event , but not president halonen . presidentti halosta ei kutsuttu ahtisaaren nobel-juhliin . helsingin sanomat according to the memoir of the former secretary of the norwegian nobel committee , geir lundestad , former foreign minister and un ambassador keijo korhonen , who was strongly against awarding the 2008 nobel peace prize to ahtisaari , wrote a letter to the committee which negatively portrayed ahtisaari as a person and his merits in international conflict zones . . honours . . national honours . : order of holy lamb recipient of the medal of st.henrik . foreign honours . : ( 12 september 2016 ) : ( 2002 ) : ( 3 march 1997 ) : : : : ( 1994 ) : estonian presidency website ( estonian ) , estonian state decorations , martti ahtisaari - eeva ahtisaari : : : : : ( 26 september 1995 ) icelandic presidency website ( icelandic ) , order of the falcon , martti & eeva ahtisaari , 26 september 1995 , grand cross with collar & grand cross respectively : : ( 1997 ) : : : ( 1996 ) : ( 1995 ) : : : ( 1994 ) : ( 1997 ) : : ( 16 june 2004 ) ( 1997 ) : : ( 1994 ) : ( 1999 ) : : first class of the order of federation : ( 1995 ) . awards . 1995 : zamenhof prize for international understanding , of the world esperanto association 1998 : honorary doctorate from helsinki university of technology , '' tkk honorary doctor martti ahtisaari to receive nobel peace prize '' , aalto university webpage , 13.10.2008 . au is successor to hut/tkk . retrieved 2012-08-08 . and from national university of kyiv-mohyla academy 2000 : j . william fulbright prize for international understanding 2000 : freedom medal four freedoms award freedom medal 2000 : : hessian peace prize laureates of the hessian peace prize , hsfk.de dead link at crisis management initiative website : . 2004 : oliver tambo 2006 : gold medal of the american-scandinavian foundation cv of martti ahtisaari , cmi.fi 2007 : : manfred wörner medal of the german ministry of defense 2007 : honorary degree , university of st . gallen , switzerland 2008 : delta prize for global understanding 2008 : félix houphouët-boigny peace prize 2008 : nobel peace prize 2008 : : geuzenpenning 2011 : honorary degree , university of calgary , canada . see also . list of peace activists . notes . external links . martti ahtisaari 's homepage martti ahtisaari 's project syndicate op/eds ahtisaari nobel prize lecture thisisfinland -nobel recognition rewards peaceful resolutions martti ahtisaari in the presidents of finland