Haverford College

campus . haverford college is located on the main line northwest of philadelphia . the school is connected to center city philadelphia by the paoli/thorndale line commuter rail system and norristown high speed line ( r100 ) . the northwest portion of the campus is located in haverford township in delaware county , and the southwest part of the campus is located in lower merion township in montgomery county . the campus itself is situated in an affluent suburban neighborhood , adjacent to the haverford school , the merion golf club and the merion cricket club , one of the oldest country clubs in the united states . nearby attractions within walking distance include various food markets , grocery stores , restaurants , and suburban square , which hosts retail stores , restaurants and a local farmer 's market . buildings . the college operates more than 50 academic , athletic , and residential buildings , which are mostly stone and reflect quaker and colonial design principles . the most recent additions are the marian e . koshland integrated natural science center and the douglas b . gardner '83 integrated athletic center ( colloquially referred to as the giac ) . two dorms , by tod williams billie tsien architects , began housing freshman and upperclassman in the fall of 2012 . haverford 's magill library boasts more than a half million of its own volumes and has access to nearly two million more through its unusual tripod computerized catalog system , which integrates its library with those of neighboring bryn mawr and swarthmore colleges . in addition to magill 's main resources , the college houses a number of special collections including the quaker and special collections , the c.c . morris 1904 cricket library , and numerous rare books and other treasures ; the college also maintains three smaller music , science , and astronomy libraries on campus . in the fall of 2017 , the college unveiled renovations to ryan gym , which now serves as a new visual culture , arts , and media facility ( vcam ) , housing the visual studies minor , the haverford innovations program , a maker arts space , and the john b . hurford ’ 60 center for the arts and humanities and its philadelphia area creative collaboratives initiative . the project , designed by msr architects , earned a 2018 education facility design award of excellence from the american institute of architects . a second phase to the college 's recently completed lives that speak campaign involves a renovation of magill library , which began in spring 2018 under the direction of perry , dean , rogers architects and is set to reopen as lutnick library in fall 2019 . beyond that , the college is in the early design stages of a new music building . haverford college arboretum . comprising the entire campus , the haverford college arboretum is the oldest collegiate arboretum in the united states . in 1834 , a year after the college 's founding , the english landscape gardener william carvill was hired to design the plan for the campus . carvill developed a design to replace the tilled fields , woodlots and pastures , using trees to frame and complement open spaces . he bordered the lanes with alleés of trees and planted groups of trees in odd numbers . carvill also constructed grape arbors and a serpentine walk , reflecting the english landscape tradition of sir humphry repton . carvill 's mark is still evident today in the pastoral landscape which includes several original trees including a swamp white oak , quercus bicolor , and bur oak , quercus macrocarpa , on founders green . in 1901 , a group of students and alumni formed the campus club to help preserve the campus landscape after discovering carvill 's original plan . their work eventually led to the founding of the haverford college campus arboretum association ( now the haverford college arboretum association ) in 1974 , which continues to perpetuate carvill 's original design . to date , the arboretum 's contain a nature trail , a pinetum with 300 different conifers , a duck pond , historic trees of diverse species , sculpture , as well as flower and asian gardens . . housing . roughly 99 % of the student body resides on campus , where housing options include apartments , themed houses and traditional dormitories . the minute fraction who choose to seek other accommodations do so nearby in neighboring townships . approximately 60 % of faculty also reside on campus . themed housing options include roslin house , which '' supports the endeavors of students actively engaged in organizing programs concerned with the cultures and civilizations of the spanish-speaking world '' , the ira de a . reid house , which seeks students active in the black students ' league or members of the african diaspora interested in the culture and politics of africans , cadbury house , which provides a substance-free and quiet living environment , and yarnall , which has no permanent theme . various housing and room arrangements exist , including suites of singles , doubles , and triples . student life . journalism . student publications include the bi-college news , a newspaper in collaboration with students at bryn mawr college that serves both campuses ; the clerk , an independent , online newspaper ; feathers & fur , a fashion magazine also in collaboration with students at bryn mawr college ; milkweed , a student literary magazine ; without a ( noun ) , the haverford satire/humor magazine ; body text , an academic journal ; margin , a student-edited creative magazine ; and the record , the student yearbook . athletics . haverford college competes at the ncaa division iii level in the centennial conference . haverford is home to the only varsity cricket team in the united states ; its men 's and women 's track and field and cross country teams are perennial powerhouses in their division , with men 's cross country winning the 2010 cross country division iii national championships ; its men 's soccer team is among the nation 's oldest , having won its first intercollegiate match in 1905 against harvard college , and in 2015 made it to quarterfinals of the ncca division iii championships ; its fencing team has competed since the early 1930s and is a member of both the middle atlantic collegiate fencing association ( macfa ) and the national intercollegiate women 's fencing association ( niwfa ) . several athletic teams are highly competitive in the centennial conference ; for example , women 's basketball won the 2014 centennial conference championship and progressed to the second round of the ncaa division iii women 's basketball tournament . women 's softball also won centennial conference titles in 2006 , 2014 , and in 2016 . the 2016 team advanced to the super regional tournament , a first for any centennial conference softball team . the men 's lacrosse team won the centennial conference championship in 2010 . notable people . notable graduates of haverford college include a number of prominent businessmen such as cantor fitzgerald ceo howard lutnick ( 1983 ) , co-founder of mbk partners michael kim ( 1985 ) , palantir technologies co-founder and ceo alex karp ( 1989 ) , and former co-chairman of goldman sachs and united states deputy secretary of state john c . whitehead ( 1943 ) . haverford also counts among its alumni one of the winners of the 2018 nobel prize in chemistry , george smith ( 1963 ) , emmy award-winning journalist juan williams ( 1976 ) , actor daniel dae kim ( 1990 ) , nobel peace prize winner philip noel-baker ( 1908 ) , pulitzer prize-winning humor columnist dave barry ( 1969 ) , editor-in-chief of harvard business review adi ignatius ( 1981 ) , tony award-winning playwright of lend me a tenor and crazy for you ken ludwig ( 1972 ) , pulitzer prize-winning journalist david wessel ( 1975 ) , composer steven gerber ( 1969 ) , theoretical physicist curtis callan ( 1961 ) , professional sports executive arn tellem ( 1976 ) , former ceo of npr ken stern ( 1985 ) , tech entrepreneur james kinsella ( 1982 ) , and architect gil schafer iii ( 1984 ) . notable attendees who did not graduate include the early 20th century artist and illustrator maxfield parrish , as well as actors such as chevy chase , judd nelson , and george segal . fictional fbi special agent dale cooper , from the television series twin peaks , was a member of the class of 1976 . references . further reading . haverford college alumni association . a history of haverford college for the first sixty years of its existence . philadelphia , pa . : porter & coates , 1892 . jones , rufus matthew . haverford college : a history and interpretation . new york : macmillan , 1933 . kannerstein , gregory , ed . the spirit and the intellect : haverford college 1883–1983 . haverford , pa . : haverford college , 1983 . langlieb , david m . haverford college off the record . pittsburgh , pa . : college prowler , 2005 . isaac sharpless . the story of a small college . philadelphia , pa . : the john c . winston company , 1918 . external links . official website official athletics website the bi-college news—haverford and bryn mawr 's official student newspaper