Marcus Furius Camillus

early life . camillus belonged to the lineage of the furia gens , whose origin had been in the latin city of tusculum . although this city had been a bitter enemy of the romans in the 490s bc , after both the volsci and aequi later began to wage war against rome , tusculum joined rome , unlike most latin cities . soon , the furii integrated into roman society , accumulating a long series of magistrate offices . thus the furii had become an important roman family by the 450s . plutarch , lives : wikisource life of camillus . the father of camillus was lucius furius medullinus , a patrician tribune of consular powers . camillus had more than three brothers : the eldest one was lucius junior , who was both consul and tribune of consular powers . the latin noun camillus denoted a child acolyte at religious rituals . during camillus 's infancy , his relative quintus furius paculus was the roman pontifex maximus . the 'military tribunes with consular authority ' or consular tribunes ( in latin tribuni militum consulari potestate ) , were tribunes elected with consular power during the so-called conflict of the orders in the roman republic . consular tribunes served in 444 bc and then continuously from 408 bc to 394 bc and again from 391 bc to 367 bc . the office was created , along with the magistracy of the censor , in order to give the plebeian order access to higher levels of government without having to reform the office of consul . at that time in rome 's history , plebeians could not be elected to the highest magistracy of consul , whereas they could be elected to the office of consular tribune . early career . camillus had been a noteworthy soldier in the wars with the aequi and volsci . subsequently , camillus was a military tribune . in 403 bc , he was appointed censor with marcus postumius albinus regillensis and , by means of extensive taxation , took action to solve financial problems resulting from incessant military campaigns . . against veii . in 406 bc , rome declared war against the rival etrurian city of veii . the city of veii was powerful and was located on a well-fortified and elevated site . this required the romans to commence a siege lasting several years . in 401 bc , as the war started to grow increasingly unpopular in rome , camillus was appointed consular tribune . he assumed command of the roman army , and within a short time he stormed two allies of veii , falerii and capena , which resisted behind their walls . in 398 bc , camillus received consular tribune powers and then looted capena . when rome suffered severe defeats in 396 bc , the tenth year of this war , the romans resorted again to camillus , who was named dictator for the first time . after defeating both falerii and capena at nepi , camillus commanded the final strike against veii . he dug the soft ground below the walls and the romans infiltrated through the city 's sewage system effectively , defeating the enemy . not interested in capitulation terms , but in veii 's complete destruction , the romans slaughtered the entire adult male population and made slaves of all the women and children . the plunder was large . for the battle , camillus had invoked the protection of mater matuta extensively , and he looted the statue of juno for rome . back in rome , camillus paraded on a quadriga , a four-horse chariot , and the popular celebrations lasted four days . plutarch wrote of this : camillus opposed the plebeian plan to populate veii with half of the romans . it would have resolved the poverty issues , but the patricians opposed it . deliberately , camillus protracted the project until its abandonment . camillus rendered himself controversial in not fulfilling his promise to dedicate a tenth of the plunder to delphi for the god apollo . the roman oracles announced that the gods were displeased by this , so the senate charged the citizens and the sought amounts of gold were retrieved . . aftermath . to finish falerii , which was the last surviving enemy of this war , camillus was made consular tribune again in 394 bc . he seized the opportunity to divert the bitter conflict between roman social classes into a unifying external conflict . he besieged falerii and , after he rejected as immoral the proposal of a local school teacher who had surrendered most of the local children to the romans , the people of falerii were moved to gratitude , and made peace with rome . the entire italian peninsula was impressed by the roman victories of camillus . aequi , volsci , and capena proposed peace treaties . rome increased its territory by seventy percent and some of the land was distributed to needy citizens . rome had become the most powerful nation of the central peninsula . . banishment . the romans were restive because no plunder had been reaped out of falerii . furthermore , camillus rejected both the land redistribution and the uncontrolled roman population of veii . consequently , he was impeached by his political adversaries , by an accusation of embezzlement of the etruscan plunder . to camillus , his friends explained that , although the condemnation seemed unavoidable , they would help to pay the fine . camillus spurned this , opting for exile . he abandoned rome with his wife and lucius , his surviving son , and went to ardea . in his absence , camillus was condemned to pay 1,500 denarii . . the gauls and the second foundation of rome . the gauls , who had already invaded most of etruria , reached clusium and its people turned to rome for help . however , the roman embassy provoked a skirmish and , then , the gauls marched straight for rome ( july 390 bc ) . after the entire roman army was defeated at the allia brook ( battle of the allia ) , the defenceless rome was seized by the invaders . the entire roman army retreated into the deserted veii whereas most civilians ended at the etruscan caere . nonetheless , a surrounded roman garrison continued to resist on the capitoline hill . the gauls dwelt within the city , getting their supplies by destroying all nearby towns for plunder . when the gauls headed for ardea , the exiled camillus , who was now living as a private man , organized the local forces for the defence of the city . he told the city 's inhabitants that the gauls always exterminated their defeated enemies . camillus found that the gauls were distracted , celebrating their latest spoils leading to much drunkenness at their camp . so he attacked them during the night and defeated the enemy easily with great bloodshed . camillus was hailed then by all other roman exiles throughout the region . after he refused a makeshift generalship , a roman messenger sneaked into the capitol and , therein , the senators appointed camillus dictator for a year with the task of confronting the gauls . at the roman base of veii , camillus gathered a 12,000-man army with more men joining from throughout the region . livy v.10 , vi.4 the gauls may have been ill-prepared for the siege , as an epidemic broke out among them as a result of not burying the dead . brennus and the romans negotiated an end to the siege when the romans agreed to pay one thousand pounds of gold . according to tradition , to add insult to injury , it was discovered that brennus was using heavier weights than standard for weighing the gold . when the romans complained , brennus is said to have thrown his sword and belt on the scales and shouted in latin , '' vae victis ! '' ( '' woe to the conquered '' ) . according to some roman historians , it was at this very moment that camillus arrived with a roman army and , after putting his sword on the scale , replied , '' non auro , sed ferro , recuperanda est patria '' ( '' not with gold , but with iron , will the fatherland be regained '' ) , and attacked the gauls . a battle ensued in the streets of rome , but neither army could fight effectively in the narrow streets and alleyways . the gallic and roman armies left the city and fought the next day . camillus 's army lived up to his hopes and the gallic army was routed . the romans dubbed camillus a '' second romulus , '' a second founder of rome . livy , history of rome , book 5 , chapter 49 . camillus sacrificed for the successful return and he ordered the construction of the temple of aius locutius . when plebeian orators again proposed moving to veii , camillus ordered a debate in the senate and argued for staying . the senate unanimously approved of camillus 's view and ordered the reconstruction of rome . as the senate feared sedition by plebeians , it refused camillus 's requests to resign his position as dictator before his term was finished . this made camillus the longest-reigning of all roman dictators until sulla and julius caesar . second regional war . rome 's reconstruction took an entire year . during that time , the volsci and aequi invaded the roman territory , some latin nations revolted , and the etruscans besieged sutrium , which was a roman ally . to confront such a crisis , in 389 bc , camillus , who was military tribune at that time , was appointed roman dictator yet again . when the enemy besieged rome , camillus slew most invaders on mount marcius , setting fire to their palisades during the windy hours of dawn . subsequently , camillus 's army moved south-eastward to defeat the volsci in the battle of maecium , not far from lanuvium ( 389 bc ) . camillus proceeded then to capture bola ( aequi 's capital ) thus subjugating the aequi . however , the romans lost satricum and camillus failed to capture antium , the capital of the volsci . finally , camillus arrived at satricum where the population had just been expelled by the etruscans . camillus estimated that the etruscans would be given to boisterous celebrations in satricum , so he rushed to the confrontation ; the etruscans were so intoxicated that camillus recaptured satricum with ease . after this campaign , the roman dictator camillus celebrated a triumph in rome . through camillus , the romans had proven their military professional strength and offensive readiness . further life . consular tribune ( 384 bc ) . in 384 bc , camillus was consular tribune again . his office was troubled chiefly by the charismatic marcus manlius capitolinus , who became his greatest detractor and around whom all plebeians had aggregated . while capitolinus was said to have kingly dreams , he attacked camillus with precisely such a king-like accusation . nonetheless , capitolinus was formally judged and executed . . consular tribune ( 381 bc ) . the southern latin tribes were contemptuous of the romans after their latest expedition . antium and several of the volsci cities united , including the latin cities of praeneste , and velletri . they liberated satricum , slaying all the roman inhabitants . given this crisis , camillus was appointed consular tribune for the sixth time . his health was poor but his desire for retirement was refused . camillus decided then that he would command through his son lucius . thus , camillus campaigned . on the battlefield , although camillus tried to help with the military actions while located safely in a distant camp , lucius could not cope with his duties so camillus moved onto the battlefield and the romans were able to defeat their enemy . camillus headed then to satricum with his youngest men and the city was relieved . because many of the war prisoners were from tusculum , camillus led the romans there and the city was bloodlessly annexed , and its citizens endowed with full roman rights . this favorable treatment was due to the furii coming originally from tusculum . after these events , camillus decided that he would definitely retire . . roman dictator ( 368 bc ) . nevertheless , in 368 bc , camillus was appointed roman dictator once more , nominally to conduct the war of velletri . however , in rome , the patricians of the senate were planning to use camillus as leverage against the agitated plebeians because the conflict of the orders had worsened due to a severe economic downturn . for the roman magistracy , the populists were demanding a dyad of roman consuls , of whom one should always be a plebeian . through a false military levy , camillus attempted to trick the plebeian council so it might not meet to approve such plans . the enraged assemblymen were about to punish camillus when he renounced his office of dictator . . roman dictator ( 367 bc ) . with the gauls marching once more toward latium , all romans reunited despite their severe differences . camillus was named roman dictator for the fifth time in 367 bc . he actively organized the defence of rome . through the commands of camillus , the roman soldiers were provided with protective armour against the gallic main attack : the heavy blow of their swords . both smooth iron helmets and brass-rimmed shields were made . also , long pikes were distributed to keep the enemy 's swords at a distance . the gauls camped at the anio river , carrying loads of recently captured plunder . near them , at the alban hills , camillus discovered their disorganization , which was due to unruly celebrations . therefore , before the dawn , the roman light infantry disrupted the gallic defences and , subsequently , the roman heavy infantry and pikemen finished off their enemy . after the battle , velitrae surrendered voluntarily to rome . back in rome , camillus celebrated with another triumph . . issue of the social classes . in rome , the plebeians were insistent about the dyad of consuls . the patricians refused to compromise and again sought protection behind camillus 's figure . the populists attempted to arrest camillus but he timely convoked a senate session and convinced the senate to yield to the popular demand , enacted by the plebs as the lex licinia sextia ( 367 bc ) . a new magistracy open to patricians and plebeians , the praetorship , was also created . the creation of the new magistracy was followed by general celebration . camillus ordered the construction of the temple of concord , which would be built beside the roman forum . . death . a deadly pestilence struck rome , and claimed many roman notables , including camillus , who died in 365 bc . his death was deeply mourned , as the '' second founder of rome . '' . see also . furia gens