Superchunk

history . superchunk was formed in 1989 in the town of chapel hill , north carolina , by mac mccaughan ( guitar and vocals ) , laura ballance ( bass ) , chuck garrison ( drums ) , and jack mccook ( guitar ) . initially , the band went by the name chunk ( original drummer chuck garrison 's name was misspelled as '' chunk '' garrison in the phone book , and the moniker stuck ) , and they released their first single as chunk . after adding the '' super '' prefix to their name to avoid confusion with a similarly named jazz band from new york , the first official superchunk single , '' slack motherfucker '' , followed in 1989 on merge records , founded by mccaughan and ballance . both releases were well received , and superchunk released its debut eponymous album in 1990 on matador records to more critical acclaim . mccook decided to leave the group after the release of the first album , superchunk , and connecticut-born james wilbur was recruited to take over guitar duties . in spite of the ensuing bidding war that emerged between major record labels in the aftermath of the album 's release , superchunk decided to stay independent , sticking with matador records for their second , just as critically lauded lp , no pocky for kitty , which was recorded in chicago by steve albini in 1991 . garrison left the band a few weeks before the record 's release , and jon wurster was brought on board on drums . the band put out one more record for matador , on the mouth in 1993 . after matador entered into a distribution agreement with major label atlantic records , superchunk decided to leave the label , even though the atlantic logo did not have to be displayed on their releases . instead , the band opted to release their following records through merge . the next album , foolish , brought further critical acclaim for the band in 1994 . a second singles compilation ( the first was 1992 's tossing seeds ) came out in the summer of 1995 . it was titled incidental music 1991–95 and contained most of their hard-to-find tracks ( imports , b-sides , comp . tracks ) released between 1991 and 1995 . boston was the setting for superchunk 's next album session . 1995 's here 's where the strings come in was recorded at the city 's fort apache studios and slated for a fall release . the band toured hard for strings all over the world as well as appearing on the lollapalooza tour , scoring a minor hit with the '' hyper enough '' single and video . after a brief hiatus and another australian tour , the band released a limited-edition ep called the laughter guns . they then started writing for what would become indoor living . recording started in bloomington , indiana 's echo park studios with chapel hillian john plymale co-producing with the band . superchunk stretched out a bit on indoor living , expanding their sound by adding some new instruments to the mix : piano , organ , vibes and more . the album was by far their most adventurous and at the same time their most accessible to date . superchunk delivered come pick me up , their seventh full-length studio release , in 1999 , recording in chicago at electrical audio with producer jim o'rourke . superchunk continued the expansion and growth of their sound that started with foolish , pushing themselves to new heights of creativity . in 2001 , the band released here 's to shutting up . in 2002 , superchunk began a series of limited-edition live albums known as the clambakes series . clambakes volume 1 ( limited to 1500 copies ) is an acoustic live set recorded in various record stores across the us in support of here 's to shutting up and clambakes volume 2 ( limited to 2500 copies ) is a film score superchunk was commissioned to write . it was recorded live at the castro theater in san francisco on april 23 , 2002 , during the san francisco international film festival at a showing of the 1926 teinosuke kinugasa film a page of madness . cup of sand , released in 2003 , is the third singles album compiling all singles and rare 1995–2002 tracks . clambakes series volume 3 was released in 2004 , documenting the live set superchunk played at the cat 's cradle in carrboro , north carolina , on july 23 , 1999 , for the merge records tenth anniversary celebration . in 2006 , superchunk headlined a concert held in celebration of the tenth anniversary of the daily show , a comedy central program , at irving plaza in new york . the show also featured a performance from clem snide as well as short stand-up comedy sets from various daily show correspondents . in 2007 , superchunk contributed a hidden track to the aqua teen hunger force soundtrack , '' misfits and mistakes '' , with singing from aqua teen hunger force character meatwad . on june 5 , 2007 , superchunk released the misfits and mistakes 7-inch , which has the superchunk solo version on the a-side , and the meatwad version on the b-side . the band played two shows , the eff cancer benefit in chicago on june 20 , 2007 , and headlined the inaugural free pool parties show at mccarren park pool in brooklyn , new york . they are also known to still play occasional one-off shows at home in north carolina , usually at cat 's cradle in carrboro . superchunk also recorded a cover version of '' say my name '' by destiny 's child for engine room recordings ' compilation album guilt by association , which was set to be released in september 2007 . superchunk appeared at coachella valley music and arts festival in indio , california , on april 18 , 2009 , along with other acts like yeah yeah yeahs , the killers , m.i.a . , tv on the radio , band of horses . on april 7 , 2009 , superchunk released the leaves in the gutter ep , their first cd release in seven years . it consisted of three unreleased tracks , in addition to '' misfits and mistakes '' and an acoustic version of the new song '' learned to surf '' . on may 28 , 2009 , the band announced a new 7-inch , '' crossed wires '' b/w '' blinders ( fast vers . ) '' , which released on july 7 , 2009 . it was initially limited to a pressing of 1000 on clear vinyl . on july 27 , 2010 , the band covered the cure 's in between days for av club undercover . the band 's ninth studio album , majesty shredding , was released on september 14 , 2010 . '' superchunk announce majesty shredding album '' . exclaim ! , june 3 , 2010 . the band was chosen by jeff mangum of neutral milk hotel to perform at the all tomorrow 's parties festival he curated in december 2011 in minehead , somerset . the band 's tenth studio album , i hate music , was released on august 20 , 2013 . before the release , ballance announced on the band 's website that she would not be taking part in the upcoming tour to promote the album , citing a worsening hearing condition known as hyperacusis . her live replacement is jason narducy , formerly of verbow and currently bass player with bob mould 's band . the band will be touring north america , australia and the uk as part of the tour . in november 2013 , the band played the final holiday camp edition of the all tomorrow 's parties festival in camber sands , england . on february 27 , 2016 , superchunk re-united with original drummer chuck garrison for a performance of '' slack motherfucker '' at the end of a scharpling & wurster live show in durham , north carolina . jon wurster performed some of the vocals in character as philly boy roy . in november 2017 , the band announced that their 11th studio album what a time to be alive will be released in february 2018 . on may 31 , 2019 , as part of merge records ' '' special 30th anniversary releases , '' superchunk released an acoustic version of their 1994 album foolish , titled acoustic foolish . . discography . superchunk ( 1990 ) no pocky for kitty ( 1991 ) on the mouth ( 1993 ) foolish ( 1994 ) here 's where the strings come in ( 1995 ) indoor living ( 1997 ) come pick me up ( 1999 ) here 's to shutting up ( 2001 ) majesty shredding ( 2010 ) i hate music ( 2013 ) what a time to be alive ( 2018 ) . side projects . mac mccaughan has recorded several albums as portastatic . initially a solo project , portastatic has evolved into a full band , which currently includes superchunk 's jim wilbur as a member . jim wilbur has recorded a number of singles and an album as humidifier . the album nothing changes was released on link records in 1996 . humidifier also includes john king from another merge records band , spent . in addition to his work on the best show with tom scharpling , jon wurster joined the group the mountain goats in 2007 , playing drums on the last leg of the get lonely tour . he has remained a member ever since . references . external links . merge records site scharpling and wurster handwritten interview with mac at ifpthendirt interview with mac mccaughan about '' misfits & mistakes '' + mp3 of track !