Hiram Johnson

early years . hiram johnson was born in sacramento on september 2 , 1866 . his father , grove lawrence johnson , was a republican u.s . representative and a member of the california state legislature whose career was marred by accusations of election fraud and graft . his mother , annie de montfredy , was a descendant of a family of french huguenots who had emigrated to escape religious persecution after the edict of fontainebleau . annie was a member of the daughters of the american revolution as the result of her descent from pierre van cortlandt and philip van cortlandt . johnson had one brother and three sisters . after attending public schools and heald college , johnson worked as a shorthand reporter and stenographer in law offices . he eventually studied law at the university of california , berkeley , where he was a member of the chi phi fraternity . after his admission to the bar in 1888 , johnson set up a legal practice in sacramento . in 1902 , johnson moved to san francisco , where he served as assistant district attorney and became active in reform politics . he attracted statewide attention in 1908 when he assisted francis j . heney in the prosecution of abe ruef and mayor eugene schmitz for graft . after san francisco graft trials , though only ruef served prison time . governor of california ( 1911–17 ) . in 1910 , johnson won the gubernatorial election as a member of the lincoln–roosevelt league , a progressive republican movement running on a platform opposed to the southern pacific railroad . during his campaign , he toured the state in an open automobile , covering thousands of miles and visiting small communities throughout california inaccessible by rail . in office , johnson was a populism who promoted a number of democratic reforms : the election of u.s . senators by direct popular vote , cross-filing , initiative , referendum , and recall elections . johnson 's reforms gave california a degree of direct democracy unmatched by any other u.s . state at the time . johnson was also instrumental in reigning in the power of the southern pacific railroad through the establishment of a state railroad commission . on taking office , johnson paroled the convicted southern pacific train bandit chris evans but required that he leave california . although initially opposed to the bill , johnson gave in to political pressure and supported the california alien land law of 1913 , which prevented asian immigrants ( excluded from naturalization because of their race ) from owning land in the state . . 1912 vice presidential campaign . in 1912 , johnson was a founder of the national progressive party and ran as the party 's vice presidential candidate , sharing a ticket with former president theodore roosevelt . roosevelt and johnson narrowly carried california but finished second nationally behind democratic ticket of woodrow wilson and thomas marshall . their second-place finish , ahead of incumbent republican president william howard taft remains among the strongest for any third party in american history . johnson was 1914 california gubernatorial election , almost doubling his opponent 's vote total . . u.s . senator ( 1917–45 ) . in 1916 , johnson ran successfully for the u.s . senate , defeating democrat george s . patton sr . , and assuming office on march 16 , 1917 . johnson was elected as a staunch opponent of american entry into world war i , and allegedly said , '' the first casualty when war comes is truth . '' however , this quote may be apocryphal . q : hiram johnson as a staunch isolationist , johnson voted against the league of nations during his first term . during his senate career , johnson served as chairman of the committees on cuban relations ( sixty-sixth congress ) , patents ( sixty-seventh congress ) , immigration ( sixty-eighth through seventy-first congresses ) , territories and insular possessions ( sixty-eighth congress ) , and commerce ( seventy-first and seventy-second congresses ) . in the senate , johnson helped push through the immigration act of 1924 , having worked with valentine s . mcclatchy and other anti-japanese lobbying to prohibit japanese and other east asian immigrants from entering the united states . in the early 1920s , the motion picture industry sought to establish a self-regulatory process to fend off official censorship . senator johnson was among three candidates identified alongside herbert hoover and will h . hays . hays , who had managed president harding 's 1920 campaign , was ultimately named to head the new motion picture producers and distributors of america in early 1922 . '' will hays : america 's morality czar '' , '' source : 'will hays . ' encyclopedia of world biography supplement , vol . 21 . gale group , 2001 . '' retrieved 2011-09-12 . as senator , johnson proved extremely popular . in 1934 , he was re-elected with 94.5 percent of the popular vote because he was nominated by both republicans and democrats and his only opponent was socialist george ross kirkpatrick . in 1943 , a confidential analysis of the senate foreign relations committee made by british scholar isaiah berlin for his foreign office stated that johnson : : is the isolationists ' elder statesman and the only surviving member of the william e . borah-henry cabot lodge-johnson combination which led the fight against the league in 1919 and 1920 . he is an implacable and uncompromising isolationist with immense prestige in california , of which he has twice been governor . his election to the senate has not been opposed for many years by either party . he is acutely pacific-conscious and is a champion of a more adequate defence of the west coast . he is a member of the farm bloc and is au fond , against foreign affairs as such ; his view of europe as a sink of iniquity has not changed in any particular since 1912 , when he founded a short-lived progressive party . his prestige in congress is still great and his parliamentary skill should not be underestimated . in 1945 , johnson was not present to vote against ratification of united nations charter , but made it known that he would have voted against ratification ; only senators henrik shipstead and william langer actually cast votes opposed . . presidential politics . following theodore roosevelt 's death in january 1919 , johnson was regarded as the natural leader of the progressive party . however , johnson ran for president as a republican . he was defeated for the republican presidential nomination by conservative u.s . senator warren harding of ohio . johnson also did not get the support of roosevelt 's family , who instead supported roosevelt 's long-time friend leonard wood . at the convention , johnson was asked to serve as harding 's running mate , but he declined . johnson sought the 1924 republican nomination against president calvin coolidge , but his campaign was derailed after he lost the california primary . johnson declined to challenge herbert hoover for the 1928 presidential nomination , instead choosing to seek re-election to the senate . in the 1932 presidential election , johnson broke with president hoover , and was one of the most prominent republicans supporting democrat franklin d . roosevelt . during roosevelt 's first term , johnson supported the president 's new deal economic recovery package and frequently crossed the floor to aid the democrats . he endorsed fdr in the 1936 presidential election as well , though he never switched party affiliation . johnson became disenchanted with roosevelt and the new deal following judicial procedures reform bill of 1937 . personal life . he married minne l . mcneal during his time as san francisco assistant district attorney . the couple had two sons : hiram w . johnson , jr . , and archibald mcneal johnson . transcribed by peggy hooper , 2011 from 1917 to 1929 , he resided at the riversdale mansion in riverdale park , maryland . death . having served in the senate for almost thirty years , johnson died in the naval hospital in bethesda , maryland , on august 6 , 1945 , the same day as the atomic bombing of hiroshima . he was interred in cypress lawn memorial park in colma , california . legacy . johnson gained some recognition in the media and general public during the 2003 california recall election because he was the most important person behind the introduction of the law that allowed state officials to be recalled . arnold schwarzenegger , the eventual winner , referred to johnson 's progressive legacy in his campaign speeches . on august 25 , 2009 , governor schwarzenegger and his wife , maria shriver , announced that johnson would be one of 13 inducted into the california hall of fame . as of january 2021 , johnson remains california 's longest-serving united states senator , though he would be surpassed by dianne feinstein if she serves through april 13 . the hiram johnson papers reside at the bancroft library at the university of california , berkeley . hiram johnson papers , 1895–1945 hiram johnson high school in sacramento , california is named in his honor . see also . list of united states congress members who died in office ( 1900–49 ) . references . further reading . blackford , mansel griffiths . '' businessmen and the regulation of railroads and public utilities in california during the progressive era . '' business history review 44.03 ( 1970 ) : 307–319 . feinman , ronald l . twilight of progressivism : the western republican senators and the new deal ( johns hopkins university press , 1981 ) le pore , herbert p . '' prelude to prejudice : hiram johnson , woodrow wilson , and the california alien land law controversy of 1913 . '' southern california quarterly ( 1979 ) : 99–110 . in jstor lower , richard coke . a bloc of one : the political career of hiram w . johnson ( stanford university press , 1993 ) mckee , irving . '' the background and early career of hiram warren johnson , 1866–1910 . '' pacific historical review ( 1950 ) : 17–30 . in jstor miller , karen a.j . populist nationalism : republican insurgency and american foreign policy making , 1918–1925 ( greenwood , 1999 ) olin , spencer c . california 's prodigal sons : hiram johnson and the progressives , 1911–1917 ( u of california press , 1968 ) olin , spencer c . '' hiram johnson , the california progressives , and the hughes campaign of 1916 . '' the pacific historical review ( 1962 ) : 403–412 . in jstor olin , spencer c . '' hiram johnson , the lincoln-roosevelt league , and the election of 1910 . '' california historical society quarterly ( 1966 ) : 225–240 . in jstor shover , john l . '' the progressives and the working class vote in california . '' labor history ( 1969 ) 10 4 pp : 584–601 . online weatherson , michael a . , and hal bochin . hiram johnson : political revivalist ( university press of america , 1995 ) weatherson , michael a . , and hal bochin . hiram johnson : a bio-bibliography ( greenwood press , 1988 ) . primary sources . johnson , hiram . the diary letters of hiram johnson , 1917–1945 ( vol . 1 . garland publishing , 1983 ) . external links . guide to the hiram johnson papers at the bancroft library . archives . robert e . burke collection at the labor archives of the university of washington libraries ]