Period 6 element

properties . this period contains the lanthanides , also known as the rare earths . many lanthanides are known for their magnetic properties , such as neodymium . many period 6 transition metals are very valuable , such as gold , however many period 6 other metals are incredibly toxic , such as thallium . period 6 contains the last stable element , lead . all subsequent elements in the periodic table are radioactive . after bismuth , which has a half-life or more than 10 19 years , polonium , astatine , and radon are some of the half-life and rarest elements known ; less than a gram of astatine is estimated to exist on earth at any given time . . atomic characteristics . : between initial xe and final 6s 2 electronic shells the lanthanide elements are the group of elements with atomic number increasing from 57 ( lanthanum ) to 71 ( lutetium ) . they are termed lanthanide because the lighter elements in the series are chemically similar to lanthanum . strictly speaking , both lanthanum and lutetium have been labeled as group 3 elements , because they both have a single valence electron in the d shell . however , both elements are often included in any general discussion of the chemistry of the lanthanide elements . in presentations of the periodic table , the lanthanides and the actinides are customarily shown as two additional rows below the main body of the table , with placeholders or else a selected single element of each series ( either lanthanum or lutetium , and either actinium or lawrencium , respectively ) shown in a single cell of the main table , between barium and hafnium , and radium and rutherfordium , respectively . this convention is entirely a matter of aesthetics and formatting practicality ; a rarely used wide-formatted periodic table inserts the lanthanide and actinide series in their proper places , as parts of the table 's sixth and seventh rows ( periods ) . d-block elements . lutetium . lutetium is a chemical element with the symbol lu and atomic number 71 . it is the last element in the lanthanide series , which , along with the lanthanide contraction , explains several important properties of lutetium , such as it having the highest hardness or density among lanthanides . unlike other lanthanides , which lie in the f-block of the periodic table , this element lies in the d-block ; however , lanthanum is sometimes placed on the d-block lanthanide position . chemically , lutetium is a typical lanthanide : its only common oxidation state is +3 , seen in its oxide , halides and other compounds . in an aqueous solution , like compounds of other late lanthanides , soluble lutetium compounds form a complex with nine water molecules . lutetium was independently discovered in 1907 by french scientist georges urbain , austrian mineralogist baron carl auer von welsbach , and american chemist charles james . all of these men found lutetium as an impurity in the mineral ytterbia , which was previously thought to consist entirely of ytterbium . the dispute on the priority of the discovery occurred shortly after , with urbain and von welsbach accusing each other of publishing results influenced by the published research of the other ; the naming honor went to urbain as he published his results earlier . he chose the name lutecium for the new element but in 1949 the spelling of element 71 was changed to lutetium . in 1909 , the priority was finally granted to urbain and his names were adopted as official ones ; however , the name cassiopeium ( or later cassiopium ) for element 71 proposed by von welsbach was used by many german scientists until the 1950s . like other lanthanides , lutetium is one of the elements that traditionally were included in the classification '' rare earths . '' lutetium is rare and expensive ; consequently , it has few specific uses . for example , a radioactive isotope lutetium-176 is used in nuclear technology to determine the age of meteorites . lutetium usually occurs in association with the element yttrium and is sometimes used in metal alloys and as a catalyst in various chemical reactions . 177 lu-dota-tate is used for radionuclide therapy ( see nuclear medicine ) on neuroendocrine tumours . hafnium . hafnium is a chemical element with the symbol hf and atomic number 72 . a lustrous , silvery gray , tetravalent transition metal , hafnium chemically resembles zirconium and is found in zirconium minerals . its existence was predicted by dmitri mendeleev in 1869 . hafnium was the penultimate stable isotope element to be discovered ( rhenium was identified two years later ) . hafnium is named for hafnia , the latin name for '' copenhagen '' , where it was discovered . hafnium is used in filaments and electrodes . some semiconductor fabrication processes use its oxide for integrated circuits at 45 & nbsp ; nm and smaller feature lengths . some superalloys used for special applications contain hafnium in combination with niobium , titanium , or tungsten . hafnium 's large neutron capture cross-section makes it a good material for neutron absorption in control rods in nuclear power plants , but at the same time requires that it be removed from the neutron-transparent corrosion-resistant zirconium alloys used in nuclear reactors . tantalum . tantalum is a chemical element with the symbol ta and atomic number 73 . previously known as tantalium , the name comes from tantalus , a character from greek mythology . euripides , orestes tantalum is a rare , hard , blue-gray , lustrous transition metal that is highly corrosion resistant . it is part of the refractory metals group , which are widely used as minor component in alloys . the chemical inertness of tantalum makes it a valuable substance for laboratory equipment and a substitute for platinum , but its main use today is in tantalum capacitors in electronic equipment such as mobile phones , dvd players , video game systems and computers . tantalum , always together with the chemically similar niobium , occurs in the minerals tantalite , columbite and coltan ( a mix of columbite and tantalite ) . tungsten . tungsten , also known as wolfram , is a chemical element with the chemical symbol w and atomic number 74 . the word tungsten comes from the swedish language tung sten directly translatable to heavy stone , though the name is volfram in swedish to distinguish it from scheelite , in swedish alternatively named tungsten . a hard , rare metal under standard conditions when uncombined , tungsten is found naturally on earth only in chemical compounds . it was identified as a new element in 1781 , and first isolated as a metal in 1783 . its important ores include wolframite and scheelite . the free element is remarkable for its robustness , especially the fact that it has the highest melting point of all the non-alloyed metals and the second highest of all the elements after carbon . also remarkable is its high density of 19.3 times that of water , comparable to that of uranium and gold , and much higher ( about 1.7 times ) than that of lead . tungsten with minor amounts of impurities is often brittle and hard , making it difficult to work . however , very pure tungsten , though still hard , is more ductile , and can be cut with a hard-steel hacksaw . the unalloyed elemental form is used mainly in electrical applications . tungsten 's many alloys have numerous applications , most notably in incandescent light bulb filaments , x-ray tubes ( as both the filament and target ) , electrodes in tig welding , and superalloys . tungsten 's hardness and high density give it military applications in penetrating projectiles . tungsten compounds are most often used industrially as catalysts . tungsten is the only metal from the third transition series that is known to occur in biomolecules , where it is used in a few species of bacteria . it is the heaviest element known to be used by any living organism . tungsten interferes with molybdenum and copper metabolism , and is somewhat toxic to animal life . . rhenium . rhenium is a chemical element with the symbol re and atomic number 75 . it is a silvery-white , heavy , third-row transition metal in group 7 of the periodic table . with an estimated average concentration of 1 part per billion ( ppb ) , rhenium is one of the rarest elements in the earth 's crust . the free element has the third-highest melting point and highest boiling point of any element . rhenium resembles manganese chemically and is obtained as a by-product of molybdenum and copper ore 's extraction and refinement . rhenium shows in its compounds a wide variety of oxidation states ranging from −1 to +7 . discovered in 1925 , rhenium was the last stable element to be discovered . it was named after the river rhine in europe . nickel-based superalloys of rhenium are used in the combustion chambers , turbine blades , and exhaust nozzles of jet engines , these alloys contain up to 6 % rhenium , making jet engine construction the largest single use for the element , with the chemical industry 's catalytic uses being next-most important . because of the low availability relative to demand , rhenium is among the most expensive of metals , with an average price of approximately us 4,575 per kilogram ( us 142.30 per troy ounce ) as of august 2011 ; it is also of critical strategic military importance , for its use in high performance military jet and rocket engines . . osmium . osmium is a chemical element with the symbol os and atomic number 76 . it is a hard , brittle , blue-gray or blue-black transition metal in the platinum family and is the densest naturally occurring element , with a density of ( slightly greater than that of iridium and twice that of lead ) . it is found in nature as an alloy , mostly in platinum ores ; its alloys with platinum , iridium , and other platinum group metals are employed in fountain pen tips , electrical contacts , and other applications where extreme durability and hardness are needed . hammond '' osmium '' , c . r . , p . 4-25 in . iridium . iridium is the chemical element with atomic number 77 , and is represented by the symbol ir . a very hard , brittle , silvery-white transition metal of the platinum group , iridium is the second-density element ( after osmium ) and is the most corrosion-resistant metal , even at temperatures as high as 2000 & nbsp ; °c . although only certain molten salts and halogens are corrosive to solid iridium , finely divided iridium dust is much more reactive and can be flammable . iridium was discovered in 1803 among insoluble impurities in natural platinum . smithson tennant , the primary discoverer , named the iridium for the goddess iris , personification of the rainbow , because of the striking and diverse colors of its salts . iridium is one of the rarest elements in the earth 's crust , with annual production and consumption of only three tonnes . and are the only two naturally occurring isotopes of iridium as well as the only stable isotopes ; the latter is the more abundant of the two . the most important iridium compounds in use are the salts and acids it forms with chlorine , though iridium also forms a number of organometallic compounds used in industrial catalysis , and in research . iridium metal is employed when high corrosion resistance at high temperatures is needed , as in high-end spark plugs , crucibles for recrystallization of semiconductors at high temperatures , and electrodes for the production of chlorine in the chloralkali process . iridium radioisotopes are used in some radioisotope thermoelectric generators . iridium is found in meteorites with an abundance much higher than its average abundance in the earth 's crust . for this reason the unusually high abundance of iridium in the clay layer at the cretaceous–paleogene boundary gave rise to the alvarez hypothesis that the impact of a massive extraterrestrial object caused the extinction of dinosaurs and many other species 66 & nbsp ; million years ago . it is thought that the total amount of iridium in the planet earth is much higher than that observed in crustal rocks , but as with other platinum group metals , the high density and tendency of iridium to bond with iron caused most iridium to descend below the crust when the planet was young and still molten . platinum . platinum is a chemical element with the chemical symbol pt and an atomic number of 78 . its name is derived from the spanish term platina , which is literally translated into '' little silver '' . '' platinum ( pt ) . '' encyclopædia britannica online . encyclopædia britannica inc . , 2012 . web . 24 april 2012 it is a dense , malleable , ductile , precious , gray-white transition metal . platinum has six naturally occurring isotopes . it is one of the rarest elements in the earth 's crust and has an average abundance of approximately 5 & nbsp ; μg/kg . it is the reactivity series . it occurs in some nickel and copper ores along with some native deposits , mostly in south africa , which accounts for 80 % of the world production . as a member of the platinum group of elements , as well as of the group 10 of the periodic table of elements , platinum is generally non-reactive . it exhibits a remarkable resistance to corrosion , even at high temperatures , and as such is considered a noble metal . as a result , platinum is often found chemically uncombined as native platinum . because it occurs naturally in the alluvium of various rivers , it was first used by pre-columbian south american natives to produce artifacts . it was referenced in european writings as early as 16th century , but it was not until antonio de ulloa published a report on a new metal of colombian origin in 1748 that it became investigated by scientists . platinum is used in catalytic converters , laboratory equipment , electrical contacts and electrodes , platinum-resistance thermometers , dentistry equipment , and jewelry . because only a few hundred tonnes are produced annually , it is a scarce material , and is highly valuable and is a major precious metal commodity . being a heavy metal , it leads to health issues upon exposure to its salts , but due to its corrosion resistance , it is not as toxic as some metals . its compounds , most notably cisplatin , are applied in chemotherapy against certain types of cancer . . gold . gold is a dense , soft , shiny , malleable and ductile metal . it is a chemical element with the symbol au and atomic number 79 . pure gold has a bright yellow color and luster traditionally considered attractive , which it maintains without oxidizing in air or water . chemically , gold is a transition metal and a group 11 element . it is one of the least reactive chemical elements solid under standard conditions . the metal therefore occurs often in free elemental ( native ) form , as nuggets or grains in rocks , in veins and in alluvial deposits . less commonly , it occurs in minerals as gold compounds , usually with tellurium . gold resists attacks by individual acids , but it can be dissolved by the aqua regia ( nitro-hydrochloric acid ) , so named because it dissolves gold . gold also dissolves in alkaline solutions of cyanide , which have been used in mining . gold dissolves in mercury , forming amalgam alloys . gold is insoluble in nitric acid , which dissolves silver and base metals , a property that has long been used to confirm the presence of gold in items , giving rise to the term the acid test . gold has been a valuable and highly sought-after precious metal for coinage , jewelry , and other arts since long before the beginning of recorded history . gold standards have been a common basis for monetary policy throughout human history , later being supplanted by fiat currency starting in the 1930s . the last gold certificate and gold coin currencies were issued in the u.s . in 1932 . in europe , most countries left the gold standard with the start of world war i in 1914 and , with huge war debts , failed to return to gold as a medium of exchange . a total of 165,000 tonnes of gold have been mined in human history , as of 2009 . world gold council faq . www.gold.org this is roughly equivalent to 5.3 billion troy ounces or , in terms of volume , about 8500 m 3 , or a cube 20.4 m on a side . the world consumption of new gold produced is about 50 % in jewelry , 40 % in investments , and 10 % in industry . besides its widespread monetary and symbolic functions , gold has many practical uses in dentistry , electronics , and other fields . its high malleability , ductility , resistance to corrosion and most other chemical reactions , and conductivity of electricity led to many uses of gold , including electric wiring , colored-glass production and even gold leaf eating . it has been claimed that most of the earth 's gold lies at its core , the metal 's high density having made it sink there in the planet 's youth . virtually all of the gold that mankind has discovered is considered to have been deposited later by meteorites which contained the element . this supposedly explains why , in prehistory , gold appeared as nuggets on the earth 's surface . . mercury . mercury is a chemical element with the symbol hg and atomic number 80 . it is also known as quicksilver or hydrargyrum ( mercury occurs in deposits throughout the world mostly as cinnabar ( mercuric sulfide ) . the red pigment vermilion is mostly obtained by reduction from cinnabar . cinnabar is highly toxic by ingestion or inhalation of the dust . mercury poisoning can also result from exposure to water-soluble forms of mercury ( such as mercuric chloride or methylmercury ) , inhalation of mercury vapor , or eating seafood contaminated with mercury . mercury is used in thermometers , barometers , manometers , sphygmomanometers , float valves , mercury switches , and other devices though concerns about the element 's toxicity have led to mercury thermometers and sphygmomanometers being largely phased out in clinical environments in favor of ethanol-filled , galinstan-filled , digital , or thermistor-based instruments . it remains in use in scientific research applications and in amalgam material for dental restoration . it is used in lighting : electricity passed through mercury vapor in a phosphor tube produces short-wave ultraviolet light which then causes the phosphor to fluoresce , making visible light . p-block elements . thallium . thallium is a chemical element with the symbol tl and atomic number 81 . this soft gray other metal resembles tin but discolors when exposed to air . the two chemists william crookes and claude-auguste lamy discovered thallium independently in 1861 by the newly developed method of flame spectroscopy . both discovered the new element in residues of sulfuric acid production . approximately 60–70 % of thallium production is used in the electronics industry , and the remainder is used in the pharmaceutical industry and in glass . it is also used in infrared detectors . thallium is highly toxic and was used in rat poisons and insecticides . its use has been reduced or eliminated in many countries because of its nonselective toxicity . because of its use for murder , thallium has gained the nicknames '' the poisoner 's poison '' and '' inheritance powder '' ( alongside arsenic ) . . lead . lead is a main-group element in the carbon group with the symbol pb ( from and atomic number 82 . lead is a soft , malleable other metal . it is also counted as one of the heavy metals . metallic lead has a bluish-white color after being freshly cut , but it soon tarnishes to a dull grayish color when exposed to air . lead has a shiny chrome-silver luster when it is melted into a liquid . lead is used in building construction , lead–acid battery , bullets and shots , weights , as part of solders , pewters , fusible alloys and as a radiation shield . lead has the highest atomic number of all of the stable elements , although the next higher element , bismuth , has a half-life that is so long ( much longer than the age of the universe ) that it can be considered stable . its four stable isotopes have 82 protons , a magic number in the nuclear shell model of atomic nuclei . lead , at certain exposure levels , is a poisonous substance to animals as well as for human beings . it damages the nervous system and causes brain disorders . excessive lead also causes blood disorders in mammals . like the element mercury , another heavy metal , lead is a neurotoxin that accumulates both in soft tissues and the bones . lead poisoning has been documented from ancient rome , ancient greece , and ancient china . bismuth . bismuth is a chemical element with symbol bi and atomic number 83 . bismuth , a trivalent other metal , chemically resembles arsenic and antimony . elemental bismuth may occur naturally uncombined , although its sulfide and oxide form important commercial ores . the free element is 86 % as dense as lead . it is a brittle metal with a silvery white color when newly made , but often seen in air with a pink tinge owing to the surface oxide . bismuth metal has been known from ancient times , although until the 18th century it was often confused with lead and tin , which each have some of the metal 's bulk physical properties . the etymology is uncertain but possibly comes from arabic '' bi ismid '' meaning having the properties of antimony bismuth . web mineral . retrieved on 2011-12-17 . or german words weisse masse or wismuth meaningwhite mass . bismuth is the most naturally diamagnetic of all metals , and only mercury has a lower thermal conductivity . bismuth has classically been considered to be the heaviest naturally occurring stable element , in terms of atomic mass . recently , however , it has been found to be very slightly radioactive : its only primordial isotope bismuth-209 decays via alpha decay into thallium-205 with a half-life of more than a billion times the estimated age of the universe . bismuth compounds ( accounting for about half the production of bismuth ) are used in cosmetics , pigments , and a few pharmaceuticals . bismuth has unusually low toxicity for a heavy metal . as the toxicity of lead has become more apparent in recent years , alloy uses for bismuth metal ( presently about a third of bismuth production ) , as a replacement for lead , have become an increasing part of bismuth 's commercial importance . polonium . polonium is a chemical element with the symbol po and atomic number 84 , discovered in 1898 by marie curie and pierre curie . a rare and highly radioactive element , polonium is chemically similar to bismuth and tellurium , and it occurs in uraniumores . polonium has been studied for possible use in heating spacecraft . as it is unstable , all isotopes of polonium are radioactive . there is disagreement as to whether polonium is a post-transition metal or metalloid . . astatine . astatine is a radioactive chemical element with the symbol at and atomic number 85 . it occurs on the earth only as the result of decay of heavier elements , and decays away rapidly , so much less is known about this element than its upper neighbors in the periodic table . earlier studies have shown this element follows periodic trends , being the heaviest known halogen , with melting and boiling points being higher than those of lighter halogens . until recently most of the chemical characteristics of astatine were inferred from comparison with other elements ; however , important studies have already been done . the main difference between astatine and iodine is that the hat molecule is chemically a hydride rather than a halide ; however , in a fashion similar to the lighter halogens , it is known to form ionic astatides with metals . bonds to nonmetals result in positive oxidation states , with +1 best portrayed by monohalides and their derivatives , while the higher are characterized by bond to oxygen and carbon . attempts to synthesize astatine fluoride have been met with failure . the second longest-living astatine-211 is the only one to find a commercial use , being useful as an alpha decay in medicine ; however , only extremely small quantities are used , and in larger ones it is very hazardous , as it is intensely radioactive . astatine was first produced by dale r . corson , kenneth ross mackenzie , and emilio segrè in the university of california , berkeley in 1940 . three years later , it was found in nature ; however , with an estimated amount of less than 28 & nbsp ; grams ( 1 & nbsp ; oz ) at given time , astatine is the least abundant element in earth 's crust among non-transuranium elements . among astatine isotopes , six ( with mass numbers 214 to 219 ) are present in nature as the result of decay of heavier elements ; however , the most stable astatine-210 and the industrially used astatine-211 are not . radon . radon is a chemical element with symbol rn and atomic number 86 . it is a radioactive , colorless , odorless , tasteless noble gas , occurring naturally as the decay product of uranium or thorium . its most stable isotope , radon-222 , has a half-life of 3.8 days . radon is one of the densest substances that remains a gas under normal conditions . it is also the only gas that is radioactive under normal conditions , and is considered a health hazard due to its radioactivity . intense radioactivity also hindered chemical studies of radon and only a few compounds are known . radon is formed as part of the normal radioactive decay chain of uranium and thorium . uranium and thorium have been around since the earth was formed and their isotopes of thorium has a very long half-life ( 14.05 billion years ) . uranium and thorium , radium , and thus radon , will continue to occur for millions of years at about the same concentrations as they do now . toxological profile for radon , agency for toxic substances and disease registry , u.s . public health service , in collaboration with u.s . environmental protection agency , december 1990 . as the radioactive gas of radon decays , it produces new radioactive elements called radon daughters or decay products . radon daughters are solids and stick to surfaces such as dust particles in the air . if contaminated dust is inhaled , these particles can stick to the airways of the lung and increase the risk of developing lung cancer . radon is responsible for the majority of the public exposure to ionizing radiation . it is often the single largest contributor to an individual 's background radiation dose , and is the most variable from location to location . radon gas from natural sources can accumulate in buildings , especially in confined areas such as attics and basements . it can also be found in some spring waters and hot springs . epidemiological studies have shown a clear link between breathing high concentrations of radon and incidence of lung cancer . thus , radon is considered a significant contaminant that affects indoor air quality worldwide . according to the united states environmental protection agency , radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer , after cigarette smoking , causing 21,000 lung cancer deaths per year in the united states . about 2,900 of these deaths occur among people who have never smoked . while radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer , it is the number one cause among non-smokers , according to epa estimates . . biological role . of the period 6 elements , only tungsten is known to have any biological role in organisms . however , gold , platinum , mercury , and some lanthanides such as gadolinium have applications as drugs . toxicity . most of the period 6 elements are toxic ( for instance lead ) and produce heavy-element poisoning . promethium , polonium , astatine and radon are radioactive , and therefore present radioactive hazards . notes . references .