Draize test

background . john henry draize ( 1900–1992 ) obtained a bsc in chemistry then a phd in pharmacology , studying hyperthyroidism . he then joined the university of wyoming and investigated plants poisonous to cattle , other livestock , and people . the u.s . army recruited draize in 1935 to investigate the effects of mustard gas and other chemical agents . in 1938 , after a number of reports of coal tar in mascara leading to blindness , the u.s . congress passed the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , placing cosmetics under regulatory control . the following year draize joined the fda , and was soon promoted to head of the dermal and ocular toxicity branch where he was charged with developing methods for testing the side effects of cosmetic products . this work culminated in a report by draize , his laboratory assistant , geoffrey woodard , and division chief , herbert calvery , describing how to assess acute , intermediate , and chronic exposure to cosmetics by applying compounds to the skin , penis , and eyes of rabbits . following this report , the techniques were used by the fda to evaluate the safety of substances such as insecticides and sunscreens and later adopted to screen many other compounds . by draize 's retirement in 1963 , and despite never having personally attached his name to any technique , irritancy procedures were commonly known as '' the draize test '' to distinguish the target organ , the tests are now often referred to as '' the draize eye test '' and '' the draize skin test '' . reliability . in 1971 , before the implementation in 1981 of the modern draize protocol , toxicology carrol weil and robert scala of carnegie mellon university distributed three test substances for comparative analysis to 24 different university and state laboratories . the laboratories returned significantly different evaluations , from non-irritating to severely irritating , for the same substances . a 2004 study by the u.s . scientific advisory committee on alternative toxicological methods analyzed the modern draize skin test . they found that tests would : william s . stokes , preliminary evaluation of the underprediction rate of the in vivo dermal irritation test method , u.s . scientific advisory committee on alternative toxicological methods , retrieved 29 june 2009 . misidentify a serious irritant as safe : 0-0.01 % misidentify a mild irritant as safe : 3.7 % -5.5 % misidentify a serious irritant as a mild irritant : 10.3 % -38.7 % . descriptions of the test . anti-testing . according to the american national anti-vivisection society , solutions of products are applied directly into the animals ' eyes , which can cause '' intense burning , itching and pain . '' clips are placed on the rabbits ' eyelids to hold them open during the test period , which can last several days , during which time the rabbits are placed in restraining stocks . the chemicals often leave the eyes '' ulcerated and bleeding . '' in the draize test for skin irritancy , the test substances are applied to skin that is shaved and abraded ( several layers of skin are removed with sticky tape ) , then covered with plastic sheeting . animals in product testing , navs , accessed june 30 , 2009 . . pro-testing . according to the british research defence society , the draize eye test is now a '' very mild test , '' in which small amounts of substances are used and are washed out of the eye at the first sign of irritation . in a letter to nature , written to refute an article saying that the draize test had not changed much since the 1940s , andrew huxley wrote : '' a substance expected from its chemical nature to be seriously painful must not be tested in this way ; the test is permissible only if the substance has already been shown not to cause pain when applied to skin , and in vitro pre-screening tests are recommended , such as a test on an isolated and perfused eye . permission to carry out the test on several animals is given only if the test has been performed on a single animal and a period of 24 hours has been allowed for injury to become evident . '' . differences between the rabbit eye and the human eyes . kirk wilhelmus , professor in the department of ophthalmology at baylor college of medicine , conducted a comprehensive review of the draize eye test in 2001 . he also reported that differences in anatomy and biochemistry between the rabbit and human eye indicate that testing substances on rabbits might not predict the effects on humans . however , he noted '' that eyes of rabbits are generally more susceptible to irritating substances than the eyes of humans '' making them a conservative model of the human eye . wilhelmus concluded '' the draize eye test . has assuredly prevented harm '' to humans , but predicts it will be '' supplanted as in vitro and clinical alternatives emerge for assessing irritancy of the ocular surface '' . alternatives . industry and regulatory bodies responsible for public health are actively assessing animal-free tests to reduce the requirement for draize testing . before 2009 the organisation for economic co-operation and development ( oecd ) had not validated any alternative methods for testing eye or skin irritation potential . oecd , 1987 . eye irritation testing . oecd guidelines for testing of chemicals . test guideline 405 , paris . oecd , 1992 . acute skin irritation and corrosive testing . oecd guidelines for testing of chemicals . test guideline 404 , paris . rodger d . curren and john w . harbell , '' ocular safety : a silent ( in vitro ) success story '' , atla 30 , supplement 2 , 69-74 , 2002 however , since 2000 oecd had validated alternative tests for corrosivity , meaning acids , bases and other corrosive substances are no longer required to be draize tested on animals . the alternative tests include a human skin equivalent model and the transepicutaneous resistance test ( ter ) . in addition , the use of human corneal cell line ( hce-t cells ) is also another good alternative method to test eye irritation on potential chemicals in september 2009 the oecd validated two alternatives to the draize eye test : the bovine cornea opacity test ( bcop ) and isolated chicken eye test ( ice ) . a 1995 study funded by the european commission and british home office evaluated these among nine potential replacements , including the hens ' egg chorioallantoic membrane ( het-cam ) assay and an epithelial model cultivated from human corneal cells , in comparison with draize test data . the study found that none of the alternative tests , taken alone , proved to be a reliable replacement for the animal test , however a post hoc post-hoc analysis found that in certain combinations of tests , an '' excellent performance '' was observed . positive results from some of these tests have been accepted by regulatory bodies , such as the british health and safety executive and us department of health and human services , without testing on live animals , but negative results ( no irritation ) required further in vivo testing . regulatory bodies have therefore begun to adopt a tiered testing strategy for skin and eye irritation , using alternatives to reduce draize testing of substances with the most severe effects . . regulations . uk . in britain , the home office publishes guideline for eye irritancy tests , with the aim of reducing suffering to the animals . in its 2006 guidelines , it '' strongly encourages '' in vitro screening of all compounds before testing on animals , and mandates the use of validated alternatives when available . it requires that the test solution 's '' physical and chemical properties are not such that a severe adverse reaction could be predicted '' ; therefore '' known corrosive substances or those with a high oxidation or reduction potential must not be tested . '' eye irritation tests , uk home office , retrieved 29 june 2009 . the test design requires that the substance be tested on one rabbit initially , and the effect of the substance on the skin must be ascertained before it can be introduced into the eye . if a rabbit shows signs of '' severe pain '' or distress it must be immediately killed , the study terminated and the compound may not be tested on other animals . in tests where severe eye irritancy is considered likely , a washout should closely follow testing in the eye of the first rabbit . in the uk , any departure from these guidelines requires prior approval from the home secretary . . see also . animal testing on rabbits test . notes . further reading . clelatt , kn ( ed ) : textbook of veterinary ophthalmology . lea & febiger , philadelphia . 1981 . prince jh , diesem cd , eglitis i , ruskell gl : anatomy and histology of the eye and orbit in domestic animals . charles c . thomas , springfield , 1960 . saunders lz , rubin lf : ophthalmic pathology in animals . s . karger , new york , 1975 . swanston dw : eye irritancy testing . in : balls m , riddell rj , warden an ( eds ) . animals and alternatives in toxicity testing . academic press , new york , 1983 , pp . & nbsp ; 337–367 . buehler ev , newmann ea : a comparison of eye irritation in monkeys and rabbits . toxicol appl pharmacol 6:701-710:1964 . sharpe r : the draize test-motivations for change . fd chem toxicol 23:139-143:1985 . freeberg fe , hooker dt , griffith jf : correlation of animal eye test data with human experience for household products : an update . j toxicol-cut & ocular toxicol 5:115-123:1986 . griffith jf , freeberg fe : empirical and experimental bases for selecting the low volume eye irritation test as the validation standard for in vitro methods . in : goldber am ( ed ) : in vitro toxicology : approaches to validation . new york , mary ann libert , 1987 , pp . & nbsp ; 303–311 . shopsis c , borenfreund e , stark dm : validation studies on a battery of potential in vitro alternatives to the draize test . in : goldberg am ( ed ) : in vitro toxicology : approaches to validation . new york . mary ann liebert , 1987 , pp . & nbsp ; 31–44 . maurice d : direct toxicity to the cornea : a nonspecific process ? in : goldberg am ( ed ) : in vivo toxicology : approaches to validation . new york . mary ann liebert 1987 , pp . & nbsp ; 91–93 . leighton j , nassauer j , tchao r , verdone j : development of a procedure using the chick egg as an alternative to the draize rabbit test . in : goldberg am ( ed ) : product safety evaluation . new york . mary ann liebert , 1983 , pp . l65-177 . gordon vc , bergman hc : the eyetex-mpa system . presented at the symposium , progress in in vitro technology , johns hopkins university school of hygiene and public health , baltimore , maryland , november 44 , 1987 . hertzfeld hr , myers td : the economic viability of in vitro testing techniques . in : goldberg am ( ed ) : in vitro toxicology . new york . mary ann liebert , 1987 , pp . & nbsp ; 189–202 .