Samael

judaism . second temple period and posteriority . samael was first mentioned during the second temple period and immediately after its destruction . he is apparently first mentioned in the book of enoch along with other rebellious angels . in enoch 1 he is one of the watchers who descended to earth to copulate with human women , although he is not their leader , charles , r.h . , the book of enoch , this being semyaza . the first apology by justin martyr , translated by marcus dods in the greek apocalypse of baruch , he is the dominant evil figure . samael plants the tree of knowledge , thereupon he is banished and cursed by god . to take revenge , he tempts adam and eve into sin by taking the form of the serpent . he appears further as the embodiment of evil in the ascension of isaiah , often identified as : melkira , melek ra , 'king of evil , 'king of the wicked ' ) ; malkira / malchira , malakh/malach ra , 'messenger of evil ' or 'angel of iniquity ' ) ; belkira ( prob . , baal qir , 'lord of the wall ' ) ; or bechira , bachir ra , 'the elect of evil , chosen by evil ' ) . the names belial and satan are also applied to him and he gains control of king manasseh in order to accuse isaiah of treason . . talmudic-midrashic literature . in talmudic-midrashic literature , samael 's role as an agent of evil is rather marginal , but from the fifth or sixth century onward , this name again becomes one of the most prominent among the demonic entities . in the exodus rabbah , samael is depicted as the accuser in the heavenly court and tempting to sin , while michael defends israel 's actions . here , samael is identified with satan . while satan describes his function as an '' accuser , '' samael is considered to be his proper name . he also fulfills the role of the angel of death , when he comes to take the soul of moses and is called the leader of satans . the title of satan is also applied to him in the midrash pirke de-rabbi eliezer , where he is the chief of the fallen angels . according to the text , samael opposed the creation of adam and descended to earth to tempt him into evil . riding the serpent , he convinces eve to eat the forbidden fruit . his role here might be influenced by the islamic idea of iblis , who refused to prostrate himself before adam because he consists of fire and adam merely from dust . the midrash also reveals samael fathered cain with eve . in the midrash konen , he is the ruler of the third hell . several sources , such as yalkut shimoni ( i , 110 ) describe him as the guardian angel of esau relating him to rome , the one who wrestled with jacob , the angel who ordered abraham to sacrifice isaac , and a patron of edom . . kabbalah . in kabbalah ( a . e . waite , 255 ) , samael is described as the '' severity of god , '' and is listed as fifth of the archangels of the world of briah . although both samael and lilith are major demons in earlier jewish traditions , they do not appear paired until the second half of the thirteenth century , when they are introduced together . lilith is a demon created alongside adam , originally created for the role eve would fill , who then becomes samael 's bride . with her , samael created a host of demon children , including a son , the '' sword of samael '' ( or of asmodai ) . in the kabbalistic work treatise on the left emanation , samael is part of the qliphoth , prince of all demons , and spouse of lilith . the two are said to parallel adam and eve , being emanated together from the throne of glory as a counterpart . asmodeus is also mentioned to be subservient to samael and married to a younger , lesser lilith . according to the treatise , god castrated samael in order not to fill the world with their demonic offspring , this being the reason why lilith seeks to fornicate with men . in the zohar , one of kabbalah 's main works , samael is described as a leader of the divine forces of destruction , being part of the qliphoth . he is mentioned again as the serpent 's rider , and is described as having mated with eisheth , na'amah , and agrat bat mahlat , all being '' angels '' of sacred prostitution . notably , the same work later calls him azazel , which might be a case of mistaken identity , as azazel may be himself in zoharistic lore a combination of the angels aza and azrael . it is also said that the baal shem once summoned samael to make him do his bidding . . other tradition . samael is also depicted as the angel of death and one of the seven archangels , the ruler over the fifth heaven and commander of two million angels such as the chief of other destroying angels . according to apocryphal gedulat moshe ( the apocalypse of moses , '' the ascension of moses '' in the legends of the jews by louis ginzberg ) samael is also mentioned as being in 7th & nbsp ; heaven : . gnosticism . in the apocryphon of john , on the origin of the world , and hypostasis of the archons , found in the nag hammadi library , samael is one of three names of the demiurge , whose other names are yaldabaoth and saklas . after yaldabaoth claims sole divinity for himself , the voice of sophia comes forth calling him samael , due to his ignorance . gilhus , ingvild sælid . 1985 . the nature of the archons : a study in the soteriology of a gnostic treatise from nag hammadi ( cgii , 4 ) . otto harrassowitz verlag . p . 44 fischer-mueller , e . aydeet . 1990 . '' yaldabaoth : the gnostic female principle in its fallenness . '' novum testamentum 32 ( 1 ) :79–95 . in on the origin of the world , his name is explained as '' blind god '' and his fellow archons are said to be blind , too . this reflecting the characteristics of the christian devil , making people blind , as does the devil in 2 corinthians 4 . also samael is the first sinner in the hypostasis of the archons and the first epistle of john calls the devil as sinner from the beginning . these characteristics combined with his boasting conflates the jewish god with the devil . m . david litwa esiring divinity : self-deification in early jewish and christian mythmaking oxford university press , 2016 p . 55 his appearance is that of a lion-faced serpent . fischer-mueller , e . aydeet . “ yaldabaoth : the gnostic female principle in its fallenness . ” novum testamentum , vol . 32 , no . 1 , 1990 , pp . 79–95 . although the gnostics and jewish originally used the same source , both depictions of samael developed independently . ivry , elliot r . wolfson . 1998 2013 . perspectives on jewish thought . routledge . samael is sometimes confused in some books with camael , who appears in the gospel of egyptians also as an evil power , whose name is similar to words meaning '' like god '' ( but camael with a waw missing ) . the name might be explained , because in jewish traditions , the snake had the form of a camel , before it was banished by god . . anthroposophy . to anthroposophists , samael is known as one of the seven archangels : saint gregory gives the seven archangels as anael , gabriel , michael , oriphiel , raphael , samael , and zerachiel . they are all imagined to have a special assignment to act as a global zeitgeist ( 'time-spirit ' ) , each for periods of about 360 & nbsp ; years . matherne , bobby . 2003 . '' the archangel michael , ga & nbsp ; 67 '' ( review ) . a reader 's journal 2 . retrieved on 11 & nbsp ; october 2014 .