Apple Records

history . 1967–1969 : early years . apple corps ltd was conceived by the beatles in 1967 after the death of their manager brian epstein . it was intended to be a small group of companies ( apple retail , apple publishing , apple electronics , and so on ) as part of epstein 's plan to create a tax-effective business structure . the first project that the band released after forming the company was their film magical mystery tour , which was produced under the apple films division . apple records was officially founded by the group after their return from india in 1968 as another sub-division of apple corps . at this time , the beatles were contracted to emi . in a new distribution deal , emi and its us subsidiary capitol records agreed to distribute apple records until 1976 , while emi retained ownership of their recordings . beatles recordings issued in the united kingdom on the apple label carried parlophone catalogue numbers , while us issues carried capitol catalogue numbers . apple records owns the rights to all of the beatles ' videos and movie clips , and the rights to recordings of other artists signed to the label . the first catalogue number apple 1 was a single pressing of frank sinatra singing '' maureen is a champ '' ( with lyrics by sammy cahn ) to the melody of '' the lady is a tramp '' as a surprise gift for the 21st birthday of ringo starr 's wife maureen . apple records and apple publishing signed a number of acts whom the beatles personally discovered or supported , and one or more of the beatles would be involved in the recording sessions in most cases . several notable artists were signed in the first year , including james taylor , mary hopkin , billy preston , the modern jazz quartet , the iveys ( who became badfinger ) , doris troy , and former liverpool singer jackie lomax who recorded george harrison 's '' sour milk sea '' . . 1969–1973 : klein era . in 1969 , the beatles were in need of financial and managerial direction , and john lennon was approached by allen klein , manager of the rolling stones . when klein went on to manage apple three of the beatles supported him , paul mccartney being the only group member opposed to his involvement . mccartney had suggested his father-in-law lee eastman for the job . klein took control of apple and shut down several sub-divisions , including apple electronics , and he dropped some of apple records ' artistic roster . new signings to the label were not so numerous afterward and tended to arrive through the individual actions of the former beatles . for example , elephant 's memory were recruited through lennon and ravi shankar through harrison . mccartney had little input into apple records ' roster after 1970 . klein managed apple corp . until march 1973 , when his contract expired . the beatles ' entire pre-apple catalogue on the capitol label was re-issued on the apple label in may 1971 , including the singles from '' i want to hold your hand '' to '' lady madonna '' , and the albums from meet the beatles ! to magical mystery tour . the album covers remained unchanged with the capitol logos . 1973–2007 : aspinall era , beatles reissues . after klein 's departure , apple was managed by neil aspinall on behalf of the four beatles and their heirs . apple records ' distribution contract with emi expired in 1976 , when control of the beatles ' catalogue—including solo recordings to date by george harrison , john lennon and ringo starr—reverted to emi ( paul mccartney had acquired ownership of his solo recordings when he re-signed with capitol in 1975 ) . the original uk versions of the beatles ' albums were released worldwide on compact disc in 1987 and 1988 by parlophone . previously , abbey road had been issued on cd by the emi-odeon label in japan in the early 1980s . although this was a legitimate release , it was not authorised by the beatles , emi or apple corps . following the settlement of apple 's ten-year lawsuit against emi in 1989 , new projects began to move forward , including the live at the bbc album and the beatles anthology series . it was after the anthology project ( spearheaded by neil aspinall ) that the company resumed making significantly large profits again and began its revival . the label was again newsworthy in 2006 , as the long-running dispute between apple records ' parent company and apple inc . went to the high court ( see apple corps v apple computer ) . 2007–present : jones era , itunes reissues . in 2007 , longtime chief executive neil aspinall retired and was replaced by american music industry executive jeff jones . kozinn , allan , '' magical mystery tour ends for apple corps executive '' , the new york times , 12 april 2007 , passim . ( link ) the beatles ' catalog was remastered and re-issued in september 2009 and was made available on itunes in november 2010 . when universal music group acquired emi and the beatles ' recorded music catalogue , calderstone productions was formed in 2012 to administer the beatles ' catalogue . design . image : apple iveys.jpg thumb german release of the iveys ' album maybe tomorrow standard apple album and single labels displayed a bright green granny smith apple on the a-side , while the flipside displayed the cross section of the apple . the bright green apple returned for beatles cds releases in the 1990s , following initial cd releases by parlophone . on the us issue of the beatles ' let it be album , the granny smith apple was red . the reason was that in the united states that album , being the soundtrack to the movie of the same name , was , for contractual reasons , being manufactured and distributed by united artists records and not capitol records , so the red apple was used to mark the difference . the red apple also appeared on the back cover , and on the 2009 remastered edition back cover . capitol 's parent company emi purchased united artists records in the late 1970s , and capitol gained the american rights to the let it be soundtrack album ( along with the american rights to another , earlier , united artists beatles movie soundtrack lp , 1964 's a hard day 's night ) . aside from the red apple , other examples in which the apple has been altered include george harrison 's album all things must pass triple album , on which the first two discs have orange apples while the third has a jar label reading apple jam ; black and white apples on john lennon 's album john lennon/plastic ono band and yoko ono 's album yoko ono/plastic ono band ; a blue apple on ringo starr 's single '' back off boogaloo '' ; harrison 's album extra texture ( read all about it ) , on which the apple ( in shrunken cartoon form ) is eaten away at its core ( this was intended to be a joke because it was released at a time when apple records was beginning to fold ) ; and a red apple on starr 's compilation album blast from your past . other types of apples were also used : in 1971 , for lennon 's imagine and ono 's fly , the apples respectively featured pictures of lennon and ono , as did the apples for ono 's 1973 approximately infinite universe and the singles that were released from these three albums . zapple records . image : zapple.png thumb right the zapple label of george harrison 's electronic sound lp ( us issue ) zapple records , an apple records subsidiary run by barry miles , a friend of mccartney , was intended as an outlet for the release of spoken word and avant-garde records , as a budget label . it was active only from 3 february 1969 until june 1969 ; two albums were released on the label , one by lennon and ono ( unfinished music no . 2 : life with the lions ) and one by harrison ( electronic sound ) . an album of readings by richard brautigan was planned for release as zapple 3 , and acetate disc copies were cut , but , said miles , '' the zapple label was folded by allen klein before the record could be released . the first two zapple records did come out . we just did n't have brautigan 's record ready in time before klein closed it down . none of the beatles ever heard it . '' barry miles , as quoted by richie unterberger in the sleevenotes to the eventual non-apple release of listening to richard brautigan . brautigan 's record was eventually released as listening to richard brautigan on harvest records , a subsidiary of apple distributor emi , in the us only . the first record that was done for zapple was by poet charles olson . according to miles , a spoken word album by lawrence ferlinghetti , which had been recorded and edited , would have been zapple 4 , and a spoken word album by michael mcclure had also been recorded . a planned zapple release of a uk appearance by comedian lenny bruce was never completed . an early 1969 press release also named pablo casals as an expected guest on the label . american author ken kesey was given a tape recorder to record his impressions of london , but they were never released . miles also had the intention of bringing world leaders to the label . zapple was shut down in june 1969 by klein , apparently with the backing of lennon . the archive hour , bbc radio 4 , 12 june 2004 . artists . badfinger ( originally known as the iveys ) – signed to apple after several demo tapes were brought in by beatles ' roadie mal evans , after getting approval from paul mccartney , george harrison and john lennon . they had several top 10 hits in the uk and us , including the mccartney song '' come and get it '' , and recorded five albums for apple . black dyke mills band ( as john foster & sons ltd . black dyke mills band ) – a northern england brass band whom paul mccartney employed for the one-off '' thingummybob '' / '' yellow submarine '' single . it was recorded by mccartney on location near bradford , where the group were based . brute force ( stage name of stephen friedland ) – harrison attempted to have his song '' king of fuh '' released as an apple single . emi refused to handle it , owing to its fuck double entendre ( '' fuh king '' ) , but apple manufactured a small number of copies in-house which were made available to the public . the song itself appears on the 2010 compilation come and get it : the best of apple records . elastic oz band – a one-off single , '' god save us '' , was written and produced by lennon and yoko ono to raise money for a legal battle involving oz magazine . the a-side of the single was sung by bill elliot , later a member of harrison 's dark horse records signing splinter . elephant 's memory – recruited as backing band for lennon and ono , and also released material separately , including contributions to the soundtrack of the 1969 film midnight cowboy ( not on apple ) . chris hodge – discovered by ringo starr ; they shared an interest in ufos . hodge only released two singles on apple , the second of them not issued in the uk . mary hopkin – discovered after appearing on a uk television talent show and suggested by the model twiggy . her early recordings were produced by mccartney , including the lennon-mccartney original '' goodbye '' and her hit recording of '' those were the days '' . she also released a eurovision song contest entry on apple ( '' knock , knock who 's there ? '' ) and two studio albums . hot chocolate ( as hot chocolate band ) – released one single , a reggae version of '' give peace a chance '' , which they recorded and had played to lennon , who liked it . their post-apple releases as hot chocolate were more commercially successful . jackie lomax – liverpudlian singer known to the beatles through his brian epstein connections ; he recorded the harrison-produced album is this what you want ? , released in 1969 , which also includes musical contributions from starr and mccartney . lomax 's first single , '' sour milk sea '' , features those three beatles and was written by harrison . modern jazz quartet – associated with ono , and were famous prior to their involvement with apple . they released two albums for the label , under the jasmin tree and space . yoko ono – recorded extensively with lennon and released several singles and albums herself ; on these lennon usually directed the band and also performed . david peel and the lower east side – a political folk singer brought to the label by lennon . billy preston – brought in to work with the beatles in january 1969 on their '' get back '' / '' let it be '' sessions , and signed as a solo artist . harrison produced preston 's recordings , including the 1969 hit single '' that 's the way god planned it '' . preston 's recording of harrison 's '' my sweet lord '' was released on apple before harrison 's version . preston issued two albums on apple , that 's the way god planned it in 1969 with george harrison , eric clapton and keith richards , and its follow up encouraging words in 1970 with george harrison , eric clapton , ringo starr and delaney bramlett . radha krishna temple ( london ) , the uk branch of the hare krishna movement . harrison brought the temple devotees to the label in 1969 and produced two hit singles by them in 1969–70 , including '' hare krishna mantra '' , as well as their eponymous studio album , released in 1971 . ravi shankar – an indian classical musician . harrison brought shankar to the label in 1971 and produced his apple releases , which included the raga soundtrack and in concert 1972 , a double live album with ali akbar khan . ronnie spector – married to phil spector , who separately worked with the beatles and solo beatles from 1970 onwards . harrison wrote , co-produced and played on her only apple single , '' try some , buy some '' , which was made with her husband , as an attempt to revive her recording career . the sundown playboys – a french-language cajun band from louisiana . a pre-existing single was brought to the label by starr . john tavener – a classical composer . his brother , a builder , worked on starr 's house , and the drummer took an interest in tavener . james taylor – recorded with mccartney , who appears on the james taylor ( album ) . trash ( originally white trash ) – brought to apple by tony meehan , formerly of the shadows . their second single was a cover of '' golden slumbers '' and charted on apple in the uk . doris troy – an american soul artist since the early 1960s , who worked with harrison and preston while the latter was signed to apple . troy recorded one apple album , and released two spin-off singles in 1970 , the first of which , '' ai n't that cute '' , was co-written with harrison . starr also collaborated on the album , and is credited as a co-writer with harrison and troy on some of the tracks . lon & derrek van eaton – signed to the label in september 1971 by harrison , who produced their debut single , '' sweet music '' . starr also contributed to the recording , and to other tracks on the van eatons ' 1972 apple album brother . also released were the soundtracks to come together and el topo ( in the us ) , the onetime philles records compilation phil spector 's christmas album and the multi-artist the concert for bangla desh . cassette and 8-track tape versions of bangla desh were marketed by columbia records after a deal that permitted the inclusion of bob dylan , a columbia artist , on the album . artists who had considerable success in the pop and rock world after their initial sessions at apple records include badfinger ( originally known as the iveys ) , james taylor , mary hopkin , hot chocolate , yoko ono and billy preston . artists who auditioned to appear on the label , but did not make it , include : mcgough and mcgear ( the latter of whom was mccartney 's brother ) , whose self-titled album was due to be released on apple ; it was instead released on parlophone , to which both were signed as members of the scaffold . grapefruit , whose single '' dear delilah '' was issued on rca records with apple publishing credit . focal point , a liverpool band who were going to be managed by brian epstein before he died , were signed to apple after chasing mccartney around hyde park . john lennon signed them to apple ; they were the first band signed . their single '' sycamore sid '' was issued on deram records with credit to apple publishing on the label . fire ( a band with future strawbs member dave lambert on guitar ) released two singles in 1968 : '' father 's name was dad '' , produced by tony clarke , and '' round the gum tree '' , on decca with apple publishing credits . delaney and bonnie 's accept no substitute album was originally meant to be released on apple in 1969 ; it was first released commercially on elektra records the same year . in england , copies of the lp were pressed before apple realized the band were already contracted to elektra . no album covers were ever printed ; the disc is now a high-value apple collectible . mortimer were a folk-based three-piece , notable for a recording of the beatles ' '' two of us '' . it was planned for release as an apple single in 1969 ( before the beatles ' version was issued ) under the title '' on our way home '' , but the release was cancelled . raven were offered a contract to record with apple after harrison received a tape from the band 's manager marty angelo . harrison was unable to be their producer , but sent apple a & r chief peter asher to new york city to discuss asher filling the role . this is documented in the book the longest cocktail party and in angelo 's autobiography once life matters : a new beginning . the band turned down asher 's offer , and instead signed with columbia records in 1969 . slow dog ( later known as wheels ) were a cambridge-based rock band fronted by scottish singer/guitarist dave kelly . they were the winners of the apple records-sponsored national talent contest early 1969 , organised by asher prior to his departure for the us . the winner of the talent contest was promised a record contract with apple records , but owing to asher 's departure , the band only recorded demo tracks . however , on recommendation from mal evans , warner bros . records in london signed slow dog to a record contract , officially changing their name to wheels . see also zapple records section for cancelled releases . discography . see also . apple corps v apple computer list of record labels the longest cocktail party , an inside account of apple corps by richard dilello . notes . references . . external links . the complete apple records apple sleevographia financial background of apple vinylnet 's discography for apple records