The New York Times International Edition

history . the paris herald was founded on 4 october 1887 as the european edition of the new york herald by the parent paper 's owner , james gordon bennett , jr . the company was based in neuilly-sur-seine , a suburb of paris , france . after the death of bennett in 1918 , frank munsey bought the new york herald and the paris herald . munsey sold the herald newspapers in 1924 to ogden mills reid of the new york tribune , and the paris herald became the paris herald tribune , while the new york paper became new york herald tribune . in 1924 , the reid family purchased the paper from frank munsey . it rarely generated enough profit for growth or capital improvements ; the reids subsidized the herald tribune through the paper 's early years . the reids due to financial misfortune sold the paper . in 1934 , the paper acquired its main competitor : the european edition of the chicago tribune . in 1959 , john hay whitney , a businessman and u.s . ambassador to the united kingdom , bought the new york herald tribune and its european edition . in 1966 , the new york herald tribune was merged into the short-lived new york world journal tribune and ceased publication , but the whitney family kept the paris paper going through partnerships . in december 1966 the washington post became a joint owner . international herald tribune . the new york times became a joint owner of the paris herald tribune in may 1967 , whereupon the newspaper became known as the international herald tribune ( iht ) . in 1974 , the international herald tribune began transmitting facsimile pages of the paper between nations and opened a printing site near london . in 1977 the paper opened a second site in zürich . the international herald tribune began transmitting electronic images of newspaper pages from paris to hong kong via satellite in 1980 , making the paper simultaneously available on opposite sides of the planet . this was the first such intercontinental transmission of an english-language daily newspaper and followed the pioneering efforts of the chinese-language newspaper sing tao daily ( 星島日報 ) . in 1991 , the washington post and the new york times became sole and equal shareholders of the international herald tribune . in february 2005 it opened its asia newsroom in hong kong . in april 2001 , the japanese newspaper asahi shimbun ( 朝日新聞 ) tied up with the international herald tribune and published an english-language newspaper , the international herald tribune/asahi shimbun . the diplomat tokyo notes ( december 7 , 2010 ) . asahi to drop english daily . retrieved june 1 , 2015 . after the washington post sold its stake in the international herald tribune , it continued being published under the name international herald tribune/asahi shimbun , but it was discontinued in february 2011 . . acquisition by the new york times company . on 30 december 2002 the new york times company took control of the paper by buying the 50 % stake owned by the washington post company . the takeover ended a 35-year partnership between the two us domestic competitors . the post was forced to sell when the times threatened to pull out and start a competing paper . as a result , the post entered into an agreement to publish selected post articles in the wall street journal ’ s european edition . after the takeover the iht was subtitled the global edition of the new york times instead of published by the new york times and the washington post . in 2008 , the nyt company announced the merger of the new york times and iht websites . in march 2009 the iht website became the global version of nytimes.com . ; international new york times in 2013 , the new york times company announced that the newspaper itself would be renamed the international new york times to reflect the company ’ s focus on its core new york times newspaper and to build its international presence . on october 14 , 2013 , the international herald tribune appeared on newsstands for the last time . it came with a supplemental section , titled turning the page , a retrospective on the herald tribune ’ s past articles , photographs , and place in newspaper history . on october 15 , 2013 , the international new york times debuted with a ‘ premier edition ’ flash above the masthead . it came with a supplement titled turning the page ii , which discussed and predicted likely developments in many global areas including energy , finance , technology and media . ; the new york times international edition in october 2016 , the newspaper was fully integrated with its parent and renamed the new york times international edition . while the international edition shares many columnists with the new york times , it has its own voice , particularly in the field of culture . well-known commentators include alice rawsthorn on design and souren melikian on art . the new york times international weekly . besides the daily edition , a weekly 16-page edition is published as the new york times international weekly featuring the best of new york times articles for a week . designed to complement and extend local reporting , it offers readers globally resonant coverage of ideas and trends , business and politics , science and lifestyles and more . host papers can monetize the iw through built-in advertising space , sponsorship and other opportunities to generate revenue . . affiliations . typically , the affiliation consists of an english-language edition of the local newspaper circulated together with the new york times international weekly . affiliations with international newspapers include : asahi shimbun ( japan ) le figaro ( france ) the japan times ( japan ) joongang daily ( south korea ) haaretz ( israel ) kathimerini ( greece ) the express tribune ( pakistan ) the malaysian reserve ( malaysia ) república ( nepal ) the jakarta post ( indonesia ) ara ( spain ) . cultural references . the newspaper became a mainstay of american expatriate culture in europe . in ernest hemingway ’ s novel , the sun also rises ( 1926 ) , the first thing the novel 's protagonist jake barnes does on returning from spain to france is buy the new york herald from a kiosk in bayonne and read it at a cafe . in jean-luc godard ’ s 1960 film breathless ( 1960 ) , the lead female character patricia ( jean seberg ) is an american student journalist who sells the new york herald tribune on the streets of paris . pages from the day 's paper can be seen tacked up through the office windows , a tradition that would continue with the international herald tribune . references . further reading . bingham , adrian . '' ‘ there ’ s a lot more going on ’ : the international herald tribune and the portrayal of women '' ( international herald tribune historical archive 1887-2013 . cengage learning , 2017 ) online dauncey , hugh and hare , geoff . '' the international herald tribune 1887-1918 : the symbiotic development of modern sport and an international press '' ( international herald tribune historical archive 1887-2013 . cengage learning , 2017 ) online pettitt , clare : '' 'by the herald ’ s special wire ! ' : technology and speed in transnational news . '' ( international herald tribune historical archive 1887-2013 . cengage learning , 2017 ) online reeves , richard . '' the paris tribune at one hundred '' , american heritage ( november 1987 ) . volume 38 , issue 7 . online . external links . mobile apps of the new york times