PJ Harvey

white chalk and let england shake : 2007–2014 . during her first performance since the uh huh her tour at the hay festival of literature & arts on 26 may 2006 , harvey revealed that her next studio album would be almost entirely piano-based . following the october release of the peel sessions 1991–2004 , a compilation of songs recorded from 1991 to 2000 during her radio sessions with john peel , she began recording her seventh studio album white chalk in november , together with flood , john parish and eric drew feldman and drummer jim white in a studio in west london . white chalk was released in september 2007 and marked a radical departure from her usual alternative rock style , consisting mainly of piano ballads . the album received favourable reviews , its style being described by one critic as containing '' pseudo-victorian elements—drama , restraint , and antiquated instruments and sounds . '' harvey herself said of the album : '' when i listen to the record i feel in a different universe , really , and i 'm not sure whether it 's in the past or in the future . the record confuses me , that 's what i like—it does n't feel of this time right now , but i 'm not sure whether it 's 100 years ago or 100 years in the future '' , summing up the album 's sound as '' really weird . '' during the tour for the album harvey performed without a backing band , and also began performing on an autoharp , which continues to be her primary instrument after guitar and has influenced her material since white chalk . in april 2010 , harvey appeared on the andrew marr show to perform a new song titled '' let england shake . '' in a pre-performance interview with marr , she stated that the new material she had written had been '' formed out of the landscape that i 've grown up in and the history of this nation '' and as '' a human being affected by politics . '' harvey , pj . '' i know that the music that i make is definitely formed out of the landscape that i 've grown up in and the history of this nation '' and '' i sing as a human being affected by politics and that for me is a more successful way in song . '' extracts from a transcription of an interview with pj harvey on the andrew marr show . broadcast on bbc one on 18 april 2010 . her eighth studio album let england shake was released in february 2011 , and received universal critical acclaim . nmes 10/10 review summarised the album as '' a record that ventures deep into the heart of darkness of war itself and its resonance throughout england 's past , present and future '' and other reviews also noted its themes and writing style as '' bloody and forceful , '' mixing '' ethereal form with brutal content , '' and '' her most powerful . '' dealing with the ongoing conflict in afghanistan and other episodes from english history , the album featured john parish , mick harvey and jean-marc butty as harvey 's backing band and the quartet toured extensively in its promotion . following the release of the album 's two well-received singles— '' the words that maketh murder '' and '' the glorious land '' —and the collection of short films by seamus murphy to accompany the album , harvey won her second mercury music prize on 6 september . the award marked her as the first artist to receive the award twice , entering her into the guinness book of records as the only artist to have achieved this . , and sales of let england shake increased 1,190 % overnight following her win . on 23 september , let england shake was certified gold in the united kingdom and was listed as album of the year by mojo and uncut . on 3 august 2013 , harvey released a song shaker aamer in support of the guantanamo bay detention camp detainee by the same name who was the last british citizen to be held there . the song describes in detail what aamer endured during his four-month hunger strike . . the hope six demolition project : 2015–present . on 16 january 2015 , pj harvey began recording her ninth studio album , the hope six demolition project , in front of a live audience . a custom built recording studio was made in london 's somerset house . uncut magazine noted that much like her previous album let england shake , many of the lyrics were politically charged , but this time it was more globally focused . while recording she was shown to be using saxophones , an autoharp and a bouzouki . flood was confirmed to be the producer of the album . on 18 december 2015 , harvey released a 20-second teaser for the album , which contained a release date of spring 2016 . on 21 january 2016 , the debut single , '' the wheel '' , was played on steve lamacq 's show on bbc radio 6 music . the album was released on 15 april . a new video , '' the orange monkey '' , was shared on 2 june 2016 . directed by irish filmmaker seamus murphy , it was made from footage of murphy 's and harvey 's trips to afghanistan . the album reached 1 on the uk albums chart and was nominated for a grammy award in the best alternative music album category . harvey spent much of 2016 and 2017 touring the world with her nine-piece band , taking her critically lauded live show around north america , south america , europe and australasia . . collaborations and projects . , released in 2007 . harvey has also recorded two studio albums with long-time collaborator john parish . dance hall at louse point ( 1996 ) was written collectively with parish with the exception of the song '' is that all there is ? '' , written by jerry leiber and mike stoller . the album also listed her as polly jean harvey , which in part affected the album 's sales . harvey has also reflected on how the album was '' an enormous turning point '' and '' lyrically , it moved me into areas i 'd never been to before . '' in 1998 , she also performed lead vocals on '' airplane blues , '' as a soundtrack accompaniment to the wingwalkers art exhibition by rebecca goddard and parish 's wife , michelle henning , which was released as the closing song on parish 's second solo album how animals move in 2002 . following the release of white chalk , harvey reunited with parish to record a woman a man walked by , released in march 2009 . like dance hall at louse point , the album received positive reviews but also was a moderate commercial success , peaking at number 25 in the uk albums chart . she collaborated with egyptian artist ramy essam on '' the camp '' , a charity single released in june 2017 to benefit displaced children in the lebanese beqaa valley fleeing the syrian civil war . aside from collaborations , harvey has also embarked on a number of projects as a composer . in january 2009 , a new stage production of henrik ibsen 's hedda gabler opened on broadway . directed by ian rickson and starring mary-louise parker in the title role , the play featured an original score of incidental music written by harvey . in november 2011 , harvey also composed part of the score for the young vic 's long-running production of hamlet in london . in may 2012 , harvey composed two songs , '' horse '' and '' bobby do n't steal , '' for mark cousins ' film what is this film called love ? , which also features '' to bring you my love . '' in march 2018 , pj harvey and john parish released a song called '' sorry for your loss '' as tribute to singer-songwriter mark linkous , who committed suicide in 2010 . in 2019 , harvey composed the score for shane meadows ’ miniseries , the virtues , broadcast on channel 4 . musical style and influences . harvey possesses an expansive contralto vocal range . harvey dislikes repeating herself in her music , resulting in very different-sounding albums . in an october 2004 interview with rolling stone , she said : '' when i 'm working on a new record , the most important thing is to not repeat myself & nbsp ; . that 's always my aim : to try and cover new ground and really to challenge myself . because i 'm in this for learning . '' while her musical style has been described as alternative rock , punk blues , art rock , and avant-rock , she has experimented with various other genres including electronica , indie rock and folk music . she is also known for changing her physical appearance for each album by altering her mode of dress or hairstyle , creating a unique aesthetic that extends to all aspects of the album , from the album art to the live performances . she works closely with friend and photographer maria mochnacz to develop the visual style of each album . around the time of to bring you my love , for example , harvey began experimenting with her image and adopting a theatrical aspect to her live performances . her former fashion style , which consisted of simple black leggings , turtleneck sweaters and doc martens boots , was replaced by ballgowns , catsuits , wigs and excessive make-up . she also began using stage props like a ziggy stardust-style flashlight microphone . she denied the influence of drag , kabuki or performance art on her new image , a look she affectionately dubbed '' joan crawford on lsd '' in an interview with spin in 1996 , but admitted that '' it 's that combination of being quite elegant and funny and revolting , all at the same time , that appeals to me . i actually find wearing make-up like that , sort of smeared around , as extremely beautiful . maybe that 's just my twisted sense of beauty . '' however , she later told dazed & confused magazine , '' that was kind of a mask . it was much more of a mask than i 've ever had . i was very lost as a person , at that point . i had no sense of self left at all '' , and has never repeated the overt theatricality of the to bring you my love tour . at an early age , she was introduced by her parents to blues music , jazz and art rock , which , she told rolling stone in 1995 , would later influence her : '' i was brought up listening to john lee hooker , to howlin ' wolf , to robert johnson , and a lot of jimi hendrix and captain beefheart . so i was exposed to all these very compassionate musicians at a very young age , and that 's always remained in me and seems to surface more as i get older . i think the way we are as we get older is a result of what we knew when we were children . '' during her teenage years , she began listening to new wave and synthpop bands such as soft cell , duran duran and spandau ballet , although later stated that it was a phase when she was '' having a bit of a rebellion against my parents ' record collection . '' in her later teenage years , she became a fan of american indie rock bands including pixies , television and slint ( whom she reached out to when the band included a message in the inside sleeve of spiderland saying '' interested female vocalists write 1864 douglas blvd . , louisville , ky 40205 '' ) . though not as many critics have suspected , patti smith ; a frequent comparison that harvey dismisses as '' lazy journalism . '' however , recently harvey has said that smith is '' so energising to see and so passionate with what she 's doing '' . harvey , pj . '' patti smith , whenever she 's performing i want to see her because so energising to see and so passionate with what she 's doing . '' extracts from a transcription of an interview with pj harvey in the guardian . released online on 12 september 2011 . harvey has also cited siouxsie sioux in terms of live performance , stating : '' she is so exciting to watch , so full of energy and human raw quality '' . she has also drawn inspiration from russian folk music , italian soundtrack composer ennio morricone , classical composers like arvo pärt , samuel barber and henryk górecki ; and neil young . as a lyricist , harvey has cited numerous poets , authors and lyricists as influences on her work including harold pinter , t . s . eliot , william butler yeats , james joyce , ted hughes and contemporaries such as shane macgowan and jez butterworth . . other ventures . outside her better-known music career , harvey is also an occasional artist and actress . in 1998 , she appeared in hal hartley 's film the book of life as magdalena—a modern-day character based on the biblical mary magdalene—and had a cameo role as a playboy bunny in a bunny girl 's tale , a short film directed by sarah miles , in which she also performs '' nina in ecstasy '' , an outtake from is this desire ? ( 1998 ) . harvey also collaborated with miles on another film , amaeru fallout 1972 , which includes harvey performing a cover of '' when will i see you again . '' harvey is also an accomplished sculptor who has had several pieces exhibited at the lamont gallery and the bridport arts centre . in 2010 , she was invited to be the guest designer for the summer issue of francis ford coppola 's literary magazine zoetrope : all-story . the issue featured harvey 's paintings and drawings alongside short stories by woody allen . speaking of her artistic contributions to the magazine in 2011 , harvey said : '' the first opportunity i ever had to show any work was in this magazine . they were drawn while i was writing and recording the record ( let england shake ) . it does relate to the record in the way the cycle keeps happening . '' harvey , pj . '' the first opportunity i ever had to show any work was in this magazine . they were drawn while i was writing and recording the record ( let england shake ) . it does relate to the record in the way the cycle keeps happening . '' extracts from a transcription of an interview with pj harvey on the culture show . broadcast on bbc two on 12 february 2011 . in december 2013 , harvey gave her debut public poetry reading at the british library . on 2 january 2014 , she guest-edited bbc radio 4 's today programme . in october 2015 , harvey published her first collection of poetry , a collaboration with photographer seamus murphy , entitled the hollow of the hand . to create the book , pj harvey and seamus murphy made several journeys to kosovo , afghanistan and washington , d.c . their experiences were documented in seamus murphy 's film '' a dog called money '' , due to be released in uk cinemas and online on 8 november 2019 . seamus murphy had previously worked with pj harvey to create 12 short films for let england shake . personal life . she rejects the notion that her song lyrics are autobiographical , telling the times in 1998 : '' the tortured artist myth is rampant . people paint me as some kind of black witchcraft-practising devil from hell , that i have to be twisted and dark to do what i am doing . it 's a load of rubbish '' . what is more , she later told spin : '' some critics have taken my writing so literally to the point that they 'll listen to 'down by the water ' and believe i have actually given birth to a child and drowned her . '' in the early 1990s , harvey was romantically involved with drummer and photographer joe dilworth . lindsay baker , '' let there be light : interview with polly harvey '' , the guardian , 21 october 2000 . from 1996 to 1997 , following their musical collaborations , harvey had a relationship with nick cave , and their subsequent break-up influenced cave 's follow-up studio album the boatman 's call ( 1997 ) , with songs such as '' into my arms , '' '' west country girl '' and '' black hair '' being written specifically about her . harvey has one older brother , saul , and four nephews through him . she expressed a fondness for children in 1995 and stated that she would love to have them , saying : '' i would n't consider it unless i was married . i would have to meet someone that i wanted to spend the rest of my life with . that 's the only person who i would want to be the father of my children . maybe that will never happen . i obviously see it in a very rational way but i 'd love to have children . '' harvey has encountered widespread opposition to a comment made in favour of fox hunting in a 1998 nme magazine feature , which reported harvey saying she was not opposed to fox hunting and that , '' seeing the hunt out on the fields is just so natural to me . '' harvey was appointed member of the order of the british empire ( mbe ) by queen elizabeth ii in the 2013 birthday honours for services to music . . discography . dry ( 1992 ) rid of me ( 1993 ) to bring you my love ( 1995 ) is this desire ? ( 1998 ) stories from the city , stories from the sea ( 2000 ) uh huh her ( 2004 ) white chalk ( 2007 ) let england shake ( 2011 ) the hope six demolition project ( 2016 ) . personnel . ; current members polly harvey – vocals , saxophone , guitar , autoharp , piano , organ , keyboards , violin , cello , vibraphone , marimba , bells & chimes , percussion , djembe , bass , e-bow , melodica , zither , harmonica , harp , cigfiddle ( 1991–present ) terry edwards – backing vocals , saxophones , percussion , keyboards , guitar , flute , bass harmonica , melodica , trumpet ( 1993 live performance guest , 1997 studio guest , 2014–2017 ) james johnston – backing vocals , keyboards , violin , guitar , organ ( 1993 live performance guest , 2014–2017 ) john parish – backing vocals , guitar , drums , keyboards , bass , banjo , organ , ukulele , trombone , rhodes , mellotron , xylophone , percussion ( 1994–1998 , 2006–present ) mick harvey – backing vocals , bass , keyboards , organ , guitar , drums , harmonium , accordion , bass harmonica , piano , rhodes , xylophone , percussion ( 1994–2001 , 2009–present ) jean-marc butty – backing vocals , drums , percussion ( 1994–1996 , 2006–present ) alain johannes – backing vocals , guitars , keyboards , percussion , saxophone ( 2014–2017 ) kenrick rowe – backing vocals , percussion ( 2014–2017 ) enrico gabrielli – backing vocals , percussion , bass clarinet , slide whistle , basset clarinet ( 2014–2017 ) alessandro stefana – backing vocals , guitars ( 2014–2017 ) ; former collaborators rob ellis – drums & percussion , vocals , harmonium , piano , electric piano , tambourine , synthesizer , keyboards , bells , harpsichord , vibraphone ( 1991–1993 , 1996–2005 ) ian oliver – bass ( 1991 , 2003 ) steve vaughan – bass ( 1991–1993 ) nick bagnall – bass , keyboards ( 1994–1995 ) joe gore – guitar , e-bow ( 1994–1996 ) eric drew feldman – piano , keyboards , bass , optigan , mellotron , minimoog , backing vocals ( 1994–2001 , 2006–2009 ) jeremy hogg – guitar ( 1996–1998 ) margaret fiedler – guitar , cello ( 2000–2001 ) tim farthing – guitar ( 2000–2001 ) simon '' dingo '' archer – bass ( 2004 ) josh klinghoffer – guitar , drums , percussion ( 2004 ) jim white – drums ( 2006–2007 ) carla azar – drums ( 2006–2008 , studio guest ) giovanni ferrario – guitar ( 2006–2009 ) . see also . list of awards and nominations received by pj harvey . references . further reading . . external links . – official site