Omelette

history . the earliest omelettes are believed to have originated in ancient persia . according to breakfast : a history , they were '' nearly indistinguishable '' from the iranian dish kuku ( food ) . according to alan davidson , the french word omelette came into use during the mid-16th century , but the versions alumelle and alumete are employed by the ménagier de paris ( ii , 5 ) in 1393 . '' omelette '' rabelais ( pantagruel , iv , 9 ) mentions an homelaicte d'oeufs , '' en pareille alliance , l'un appeloit une sienne , mon homelaicte . elle le nommoit mon oeuf , et estoient alliés comme une homelaicte d'oeufs '' . olivier de serres an amelette , françois pierre la varenne 's le cuisinier françois ( 1651 ) has aumelette , and the modern omelette appears in cuisine bourgeoise ( 1784 ) . three noted by maguelonne toussaint-samat , ( anthea bell , tr . ) a history of food , revised ed , 2009 , p . 326 ; de serres note '' le glossaire accadien '' according to the founding myth of the annual giant easter omelette of bessières , haute-garonne , when napoleon bonaparte and his army were traveling through southern france , they decided to rest for the night near the town of bessières . napoleon feasted on an omelette prepared by a local innkeeper , and thought it was a culinary delight . he then ordered the townspeople to gather all the eggs in the village and to prepare a huge omelette for his army the next day . alexander dumas discusses several variations of omelet in his grand dictionnaire de cuisine . one is an omelet with fresh herbs ( parsley , chives and tarragon , another is a variation with mushrooms that dumas says may be adapted using green peas , asparagus , spinach , sorrel or varieties of truffles . the '' kirsch omelet '' ( or rum omelet ) is a sweet omelet made with sugar and liquor , either kirsh or rum . the omelet is rolled and sprinkled with powdered sugar . a hot poker is used to burn a design into the omelet and it is served with a sweet sauce made of liquor and apricot jam . another sweet omelet , attributed to a royal cook of prussia , is made with apples and brown sugar glaze . of the arabian omelet , dumas writes '' i have been concerned in this book to give the recipes of peoples who have no true cuisine . here , for example , is a recipe the bey 's cook was good enough to give me . '' the omelet itself is made with an ostrich egg and served with a spicy tomato-pepper sauce . alexandre dumas ' dictionary of cuisine , 1873 . variations by country . china . egg foo yung , a cantonese omelette made with beaten eggs and usually ham egg foo yung an oyster omelette , a dish of hokkien and teochew origin made with oysters , starch and egg batter . france . depending on sources , a standard omelette is cooked in butter on medium ( or sometimes high ) heat , is supposed to be golden brown or '' unbrowned or very lightly browned '' on the outside and soft in the inside ginette mathiot ( éd ) , la cuisine pour tous , 1955 , p.107 : '' ( . ) laissez cuire à feu vif . l'omelette doit être dorée à l'extérieur , baveuse au centre . '' ( though variations are possible according to preferences ) ; according to some american cookbooks reflecting high-end restaurant practices , a '' french omelette '' should be unbrowned , cooked slowly over medium-low to medium heat , with initial stirring to prevent curds and sticking . good with just salt and pepper , this omelette is often flavored with tomato and finely chopped herbs ( often fines herbes julia child , bertholle , l . , beck , s . , mastering the art of french cooking ( vol . i ) , page 135 , knopf , 1961 or tarragon , chervil , parsley and chives ) or chopped onions . the omelette de la mère poulard , a norman specialty first developed in mont-saint-michel , has been called the most famous omelette in the world . it is served without fillings but often served with heavy garnishes . . india . appam is an omelette made with fermented rice batter and coconut milk , an egg is broken into the batter as it cooks . in parsi cuisine , pora is an omelette made from eggs , onion , tomato , green chillies , and coriander leaves . it is usually served for breakfast with indian/irani tea and bread . indonesia . in betawi cuisine , kerak telor is a traditional spicy omelette that made from glutinous rice cooked with egg and served with serundeng ( fried shredded coconut ) , fried shallots and dried shrimp as topping . fuyunghai or puyonghai is a chinese indonesian omelette , usually made from the mixture of vegetables such as carrots , bean sprouts , and cabbages , mixed with meats such as crab , shrimp , or minced chicken . iran . kuku is an omelette frequently containing large proportions of other ingredients , including herbs , folded in . nargesi or spinach omelette , an iranian dish , is made with fried onions and spinach , and is spiced with salt , garlic , and pepper . in iran , the kind of omelette which is about ground or chopped tomato with egg folded in , is mostly consumed or served as breakfast rather than dinner or lunch . cafes in part are judged by the quality of their omelette , and despite the fact that it is an easy cuisine to prepare at home , people in iran would rather enjoy it in traditional cafes for breakfast . . italy . a frittata is a kind of open-faced italian omelette that can contain cheese , vegetables , or even leftover pasta . frittata are cooked slowly . except for the cooking oil , all ingredients are fully mixed with the eggs before cooking starts . japan . in japan , tamagoyaki is a traditional omelette in which eggs are beaten with mirin , soy sauce , bonito flakes , sugar and water , and cooked in a makiyakinabe . the omelette is cooked by frying a thin layer of egg mixture and then rolling it up quickly with a pair of chopsticks to form a sausage shape in one end of the pan . another thin layer of egg is then added to the bottom of the pan and is again rolled , with the original rolled , cooked egg at the centre , over to the other end of the pan . this is repeated until all the egg has been used up , resulting in a dense cylindrical omelette containing many thin layers . this is then squeezed into a rectangular or circular cross-section using a sushi mat , and sliced into segments for serving . omelette ( pronounced omuretsu ) can mean a western omelette . omurice ( from the english words '' omelette '' and '' rice '' ) is an omelette filled with rice and usually served with a large amount of tomato ketchup . omu-soba is an omelette with yakisoba as its filling . tenshindon is a japanese-chinese specialty , consisting of a crab meat omelette on rice . . korea . in the korean cuisine , traditional omelettes are known as gyeran-mari ( 계란말이 , '' rolled-eggs '' ) which is a type of savory banchan . gyeran-mari is made with beaten eggs , mixed with finely diced vegetables , meats , and seafood . this side dish is often found in most korean banquet ( janchi ) meals , as well as korean fast food ( bunsik ) restaurants . philippines . in the philippines , omelettes are usually known as torta , they include : tortang dulong or maranay - an omelette , usually crispy , made with tiny fish from the family salangidae known as dulong in tagalog and ipon , libgao , or maranay in visayan . it is sometimes called okoy , though traditional okoy is not an omelette , but rather a type of fritter made with glutinous rice . tortang giniling or tortang picadillo - an omelette with ground meat ( usually beef or pork ) and sautéed vegetables . tortang gulay - an omelette with peppers , mushrooms , onion , and garlic . tortang kalabasa - an omelette made with finely julienned calabaza , eggs , flour , and salt . tortang kamote - an omelette made with mashed sweet potato , eggs , flour , and salt . tortang talong - an eggplant fritter . . spain . the spanish tortilla de patatas , or tortilla española in other spanish-speaking countries , is a traditional and very popular thick omelette containing sliced potatoes sautéed in cooking oil . it often includes sliced onions ( tortilla de patata con cebolla ) and less commonly other additional fillings , such as cheese , bell peppers , or diced ham . thailand . in thai cuisine , a traditional omelette is called khai chiao ไข่เจียว ( khai meaning '' egg '' , and chiao meaning oil-fried ) , in which the beaten egg mixture and a small quantity of fish sauce is deep fried in a wok filled with 1-2 cups of vegetable oil and served over steamed rice . the dish is usually served with sriracha sauce and cilantro . a variation on this dish is khai chiao songkhrueang , where the plain egg omelette is served together with a stir-fry of meat and vegetables . yet another type of thai omelette is khai yat sai , literally '' eggs filled with stuffing '' . . united states . a denver omelette , also known as a southwest omelette or western omelette , is an omelette filled with diced ham , onions , and green bell peppers , though there are many variations on fillings . often served in the southwestern united states , this omelette sometimes has a topping of cheese and a side dish of hash browns or fried potatoes . a hangtown fry , containing bacon and breaded oysters , is an unusual omelette that originated in placerville , california , during the gold rush . an egg white omelette is a variation which omits the yolks to remove fat and cholesterol , which reside exclusively in the yolk portion of an egg . mesoamerica . while the spanish term tortilla in spain and the philippines is applied to an omelette dish , in mesoamerica it is a surrogate term for a flatbread made of wheat or corn . an omelette in mesoamerica is commonly termed as tortilla de huevos , and more colloquially , omleta . gallery . file : kuku sabzi ( iranian food ) . jpg omelette containing large amounts of chopped herbs . file : foodomelete.jpg a browned omelette file : omlette-fold.jpg an omelette foldover file : masala omelette with bread toasties.jpg masala omelette with bread toasties file : denver omelette.jpg denver omelette served with hash browns and english muffin file : iranian omelet.jpg iranian omelette with tomato file : tamagoyaki by naotakem in tokyo.jpg tamagoyaki , a japanese omelette file:2016-06-12 ohshou , gokuoh tenshin-han 王将・極王天津飯 630円.jpg tenshindon file : eggplant torta.jpg tortang talong , a filipino omelette made with grilled eggplant . records . on march 19 , 1994 , the largest omelette in the world at the time was made with 160,000 eggs in yokohama , japan , but was subsequently overtaken by another , weighing , made by the canadian lung association at the brockville memorial centre in brockville , ontario , canada , on may 11 , 2002 . in turn , that record was surpassed on august 11 , 2012 , by an omelette cooked by the ferreira do zêzere city council in santarém , portugal . this record-breaking omelette weighed , and required 145,000 eggs and a diameter pan . . see also . list of egg dishes list of brunch foods shakshouka . references . external links .