1965 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1965 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . february 15 – george stevens ' production of the greatest story ever told , a retelling of the account of jesus christ , premieres in new york city , new york . it was such a flop with critics and audiences that its failure discouraged production of religious epics for many years . it is considered notable in the 21st century for its astonishing landscapes , powerful and provocative cinematography , max von sydow 's debut acting performance in an american film , and the final film performance of claude rains . march 2 – the rodgers and hammerstein film adaptation of the sound of music , directed by robert wise and starring julie andrews and christopher plummer , premieres . it quickly became a worldwide phenomenon and an instant classic . it successfully displaced gone with the wind to become , at the time , the highest-grossing film of all-time . the sound of music is credited as the film that saved and restored twentieth century-fox from bankruptcy after it suffered from extremely high production costs of cleopatra two years prior . july 1 – blake edwards 's epic comedy the great race , starring tony curtis , jack lemmon , natalie wood , peter falk , and keenan wynn , premieres . initially a flop with critics and audiences , some do admire edwards ' direction , the acting by its ensemble cast , henry mancini 's music and its climactic pie fight . december 22 – david lean 's film adaptation of boris pasternak 's doctor zhivago , starring omar sharif , julie christie , rod steiger , and alec guinness , premieres and , like the sound of music , quickly became a worldwide phenomenon . its moral story and message of a love and human spirit that defied the communist soviet union have made the film a true classic with critics and audiences . it was included among top films by the american film institute . in a decade of very difficult times for its studio , zhivago became the most successful and acclaimed metro-goldwyn-mayer film since how the west was won ; it was the greatest mgm film since ben-hur . awards . academy awards : : best picture : the sound of music – argyle enterprises , 20th century fox : best director : robert wise – the sound of music : best actor : lee marvin – cat ballou : best actress : julie christie – darling : best supporting actor : martin balsam – a thousand clowns : best supporting actress : shelley winters – a patch of blue : best foreign language film : the shop on main street ( obchod na korze ) , directed by ján kadár and elmar klos , czechoslovakia bafta film awards : : bafta award for best film : my fair lady : best british film : the ipcress file golden globe awards : : drama : : best picture : doctor zhivago : best actor : omar sharif – doctor zhivago : best actress : samantha eggar – the collector : comedy or musical : : best picture : the sound of music : best actor : lee marvin – cat ballou : best actress : julie andrews – the sound of music : other : best supporting actor : oskar werner – the spy who came in from the cold : best supporting actress : ruth gordon – inside daisy clover : best director : david lean – doctor zhivago palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : the knack . and how to get it , directed by richard lester , united kingdom golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : vaghe stelle dell'orsa ( sandra of a thousand delights ) , directed by luchino visconti , italy golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : alphaville , directed by jean-luc godard , france / italy . 1965 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1965 january 8 dear brigitte january 15 baby the rain must fall january 28 36 hours february 1965 february 10 strange bedfellows sylvia february 15 lord jim february 23 dr . terror 's house of horrors february 24 love has many faces march 1965 march 2 the sound of music march 5 face of the screaming werewolf the rounders march 6 nightmare in the sun march 15 major dundee march 21 die ! die ! my darling ! march 24 john goldfarb , please come home ! march 31 the truth about spring . april–june . april 1965 april 3 the man from button willow april 6 in harm 's way april 7 bus riley 's back in town girl happy april 8 the world of abbott and costello april 9 the greatest story ever told april 14 beach blanket bingo the satan bug may 1965 5 may alphaville brainstorm 7 may joy in the morning 13 may the yellow rolls-royce 14 may harlow 26 may mirage june 1965 june 2 what 's new pussycat ? june 3 shenandoah june 9 up from the beach june 16 those magnificent men in their flying machines june 18 i 'll take sweden june 23 genghis khan ( 1965 film ) the hallelujah trail harlow von ryan 's express willy mcbean and his magic machine june 24 cat ballou june 30 ski party tickle me . july–september . july 1965 july 1 the family jewels the great race the sons of katie elder july 3 the hill ( u.k . ) july 12 the art of love july 14 how to stuff a wild bikini july 21 i saw what you did july 22 the amorous adventures of moll flanders july 29 ship of fools august 1965 august 1 voyage to the prehistoric planet august 3 darling you must be joking ! ( u.k . ) august 9 the brigand of kandahar august 14 a very special favor august 18 catch us if you can the monkey 's uncle sergeant deadhead august 23 dr . who and the daleks ( u.k . ) august 25 morituri that funny feeling wild on the beach september 1965 september 1 billie september 3 the battle of the villa fiorita september 8 operation c.i.a . september 20 how to murder your wife september 24 marriage on the rocks september 27 mickey one . october–december . october 1965 october 6 who killed teddy bear october 7 the agony and the ecstasy october 11 the bedford incident ( us/uk ) october 13 situation hopeless . but not serious october 15 the cincinnati kid october 17 sting of death october 27 king rat november 1965 november 4 never too late november 6 dr . goldfoot and the bikini machine november 10 the war lord november 15 bunny lake is missing november 18 for a few dollars more ( italy ) november 19 return from the ashes november 24 harum scarum november 25 lady l november 26 carry on cowboy ( uk ) december 1965 december 2 that darn cat ! december 8 the return of ringo ( italy ) december 10 a patch of blue december 13 a thousand clowns december 15 the flight of the phoenix december 16 battle of the bulge the spy who came in from the cold december 19 invasion of astro-monster december 22 doctor zhivago ( uk/italy/us ) december 23 the slender thread december 24 bad girls go to hell december 29 thunderball ( uk/us ) . notable films released in 1965 . united states unless stated . . the 10th victim ( la decima vittima ) , starring marcello mastroianni and ursula andress – ( italy/france ) 36 hours , starring james garner , rod taylor and eva marie saint the 317th platoon ( la 317ème section ) , written and directed by pierre schoendoerffer – ( france ) . a . abashiri prison ( abashiri bangaichi ) , starring ken takakura – ( japan ) adventures of a dentist ( pokhozhdyeniya zubnovo vracha ) , directed by elem klimov – ( u.s.s.r . ) the adventures of the smurfs ( les aventures des schtroumpfs ) – ( belgium ) the agony and the ecstasy , directed by carol reed , starring charlton heston and rex harrison the alphabet murders , directed by frank tashlin , starring tony randall and anita ekberg alphaville ( alphaville , une étrange aventure de lemmy caution ) , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) always further on ( tarahumara ( cada vez más lejos ) ) , directed by luis alcoriza – ( mexico ) the amorous adventures of moll flanders , starring kim novak , richard johnson and angela lansbury the art of love , directed by norman jewison , starring james garner , angie dickinson , elke sommer and dick van dyke arzoo ( wish ) , starring sadhana – ( india ) the ashes ( popioły ) , directed by andrzej wajda – ( poland ) . b . baby the rain must fall , starring steve mcqueen and lee remick bad girls go to hell , directed by doris wishman battle of the bulge , starring henry fonda , robert shaw and robert ryan the battle of the villa fiorita , directed by delmer daves , starring maureen o'hara , rossano brazzi , olivia hussey beach blanket bingo , directed by william asher , starring annette funicello , frankie avalon , deborah walley , don rickles the bedford incident , starring richard widmark and sidney poitier – ( us/uk ) behind the mask of zorro , directed by ricardo blasco and starring tony russel – ( italy/spain ) billie , directed by don weis and starring patty duke black humor , anthology film directed by claude autant-lara , giancarlo zagni and josé maría forqué – ( france/italy/spain ) black wind ( viento negro ) , directed by servando gonzález – ( mexico ) boeing boeing , starring jerry lewis and tony curtis la bohème , directed by franco zeffirelli – ( west germany ) brainstorm , directed by william conrad , starring anne francis and jeffrey hunter the brigand of kandahar , starring oliver reed and yvonne romain bunny lake is missing , directed by otto preminger , starring laurence olivier and carol lynley – ( u.k . ) bus riley 's back in town , starring ann-margret and michael parks . c . the camp followers ( le soldatesse ) , starring anna karina – ( italy ) carry on cowboy , starring sid james , kenneth williams , jim dale – ( u.k . ) casanova 70 , starring marcello mastroianni and virna lisi – ( italy ) cat ballou , starring jane fonda and lee marvin catch us if you can ( a.k.a . having a wild weekend ) , starring the dave clark five – ( u.k . ) china ! , a documentary written by felix greene chronicle of a boy alone ( crónica de un niño solo ) – ( argentina ) the cincinnati kid , directed by norman jewison , starring steve mcqueen , edward g . robinson , ann-margret , karl malden , tuesday weld , joan blondell city under the sea ( a.k.a . war-gods of the deep ) , starring vincent price and tab hunter clarence , the cross-eyed lion , starring marshall thompson and betsy drake cloportes ( la aétamorphose des cloportes ) , directed by pierre granier-deferre – ( france/italy ) coast of skeletons , directed by robert lynn and starring richard todd and dale robertson – ( u.k./south africa ) the collector , directed by william wyler , starring terence stamp and samantha eggar – ( u.k./u.s . ) crack in the world , starring dana andrews , kieron moore , janette scott cup fever , starring bernard cribbins – ( u.k . ) curse of the fly , starring brian donlevy , george baker , carole gray curse of simba ( a.k.a . curse of simba / voodoo blood death ) , directed by lindsay shonteff – ( u.k . ) . d . darling , directed by john schlesinger , starring laurence harvey , dirk bogarde , julie christie – ( u.k . ) dear brigitte , starring james stewart , bill mumy , glynis johns , ed wynn , brigitte bardot the decadent influence ( une fille et des fusils , a.k.a . to be a crook ) , directed by claude lelouch – ( france ) a devilish homicide ( salinma ) – ( south korea ) die ! die ! my darling ! ( a.k.a . fanatic ) , starring tallulah bankhead and stefanie powers dingaka , starring stanley baker – ( south africa ) do not disturb , starring doris day and rod taylor doctor zhivago , directed by david lean , starring omar sharif , julie christie , geraldine chaplin , rod steiger , alec guinness—winner of 5 academy awards – ( u.k . ) the dolls ( le bambole ) , starring nino manfredi , monica vitti , elke sommer and gina lollobrigida – ( italy ) dr . goldfoot and the bikini machine , starring vincent price and frankie avalon dr . terror 's house of horrors , starring peter cushing and christopher lee – ( u.k . ) dr . who and the daleks , starring peter cushing – ( u.k . ) . e . the early bird , starring norman wisdom – ( u.k . ) the eleanor roosevelt story , a documentary directed by richard kaplan sytten ( sytten ) , starring ole søltoft and ghita nørby – ( denmark ) . f . the face of fu manchu , directed by don sharp and starring christopher lee – ( u.k./west germany ) the family jewels , starring jerry lewis fantômas se déchaîne ( fantômas unleashed ) , starring jean marais – ( france ) faster , pussycat ! kill ! kill ! , directed by russ meyer ferry cross the mersey , starring gerry and the pacemakers – ( u.k . ) film , written by samuel beckett and directed by alan schneider fists in the pocket ( i pugni in tasca ) – ( italy ) the flight of the phoenix , directed by robert aldrich , starring james stewart , richard attenborough , hardy krüger , ernest borgnine , peter finch for a few dollars more , directed by sergio leone , starring clint eastwood – ( italy ) frankenstein conquers the world ( furankenshutain tai baragon ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) funny things happen down under , starring olivia newton-john – ( australia ) . g . il gaucho , starring vittorio gassman and nino manfredi – ( italy/argentina ) gendarme in new york ( le gendarme à new york ) , starring louis de funès – ( france/italy/u.s . ) genghis khan , starring omar sharif , stephen boyd and james mason girl happy , starring elvis presley the girls on the beach , directed by william n . witney , starring noreen corcoran and martin west the glory guys , directed by arnold laven , starring tom tryon and harve presnell goldstein , comedy ensemble film , with actors from the second city , including severn darden the great race , directed by blake edwards , starring tony curtis , jack lemmon , natalie wood , peter falk , ross martin the great sioux massacre , directed by sidney salkow and starring joseph cotten , darren mcgavin and philip carey the greatest story ever told , directed by george stevens , starring max von sydow , charlton heston , dorothy mcguire , david mccallum , martin landau , telly savalas guide , directed by vijay anand , starring dev anand – ( india ) gumnaam ( unknown ) , starring manoj kumar – ( india ) . h . the hallelujah trail , directed by john sturges , starring burt lancaster , lee remick , jim hutton , pamela tiffin hands of a gunfighter ( ocaso de un pistolero / il destino di un pistolero ) , directed by rafael romero marchent – ( italy/spain ) happiness ( le bonheur ) , directed by agnès varda – ( france ) harlow , starring carroll baker , peter lawford , red buttons , mike connors , leslie nielsen , angela lansbury harlow , starring carol lynley , efrem zimbalist , jr . , barry sullivan , hurd hatfield , ginger rogers harum scarum , aka harem holiday , starring elvis presley , mary ann mobley , fran jeffries harvey middleman , fireman , written and directed by ernest pintoff help ! , directed by richard lester , starring the beatles – ( u.k . ) the heroes of telemark , starring kirk douglas and richard harris a high wind in jamaica , starring anthony quinn and james coburn – ( u.k . ) the hill , directed by sidney lumet , starring sean connery , ian bannen , ossie davis – ( u.k . ) the hour and turn of augusto matraga ( a hora e a vez de augusto matraga ) – ( brazil ) how to murder your wife , starring jack lemmon and virna lisi how to stuff a wild bikini , starring annette funicello , dwayne hickman , buster keaton , beverly adams , mickey rooney . i . i , a woman ( jeg - en kvinde ) , directed by mac ahlberg – ( denmark/sweden ) i knew her well ( io la conoscevo bene ) , starring stefania sandrelli , nino manfredi , franco nero – ( italy ) i 'll take sweden , starring bob hope , dina merrill , frankie avalon , tuesday weld impossible on saturday ( pas question le samedi ) – ( italy/france/israel ) in harm 's way , directed by otto preminger , starring john wayne , kirk douglas , patricia neal , brandon dewilde , paula prentiss , henry fonda inside daisy clover , starring natalie wood , robert redford , christopher plummer inside the forbidden city ( song gong mi shi ) – ( hong kong ) intimate lighting ( intimní osvětlení ) , directed by ivan passer – ( czechoslovakia ) invasion of astro-monster ( kaijû daisensô ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the ipcress file , directed by sidney j . furie , starring michael caine – bafta award for best british film – ( u.k . ) i saw what you did , starring joan crawford . j . john goldfarb , please come home ! , starring shirley maclaine , richard crenna , peter ustinov joy in the morning , starring richard chamberlain and yvette mimieux juliet of the spirits ( giulietta degli spiriti ) , directed by federico fellini – ( italy/france ) . k . king rat , starring george segal , tom courtenay and james fox the knack . and how to get it , directed by richard lester and starring rita tushingham – ( u.k . ) . l . the lace wars ( les fêtes galantes ) , directed by rené clair – ( france/romania ) lady l , directed by peter ustinov , starring sophia loren , paul newman and david niven laurel and hardy 's laughing 20 's , a retrospective film directed by robert youngson licensed to kill , starring tom adams – ( u.k . ) life at the top , starring laurence harvey and jean simmons – ( u.k . ) the liquidator , directed by jack cardiff , starring rod taylor and trevor howard ( u.k . ) la loba ( the she-wolf ) – ( mexico ) lord jim , starring peter o'toole – ( uk/us ) love and kisses , starring rick nelson the love goddesses , a documentary directed by saul j . turell love has many faces , starring lana turner , hugh o'brian and cliff robertson love meetings , a documentary by pier paolo pasolini – ( italy ) the loved one , directed by tony richardson , starring robert morse and jonathan winters loves of a blonde ( lásky jedné plavovlásky ) , directed by miloš forman – ( czechoslovakia ) . m . a maiden for a prince ( una vergine per il principe ) , starring virna lisi and vittorio gassman – ( italy ) major dundee , directed by sam peckinpah , starring charlton heston , richard harris , james coburn , jim hutton the man from button willow man is not a bird ( čovek nije tica ) – ( yugoslavia ) marco the magnificent ( la fabuleuse aventure de marco polo ) , directed by denys de la patellière and noël howard – ( multiple countries ) marriage on the rocks , starring frank sinatra , dean martin and deborah kerr marvelous angelique ( merveilleuse angélique ) , directed by bernard borderie – ( france/italy/west germany ) mchale 's navy joins the air force mickey one , directed by arthur penn , starring warren beatty mirage , directed by edward dmytryk , starring gregory peck , diane baker and walter matthau mister moses , directed by ronald neame and starring robert mitchum and carroll baker the moment of truth ( il momento della verità ) , directed by francesco rosi – ( italy ) the money trap , starring glenn ford , rita hayworth , ricardo montalbán , joseph cotten , elke sommer the monkey 's uncle , starring annette funicello and tommy kirk morituri , starring marlon brando and yul brynner mozambique , directed by robert lynn – ( u.k./west germany ) my baby is black ( les lâches vivent d'espoir ) , 1961 french film released in the u.s . in 1965 – ( france ) . n . the nanny , starring bette davis – ( u.k . ) the naked prey , directed by and starring cornel wilde – ( u.s./south africa ) never too late , starring paul ford , maureen o'sullivan , connie stevens , jim hutton nightmare castle , starring barbara steele – ( italy ) nightmare in the sun , starring ursula andress , john derek , aldo ray and sammy davis , jr . ninety degrees in the shade ( třicet jedna ve stínu ) , directed by jiří weiss – ( u.k./czechoslovakia ) none but the brave , directed by and starring frank sinatra , with clint walker and tommy sands . o . once a thief , starring alain delon and ann-margret – ( united states/france ) one way pendulum , directed by peter yates – ( u.k . ) operation c.i.a . , starring burt reynolds and danielle aubry operation crossbow , starring sophia loren – ( u.k . ) operation y and shurik 's other adventures ( operatsiya „ y “ i drugie priklyucheniya shurika ) , starring aleksandr demyanenko – ( u.s.s.r . ) oss 117 mission for a killer ( furia à bahia pour oss 117 ) , directed by andré hunebelle and starring frederick stafford – ( france ) othello , directed by stuart burge , starring laurence olivier , maggie smith , frank finlay – ( u.k . ) . p . pandora and the magic box , directed by joseph w . sarno paris secret , a documentary directed by edouard logereau a patch of blue , starring sidney poitier , elizabeth hartman , shelley winters pierrot le fou , directed by jean-luc godard , starring jean-paul belmondo and anna karina – ( france ) pinocchio in outer space , produced and directed by ray goossens – ( u.s./belgium ) a pistol for ringo ( una pistola per ringo ) , directed by duccio tessari planet of the vampires ( terrore nello spazio ) , directed by mario bava – ( italy/spain ) the possessed ( la donna del lago ) , directed by luigi bazzoni and franco rossellini – ( italy ) promise her anything , directed by arthur hiller , starring warren beatty and leslie caron . r . the rabbit is me ( das kaninchen bin ich ) – ( east germany ) a rage to live , directed by walter grauman and starring suzanne pleshette the railroad man ( il ferroviere ) , directed by pietro germi – ( italy ) the railrodder , a comedy short starring buster keaton in his last film – ( canada ) rapture ( la fleur de l'âge ) , directed by john guillermin , starring melvyn douglas , patricia gozzi and dean stockwell – ( france/u.s . ) răscoala , directed by mircea mureșan – ( romania ) red beard ( akahige ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) red line 7000 , directed by howard hawks and starring james caan repulsion , directed by roman polanski , starring catherine deneuve – ( u.k . ) return from the ashes , starring maximilian schell and samantha eggar the return of mr . moto , starring henry silva – ( u.k . ) the return of ringo ( il ritorno di ringo ) , directed by duccio tessari rotten to the core , directed by john boulting – ( u.k . ) the rounders , directed by burt kennedy , starring glenn ford and henry fonda . s . samurai spy ( ibun sarutobi sasuke ) – ( japan ) sandra ( vaghe stelle dell'orsa ) , directed by luchino visconti , starring claudia cardinale – ( italy ) são paulo , sociedade anônima ( são paulo , the anonymous town ) – ( brazil ) the saragossa manuscript ( rekopis znaleziony w saragossie ) , starring zbigniew cybulski – ( poland ) the sandpiper , directed by vincente minnelli , starring elizabeth taylor , richard burton and eva marie saint sands of the kalahari , starring stuart whitman , stanley baker , susannah york – ( u.k . ) the satan bug , starring george maharis and anne francis secrets behind the wall ( kabe no naka no himegoto ) – ( japan ) sergeant deadhead , starring frankie avalon and deborah walley shadows of forgotten ancestors ( tini zabutykh predkiv ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) shakespeare wallah , directed by james ivory , starring shashi kapoor , felicity kendal , madhur jaffrey the shameless old lady ( la vieille dame indigne ) , directed by rené allio – ( france ) she , starring ursula andress and peter cushing – ( u.k . ) shenandoah , starring james stewart , doug mcclure , rosemary forsyth , katharine ross ship of fools , directed by stanley kramer , starring vivien leigh , simone signoret , lee marvin , michael dunn , josé ferrer the shop on main street ( obchod na korze ) , directed by ján kadár and elmar klos ( czechoslovakia ) simon of the desert ( simón del desierto ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) the sin ( al haram ) – ( egypt ) situation hopeless . but not serious , starring alec guinness , mike connors , robert redford ski party , starring frankie avalon and yvonne craig the skull , starring peter cushing , christopher lee , patrick wymark – ( u.k . ) slalom , starring vittorio gassman , adolfo celi , beba lončar , daniela bianchi – ( italy ) the sleeping car murders ( compartiment tueurs ) , directed by costa-gavras , starring yves montand and simone signoret – ( france ) the slender thread , directed by sydney pollack , starring sidney poitier , anne bancroft , telly savalas and ed asner the sons of katie elder , directed by henry hathaway , starring john wayne and dean martin the sound of music , directed by robert wise , starring julie andrews and christopher plummer the spy who came in from the cold , directed by martin ritt , starring richard burton and claire bloom – ( u.k . ) sting of death , directed by william grefe story of a prostitute ( shunpuden ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) strange bedfellows , starring rock hudson and gina lollobrigida a study in terror , starring john neville , donald houston and anthony quayle- ( u.k . ) a swingin ' summer , starring james stacy and raquel welch sword of the beast ( kedamono no ken ) , directed by hideo gosha – ( japan ) sylvia , starring carroll baker and george maharis synanon , directed by richard quine , starring edmond o'brien , chuck connors , stella stevens . t . tattooed life ( irezumi ichidai ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) ten little indians , starring shirley eaton , hugh o'brian , daliah lavi , stanley holloway , wilfred hyde-white , fabian forte – ( u.k . ) that darn cat ! starring dean jones that funny feeling , starring bobby darin and sandra dee that man in istanbul , directed by antonio isasi-isasmendi and starring horst buchholz – ( france/italy/spain ) the third day , starring george peppard and elizabeth ashley thirty three ( tridtsat tri ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) those calloways , produced by walt disney and directed by norman tokar those magnificent men in their flying machines , directed by ken annakin , starring stuart whitman , sarah miles , robert morley , gert fröbe – ( u.k . ) a thousand clowns , starring jason robards , barry gordon , martin balsam , barbara harris thunderball , starring sean connery ( as james bond ) , with claudine auger , luciana paluzzi , adolfo celi – ( u.k . ) tickle me , starring elvis presley tokyo olympiad , a documentary directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) town tamer , directed by lesley selander and starring dana andrews the truth about spring , directed by richard thorpe , starring hayley mills and john mills two on a guillotine , directed by william conrad and starring connie stevens . u . the uninhibited ( los pianos mecánicos ) , directed by juan antonio bardem , starring melina mercouri and james mason – ( spain ) up from the beach , starring cliff robertson up to his ears ( les tribulations d'un chinois en chine ) , starring jean paul belmondo and ursula andress – ( france ) . v . a very special favor , starring rock hudson and leslie caron victim five , directed by robert lynn – ( u.k . ) viva maria ! , directed by louis malle , starring brigitte bardot and jeanne moreau – ( france ) von ryan 's express , directed by mark robson , starring frank sinatra , trevor howard , edward mulhare , adolfo celi voyage to the prehistoric planet , starring basil rathbone . w . waqt , starring sunil dutt and sadhana – ( india ) the war game , a tv docudrama directed by peter watkins – ( u.k . ) the war lord , starring charlton heston , richard boone , rosemary forsyth what 's new pussycat ? , directed by clive donner , starring peter sellers , peter o'toole , woody allen , romy schneider , paula prentiss , capucine who killed teddy bear , starring sal mineo , juliet prowse and elaine stritch wild on the beach , starring sherry jackson , frankie randall , sonny & cher willy mcbean and his magic machine , stop-motion film produced by arthur rankin , jr . and videocraft international winter kept us warm , directed by david secter – ( canada ) the world of abbott and costello , starring bud abbott and lou costello . y . yo yo , directed by and starring pierre étaix – ( france ) you must be joking ! , starring lionel jeffries , denholm elliott , michael callan – ( u.k . ) young cassidy , directed by jack cardiff and john ford – ( u.k . ) young dillinger , starring nick adams and mary ann mobley . z . zatoichi and the chess expert ( zatōichi jigoku-tabi ) , directed by kenji misumi – ( japan ) zatoichi and the doomed man ( zatōichi sakate-giri ) , directed by kazuo mori – ( japan ) . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) goofy ( 1965 ) . births . january 3 – jens albinus , danish actor january 4 – julia ormond , english actress january 9 – joely richardson , english actress january 15 – james nesbitt , northern irish actor january 22 – diane lane , american actress january 27 – alan cumming , scottish actor february 1 – brandon lee , american actor ( d . 1993 ) february 3 – maura tierney , american actress february 7 – chris rock , american actor and comedian february 9 - keith wickham , british voice actor , comedian and screenwriter february 18 – dr . dre , american music producer february 24 – kristin davis , american actress march 14 – aamir khan , indian actor march 23 - peter jacobson , american actor march 25 – sarah jessica parker , american actress march 31 – steve bing , american businessman , philanthropist and film producer ( suicide 2020 ) april 4 – robert downey , jr . , american actor april 16 jon cryer , american actor martin lawrence , american actor and comedian april 26 – kevin james , american actor and comedian april 30 - adrian pasdar , american actor and voice artist may 23 – liina tennosaar , estonian actress may 24 – john c . reilly , american actor and comedian may 31 – brooke shields , american actress and model june 10 – elizabeth hurley , english model and actress june 18 – kim dickens , american actress june 19 – sean marshall , american child actor and singer june 28 – sonny strait , american voice actor july 3 – connie nielsen , danish actress july 25 – illeana douglas , american actress july 26 – jeremy piven , american actor august 10 - claudia christian , american actress and singer august 11 – viola davis , american actress august 19 kevin dillon , american actor kyra sedgwick , american actress august 24 – marlee matlin , american actress september 3 – charlie sheen , american actor september 21 - cheryl hines , american actress , comedian and director september 30 - omid djalili , british stand-up comedian , actor , television producer , voice actor and writer of iranian descent october 8 – peter greene , american actor october 10 – chris penn , american actor ( d . 2006 ) october 11 lennie james , english actor ivo uukkivi , estonian actor , singer and television producer october 14 – steve coogan , english actor october 19 – merle jääger , estonian actress and poet october 31 - rob rackstraw , british voice actor november 2 – shah rukh khan , indian actor november 21 – alexander siddig , sudanese-english actor november 24 – shirley henderson , scottish actress november 30 – ben stiller , american actor december 7 – jeffrey wright , american actor december 21 – andy dick , american comedian , actor , musician and television and film producer december 27 – salman khan , indian actor december 31 – gong li , chinese actress . deaths . january 14 – jeanette macdonald , 61 , american actress , singer , san francisco , one hour with you february 10 – arnold manoff , 50 , american screenwriter , no minor vices , casbah february 15 – nat king cole , 45 , american singer and actor , st . louis blues , istanbul february 23 – stan laurel , 74 , british actor , the flying deuces , sons of the desert march 1 – fred immler , 84 , german actor , madame du barry , zapata 's gang march 6 – margaret dumont , 82 , american actress , duck soup , a night at the opera march 23 – mae murray , 79 , american actress , the merry widow , the delicious little devil march 28 clemence dane , 77 , british screenwriter , anna karenina , perfect strangers jack hoxie , 80 , american western actor , the last frontier , gold april 1 – edna tichenor , 64 , american actress , london after midnight , the show april 3 – ray enright , 69 , american director , alibi ike , the spoilers april 8 – lars hanson , 78 , swedish actor , the wind , flesh and the devil april 10 – linda darnell , 41 , american actress , my darling clementine , the mark of zorro april 24 – louise dresser , 85 , american actress , a ship comes in , the scarlet empress april 30 – helen chandler , 59 , american actress , dracula , the last flight 5 may – john waters , 71 , screenwriter and director , the big country , the desperate hours june 6 – lech owron , 71 , polish actor , vampires of warsaw , the little eagle june 7 – judy holliday , 43 , american actress , born yesterday , bells are ringing june 8 – florence ryerson , 72 , american screenwriter , the wizard of oz , the ice follies of 1939 june 15 – steve cochran , 48 , american actor , the best years of our lives , white heat june 22 – david o . selznick , 63 , american producer , gone with the wind , rebecca june 23 – mary boland , 85 , american stage and film actress , the women , ruggles of red gap june 27 – anthony veiller , 62 , american screenwriter , the stranger , the killers july 11 – ray collins , 78 , american actor , citizen kane , the kid from left field july 19 – clyde beatty , 62 , american actor and animal trainer , africa screams , ring of fear july 24 – constance bennett , 60 , american actress , topper , merrily we live july 28 – minor watson , 75 , american actor , woman of the year , the jackie robinson story august 6 everett sloane , 55 , american actor , citizen kane , the lady from shanghai nancy carroll , 61 , american actress , the devil 's holiday , hot saturday august 30 – pauline garon , 64 , canadian actress , the heart of broadway , the college hero september 2 – felix e . feist , 55 , american director , this woman is dangerous , the big trees september 4 – isabel jeans , 93 , british actress , suspicion , gigi september 7 catherine dale owen , 70 , american actress , such men are dangerous , born reckless jean peyrière , 79 , french actor , le roi de paris , fanfan la tulipe september 8 – dorothy dandridge , 42 , american actress , singer , carmen jones , porgy and bess september 27 – clara bow , 60 , american actress , wings , it september 29 – eddie gribbon , 75 , american film actor , brother of harry gribbon october 3 – zachary scott , 51 , american actor , mildred pierce , the southerner october 18 – henry travers , 91 , british actor , it 's a wonderful life , shadow of a doubt october 21 – marie mcdonald , 42 , american actress , the geisha boy , living in a big way october 23 – janice logan , 50 , american actress , dr . cyclops , opened by mistake october 31 – rita johnson , 52 , american actress , here comes mr . jordan , the major and the minor november 14 – russell collins , 68 , american actor , miss sadie thompson , bad day at black rock november 26 – wild bill elliott , 61 , american actor , the san antonio kid , sudden danger december 5 – joseph i . breen , 77 , chief administrator of the motion picture production code of 1930 ( hays code ) from 1934 to 1954 december 22 – albert ritz , 64 , american entertainer of the ritz brothers , sing , baby , sing , life begins in college december 29 – frank s . nugent , 57 , american screenwriter , the searchers , she wore a yellow ribbon . film debuts . woody allen – what 's new pussycat ed asner – the satan bug sonny & cher – wild on the beach dabney coleman – the slender thread robert de niro – encounter and three rooms in manhattan michael gambon – othello derek jacobi – othello philip kaufman – director – goldstein george lucas – director – look at life katharine ross – shenandoah sam waterston – the plastic dome of norma jean . references .