English numerals

cardinal numbers . cardinal numbers refer to the size of a group . in english , these words are numerals . alternatively , and for greater numbers , one may say for 1/2 '' one over two '' , for 5/8 '' five over eight '' , and so on . this '' over '' form is also widely used in mathematics . fractions together with an integer are read as follows : 1 1/2 is '' one and a half '' 6 1/4 is '' six and a quarter '' 7 5/8 is '' seven and five eighths '' a space is required between the whole number and the fraction ; however , if a special fraction character is used like '' ½ '' , then the space can be done without , e.g . 9 1/2 9½ numbers with a decimal point may be read as a cardinal number , then '' and '' , then another cardinal number followed by an indication of the significance of the second cardinal number ( mainly u.s . ) ; or as a cardinal number , followed by '' point '' , and then by the digits of the fractional part . the indication of significance takes the form of the denominator of the fraction indicating division by the smallest power of ten larger than the second cardinal . this is modified when the first cardinal is zero , in which case neither the zero nor the '' and '' is pronounced , but the zero is optional in the '' point '' form of the fraction . some american and canadian schools teach students to pronounce decimally written fractions ( for example , . 5 ) as though they were longhand fractions ( five tenths ) , such as thirteen and seven tenths for 13.7 . this formality is often dropped in common speech and is steadily disappearing in instruction in mathematics and science as well as in international american schools . in the u.k . , and among most north americans , 13.7 would be read thirteen point seven . for example : 0.002 is '' point zero zero two '' , '' point oh oh two '' , '' nought point zero zero two '' , etc . ; or '' two thousandths '' ( u.s . , occasionally ) 3.1416 is '' three point one four one six '' 99.3 is '' ninety-nine point three '' ; or '' ninety-nine and three tenths '' ( u.s . , occasionally ) . in english the decimal point was originally printed in the center of the line ( 0·002 ) , but with the advent of the typewriter it was placed at the bottom of the line , so that a single key could be used as a full stop/period and as a decimal point . in many non-english languages a full-stop/period at the bottom of the line is used as a thousands separator with a comma being used as the decimal point . whether or not digits or words are used . with few exceptions , most grammatical texts rule that the numbers zero to nine inclusive should be '' written out '' & ndash ; instead of '' 1 '' and '' 2 '' , one would write '' one '' and '' two '' . gary blake and robert w . bly , the elements of technical writing , pg . 22 . new york : macmillan publishers , 1993 . : example : '' i have two apples . '' ( preferred ) : example : '' i have 2 apples . '' after '' nine '' , one can head straight back into the 10 , 11 , 12 , etc . , although some write out the numbers until '' twelve '' . : example : '' i have 28 grapes . '' ( preferred ) : example : '' i have twenty-eight grapes . '' another common usage is to write out any number that can be expressed as one or two words , and use figures otherwise . : examples : : : '' there are six million dogs . '' ( preferred ) : : '' there are 6,000,000 dogs . '' : : '' that is one hundred and twenty-five oranges . '' ( british english ) : : '' that is one hundred twenty-five oranges . '' ( us-american english ) : : '' that is 125 oranges . '' ( preferred ) numbers at the beginning of a sentence should also be written out , or the sentence rephrased . the above rules are not always followed . in literature , larger numbers might be spelled out . on the other hand , digits might be more commonly used in technical or financial articles , where many figures are discussed . in particular , the two different forms should not be used for figures that serve the same purpose ; for example , it is inelegant to write , '' between day twelve and day 15 of the study , the population doubled . '' . empty numbers . colloquial english 's small vocabulary of empty numbers can be employed when there is uncertainty as to the precise number to use , but it is desirable to define a general range : specifically , the terms '' umpteen '' , '' umpty '' , and '' zillion '' . these are derived etymologically from the range affixes : '' -teen '' ( designating the range as being between 13 and 19 inclusive ) '' -ty '' ( designating the range as being in one of the decades between 20 and 90 inclusive ) '' -illion '' ( designating the range as being above 1,000,000 ; or , more generally , as being extremely large ) . the prefix '' ump- '' is added to the first two suffixes to produce the empty numbers '' umpteen '' and '' umpty '' : it is of uncertain origin . a noticeable absence of an empty number is in the hundreds range . usage of empty numbers : the word '' umpteen '' may be used as an adjective , as in '' i had to go to umpteen stores to find shoes that fit . '' it can also be used to modify a larger number , usually '' million '' , as in '' umpteen million people watched the show ; but they still cancelled it . '' '' umpty '' is not in common usage . it can appear in the form '' umpty-one '' ( paralleling the usage in such numbers as '' twenty-one '' ) , as in '' there are umpty-one ways to do it wrong . '' '' umpty-ump '' is also heard , though '' ump '' is never used by itself . the word '' zillion '' may be used as an adjective , modifying a noun . the noun phrase normally contains the indefinite article '' a '' , as in '' there must be a zillion pages on the world wide web . '' the plural '' zillions '' designates a number indefinitely larger than '' millions '' or '' billions '' . in this case , the construction is parallel to the one for '' millions '' or '' billions '' , with the number used as a plural count noun , followed by a prepositional phrase with '' of '' , as in '' there are zillions of grains of sand on the beaches of the world . '' empty numbers are sometimes made up , with obvious meaning : '' squillions '' is obviously an empty , but very large , number ; a '' squintillionth '' would be a very small number . some empty numbers may be modified by actual numbers , such as '' four zillion '' , and are used for jest , exaggeration , or to relate abstractly to actual numbers . empty numbers are colloquial , and primarily used in oral speech or informal contexts . they are inappropriate in formal or scholarly usage . see also placeholder name . see also . indefinite and fictitious numbers list of numbers long and short scales names of large numbers natural number number prefixes and their derivatives . references . external links . english numbers - explanations , exercises and number generator ( cardinal and ordinal numbers ) de : zahlennamen fr : nombres en français ja : 数詞 pt : nomes dos números