James K. Baxter

early life . baxter was born in dunedin as the second son to archibald baxter and millicent brown and grew up near brighton , 20 & nbsp ; km south of dunedin city . he was named after keir hardie , a founder of the british labour party . baxter 's father had been a conscientious objector during world war i , and both his parents were active pacifists and socialists . his mother had studied latin , french and german at the presbyterian ladies ' college , sydney , the university of sydney and newnham college , university of cambridge . baxter and his brother were not baptised , although their mother read to them sometimes from the bible . on his first day of school at brighton primary school ( now big rock primary school ) , baxter burned his hand on a stove and later used this incident to represent the failure of institutional education . in 1936 , when baxter was ten , the family moved to wanganui where he and his brother attended st johns hill school , and the following year they moved to england and attended sibford school in the cotswolds . both schools were quaker schools and boarding schools . in 1938 the family returned to new zealand . baxter said of his early life that he felt a gap between himself and other people , '' increased considerably by the fact that i was born in new zealand , and grew up there till i was nine , and then attended an english boarding school for a couple of years , and came back to new zealand at thirteen , in the first flush of puberty , quite out of touch with my childhood companions and uncertain whether i was an englishman or a new zealander '' . baxter began writing poetry at the age of seven , and he accumulated a large body of technically accomplished work both before and during his teenage years . in 1940 , baxter began attending king 's high school , dunedin , where he was bullied , because of his differences to other students ( in personality , voice and background ) , his lack of interest in team sports and his family 's pacifism . his older brother , terence , was a conscientious objector like their father and was detained in military camps between 1941 and 1945 for his refusal to fight in world war ii . between 1942 and 1946 , baxter drafted around 600 poems , saying later in life that his experiences as a teenager were painful but '' created a gap in which the poems were able to grow '' . in 1943 , baxter 's final year of high school , he wrote to a friend that he was considering becoming a lawyer , but was '' not decided on it '' : '' if i should find it possible to live by writing i would gladly do so . yet many men have thought they could , and found it an illusion . '' . life and career . early literary career . in march 1944 , at age seventeen , baxter enrolled at the university of otago . that same year , he published his first collection of poetry , beyond the palisade , to much critical acclaim . allen curnow selected six poems from the collection for 1945 collection a book of new zealand verse 1923–1945 , and described baxter 's poems as '' a new occurrence in new zealand : strong in impulse and confident in invention , with qualities of youth in verse which we have lacked '' . in this year , baxter also won the macmillan brown prize for his poem '' convoys '' . the prize was coincidentally named after his scottish maternal grandfather , john macmillan brown . baxter 's work during this time was , as with his contemporary compatriots , most notably the experimental novelist janet frame , largely influenced by the modernist works of dylan thomas . he was a member of the so-called '' wellington group '' of writers that also included louis johnson , w.h . oliver and alistair campbell . baxter typically wrote short lyrical poems or cycles of the same rather than longer poems . after his eighteenth birthday on 29 june 1944 , like his father and brother , baxter registered as a conscientious objector , citing '' religious and humanitarian '' grounds . the authorities did not pursue him however due to the late stage of the war . baxter failed to complete his course work at the university of otago due to increasing alcoholism , and was forced to take a range of odd jobs from 1945–7 . he fictionalised these experiences in his only novel horse , published posthumously in 1985 . it was during this time that he had his first significant relationship , with a young medical student , but the relationship ended due to his alcoholism . he wrote the collection of poems cold spring about this early failed relationship , but it was not published until after his death in 1996 . in 1947 he met jacquie sturm , a young māori student , who would later become his wife . in late 1947 , baxter moved to christchurch where he continued working odd jobs . although he did not enrol at the university of canterbury he became the literary editor of its student magazine , canta , and attended some lectures . his behaviour could be erratic due to his alcoholism . his second collection , blow , wind of fruitfulness was published in 1948 , and its themes included the new zealand landscape and solitude . curnow , in a review , described baxter as '' the most original of new zealand poets now living '' . . marriage and later career . in 1948 baxter married jacquie sturm at st john 's cathedral , napier , and his developing interest in christianity culminated in his joining the anglican church and being baptised during that same year . they moved to wellington and in february 1951 baxter enrolled at wellington teachers ' college . in 1952 baxter 's poems were published in a collaborative volume , poems unpleasant , alongside poems from louis johnson and anton vogt . he completed his teaching course in december 1952 , and subsequently published his third major collection of poems , the fallen house . in 1954 he was appointed assistant master at epuni school , lower hutt , and it was here that he wrote a series of children 's poems published later as the tree house , and other poems for children ( 1974 ) . baxter and his wife had a daughter , hilary , in 1949 , and a son , john , in 1952 . in late 1954 , baxter joined alcoholics anonymous , successfully achieving sobriety , and in 1955 , he finally graduated with a bachelor of arts from victoria university college . he had also received a substantial inheritance from a great-aunt in 1955 and was able to purchase a house for the family in ngaio , wellington . he left epuni school early in 1956 to write and edit primary school bulletins for the department of education 's school publications branch . this period is likely to have influenced his later writing which criticised bureaucracy . in 1957 baxter took a course in roman catholicism and his collection of poems in fires of no return , published in 1958 by oxford university press , was influenced by his new faith . this was his first work to be published internationally , though it was not critically well-received . baxter 's wife , a committed anglican , was dismayed by his conversion to catholicism , and it was partly because of his conversion that they separated in 1957 . baxter admitted however in a letter to a friend that his conversion was '' just one more event in a series of injuries , alcoholism , and gross mistakes '' . through the late 50s and 60s baxter visited the southern star abbey , a cistercian monastery at kopua near central hawke 's bay . he was baptised into the catholic church in 1958 . later in 1958 , baxter received a unesco stipend to study educational publishing and began an extended journey through asia , and especially india , where rabindranath tagore 's university shantiniketan was one of the inspirations for baxter 's later community at jerusalem , new zealand . in india he was reconciled with his wife and contracted dysentery . his writing after returning from india was more overtly critical of new zealand society , evident in the collection howrah bridge and other poems ( 1961 ) . he was particularly concerned about the displacement of māori within the country . in the late 1950s and 1960s baxter became a powerful and prolific writer of both poems and drama , and it was through his 1958 radio play jack winter 's dream that he became internationally known . the play was produced by the new zealand broadcasting service for radio , and in 1978 was adapted for the screen by new zealand filmmaker david sims . the first half of the 1960s also saw , however , baxter struggling to make ends meet on a postman 's wage , having resigned from the department of education in 1963 and refused to take work as a schoolmaster . he also controversially criticised the penguin book of new zealand verse , an anthology published by his former champion allen curnow , for under-representing younger new zealand poets . however , in 1966 baxter 's critically acclaimed collection of poems pig island letters was published in which his writing found a new level of clarity . in 1966 , baxter took up the robert burns fellowship at the university of otago , which eased the money worries for a time . he held the fellowship for two years during which time he participated in protests against the vietnam war . . jerusalem . in 1968 baxter claimed in a letter to his friend john weir that he had been instructed in a dream to '' go to jerusalem '' . jerusalem , new zealand was a small māori settlement ( known by its māori transliteration , hiruhārama ) on the wanganui river . he left his university position and a job composing catechetical material for the catholic education board , with nothing but a bible . this was the culmination of a short period in which he struggled with family life and his vocation as a poet . while planning his move to jerusalem , in early 1969 , baxter spent some time in grafton , auckland where he set up a drop-in centre for drug addicts , acting on the same principles as alcoholics anonymous . around this time , baxter worked for three weeks as a cleaner at chelsea sugar refinery , which inspired the poem ballad of the stonegut sugar works . he had been referred to the job by poet hone tuwhare . he also adopted the māori version of his name , hemi . around july or august 1969 , baxter travelled to jerusalem , which according to john weir was at that time '' a tiny māori settlement – it had a marae , a resident priest , a church , a convent , resident nuns and some abandoned dwellings . '' baxter stayed in a cottage owned by the sisters of compassion , and obtained permission for a long stay from the mother general of the sisters . he proceeded to form a commune structured around '' spiritual aspects of māori communal life '' . it was a place where he felt he could embody both his catholic faith and his interest in māori culture . he lived a sparse and isolated existence and made frequent trips to the nearby cities where he worked with the poor and spoke out against what he perceived as a social order that sanctions poverty . his poems of this time , published in his final collections jerusalem sonnets ( 1970 ) and autumn testament ( 1972 ) , have a conversational style but speak strongly of his social and political convictions . the commune 's popularity grew , in part due to an article in the sunday times newspaper in june 1970 , and by mid-1970 around 25 people were living in the community . the population increased to 40 permanent residents by may 1971 , mostly aged between 16 and 25 , living in three abandoned houses , and the number of visitors was estimated by baxter at about a thousand over the year . the five goals baxter devised for the commune were : '' to share one 's goods ; to speak the truth , not hiding one 's heart from others ; to love one another and show it by the embrace ; to take no job where one has to lick the boss 's arse ; to learn from the maori side of the fence '' . he was , however , reluctant to impose any kind of rules or work roster . the increased numbers of residents and visitors , and the lack of order and regulation , led to growing concern from the sisters of compassion and wanganui district council , and opposition from local residents , particularly the local māori iwi , ngāti hau . baxter himself was often absent from the commune participating in protests or other social work . in september 1971 , the commune was disbanded under pressure from the council and local farmers . baxter returned to live in wellington , but in february 1972 was permitted to return to jerusalem provided that only 10 people would be allowed to live on the land at any one time . . final years and death . the harsh deprivations baxter adopted at this time took their toll on his health . by 1972 he was too ill to continue living at jerusalem and moved to another commune near auckland . on 22 october 1972 he suffered a coronary thrombosis in the street and died in a nearby house , aged 46 . he was buried at jerusalem on māori land in front of '' the top house '' where he had lived , in a ceremony combining māori and catholic traditions . a river boulder on the burial site was inscribed with his māori name hemi . sturm was baxter 's literary executor after his death . she collected and catalogued his prolific writing , arranged new and revised publications of his work , and negotiated the use and adaptation of his works . she set up the james k . baxter charitable trust , which supported causes he had supported , for example prison reform and drug addiction rehabilitation programmes , and ensured that all proceeds of his work went to the trust . . allegations of sexual assault . in january 2019 , the victoria university press published a collection of baxter 's personal letters as james k baxter : letters of a poet . the collection was edited by his friend , john weir . one letter in the collection revealed that baxter confided to a friend that he raped his wife , jacquie sturm , after she expressed low interest in sex . new zealanders reacted with dismay to the revelations , describing them as '' awful '' , '' terrible '' and '' shocking '' . in the spinoff john newton wrote that it is no longer possible to talk about baxter without addressing how baxter thinks and writes about women . paul millar , a baxter scholar and personal friend of sturm , who had been appointed as her literary executor after her death , cautioned against reading the letter as turning sturm into a victim : '' leaving apart how appalling this letter is – a betrayal on so many levels from the brutal act described , the lack of shame in the description , and the profound betrayal of trust – its publicity is once again putting jacquie in a subordinate position to baxter , a bit player in his narrative . jacquie deserves much more than to be remembered as baxter ’ s victim . despite everything she endured , she emerged victorious . if people really want to know jacquie they should seek our her writing , not baxter 's . '' mark williams , emeritus professor of english at victoria university , said the admission was consistent with what he knew of baxter : '' he observed his own adulteries objectively as part of the fallen human condition . this even extended to marital rape . i ’ m not sure if he was simply a phoney , as some have observed . he was genuinely religious . the problem is that his religious faith allowed him to regard his sexual failings—small and great—at a quizzical remove . '' baxter and sturm 's great-grandson , jack mcdonald , wrote that the account was '' sickening '' and that he believed his great-grandmother '' would never have wanted these brutal details made public '' . he also noted that she never received sufficient credit for connecting baxter to the māori world : '' the reality is that nana had introduced baxter to everything he knew about māoritanga '' . an allegation of attempted rape followed when , in april 2019 , the new zealand news outlet stuff published an account by rosalind lewis ( ros ) , who had been at the jerusalem commune in 1970 when she was aged 18 years . ros described an '' attempted rape '' , which would have succeeded were it not for baxter 's erectile dysfunction . she mentioned a friend of hers , '' angela '' , who had told ros that she was permitted to watch him flagellate himself ( presumably a variety of religious penance ) , and that she , angela , knew of two other women who she claims were sexually abused . no charges were pressed at the time by the women . lewis said : '' this truth needs to sit alongside baxter 's literary achievements . it must be fully acknowledged and never glossed over . this is for the sake of women such as myself and for those who may not be able to find a voice as i have . as ever , in celebrating the genius of baxter the artist , we can not overlook the evils of baxter the human being . '' . critical reception and legacy . criticism of baxter 's poetry has generally focussed on his incorporation of european myths into his new zealand poems , his interest in māori culture and language , and the significance of his religious experiences and conversion to roman catholicism . new zealand poet laureate vincent o'sullivan wrote in 1976 that baxter is an inherently new zealand poet : '' that is the proportion of baxter 's achievement – the most complete delineation yet of a new zealand mind . the poetic record of its shaping is as original an act as anything we have . '' a common theme in baxter 's extensive body of writing was strong criticism of new zealand society . his biographer paul millar said : '' if , at times , baxter appears to evaluate new zealand society harshly , his judgements are always from the perspective of one intimately involved in the social process . '' baxter 's use of te reo māori has inspired both praise and criticism . w.h . oliver described it as '' often a cosmetic device , or worse , an earnest affectation '' . by contrast , john newton noted that at least some māori welcomed baxter 's engagement with their language and culture , and john weir regards his use as '' a genuine attempt at using a bicultural language in this country when no other pākehā was doing so '' . in his critical study lives of the poets , michael schmidt claimed that baxter was '' one of the most precocious poets of the century '' whose neglect outside of new zealand is baffling . in schmidt 's view , baxter 's writing was affected by his alcoholism . schmidt also commented on baxter 's influences , noting that his work drew upon dylan thomas and w . b . yeats ; then on louis macneice and robert lowell . michael schmidt identified '' an amalgam of hopkins , thomas and native atavisms '' in baxter 's prelude n.z . the critic martin seymour-smith ranked baxter above robert lowell ( '' baxter knew all about narcissism and vanity , and is a much superior poet '' ) , and defended baxter 's high reputation on the grounds of his spiritual and intellectual seeking : '' baxter 's energy and sheer intelligence , his refusal to give way to mean cerebral impulses or to give up his terrible struggle with himself , are sufficient to justify his high position in new zealand poetry '' . on the other hand , smith said that baxter '' remained , disappointingly , over-intoxicated with his own energy , and never convincingly manifested qualities of restraint to balance it . '' seymour-smith , michael '' guide to world literature '' , macmillan , 1985 , p . 978 a number of baxter 's poems were written in the ballad form , and baxter has been described by critics as '' new zealand 's principal lyricist '' . a number of baxter 's works have since been translated into music by new zealand musicians . in 2000 , a collection of songs written to baxter 's poems was released , titled baxter , and featuring some of new zealand 's most well-known musicians : for example dave dobbyn , the chills , emma paki , greg johnson , david downes and mahinārangi tocker . it was devised by new zealand singer-songwriter charlotte yates . . selected works . beyond the palisade , 1944 blow , wind of fruitfulness , 1948 hart crane ; a poem , 1948 recent trends in new zealand poetry , 1951 poems unpleasant , 1952 ( with louis johnson and anton vogt ) rapunzel : a fantasia for six voices , 1953 the fallen house , 1953 the fire and the anvil , 1955 traveller ’ s litany , 1956 the iron breadboard : studies in new zealand writing , 1950 the night shift : poems on aspects of love , 1957 ( with charles doyle , louis johnson and kendrick smithyman ) in fires of no return , 1958 chosen poems , 1958 two plays : the wide open cage and jack winter 's dream , 1959 the ballad of calvary street , 1960 howrah bridge and other poems , 1961 three women and the sea , 1961 the spots of the leopard , 1962 the ballad of the soap powder lock-out , 1963 a selection of poetry , 1964 pig island letters , 1966 aspects of poetry in new zealand , 1967 the lion skin , 1967 the man on the horse , 1967 the bureaucrat , 1968 ( prod . ) the rock woman : selected poems , 1969 jerusalem sonnets : poems for colin durning , 1970 the flowering cross , 1970 the devil and mr mulcahy , and the band rotunda , 1971 ( plays ) jerusalem daybook , 1971 the sore-footed man , and the temptations of oedipus , 1971 ( plays ) ode to auckland and other poems , 1972 autumn testament , 1972 ( reissued in 1998 , edited by paul millar ) four god songs , 1972 letter to peter olds , 1972 . posthumously published . runes , 1973 two obscene poems , 1974 barney flanagan and other poems , read by james k . baxter ( record ) , 1973 the labyrinth : some uncollected poems 1944–72 , 1974 the tree house and other poems for children , 1974 the bone chanter , edited and introduced by john weir , 1976 the holy life and death of concrete grady , edited and introduced by john weir , 1976 baxter basics , 1979 collected poems , edited by john weir , 1979 ( reissued in 1995 and 2004 ) collected plays , edited by howard mcnaughton , 1982 selected poems , edited by john weir , 1982 horse : a novel , 1985 the essential baxter , selected and introduced by john weir , 1993 cold spring : baxter 's unpublished early collection , edited and introduced by paul millar , 1996 james k . baxter : poems , selected and introduced by sam hunt , 2009 poems to a glass woman , with introductory essay by john weir , 2012 james k . baxter : complete prose , four volume set edited by john weir , 2015 ( victoria university press ) james k baxter : letters of a poet , edited by john weir , 2015 ( victoria university press )