Longwave

propagation . because of their long wavelength , radio waves in this frequency range can diffract over obstacles like mountain ranges and travel beyond the horizon , following the contour of the earth . this mode of propagation , called ground wave , is the main mode in the longwave band . the attenuation of signal strength with distance by absorption in the ground is lower than at higher frequencies , and falls with frequency . low frequency ground waves can be received up to from the transmitting antenna . very low frequency waves below 30 & nbsp ; khz can be used to communicate at transcontinental distances , and can penetrate saltwater to depths of hundreds of feet , and is used by the military to communication with submarines . low frequency waves can also occasionally travel long distances by reflecting from the ionosphere ( the actual mechanism is one of refraction ) , although this method , called skywave or '' skip '' propagation , is not as common as at higher frequencies . reflection occurs at the ionospheric e layer or f region . skywave signals can be detected at distances exceeding from the transmitting antenna . . non-broadcast use . non-directional beacons . non-directional beacons transmit continuously for the benefit of radio direction finders in marine and aeronautical navigation . they identify themselves by a callsign in morse code . they can occupy any frequency in the range 190–1750 & nbsp ; khz . in north america , they occupy 190–535 & nbsp ; khz . in itu region 1 the lower limit is 280 & nbsp ; khz . time signals . there are institutional broadcast stations in the range that transmit coded time signals to radio clocks . for example : wwvb in colorado , united states , on 60 & nbsp ; khz dcf77 in frankfurt , germany , on 77.5 & nbsp ; khz jjy in japan , on 40 & 60 & nbsp ; khz 66.66 & nbsp ; khz in taldom transmitter , russia bpc in lintong , china , 68.5 & nbsp ; khz msf time and 60 & nbsp ; khz frequency standard transmitted from anthorn in the uk . tdf from allouis , france , on 162 & nbsp ; khz radio clock receive their time calibration signals with built-in long-wave receivers . they use long-wave , rather than shortwave or mediumwave , because long-wave signals from the transmitter to the receiver always travel along the same direct path across the surface of the earth , so the time delay correction for the signal travel time from the transmitting station to the receiver is always the same for any one receiving location . longwaves travel by groundwaves that hug the surface of the earth , unlike mediumwaves and shortwaves . those higher-frequency signals do not follow the surface of the earth beyond a few kilometers , but can travel as skywaves , ‘ bouncing ’ off different layers of the ionosphere at different times of day . these different propagation paths can make the time lag different for every signal received . the delay between when the long-wave signal was sent from the transmitter ( when the coded time was correct ) and when the signal is received by the clock ( when the coded time is slightly late ) depends on the overland distance between the clock and the transmitter and the speed of light in a medium , which is also very nearly constant . since the time lag is essentially the same , a single constant shift forward from the time coded in the signal can compensate for all long-wave signals received at any one location from the same time signal station . submarine communication . the militaries of the united kingdom , russian federation , united states , germany , india and sweden use frequencies below 50 & nbsp ; khz to communicate with submerged submarines . lowfer . licensed operators in the u.s . may transmit on the newly-allocated 2200-meter band from 136–139 & nbsp ; khz at maximum equivalent power radiated from the antenna of 1 & nbsp ; watt ( eirp ) ; most nations in europe already have adopted the new band , along with many others worldwide . in north america during the 1970s , the frequencies 167 , 179 , and 191 & nbsp ; khz were assigned to the short-lived public emergency radio of the united states . nowadays , in the united states , part 15 of fcc regulations allow unlicensed use of the 160–190 & nbsp ; khz band a transmitter / amplifier output power to the antenna of at most 1 & nbsp ; watt , with an antenna at most 15 & nbsp ; meters ( 49 & nbsp ; feet ) high ; this is called lowfer ( lowfer ) . the 190–435 & nbsp ; khz band is used for navigational beacons . frequencies from 472–479 & nbsp ; khz are available to licensed amateurs as the new 630-meter band , part of the now-defunct 500 khz , but this is often considered a medium wave sub-band . historic . swedish station saq , located at the varberg radio station facility in grimeton , is the last remaining operational alexanderson alternator long-wave transmitter . although the station ended regular service in 1996 , it has been maintained as a world heritage site , and makes at least two demonstration transmissions yearly , on 17.2 & nbsp ; khz . saq transmission . radiostation grimeton saq . retrieved 5 april 2015 . . broadcasting . longwave is used for broadcasting only within itu region 1 . the long-wave broadcasters are located in western , northern , central , and southeastern europe , the former soviet union , mongolia , algeria , and morocco . typically , a larger geographic area can be covered by a long-wave broadcast transmitter compared to a medium-wave one . this is because ground-wave propagation suffers less attenuation due to ground conductivity at lower frequencies . ground-wave propagation curves for frequencies between 10 khz and 30 mhz . itu-r recommendation p.368-9 . carrier frequencies . long-wave carrier frequencies are exact multiples of 9 & nbsp ; khz ; ranging from 153 to 279 & nbsp ; khz , except for a french-language station , europe no . 1 in germany . this station kept correctly spaced channels spacing for 4 months—only 7 years ago , and all mongolian transmitters are 2 & nbsp ; khz above the internationally recognized channels . until the 1970s , some long-wave stations in northern and eastern europe and the soviet union operated on frequencies as high as 433 & nbsp ; khz . some radio broadcasters , for instance droitwich transmitting station in the uk , derive their carrier frequencies from an atomic clock , allowing their use as frequency standards . droitwich also broadcasts a low bit-rate data channel , using narrow-shift phase-shift keying of the carrier , for radio teleswitch . in 2014 and 2015 russia closed all of its lw broadcast transmitters . . long-distance reception . because long-wave signals can travel very long distances , some radio amateurs and shortwave listening engage in an activity called dxing . dxers attempt to listen in to far away transmissions , and they will often send a reception report to the sending station to let them know where they were heard . after receiving a report , the sending station may mail the listener a qsl card to acknowledge this reception . reception of long-wave signals at distances in excess of have been verified . . list of long-wave broadcasting transmitters . . list of stations currently operating . : de : langwellenrundfunk world radio tv handbook