USS North Dakota (BB-29)

design . the two delaware-class battleships were ordered in response to the british battleship , the first all-big-gun battleship to enter service . the previous american dreadnoughts , the , had been designed before the particulars of hms dreadnought were known . the navy decided that another pair of battleships should be built to counter the perceived superiority of dreadnought over south carolina , and so rear admiral washington l . capps prepared a design for a ship with an additional main battery gun turret to match dreadnoughts ten guns . but unlike dreadnought , all ten of north dakotas guns could fire on the broadside . at the time of her construction , north dakota was the largest and most powerful battleship then building in the world . north dakota was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of . she displaced as designed and up to at full load . the ship was powered by two-shaft curtis steam turbines and fourteen coal-fired babcock & wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 21 knots . the ship had a cruising range of at a speed of . she had a crew of 933 officers and men . her bow had an early example of bulbous bow . pianc marcom working group 08 : the damage inflicted by ships with bulbous bows on underwater structures ( supplement to bulletin nr . 70 , ptc2 report of wg 08 - 1990 issue ) , page 6 the ship was armed with a main battery of ten /45 mark 5 guns in five twin mark 7 gun turrets on the centerline , two of which were placed in a superfire forward . the other three turrets were placed aft of the superstructure . the secondary battery consisted of twenty-one /50 mark 6 guns mounted on mark 9 and mark 12 pedestal mounts in casemates along the side of the hull . as was standard for capital ships of the period , she carried a pair of torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . north dakotas main armored belt was thick , while the armored deck was thick . the gun turrets had thick faces and the conning tower had thick sides . service history . construction – 1917 . the keel for north dakota was laid down at the fore river shipyard in quincy , massachusetts , on 16 december 1907 . she was launched on 10 november 1908 , and completed on 11 april 1910 , thereafter being commissioned into the fleet . on 8 september 1910 , the ship suffered an oil-tank explosion and fire while at sea . six men—chief watertenders august holtz and patrick reid , chief machinist 's mates thomas stanton and karl westa , machinist 's mate first class charles c . roberts , and watertender harry lipscomb—each received the medal of honor '' for extraordinary heroism in the line of his profession '' during the fire . after her commissioning , north dakota was assigned to the atlantic fleet ; she participated in the normal peacetime routine of training cruises , fleet maneuvers , and gunnery drills in the atlantic and in the caribbean sea . on 2 november 1910 , she crossed the atlantic for the first time , on a good-will visit to britain and france . fleet maneuvers followed in the caribbean the next spring . midshipmen training cruises for cadets from the usna occupied north dakotas time in the summers of 1912 and 1913 . on 1 january 1913 , she joined the honor escort for the british armored cruiser , which was carrying the remains of whitelaw reid , the united states ambassador to great britain . the united states remained neutral when war in europe broke out in august 1914 ; in the americas , political disturbances in mexico during mexican revolution kept the us navy occupied that year . north dakota steamed off veracruz , where she arrived on 26 april 1914 , five days after american sailors had occupied the city . she cruised the coast of mexico to protect americans in the country until october , when she returned to norfolk , virginia , arriving on 16 october . as war loomed , the atlantic fleet began intensive training to prepare for a possible american entrance into the conflict . world war i . north dakota was conducting gunnery training in chesapeake bay when the united states declared war on germany on 6 april 1917 . unlike her sister , north dakota remained in american waters for the duration of the war , and did not see action . she was based out of york river , virginia and new york city , and was tasked with training gunners and engine room personnel for the rapidly expanding wartime fleet . admiral hugh rodman requested that north dakota remain behind because he did not trust the reliability of her engines . in 1917 , her engines were replaced with new geared turbines , and new fire control equipment was installed . on 13 november 1919 , north dakota left norfolk , carrying the remains of the italian ambassador to the united states , vincenzo macchi di cellere , who had died 20 october in washington , d.c . the ship stopped in athens , constantinople , valencia , and gibraltar while cruising the mediterranean sea . she thereafter returned to the united states , and participated in fleet maneuvers in the caribbean in the spring of 1920 . in july 1921 , she was present during the joint army-navy bombing tests , where the ex-german battleship and cruiser were sunk in an air-power demonstration . north dakota returned to the normal peacetime routine of training exercises , including two midshipmen cruises in the summers of 1922 and 1923 ; the latter cruise went to european waters , where she visited spain , scotland , and scandinavia . in the years immediately following the end of the war , the united states , britain , and japan all launched huge naval construction programs . all three countries decided that a new naval arms race would be ill-advised , and so convened the washington naval conference to discuss arms limitations , which produced the washington naval treaty , signed in february 1922 . under the terms of article ii of the treaty , north dakota and her sister delaware were to be scrapped as soon as the new battleships and , then under construction , were ready to join the fleet . north dakota was decommissioned on 22 november 1923 in norfolk in accordance with the terms of the treaty . she was disarmed and reclassified as an '' unclassified '' ship on 29 may 1924 , and thereafter converted into a radio-controlled gunnery target ship . her turbines were removed for later use aboard the battleship when she was modernized in the 1930s . she served in that capacity until 1930 , when she was replaced by the battleship . she was stricken from the naval vessel register on 7 january 1931 and sold to the union shipbuilding co of baltimore on 16 march 1931 for dismantling . footnotes . notes . . citations .