1975 in literature

events . january 1 – english-born comic writer p . g . wodehouse is awarded a knighthood , knight commander of the most excellent order of the british empire . six weeks before he dies in the united states . january – colin dexter 's detective novel last bus to woodstock introduces his oxford police officer , inspector morse . april 23 barbara pym and philip larkin meet in person for the first time , at the randolph hotel , oxford , after years of correspondence . harold pinter 's play no man 's land is premièred by the national theatre at the old vic in london , directed by peter hall and starring sir john gielgud and sir ralph richardson . april 28 – harold pinter leaves his first wife , the actress vivien merchant , having begun an affair with the married biographer lady antonia fraser on january 8 . may 10 – leftist salvadoran poet , journalist and political activist roque dalton ( born 1935 ) is assassinated by former colleagues in the people 's revolutionary army ( el salvador ) . august 12 – as the 20-year time limit stipulated by thomas mann at his death expires , sealed packets of 32 of the author 's notebooks are opened in zürich , switzerland . unknown dates writing as émile ajar , the author romain gary becomes the only person to win the prix goncourt twice . radical australian poet dorothy hewett publishes her collection rapunzel in suburbia , triggering a successful libel action by her ex-husband . hearing secret harmonies , the twelfth and final novel in the a dance to the music of time series begun in 1951 by anthony powell , is published . the french critic hélène cixous coins the term écriture féminine in an article , '' le rire de la méduse '' . milan kundera emigrates from czechoslovakia to france , to take up an academic position at the university of rennes . the petrarca-preis is founded by hubert burda . new books . fiction . chabua amirejibi – data tutashkhia edward abbey – the monkey wrench gang dritëro agolli – njeriu me top ( the man with the cannon ) robert aickman – cold hand in mine : eight strange stories martin amis – dead babies natalie babbitt – tuck everlasting donald barthelme – the dead father saul bellow – humboldt 's gift thomas berger – sneaky people thomas bernhard – correction ( korrektur ) jorge luis borges – the book of sand ( el libro de arena , short stories ) malcolm bradbury – the history man john braine – the pious agent morley callaghan – a fine and private place j . l . carr – how steeple sinderby wanderers won the f.a . cup agatha christie – curtain ( novel ) ( written in 1940s ) james clavell – shōgun michael crichton – the great train robbery a . j . cronin – the minstrel boy robertson davies – world of wonders l . sprague de camp and fletcher pratt – the compleat enchanter samuel r . delany – dhalgren michel déon – the foundling boy ( le jeune homme vert ) august derleth – harrigan 's file guram dochanashvili – the first garment e . l . doctorow – ragtime max frisch – montauk carlos fuentes – terra nostra william gaddis – j r gabriel garcía márquez – the autumn of the patriarch ( el otoño del patriarca ) romain gary as émile ajar – the life before us ( la vie devant soi ) rumer godden – the peacock spring arthur hailey – the moneychangers peter handke – a moment of true feeling ( die stunde der wahren empfindung ) thomas harris – black sunday xavier herbert – poor fellow my country georgette heyer – my lord john jack higgins – the eagle has landed ruth prawer jhabvala – heat and dust gayl jones – corregidora stephen king – salem 's lot sheridan le fanu ( died 1873 ) – the purcell papers derek lambert – touch the lion 's paw david lodge – changing places robert ludlum – the road to gandolfo john d . macdonald – the dreadful lemon sky bharati mukherjee – wife abdul rahman munif – east of the mediterranean gary myers – the house of the worm v . s . naipaul – guerrillas n . richard nash - cry macho tim o'brien – northern lights gerald w . page , editor – nameless places robert b . parker – mortal stakes georges perec – w , or the memory of childhood ( w , ou le souvenir d'enfance ) elizabeth peters – crocodile on the sandbank ( first in the amelia peabody series ) baltasar porcel – horses into the night ( cavalls cap a la fosca ) anthony powell – hearing secret harmonies james purdy – in a shallow grave judith rossner – looking for mr . goodbar joanna russ – the female man nawal el saadawi – woman at point zero ( emra ' a enda noktat el sifr ) paul scott – a division of the spoils anya seton – smouldering fires gerald seymour – harry 's game tom sharpe – blott on the landscape robert shea and robert anton wilson – the illuminatus ! trilogy ( individual editions ) m . p . shiel – xélucha and others rex stout – a family affair glendon swarthout – the shootist joseph wambaugh – the choirboys keith waterhouse – billy liar on the moon jack vance – showboat world georgi vladimov – faithful ruslan ( « верный руслан . история караульной собаки » , first trade publication ) roger zelazny – sign of the unicorn . children and young people . verna aardema ( with leo and diane dillon ) – why mosquitoes buzz in people 's ears nina bawden – the peppermint pig susan cooper – the grey king roald dahl – danny , the champion of the world rumer godden – mr . mcfadden 's hallowe'en peter härtling – oma ( grandma ) eva ibbotson – the great ghost rescue ronald mccuaig – fresi fantastika ( norwegian translation of gangles ) ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat and the invention bill peet cyrus the unsinkable sea serpent the gnats of knotty pine robert westall – the machine gunners . drama . alan ayckbourn – bedroom farce patrick galvin – we do it for love trevor griffiths – comedians christopher hampton – treats david hare fanshen teeth ' n ' smiles colin higgins and denis cannan with peter brook – the ik franz xaver kroetz geisterbahn ( ghost train ) das nest ( the nest ) tom murphy – the sanctuary lamp stewart parker – spokesong harold pinter – no man 's land wole soyinka – death and the king 's horseman ben travers – the bed before yesterday . poetry . lin carter – dreams from r'lyeh leslie norris – mountains , polecats , pheasants and other elegies . non-fiction . philip agee – inside the company : cia diary kingsley amis – rudyard kipling and his world robert bresson – notes on the cinematographer ( notes sur le cinématographe ) jacob bronowski – the ascent of man mary chamberlain – fenwomen : a portrait of women in an english village l . sprague de camp blond barbarians and noble savages lovecraft : a biography the miscast barbarian : a biography of robert e . howard michel foucault – discipline and punish ( surveiller et punir : naissance de la prison ) paul fussell – the great war and modern memory paul horgan – lamy of santa fe frank belknap long – howard phillips lovecraft : dreamer on the nightside philip roth – reading myself and others peter singer – animal liberation paul theroux – the great railway bazaar . births . january 13 – daniel kehlmann , german novelist february 25 – carrie mac , canadian young-adult fiction writer february 27 – cynan jones , welsh novelist april 11 – walid soliman , tunisian author and translator june 23 – markus zusak , australian young-adult novelist july 19 – martina montelius , swedish playwright august 20 – matthew and michael dickman , american poets october 27 – zadie smith ( sadie smith ) , english novelist unknown dates – gavin francis , scottish medical writer and physician . deaths . january 15 – sydney goodsir smith , scottish poet , dramatist and novelist ( heart attack , born 1915 ) february 14 sir julian huxley , english biologist and author ( born 1887 ) sir p . g . wodehouse , english-born comic novelist ( born 1881 ) february 20 – ivan sokolov-mikitov , russian author ( born 1882 ) march 3 – t . h . parry-williams , welsh poet ( born 1887 ) march 7 – kate seredy , hungarian-born american children 's writer and illustrator ( born 1899 ) march 13 – ivo andrić , serbo-croatian novelist and nobel laureate ( born 1892 ) april 23 – rolf dieter brinkmann , german poet ( killed in hit-and-run-accident in london , born 1940 ) may 21 – a . h . dodd , welsh historian ( born 1891 ) june 8 – murray leinster ( william fitzgerald jenkins ) , american science fiction writer ( born 1896 ) july 10 – peter anson , english writer on religion and maritime matters ( born 1889 ) september 20 – saint-john perse ( alexis leger ) , french poet and nobel laureate ( born 1887 ) october 5 – lady constance malleson , irish actress and writer ( born 1895 ) october 22 – arnold j . toynbee , english historian ( born 1889 ) november 13 – r . c . sherriff , english dramatist and novelist ( born 1896 ) november 19 – elizabeth taylor , english novelist ( cancer , born 1912 ) november 27 – ross mcwhirter , english sports journalist and joint compiler of guinness book of records ( assassinated , born 1925 ) december 4 – hannah arendt , german-american philosopher ( born 1906 ) december 7 – thornton wilder , american novelist and dramatist ( born 1897 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : eugenio montale . canada . see 1975 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : romain gary – la vie devant soi prix médicis french : jacques almira , le voyage à naucratis prix médicis international : steven millhauser , la vie trop brève d'edwin mulhouse – united states . spain . premio nadal : francisco umbral , las ninfas . united kingdom . booker prize : ruth prawer jhabvala , heat and dust carnegie medal for children 's literature : robert westall , the machine gunners cholmondeley award : jenny joseph , norman maccaig , john ormond duff cooper prize : seamus heaney , north eric gregory award : john birtwhistle , duncan bush , val warner , philip holmes , peter cash , alasdair paterson james tait black memorial prize for fiction : brian moore , the great victorian collection james tait black memorial prize for biography : karl miller , cockburn 's millennium . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for belles lettres : kenneth burke nebula award : joe haldeman , the forever war newbery medal for children 's literature : virginia hamilton , m . c . higgins , the great newdigate prize : andrew motion pulitzer prize for drama : edward albee , seascape pulitzer prize for fiction : michael shaara – the killer angels pulitzer prize for poetry : gary snyder – turtle island . elsewhere . miles franklin award : xavier herbert , poor fellow my country viareggio prize : paolo volponi , il sipario ducale . references .