Exhaust gas recirculation

history . the first egr systems were crude ; some were as simple as an orifice jet between the exhaust and intake tracts which admitted exhaust to the intake tract whenever the engine was running . difficult starting , rough idling , and reduced performance and fuel economy resulted . by 1973 , an egr valve controlled by manifold vacuum opened or closed to admit exhaust to the intake tract only under certain conditions . control systems grew more sophisticated as automakers gained experience ; volkswagen 's '' coolant controlled exhaust gas recirculation '' system of 1973 exemplified this evolution : a coolant temperature sensor blocked vacuum to the egr valve until the engine reached normal operating temperature . this prevented driveability problems due to unnecessary exhaust induction ; forms under elevated temperature conditions generally not present with a cold engine . moreover , the egr valve was controlled , in part , by vacuum drawn from the carburetor venturi , which allowed more precise constraint of egr flow to only those engine load conditions under which is likely to form . '' 1973 cleaner air system highlights '' – chrysler corporation , imperialclub.com later , backpressure transducers were added to the egr valve control to further tailor egr flow to engine load conditions . most modern engines now need exhaust gas recirculation to meet emissions standards . however , recent innovations have led to the development of engines that do not require them . the 3.6 chrysler pentastar engine is one example that does not require egr . . egr . the exhaust gas contains water vapor and carbon dioxide which both have lower heat capacity ratio than air . adding exhaust gas therefore reduces pressure and temperature during the isentropic compression in the cylinder , and lowers the adiabatic flame temperature . in a typical automotive spark-ignited ( si ) engine , 5 % to 15 % of the exhaust gas is routed back to the intake as egr . the maximum quantity is limited by the need of the mixture to sustain a continuous flame front during the combustion event ; excessive egr in poorly set up applications can cause misfires and partial burns . although egr does measurably slow combustion , this can largely be compensated for by advancing spark timing . the impact of egr on engine efficiency largely depends on the specific engine design , and sometimes leads to a compromise between efficiency and emissions . a properly operating egr can theoretically increase the efficiency of gasoline engines via several mechanisms : reduced throttling losses . the addition of inert exhaust gas into the intake system means that for a given power output , the throttle plate must be opened further , resulting in increased inlet manifold pressure and reduced throttling losses . alger , 2010 . quote : '' recent studies performed by engineers at southwest research institute ( swri ) have examined the role that exhaust gas recirculation ( egr ) can play in reducing , or even eliminating , these sources of inefficiency in gasoline engines . in internally funded research , they determined that egr can improve the fuel consumption of both direct-injected and port-injected gasoline engines by reducing pumping losses , mitigating knock , cooling the exhaust and eliminating the need for fuel enrichment . '' reduced heat rejection . lowered peak combustion temperatures not only reduces formation , it also reduces the loss of thermal energy to combustion chamber surfaces , leaving more available for conversion to mechanical work during the expansion stroke . reduced chemical dissociation . the lower peak temperatures result in more of the released energy remaining as sensible energy near top dead center ( tdc ) , rather than being bound up ( early in the expansion stroke ) in the dissociation of combustion products . this effect is minor compared to the first two . egr is typically not employed at high loads because it would reduce peak power output . this is because it reduces the intake charge density . egr is also omitted at idle ( low-speed , zero load ) because it would cause unstable combustion , resulting in rough idle . since the egr system recirculates a portion of exhaust gases , over time the valve can become clogged with carbon deposits that prevent it from operating properly . clogged egr valves can sometimes be cleaned , but replacement is necessary if the valve is faulty . in diesel engines . in modern diesel engines , the egr gas is usually cooled with a heat exchanger to allow the introduction of a greater mass of recirculated gas . uncooled egr designs do however exist , often referred to as hot gas recirculation ( hgr ) . unlike spark-ignition engines , diesels are not limited by the need for a contiguous flamefront ; furthermore , since diesels always operate with excess air , they benefit from egr rates as high as 50 % ( at idle , when there is otherwise a large excess of air ) in controlling emissions . exhaust recirculated back into the cylinder can increase engine wear as carbon particulates blow by the piston rings and into the oil . dennis a . , garner c . , taylor d . ( 1999 ) . the effect of egr on diesel engine wear , sae 1999-01-0839 , in-cylinder diesel particulate and control 1999 since modern diesels often have a throttle , egr can reduce the need for throttling eliminating losses in the same way that it does for si engines . reduced throttling also reduces the problem with engine oil being sucked past the piston rings into the cylinder causing carbon deposits there . exhaust gas—largely nitrogen , carbon dioxide , and water vapor—has a higher specific heat than air , so it still serves to lower peak combustion temperatures . however , adding egr to a diesel reduces the specific heat ratio of the combustion gases in the power stroke . this reduces the amount of power that can be extracted by the piston . egr also tends to reduce the amount of fuel burned in the power stroke . this is evident by the increase in particulate emissions that corresponds to an increase in egr . nagel , john ( 2002 ) . diesel engine and fuel system repair , . bennett , sean ( 2004 ) . medium/heavy duty truck engines , fuel & computerized management systems 2nd edition , . particulate matter ( mainly carbon ) that is not burned in the power stroke is wasted energy . stricter regulations on particulate matter ( pm ) call for further emission controls to be introduced to compensate for the pm emission increases caused by egr . the most common is a diesel particulate filter ( dpf ) in the exhaust system which cleans the exhaust but causes a constant minor reduction in fuel efficiency due to the back pressure created . the nitrogen dioxide component of emissions is the primary oxidizer of the soot caught in the dpf at normal operating temperatures . this process is known as passive regeneration . increasing egr rates cause passive regeneration to be less effective at managing the pm loading in the dpf . this necessitates periodic active regeneration of the dpf by burning diesel fuel in the oxidation catalyst in order to significantly increase exhaust gas temperatures through the dpf to the point where pm is quickly burned by the residual oxygen in the exhaust . by feeding the lower oxygen exhaust gas into the intake , diesel egr systems lower combustion temperature , reducing emissions of . this makes combustion less efficient , compromising economy and power . the normally '' dry '' intake system of a diesel engine is now subject to fouling from soot , unburned fuel and oil in the egr bleed , which has little effect on airflow . however , when combined with oil vapor from a positive crankcase ventilation system ( pcv ) system , can cause buildup of sticky tar in the intake manifold and valves . it can also cause problems with components such as swirl flaps , where fitted . diesel egr also increases soot production , though this was masked in the us by the simultaneous introduction of dpfs . scr or egr ? - fleetowner magazine . egr systems can also add abrasive contaminants and increase engine oil acidity , which in turn can reduce engine longevity . bennett , sean ( 2004 ) . medium/heavy duty truck engines , fuel & computerized management systems 2nd edition , . page : 206 though engine manufacturers have refused to release details of the effect of egr on fuel economy , the epa regulations of 2002 that led to the introduction of cooled egr were associated with a 3 % drop in engine efficiency , bucking a trend of a . 5 % a year increase . . see also . diesel exhaust secondary air injection . sources . heywood , john b . , '' internal combustion engine fundamentals , '' mcgraw hill , 1988 . van basshuysen , richard , and schäfer , fred , '' internal combustion engine handbook , '' sae international , 2004 . '' bosch automotive handbook , '' 3rd edition , robert bosch gmbh , 1993 .