1948 in literature

events . january 6 – the poet pablo neruda speaks out in the senate of chile against political repression and is forced into hiding . january 28 – a debate between bertrand russell and frederick copleston on the existence of god is broadcast by the bbc . february 5 – a private assembly of 50 major literary and artistic figures listens to a recording of antonin artaud 's play pour en finir avec le jugement de dieu ( to have done with the judgment of god ) , whose broadcast on french radio three days earlier has been prohibited . february 17–november 24 – venezuelan novelist rómulo gallegos serves as his country 's first correctly elected president , until overthrown in a military coup . march 21 – halldor laxness 's the atom station sells out all copies on its first day of publication . may – bertolt brecht 's the caucasian chalk circle ( 1944 ) is first performed as a student production , in english , at carleton college , northfield , minnesota . this year also sees the première of brecht 's adaptation of antigone , at the chur stadttheater in switzerland , with helene weigel in the title rôle . may 4 – sir laurence olivier 's film of shakespeare 's hamlet is shown . it will be the first british film to win the academy award for best picture . c . june 1 – the first volume of winston churchill 's the second world war ( 1948–1953 ) is published . september 8 – terence rattigan 's one-act plays the browning version and harlequinade are first performed at the phoenix theatre ( london ) . september 17 – the irish poet w . b . yeats , who died at menton , france , in 1939 , is reburied at drumcliffe , county sligo , '' under bare ben bulben 's head '' , having been moved from the original burial place , roquebrune-cap-martin , on the irish naval service corvette lé macha . his grave at drumcliffe , with an epitaph from '' under ben bulben '' , one of his final poems ( '' cast a cold eye/on life , on death./horseman , pass by '' ) , becomes a place of literary pilgrimage . november 13 – alice 's adventures under ground , the original manuscript of lewis carroll 's alice 's adventures in wonderland , bought by a group of american anglophiles in 1946 , is presented by luther h . evans ( librarian of congress ) to the british library . unknown dates the 20th and last edition of the index librorum prohibitorum is published by the holy see . the london publisher weidenfeld & nicolson is founded by george weidenfeld and nigel nicolson . the pulitzer prize for the novel is renamed the pulitzer prize for fiction . the palatino serif typeface , designed by hermann zapf , is released by the mergenthaler linotype company . new books . fiction . ilse aichinger – die größere hoffnung ( the greater hope , translated as herod 's children ) jerzy andrzejewski – ashes and diamonds isaac asimov – '' the endochronic properties of resublimated thiotimoline '' ( short story ) nigel balchin – the borgia testament rené barjavel – le diable l'emporte alexander baron – from the city , from the plough hervé bazin – viper in the fist ( vipère au poing ) henry bellamann – parris mitchell of king 's row elizabeth bowen – the heat of the day jocelyn brooke the military orchid the scapegoat pearl s . buck – peony taylor caldwell – melissa truman capote – other voices , other rooms al capp – the life and times of the shmoo john dickson carr ( as carter dickson ) – the skeleton in the clock adolfo bioy casares – the celestial plot ( la trama celeste ) ( short stories ) willa cather ( died 1947 ) – the old beauty and others ( short stories , including '' the best years '' ) agatha christie taken at the flood the rose and the yew tree ( as by mary westmacott ) the witness for the prosecution and other stories james gould cozzens – guard of honor edmund crispin – love lies bleeding a . j . cronin – shannon 's way osamu dazai – no longer human l . sprague de camp – divide and rule l . sprague de camp and fletcher pratt – the carnelian cube august derleth – not long for this world lord dunsany – the fourth book of jorkens howard fast – my glorious brothers william faulkner – intruder in the dust gaito gazdanov – the specter of alexander wolf ( serialization completed ) henry green – concluding graham greene – the heart of the matter giovannino guareschi – mondo piccolo : don camillo ( the little world of don camillo ) hella haasse ( anonymously ) – oeroeg l . p . hartley – the travelling grave and other stories marguerite henry – king of the wind georgette heyer – the foundling zora neale hurston – seraph on the suwanee aldous huxley – ape and essence hammond innes – maddon 's rock shirley jackson the road through the wall '' the lottery '' ( short story ) '' charles '' ( short story ) anna kavan – the house of sleep patrick kavanagh – tarry flynn halldór laxness – the atom station alexander lernet-holenia – the count of saint germain audrey erskine lindop – soldiers ' daughters never cry ross lockridge , jr . – raintree county norman mailer – the naked and the dead thomas mann – joseph and his brothers leopoldo marechal – adam buenosayres ana maría matute – los abel w . somerset maugham – catalina c . l . moore – the mask of circe zoe b . oldenbourg – the world is not enough alan paton – cry , the beloved country ellery queen – ten days ' wonder seabury quinn – roads anya seton – the hearth and the eagle irwin shaw – the young lions nevil shute – no highway b . f . skinner – walden two clark ashton smith – genius loci and other tales dodie smith – i capture the castle william gardner smith – last of the conquerors howard spring – there is no armour rex stout – and be a villain ahmet hamdi tanpınar – a mind at peace ( huzur , serial publication ) josephine tey – the franchise affair gore vidal – the city and the pillar mika waltari – the adventurer ( mikael karvajalka ) donald wandrei – the web of easter island evelyn waugh – the loved one stanley g . weinbaum – the black flame dorothy west – the living is easy thornton wilder – the ides of march herman wouk – city boy : the adventures of herbie bookbinder . children and young people . bertil almqvist – barna hedenhös : bilder från stenåldern ( the hedenhös family : pictures from the stone age ) hans fischer – pitschi . das kätzchen , das immer etwas anderes wollte . eine traurige geschichte , die aber gut aufhört antonia forest – autumn term ( first in the marlow series of ten books ) ruth stiles gannett – my father 's dragon marguerite henry – king of the wind lorna hill – marjorie and co . ( first in the marjorie series of six books ) tove jansson – trollkarlens hatt ( the magician 's hat , translated as finn family moomintroll ) astrid lindgren – pippi in the south seas ( pippi långstrump i söderhavet ) dr . seuss – thidwick the big-hearted moose rosemary tonks – on wooden wings : the adventures of webster geoffrey trease – the hills of varna ( also as shadow of the hawk ) elfrida vipont – the lark in the moon . drama . bertolt brecht – antigone , the caucasian chalk circle and mr puntila and his man matti ( herr puntila und sein knecht matti , first performed ) robertson davies – overlaid witold gombrowicz – the marriage ( first published , in spanish translation ) kenneth horne – a lady mislaid junji kinoshita – yūzuru ( twilight crane ) dudley leslie and j . lee thompson – the human touch terence rattigan – the browning version and harlequinade jean-paul sartre – dirty hands ( les mains sales ) vernon sylvaine - one wild oat john van druten – make way for lucia kerala women 's malayalam collective – thozhil kendrathilekku ( to the workplace ! ) . poetry . sukanta bhattacharya ( died 1947 ) – chharpatra ( ছাড়পত্র , '' certificate '' ) olga kirsch – mure van die hart derek walcott – 25 poems . non-fiction . winston churchill – the gathering storm ( the second world war , vol . 1 ) t . s . eliot – notes towards the definition of culture robert graves – the white goddess frank bunker gilbreth , jr . and ernestine gilbreth carey – cheaper by the dozen richard hofstadter – the american political tradition f . r . leavis – the great tradition betty macdonald – the plague and i dumas malone – jefferson and his time thomas merton – the seven storey mountain a . a . milne – the norman church anthony powell – john aubrey and his friends paul samuelson – economics john steinbeck ( photographs by robert capa ) – a russian journal . births . january 1 – lynn abbey ( marilyn lorraine abbey ) , american writer january 2 – joyce wadler , american writer and memoirist january 20 – nigel williams , english author , playwright and screenwriter february 3 – henning mankell , swedish crime novelist , children 's author and dramatist ( died 2015 ) february 5 – christopher guest , english-american writer , actor and director february 15 – art spiegelman , american cartoonist february 19 – clive sinclair , english short-story writer february 28 – mike figgis , english writer , director and composer february 29 hermione lee , english biographer patricia a . mckillip , american fantasy and science fiction novel author march 4 – james ellroy , american crime fiction author march 17 – william gibson , american-born speculative novelist march 28 – iman budhi santosa , indonesian poet april 4 – patricia a . mckillip , american science fiction , horror and fantasy author april 21 – clare boylan , irish novelist ( died 2006 ) april 28 – terry pratchett , english comic fantasy author ( died 2015 ) may 31 – svetlana alexievich , belarusian writer of literary reportage , nobel prize in literature recipient june 14 – laurence yep , american author june 16 – f . van dixhoorn , dutch poet june 21 – andrzej sapkowski , polish fantasy author july 22 – s . e . hinton , american young-adult author august 2 – snoo wilson , english playwright and screenwriter ( died 2013 ) august 8 – miranda seymour , english novelist and biographer august 28 – vonda n . mcintyre , american science fiction writer ( died 2019 ) august 29 – nick darke , cornish playwright ( died 2005 ) september 16 – julia donaldson , english author and children 's writer september 20 – george r . r . martin ( george raymond martin ) , american fantasy author october 6 – zakes mda ( zanemvula kizito gatyeni mda ) , south african novelist , poet and playwright october 9 – ciaran carson , northern irish poet and novelist october 17 – robert jordan ( james oliver rigney , jr ) , american fantasy author ( died 2007 ) october 18 – ntozake shange ( paulette l . williams ) , african american playwright , poet and novelist ( died 2018 ) unknown dates wolf erlbruch , german children 's book illustrator and writer ibrahim kuni , libyan novelist suzanne robert , french canadian novelist ( died 2007 ) edward rutherfurd ( francis edward wintle ) , english novelist . deaths . march 6 – ross lockridge , jr . , american author ( suicide , born 1914 ) march 10 – zelda fitzgerald , american novelist ( killed in fire , born 1900 ) april 22 – prosper montagné , french chef and food author ( born 1865 ) may 5 – sextil pușcariu , romanian linguist , philologist and journalist ( heart failure , born 1877 ) may 20 – victor ido , dutch east indian journalist , novelist and dramatist ( born 1869 ) may 22 – claude mckay , jamaican american writer ( born 1889 ) june 16 – holbrook jackson , english journalist , writer , publisher and bibliophile ( born 1874 ) june 21 – alice brown , american novelist , poet and dramatist ( born 1857 ) july 3 – phelps putnam , american poet ( born 1894 ) july 4 – monteiro lobato , brazilian fiction writer , particularly for children ( born 1882 ) july 5 – georges bernanos , french novelist ( born 1888 ) july 21 – j.-h . rosny jeune ( séraphin justin françois boex ) , french science fiction writer ( born 1859 ) july 27 – susan glaspell , american dramatist and novelist ( born 1876 ) august 3 – venetia stanley , english correspondent ( cancer , born 1887 ) august 19 – frederick philip grove , german-born canadian novelist and essayist ( born 1879 ) september 8 – thomas mofolo , sotho novelist ( born 1876 ) september 9 – lajos bíró , hungarian novelist , dramatist and screenwriter ( born 1880 ) september 20 – husain salaahuddin , maldivian writer ( born 1881 ) october 12 – alfred kerr , german theatre critic ( suicide , born 1867 ) december 13 – michael roberts , english poet and critic ( born 1902 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : richard armstrong , sea change james tait black memorial prize for fiction : graham greene , the heart of the matter james tait black memorial prize for biography : percy a . scholes , the great dr burney newbery medal for children 's literature : william pene du bois , the twenty-one balloons nobel prize for literature : t . s . eliot premio nadal : sebastián juan arbó , sobre las piedras grises pulitzer prize for drama : tennessee williams , a streetcar named desire pulitzer prize for fiction : james a . michener – tales of the south pacific pulitzer prize for poetry : w . h . auden : the age of anxiety . references .