Pierre Puvis de Chavannes

early life and education . puvis de chavannes was born pierre-cécile puvis in a suburb of lyon , france on december 14 , 1824 . he was the son of a mining engineer and descended from an old noble family of burgundy . he later added the ancestral '' de chavannes '' to his name . throughout his life , he spurned his lyon origins , preferring to identify himself with the 'strong ' blood of the burgundians , where his father originated . brown price , a . , 2010 , pierre puvis de chavannes , vol . 1 , the artist and his art , new haven and london : yale university press , p . 7 puvis de chavannes was educated at the amiens college and at the lycée henri iv in paris . he intended to follow his father 's profession until a serious illness compelled him to convalesce at mâcon with his brother and sister-in-law in 1844 and 1845 , which interrupted his studies . a journey to italy opened his mind to fresh ideas , and on his return to paris in 1846 , he announced his intention to become a painter . he studied first under eugène delacroix , but only very briefly , as delacroix closed his studio shortly afterwards due to ill health . he studied subsequently under henri scheffer and then thomas couture . his training was not classical as he found that he preferred to work alone . he took a large studio near the gare de lyon and attended anatomy classes at the académie des beaux-arts . brown price 2010 it was not until a number of years later , when the government of france acquired one of his works , that he gained wide recognition . in 1850 , puvis de chavannes made his salon debut with dead christ , jeune noir à l'épée ( black lad with a sword ) , the reading lesson , and portrait of a man . work . puvis de chavannes 's work is seen as symbolist in nature , even though he studied with some of the romanticism , and he is credited with influencing an entire generation of painters and sculptors , particularly the works of the modernists . one of his protégés was georges de feure . mural work . puvis de chavannes is best known for his mural painting , and came to be known as 'the painter for france . ' his first commission was for his brother 's chateau , le brouchy , a medieval-style structure near cuiseaux in saône-et-loire . the principal decorations take the four seasons as their theme . brown price , a . , 2010 , v1 , p . 26 his first public commissions came early in the 1860s , with work at the musée de picardie at amiens . the first four works were concordia ( 1861 ) , bellum ( 1861 ) , le travail ( work ; 1863 ) and le repos ( rest ; 1863 ) . the regions . over the course of his career , puvis received a substantial number of commissions for works to be carried out in public and private institutions throughout france . his early work at the musée de picardie had helped him to develop his classicizing style , and the decorative aesthetic of his mural works . among his public works are the later cycles completed at amiens ( ave picardia nutrix , 1865 ) , at marseille , at lyon and at poitiers . of particular importance is the cycle at the palais de beaux arts in lyon , which includes three significant works , filling the wall space in the main staircase . from left to right , the works are antique vision ( 1884 ) , the wood dear to the arts and the muses ( 1884 ) , and christian inspiration ( 1884 ) . paris . puvis ' career was tied up with a complicated debate that had been ongoing since the beginning of the third republic ( 1870 ) , and at the end of the violence of the paris commune . the question at stake was the identity of france and the meaning of 'frenchness ' . royalists felt that the revolution of 1789 had been an immense disaster and that france had been thrown off course , while the republicans felt that the revolution had allowed france to revert to its true course . consequently , works that were to be displayed in public spaces , such as murals , had the important task of fulfilling the ideology of the commissioning party . many scholars of puvis 's works have noted that his success as a 'painter for france ' was largely due to his ability to create works which were agreeable to the many ideologies in existence at this time . his first parisian commission was for a cycle at the church of saint genevieve , which is now the secular pantheon , begun in 1874 . his two subjects were l'education de sainte geneviève and la vie pastoral de sainte geneviève . this commission was followed by works at the sorbonne , namely the enormous hemicycle , the sacred grove or l'ancienne sorbonne amongst the muses in the grand amphitheater of the sorbonne . his final commission in this trinity of republican commissions was the crowning glory of puvis 's career , the works summer and winter , at the hôtel de ville ( city hall ) in paris . many of these works are characterized by their nod to classical art , visible in the careful balanced compositions , and the subject matter is frequently a direct reference to visions of hellenistic greece , particularly in the case of antique vision . works on canvas . puvis de chavannes was president and co-founder in 1890 of the société nationale des beaux-arts ( national society of fine arts ) founded in paris . it became the dominant salon of art at the time and held exhibitions of contemporary art that was selected only by a jury composed of the officers of the société . those who translated best the spirit of the work of pierre-cécile puvis de chavannes ' in their own creations were , in germany , the painter ludwig von hofmann and in france , auguste rodin . the study poemas e pedras , by rita rios , são paulo , ( 2011 ) . his easel paintings also may be found in many american and european galleries . some of these paintings are , death and the maiden the dream the poor fisherman , 1881 , oil on canvas vigilance the meditation mary magdalene at saint baume saint genoveva young girls at the seaside , 1879 , oil on canvas mad woman at the edge of the sea hope hope ( nude ) kneeling nude woman , viewed from back the sacred grove as far as the appreciation of his life 's work is concerned , puvis de chavannes was never properly understood by his contemporaries . at the beginning of his career , art criticism was divided into two camps . adored by the idealists , he was despised by the partisans of the realists . only with the advent of symbolism did these two camps unite , but without achieving a convincing appreciation of the painter . today 's research has inherited this contradiction of art criticism and therefore still does not offer a convincing presentation of puvis de chavanne 's art . manuel mayer : die erträumte kunst pierre puvis de chavannes ’ . eine studie zum verhältnis von forschung und kunstkritik im angesicht einer malerei zwischen staffelei- und wandbild , art dok , publikationsplattform kunst- und bildwissenschaften universität heidelberg , heidelberg 2020 . . personal life . in montmartre , he had an affair with one of his models , suzanne valadon , who would become one of the leading artists of the day as well as the mother , teacher , and mentor of maurice utrillo . from 1856 , he was in a relationship with the romanian princess , marie cantacuzène . the couple were together for 40 years , and were married before their deaths in 1898 . . puvis de chavannes prize . beginning in 1926 , the prix puvis de chavannes ( puvis de chavannes prize ) was awarded by the national society of fine arts ( société nationale des beaux-arts ) . the prix puvis de chavannes is the retrospective exhibition in paris of the main works of the artist awarded the prize that year . during the twentieth century , this exhibition was located at the grand palais or the musée d'art moderne . recipients of the prize include : 1941 : wilhem van hasselt 1944 : jean gabriel domergue 1948 : joseph pinchon 1952 : tristan klingsor 1955 : georges delplanque 1957 : albert decaris 1958 : jean picard le doux 1963 : maurice boitel , home page of maurice boitel 1966 : pierre gaillardot 1968 : pierre-henry 1969 : louis vuillermoz 1970 : daniel du janerand 1971 : jean-pierre alaux 1975 : jean monneret 1987 : andré hambourg 1991 : gaston sébire 1993 : jean cluseau-lanauve 2006 : paul collomb société nationale des beaux-arts , biennale 1991 , grand palais , année du centenaire , catalogue pages 8 and 9 . gallery . file : pierre puvis de chavannes , giovane nero con la spada , 1850.jpg jeune noir à l'épée ( black lad with a sword ) ( 1850 ) musée d'orsay . file : pierre puvis de chavannes , 1863 , le travail , musée de picardie.jpg le travail ( 1863 ) musée de picardie . cliché h.maertens file : pierre-cécile puvis de chavannes 004.jpg the white rocks ( 1869–1872 ) file : pierre-cécile puvis de chavannes 007.jpg hope ( 1872 ) walters art museum file : pierre-cécile puvis de chavannes 003.jpg the dream ( 1883 ) walters art museum file : pierre puvis de chavannes - '' ludus pro patria '' - walters 3716.jpg ludus pro patria ( 1883 ) walters art museum file : pierre-cécile puvis de chavannes 001.jpg the shepherd 's song ( 1891 ) file : poorfisherman.jpg the poor fisherman file : pierre puvis de chavannes - study for patriotism - google art project.jpg study for patriotism ( circa 1893 ) . see also . symbolism ( arts ) boston public library list of european art awards les maîtres de l'affiche . references . sources . . further reading . manuel mayer : die erträumte kunst pierre puvis de chavannes ’ . eine studie zum verhältnis von forschung und kunstkritik im angesicht einer malerei zwischen staffelei- und wandbild . hrsg . : art dok . publikationsplattform kunst- und bildwissenschaften der universität heidelberg . heidelberg 2020 . arcadia by the shore : the mythic world of puvis de chavannes , exhibotion catalogue katalog , bunkamura museum of art ( tokyo ) , shimane art museum ( matsue ) , aimée brown-price , with contribution by bertrand puvis de chavannes , tokyo/matsue 2014 . aimée brown-price pierre puvis de chavannes , 2 vols , new haven/london 2010 , yale university press . kerstin thomas : welt und stimmung bei puvis de chavannes , seurat und gauguin , passagen/passages deutsches forum für kunstgeschichte , berlin/munich 2010 . puvis de chavannes . une voie singulière au siècle de l'impressionnisme , exhibition catalogue , musée de picardie amiens , matthieu pinette , amiens 2005 . jennifer l . shaw dream states . puvis de chavannes , modernism , and the fantasy of france , new haven/london 2002 . from puvis de chavannes to matisse and picasso : toward modern art , exhibition catalogue , palazzo grassi , serge lemoine , venice 2002 . puvis de chavannes au musée des beaux-arts de lyon , exhibition catalogue , musée des beaux-arts lyon , dominique brachlianoff , lyon 1998 . brian petrie puvis de chavannes , aldershot/vermont 1997 . pierre puvis de chavannes , exhibition catalogue , van gogh museum , amsterdam , aimée brown price , zwolle 1994 . robinson , w.h . , 1991 , ‘ puvis de chavannes ’ s ‘ summer ’ and the symbolist avant-garde ’ , the bulletin of the cleveland museum of art , vol . 78 , no . 1 ( jan . ) pp . & nbsp ; 2–27 dictionnaire de la peinture française , librairie larousse , 1989/1991 , paris , stefan germer historizität und autonomie . studien zu wandbildern im frankreich des 19 . jahrhunderts . ingres , chassériau , chenavard und puvis de chavannes , studien zur kunstgeschichte , vol 47 , hildesheim/zurich/new york 1988 . puvis de chavannes . 1824–1898 , exhibition catalogue , grand palais , paris , galerie nationale du canada , ottawa , secrétariat d'état à la culture und éditions des musées nationaux , louise d'argencourt ( ottawa ) and jacques foucart ( paris ) , paris 1976 / the national gallery of canada , ottawa 1977 . puvis de chavannes and the modern tradition , exhibition catalogue , art gallery of ontario , richard j . wattenmaker , toronto/ontario 1975 . joseph ishikawa moderne malgré lui : the phenomenon of puvis de chavannes , art journal 27:4 , summer 1968 . robert goldwater puvis de chavannes . some reasons for a reputation , art bulletin 28 , march 1946 . rené jullian l'oeuvre de jeunesse de puvis de chavannes , gazette des beaux-arts , november 1938 . levin , m.r . , 1986 , republican art and ideology in late nineteenth century france , ann arbor : umi research press russell t . clement four french symbolists . a sourcebook on pierre puvis de chavannes , gustave moreau , odilon redon , and maurice denis , westport/london 1996 . external links . commercial art gallery guide pierre puvis de chavannes at artchive.com jennifer a . thompson , '' peace and war by pierre puvis de chavannes ( cat . 1062,1063 ) , '' in the john g . johnson collection : a history and selected works , a philadelphia museum of art free digital publication