Dionysius of Halicarnassus

life . he was a halicarnassus . at some time he moved to rome after the termination of the civil wars , and spent twenty-two years studying latin and literature and preparing materials for his history . j e sandys , a dictionary of classical antiquities ( london 1894 p . 190 during this period , he gave lessons in rhetoric , and enjoyed the society of many distinguished men . the date of his death is unknown . in the 19th century , it was commonly supposed that he was the ancestor of aelius dionysius . . works . his major work , entitled , embraced the history of rome from the mythical period to the beginning of the first punic war . it was divided into twenty books , of which the first nine remain entire , the tenth and eleventh are nearly complete , and the remaining books exist in fragments , j e sandys , a dictionary of classical antiquities ( london 1894 p . 190 in the excerpts of the roman emperor constantine vii and an epitome discovered by angelo mai in a milan manuscript . the first three books of appian , plutarch 's life of camillus and life of coriolanus also embody much of dionysius . outline of “ roman antiquities “ with chronological where possible . book i . mythological history of italy and its people ending with the death of remus bce ( 1300 ? ) -753 . book ii . the start of roman monarchy and its first two kings , romulus and numa pompilius bce 753-673 . romulus customs and laws for rome sabine war- the combat is described with numerous officers , thousands of infantry , and cavalry combatants . the real rome of 8th century bce was a tiny village that possibly participated in small scale raids with neighbors . book iii . king tullus hostilius through king lucius tarquinius priscus bce 673-575 . book iv . last of the roman kings and end to the monarchy with overthrow of tarquinius superbus bce 575-509 . book v . start of roman republic and consular years bce 509-497 . book vi . bce 496-493 . book vii . bce 492-490 . book viii . bce 489- 482 . book ix . bce 481-462 . book x . bce 461- 449 the decemverite . note- last ten books only remain in fragments . except book 11 has substantial extant material remaining . book 11 . bce 449-443 . book 12 . bce 442- 396 . book 13 . bce 394- 390 . book 14 . gauls and the bce 390 sack of rome . book 15 . first and second samnite war . book 16 . third samnite war . book 17/18 . third samnite war . book 19 . the city of tarentum and the beginning of roman pyrrhic war . book 20 . roman-pyrrhic war , with pyrrhus ’ s second invasion of italy . his chief object was to reconcile the greeks to the rule of rome , by dilating upon the good qualities of their conquerors and also by arguing , using more ancient sources , that the romans were genuine descendants of the older greeks . gabba , e . ( 1991 ) , dionysius and the history of archaic rome . berkeley . according to him , history is philosophy teaching by examples , and this idea he has carried out from the point of view of a greek rhetorician . but he carefully consulted the best authorities , and his work and that of livy are the only connected and detailed extant accounts of early roman history . s usher , the historians of greece and rome ( london 1969 ) p . 240-1 dionysius was also the author of several rhetorical treatises , in which he shows that he has thoroughly studied the best attic models : the art of rhetoric , which is rather a collection of essays on the theory of rhetoric , incomplete , and certainly not all his work ; the arrangement of words , , treating of the combination of words according to the different styles of oratory ; on imitation , on the best models in the different kinds of literature and the way in which they are to be imitated—a fragmentary work ; commentaries on the attic orators , which , however , only deal with lysias , isaeus , isocrates and ( by way of supplement ) dinarchus ; on the admirable style of demosthenes ; and on the character of thucydides . the last two treatises are supplemented by letters to pompey and ammaeus ( two , one of which is about thucydides ) . . dionysian imitatio . dionysian imitatio is the literary method of imitation as formulated by dionysius , who conceived it as the rhetorical practice of emulating , adapting , reworking , and enriching a source text by an earlier author . ruthven ( 1979 ) pp . 103–4 jansen ( 2008 ) it shows marked similarities with quintilian ’ s view of imitation , and both may derive from a common source . s f bonner , the literary treatises of dionysius of halicarnassus ( 2013 ) p . 39 dionysius ' concept marked a significant departure from the concept of mimesis formulated by aristotle in the 4th century bc , which was only concerned with '' imitation of nature '' and not '' imitation of other authors . '' latin orators and rhetoricians adopted dionysius ' method of imitatio and discarded aristotle 's mimesis . . history in the roman antiquities , and the foundation myth . dionysius carried out extensive research for his roman history , selecting among authorities , and preserving ( for example ) details of the servian census . s usher , the historians of greece and rome ( london 1969 ) p . 239 his first two books present a unified account of the supposed greek origin for rome , merging a variety of sources into a firm narrative : his success , however , was at the expense of concealing the primitive roman actuality ( as revealed by archaeology ) . s usher , the historians of greece and rome ( london 1969 ) p . 241 along with livy , j burrow , a history of histories ( penguin 2009 ) p . 101 and 116 dionysius is thus one of the primary sources for the accounts of the roman foundation myth , and that of romulus and remus , and was relied on in the later publications of plutarch , for example . he writes extensively on the myth , sometimes attributing direct quotations to its figures . the myth spans the first 2 volumes of his roman antiquities , beginning with book i chapter 73 and concluding in book ii chapter 56 . romulus and remus . . origins and survival in the wild . dionysius claims that the twins , romulus and remus , were born to a vestal named rea silvia ( sometimes called rea ) , descended from aeneas of troy and the daughter of latinus of the latins ( italic tribe ) , thus linking rome to trojans and latins both . dionysius lays out the different accounts of her pregnancy and the twins ' conception , but declines to choose one over the others . citing fabius , cincius , porcius cato , and piso , dionysius recounts the most common tale , whereby the twins are to be tossed into the tiber ; are left at the site of the ficus ruminalis ; and rescued by a she-wolf who nurses them in front of her lair ( the lupercal ) . dionysius relates an alternate , '' non-fantastical '' version of romulus and remus ' birth , survival and youth . in this version , numitor managed to switch the twins at birth with two other infants . the twins were delivered by their grandfather to faustulus to be fostered by him and his wife , laurentia , a former prostitute . according to plutarch , lupa ( latin for '' wolf '' ) was a common term for members of her profession and this gave rise to the she-wolf legend . education , and foundation of rome . the twins receive a proper education in the city of gabii , before eventually winning control of the area around where rome would be founded . dispute over the particular hill upon which rome should be built , the palatine hill or the aventine hill for its strategic advantages saw the brothers fall out and remus killed . before construction on the city began romulus made sacrifices and received good omens , and he then ordered the populace to ritually atone for their guilt . the city 's fortifications were first and then housing for the populace . he assembled the people and gave them the choice as to what type of government they wanted - monarchy , democracy , or oligarchy - for its constitution . t p wiseman , remembering the roman republic ( 2011 ) p . xviii-ix after his address , which extolled bravery in war abroad and moderation at home , and in which romulus denied any need to remain in power , the people decided to remain a kingdom and asked him to remain its king . before accepting he looked for a sign of the approval of the gods . he prayed and witnessed an auspicious lightning bolt , after which he declared that no king shall take the throne without receiving approval from the gods . institutions . dionysus then provided a detailed account of the ‘ romulus ’ constitution , most probably based on the work of terentius varro . t p wiseman , remembering the roman republic ( 2011 ) p . xviii romulus supposedly divides rome into 3 tribes , each with a tribune in charge . each tribe was divided into 10 curia , and each of those into smaller units . he divided the kingdoms land holdings between them , and dionysus alone among our authorities insists that this was done in equal lots . t p wiseman , remembering the roman republic ( 2011 ) p . xviii the patrician class was separated from the plebeian class ; while each curiae was responsible for providing soldiers in the event of war . a system of patronage ( clientela ) , a senate ( attributed by dionysius to greek influence ) and a personal bodyguard of 300 of the strongest and fittest among the nobles were also established : the latter , the celeres , were so-named either for their quickness , or , according to valerius antias , for their commander . t p wiseman , remembering the roman republic ( 2011 ) p . ii a separation of power,14.1-3 and measures to increase manpower,15-17 were also instituted , as were rome 's religious customs and practices18-23 , and a variety of legal measures praised by dionysus . again , dionysius thoroughly describes the laws of other nations before contrasting the approach of romulus and lauding his work . the roman law governing marriage is , according to his antiquities , an elegant yet simple improvement over that of other nations , most of which he harshly derides . by declaring that wives would share equally in the possessions and conduct of their husband , romulus promoted virtue in the former and deterred mistreatment by the latter . wives could inherit upon their husband 's death . a wife 's adultery was a serious crime , however , drunkenness could be a mitigating factor in determining the appropriate punishment . because of his laws , dionysius claims that not a single roman couple divorced over the following five centuries . romulus ' laws governing parental rights , in particular , those that allow fathers to maintain power over their adult children were also considered an improvement over those of others ; while dionysius further approved of how , under the laws of romulus , native-born free roman 's were limited to two forms of employment : farming and the army . all other occupations were filled by slaves or non-roman labor . romulus used the trappings of his office to encourage compliance with the law . his court was imposing and filled with loyal soldiers and he was always accompanied by the lictor appointed to be his attendants . sabine women , and death of romulus . following his institutional account , dionysus described the famous abducting of the sabine women , stressing particularly how they were to be married according to their own sabine customs , g miles , livy ( 2018 ) p . 197 and suggesting thereby that the abduction was a pretext for alliance with the sabines . r hexter ed . , innovations of antiquity ( 2013 ) p . 164 in his narrative , however , the cities of caecina , crustumerium , and antemnae petition for tatius , king of the sabines to lead them to war ; and it is only after the famous intervention of the sabine women that the nations agreed to become a single kingdom under the joint rule of romulus and tatius , both declared quirites . after the death of tatius , however , romulus became more dictatorial , until he met his end , either through actions divine or earthly . see also . battle of the lacus curtius diodorus siculus hellanicus of lesbos . editions . collected works edited by friedrich sylburg ( 1536–1596 ) ( parallel greek and latin ) ( frankfurt 1586 ) ( available at google books ) complete edition by johann jakob reiske ( 1774–1777 ) archaeologia by a . kiessling ( 1860-1870 ) ( vol . 1 , vol . 2 , vol . 3 , vol . 4 ) and v . prou ( 1886 ) and c . jacoby ( 1885–1925 ) ( vol . 1 , vol . 2 , vol . 3 , vol . 4 , supplementum ) opuscula by hermann usener and ludwig radermacher ( 1899-1929 ) in the teubner series ( vol . 1 contains commentaries on the attic orators , letter to ammaeus , on the admirable style of demosthenes , on the character of thucydides , letter to ammaeus about thucydides , vol . 2 contains the arrangement of words , on imitation , letter to gn . pompeius , the art of rhetoric , fragments ) roman antiquities by v . fromentin and j . h . sautel ( 1998– ) , and opuscula rhetorica by aujac ( 1978– ) , in the collection budé english translation by edward spelman ( 1758 ) ( available at google books ) trans . earnest cary , harvard university press , loeb classical library : roman antiquities , i , 1937 . roman antiquities , ii , 1939 . roman antiquities , iii , 1940 . roman antiquities , iv , 1943 . roman antiquities , v , 1945 . roman antiquities , vi , 1947 . roman antiquities , vii , 1950 . trans . stephen usher , critical essays , i , harvard university press , 1974 , trans . stephen usher , critical essays , ii , harvard university press , 1985 , . references . further reading . bonner , s . f . 1939 . the literary treatises of dionysius of halicarnassus : a study in the development of critical method . cambridge , uk : cambridge univ . press . damon , c . 1991 . aesthetic response and technical analysis in the rhetorical writings of dionysius of halicarnassus . museum helveticum 48 : 33–58 . dionysius of halicarnassus . 1975 . on thucydides . translated , with commentary , by w . kendrick pritchett . berkeley and london : univ . of california press . gabba , emilio . 1991 . dionysius and the history of archaic rome . berkeley : univ . of california press . gallia , andrew b . 2007 . reassessing the 'cumaean chronicle ' : greek chronology and roman history in dionysius of halicarnassus . journal of roman studies 97 : 50–67 . jonge , casper constantijn de . 2008 . between grammar and rhetoric : dionysius of halicarnassus on language , linguistics and literature . leiden : brill . jonge , casper c . de , and richard l . hunter ( ed . ) . 2018 . dionysius of halicarnassus and augustan rome . cambridge : cambridge university press . sacks , kenneth . 1986 . rhetoric and speeches in hellenistic historiography . athenaeum 74 : 383–95 . usher , s . 1974–1985 . dionysius of halicarnassus : the critical essays . 2 vols . cambridge , ma , and london : harvard univ . press . wiater , n . 2011 . the ideology of classicism : language , history and identity in dionysius of halicarnassus . berlin and new york : de gruyter . wooten , c . w . 1994 . the peripatetic tradition in the literary essays of dionysius of halicarnassus . in : peripatetic rhetoric after aristotle . edited by w . w . fortenbaugh and d . c . mirhady , 121–30 . rutgers university studies in classical humanities 6 . new brunswick , nj : transaction . external links . english translation of the antiquities ( at lacuscurtius ) 1586 edition with the original greek from the internet archive greek text and french translation