City manager

responsibilities . in a technical sense , the term '' city manager , '' in contrast to '' chief administrative officer '' ( cao ) , implies more discretion and independent authority that is set forth in a charter or some other body of codified law , as opposed to duties being assigned on a varying basis by a single superior , such as a mayor . svara , james h . and kimberly l . nelson . ( 2008 , august ) . taking stock of the council-manager form at 100 . public management magazine , pp 6-14 , at : as the top appointed official in the city , the city manager is typically responsible for most if not all of the day-to-day administrative operations of the municipality , in addition to other expectations . sample ordinance , icma . some of the basic roles , responsibilities , and powers of a city manager include : supervision of day-to-day operations of all city departments and staff through department heads ; oversight of all recruitment , dismissal , disciplining and suspensions ; preparation , monitoring , and execution of the city budget , which includes submitting each year to the council a proposed budget package with options and recommendations for its consideration and possible approval ; main technical advisor to the council on overall governmental operations ; public relations , such as meeting with citizens , citizen groups , businesses , and other stakeholders ( the presence of a mayor may alter this function somewhat ) ; operating the city with a professional understanding of how all city functions operate together to their best effect ; attends all council meetings , but does not have any voting rights additional duties that may be assigned by the council the responsibilities may vary depending upon charter provisions and other local or state laws , rules , and regulations . in addition , many states , such as the states of new hampshire and missouri , have codified in law the minimum functions a local '' manager '' must perform . mrs nh rsa the city manager position focuses on efficiency and providing a certain level of service for the lowest possible cost . macdonald , lynn . '' the impact of government structure on local public expenditures . '' public choice 136.3/4 ( 2008 ) : 457-473 . political science complete . web . 25 sept . 2015 . the competence of a city manager can be assessed using composite indicators . manager members of the international city/county management association ( icma ) are bound by a rather rigid and strongly enforced code of ethics that was originally established in 1924 . since that time the code had been up-dated/revised on seven occasions , the latest taking place in 1998 . the updates have taken into account the evolving duties , responsibilities , and expectations of the profession ; however the core dictate of the body of the code -- '' to integrity ; public service ; seek no favor ; exemplary conduct in both personal and professional matters ; respect the role and contributions of elected officials ; exercise the independence to do what is right ; political neutrality ; serve the public equitably and governing body members equally ; keep the community informed about local government matters ; and support and lead our employ-ees '' —have not changed since the first edition . . history . most sources trace the first city manager to staunton , virginia in 1908 . some of the other cities that were among the first to employ a manager were sumter , south carolina ( 1912 ) and dayton , ohio ( 1914 ) ; dayton was featured in the national media , and became a national standard . the first '' city manager 's association '' meeting of eight city managers was in december 1914 . the city manager , operating under the council-manager government form , was created in part to remove city government from the power of the political parties , and place management of the city into the hands of an outside expert who was usually a business manager or engineer , with the expectation that the city manager would remain neutral to city politics . by 1930 , two hundred american cities used a city manager form of government . in 1913 , the city of dayton , ohio suffered a great flood , and responded with the innovation of a paid , non-political city manager , hired by the commissioners to run the bureaucracy ; civil engineers were especially preferred . other small or middle-sized american cities , especially in the west , adopted the idea . in europe , smaller cities in the netherlands were specially attracted by the plan . stefan couperus , '' the managerial revolution in local government : municipal management and the city manager in the usa and the netherlands 1900–1940 . '' management & organizational history ( 2014 ) 9 4 pp : 336-352 . by 1940 , there were small american cities with city managers that would grow enormously by the end of the century : austin , texas ; charlotte , north carolina ; dallas , texas ; dayton , ohio ; rochester , new york ; and san diego , california . harold a . stone et al . , city manager government in nine cities ( 1940 ) ; frederick c . mosher et al . , city manager government in seven cities ( 1940 ) . profile . in the early years of the profession , most managers came from the ranks of the engineering professions . stillman , richard j . ( 1974 ) . the rise of the city manager : a public professional in local government . albuquerque : university of new mexico press . today , the typical and preferred background and education for the beginning municipal manager is a master 's degree in public administration ( mpa ) , and at least several years ' experience as a department head in local government , or as an assistant city manager . as of 2005 , more than 60 % of those in the profession had a mpa , mba , or other related higher-level degree . icma statistics the average tenure of a manager is now 7–8 years , and has risen gradually over the years . tenures tend to be less in smaller communities and higher in larger ones , and they tend to vary as well , depending on the region of the country . ammons , david m and matthew j . bosse . ( 2005 ) . '' tenure of city managers : examining the dual meanings of 'average tenure ' . '' state & local government review , vol . 37 , no . 1 , pp . 61-71 . at : educational level of local government managers ( myb municipal yearbook ; sop state of the profession survey ) : . see also . local government local government in the united states council-manager government town clerk . notes . further reading . kemp , roger l . managing america 's cities : a handbook for local government productivity , mcfarland and co . , jefferson , nc , usa , and london , eng . , uk 1998 . _______ , model government charters : a city , county , regional , state , and federal handbook , mcfarland and co . , jefferson , nc , usa , and london , eng . , uk , 2003 _______ , forms of local government : a handbook on city , county and regional options , mcfarland and co . , jefferson , nc , usa , and london , eng . , uk , 2007 . stillman , richard joseph . the rise of the city manager : a public professional in local government . ( university of new mexico press , 1974 ) weinstein , james . '' organized business and the city commission and manager movements . '' journal of southern history ( 1962 ) : 166-182 . in jstor white , leonard d . the city manager ( 1927 ) . external links . international city/county management association , icma is the professional and educational organization for chief appointed managers , administrators , and assistants in cities , towns , counties , and regional entities throughout the world . staunton , virginia : birthplace of city manager form of government , a history on the city manager system of government .