Baking powder

formulation and mechanism . baking powder is made up of a base , an acid , and a buffering material to prevent the acid and base from reacting before their intended use . most commercially available baking powders are made up of sodium bicarbonate ( nahco 3 , also known as baking soda or bicarbonate of soda ) and one or more acid salts . . acid-base reactions . when combined with water , the sodium bicarbonate and acid salts react to produce gaseous carbon dioxide . whether commercially or domestically prepared , the principles behind baking powder formulations remain the same . the acid-base reaction can be generically represented as shown : : nahco 3 + h + → na + + co 2 + h 2 o the real reactions are more complicated because the acids are complicated . for example , starting with baking soda and monocalcium phosphate , the reaction produces carbon dioxide by the following stoichiometry : :14 nahco 3 + 5 ca ( h 2 po 4 ) 2 → 14 co 2 + ca 5 ( po 4 ) 3 oh + 7 na 2 hpo 4 + 13 h 2 o image : calcium dihydrogen phosphate.png thumb 220px monocalcium phosphate ( '' mcp '' ) is a common acid component in domestic baking powders . a typical formulation ( by weight ) could call for 30 % sodium bicarbonate , 5–12 % monocalcium phosphate , and 21–26 % sodium aluminium sulfate . alternately , a commercial baking powder might use sodium acid pyrophosphate as one of the two acidic components instead of sodium aluminium sulfate . another typical acid in such formulations is cream of tartar ( kcarbonhydrogenoxygen ) , a derivative of tartaric acid . in some jurisdictions , it is required that baking soda must produce at least 10 per cent of its weight of carbon dioxide . . single- and double-acting baking powders . the use of two acidic components is the basis of the term '' double acting . '' the acid in a baking powder can be either fast-acting or slow-acting . a fast-acting acid reacts in a wet mixture with baking soda at room temperature , and a slow-acting acid does not react until heated . when the chemical reactions in baking powders involve both fast- and slow-acting acids , they are known as '' double-acting '' ; those that contain only one acid are '' single-acting '' . by providing a second rise in the oven , double-acting baking powders increase the reliability of baked goods by rendering the time elapsed between mixing and baking less critical . this is the type of baking powder most widely available to consumers today . double-acting baking powders work in two phases ; once when cold , and once when hot . for example , rumford baking powder is a double-acting product that contains only monocalcium phosphate as a leavening acid . with this acid , about two-thirds of the available gas is released within about two minutes of mixing at room temperature . it then becomes dormant because an intermediate species , dicalcium phosphate , is generated during the initial mixing . further release of gas requires the batter to be heated above 140 & nbsp ; °f ( 60 & nbsp ; °c ) . common low-temperature acid salts include cream of tartar and monocalcium phosphate ( also called calcium acid phosphate ) . high-temperature acid salts include sodium aluminium sulfate , sodium aluminium phosphate , and sodium acid pyrophosphate . . starch component . baking powders also include components to improve their stability and consistency . cornstarch , flour , or potato starch are often used as buffers . john brodie , john godber '' bakery processes , chemical leavening agents '' in kirk-othmer encyclopedia of chemical technology 2001 , john wiley & sons . an inert starch serves several functions in baking powder . primarily it is used to absorb moisture , and thus prolong shelf life of the compound by keeping the powder 's alkaline and acidic components dry so as not to react with each other prematurely . a dry powder also flows and mixes more easily . finally , the added bulk allows for more accurate measurements . . history . before baking powder . when amelia simmons published american cookery ( 1792 ) , the first american cookbook , the recipes she included used three possible types of leavening : baker 's yeast , emptins ( from the leavings of brewer 's yeast ) , and pearlash . at that time , the mechanisms underlying the action of yeasts and other leavenings were not understood , and reliable commercial products were not available . bakers obtained yeasts from brewers or distillers or made their own by exposing mixtures of flour and water to the open air . if lucky , they could capture useful wild yeast and keep some alive , regularly feeding it for ongoing use and trying to avoid contamination . women who made their own ale could use the brewing dregs or '' emptins '' in their baking . the effectiveness of such leavenings varied widely . resulting baked goods often had a sour or bitter taste . breads were made of grain , water , yeast , and sometimes salt . cooks also made yeast , sponge and pound cakes . yeast cakes were similar to breads but included fancier ingredients , like sugar , spices , fruits or nuts . sponge cakes used beaten egg whites for leavening . pound cakes combined butter , sugar , and flour and eggs , and were particularly dense . making cakes was even more laborious than making bread : to prepare a cake , a manservant might have to beat the ingredients together as long as an hour . . pearlash . the third type of leavening , pearlash , was the precursor to modern baking powder . pearlash was a purified form of potash . it was first used as a leavening agent by native americans and was the subject of the first patent in the united states , issued in april 1790 . its preparation was time-consuming , but could be accomplished by a housewife with a cast-iron kettle : it involved soaking fireplace ashes in water to make lye , and then boiling the lye to remove water and obtain '' salts '' . the active ingredient in pearlash was potassium carbonate ( potassiumcarbonate ) . combining it with an acidic ingredient like sour milk or lemon juice resulted in a chemical reaction that produced carbon dioxide . once prepared , the white powder was much more stable than yeast . small amounts could be used on a daily basis , rather than baking a week or two weeks ' worth of bread at one time . american cookery was the first cookbook to call for its use , but by no means the last . with pearlash , cooks were able to create new recipes for new types of cakes , cookies , and biscuits that were quicker and easier to make than yeast-based recipes . . experimentation . between the publication of american cookery in 1796 , and the mid-1800s , cooks experimented with a variety of acids , alkalis , and mineral salts as possible chemical leaveners . many were already available in households as medicinal , cleaning or solvent products . smelling salts , hartshorn , and sal volatile were all ammonia inhalants , containing forms of ammonium carbonate . the term '' saleratus '' was applied confusingly to both potassium bicarbonate and to sodium bicarbonate ( nabicarbonate , what we now call baking soda ) . baking soda and cream of tartar were relatively new ingredients for cooks : soda may have been introduced to american cooking by female irish immigrants who found work as kitchen help . cream of tartar , also known as tartaric acid or potassium bitartrate , was a by-product of wine-making and had to be imported from france and italy . in 1846 , the first edition of catherine beecher 's cookbook domestic recipe book ( 1846 ) included a recipe for an early prototype of baking powder biscuits that used both baking soda and cream of tartar . several recipes in the compilation cookbook practical american cookery ( 1855 ) used baking soda and cream of tartar to form new types of dough . there were recipes for a '' crust '' similar to modern dumplings or cobbler , several for cakes , and one for '' soda doughnuts '' . when the third edition of miss beecher 's domestic receipt book appeared in 1858 , it included 8 types of leaveners , only two of which could be made at home . baking soda and cream of tartar were sold by chemists rather than in grocery stores . pharmacists purchased the materials in bulk and then dispensed them individually in small amounts in paper packaging . at least one contributor to practical american cookery provided instructions on how to handle baking soda and cream of tartar . even with instructions , early leaveners could be difficult to obtain , awkward to store , unstandardized , and unpredictable to use . the chemical leavening effects were accomplished by the activating of a base such as baking soda in the presence of liquid ( s ) and an acid such as sour milk , vinegar , lemon juice , or cream of tartar . because these acidulants react with baking soda quickly , retention of gas bubbles was dependent on batter viscosity . it was critical for the batter to be baked quickly , before the gas escaped . the next step , the development of baking powder , created a system where the gas-producing reactions could be delayed until needed . . the rise of baking powder . the creation of shelf-stable chemical combinations of sodium bicarbonate and cream of tartar is seen as marking the true introduction of baking powder . although cooks had used both sodium bicarbonate and cream of tartar in recipes , they had to purchase the ingredients individually and store them separately to prevent them from spoiling or reacting prematurely . as chemists developed more uniform constituents , they also began to experiment with ways of combining them . in the mid-late 1800s , chemists introduced the first modern baking powders . . alfred bird . the first to create a form of baking powder was english chemist and food manufacturer alfred bird in 1843 . bird was motivated to develop a yeast-free leavener because his wife elizabeth was allergic to eggs and yeast . his formulation included bicarbonate of soda and tartaric acid , mixed with starch to absorb moisture and prevent the other ingredients from reacting . a single-action form of baking powder , alfred bird 's baking powder reacted as soon as it became damp . bird focused on selling his baking powder to the british army during the crimean war , and to explorers like francis mcclintock , rather than the domestic market . nonetheless , bird 's creation of baking powder enabled cooks to take recipes for cakes such as the patriotically-named victoria sponge and make them rise higher . he did not patent his discovery , and others such as henry jones of bristol soon produced and patented similar products . in 1845 , jones patented '' a new preparation of flour '' ( self-raising flour ) that included sodium bicarbonate and tartaric acid to obtain a leavening effect . . eben norton horsford . in america , eben norton horsford , a student of justus von liebig , set out to create a flour fortifier and leavening agent . in 1856 , he was awarded a patent for '' pulverulent phosphoric acid , '' a process for extracting monocalcium pyrophosphate extracted from bones . combined with baking soda , monocalcium phosphate provided a double-acting form of leavening . its initial reaction , when exposed to water , released carbon dioxide and produced dicalcium phosphate , which then reacted under heat to release second-stage carbon dioxide . in 1859 , horsford and george wilson formed the rumford chemical works , named in honor of count rumford . in 1861 , horsford published the theory and art of breadmaking : a new process without the use of ferment , describing his innovations . in 1864 , he obtained a patent for a self-rising flour or '' bread preparation '' in which calcium acid phosphate and sodium bicarbonate acted as a leavener . horsford 's research was interrupted by the american civil war , but in 1869 horsford finally created an already-mixed leavening agent by using cornstarch as a buffer . rumford chemical works then began the manufacture of what can be considered a true baking powder . throughout his career , horsford continued to experiment extensively with possible techniques and preparations for baking powder . horsford 's leavening products were marketed originally as '' horsford 's yeast powder '' and later as '' rumford baking powder '' . they were packaged in glass bottles and later in metal cans . in 2006 the rumford chemical works in east providence , rhode island were designated a national historic chemical landmark in recognition of baking powder 's impact in making baking easier , quicker , and more reliable . in the 1860s , horsford shared his formula for baking powder with his former teacher , justus von liebig , who in turn shared it with ludwig clamor marquart and carl zimmer in germany . baking powders based on horsford 's formula were sold in england as '' horsford-liebig baking powder '' . they were also sold by several companies in germany , beginning with marquart and with zimmer . however , baking powder was not successful in germany at that time . much of german baking occurred in guild-based bakeries , rather than in private homes , and the guilds were not interested in replacing centuries-old craft skills with a new technology . nonetheless , liebig clearly saw the importance of horsford 's work , stating : the formation of a brand 's current baking powder may be very different from the original formula they produced , shown above . they may now use combinations of acids , or different acids altogether . as of 2010 , the two main baking powder companies in the united states were clabber girl and calumet . calumet held about 1/3 of the american baking powder market , with clabber girl ( which produces the clabber girl , rumford , and davis brands of baking powder , among others ) dominating 2/3 . ( davis baking powder is commonly found in the northeastern united states . ) . how much to use . generally , one teaspoon ( 5 g or 1/6 oz ) of baking powder is used to raise a mixture of one cup ( 120 & nbsp ; g or 4oz ) of flour , one cup of liquid , and one egg . however , if the mixture is acidic , baking powder 's additional acids remain unconsumed in the chemical reaction and often lend an unpleasant taste to food . high acidity can be caused by ingredients such as buttermilk , lemon juice , yogurt , citrus , or honey . when excessive acid is present , some of the baking powder should be replaced with baking soda . for example , one cup of flour , one egg , and one cup of buttermilk requires only ½ teaspoon of baking powder—the remaining leavening is caused by buttermilk acids reacting with ¼ teaspoon of baking soda . however , with baking powders that contain sodium acid pyrophosphate , excess alkaline substances can sometimes deprotonate the acid in two steps instead of the one that normally occurs , resulting in an offensive bitter taste to baked goods . calcium compounds and aluminium compounds do not have that problem , though , since calcium compounds that deprotonate twice are insoluble and aluminium compounds do not deprotonate in that fashion . moisture and heat can cause baking powder to lose its effectiveness over time , and commercial varieties have a somewhat arbitrary expiration date printed on the container . regardless of the expiration date , the effectiveness can be tested by placing a teaspoon of the powder into a small container of hot water . if it bubbles vigorously , it is still active and usable . . comparisons . different brands of baking powder can perform quite differently in the oven . early baking powder companies published their own cookbooks , to promote their new products , to educate cooks about exactly how and when to use them , and because cooks could not easily adapt recipes that were developed using different types of baking powder . baking powders using cream-of-tartar , phosphates , or alums could behave very differently , and required different amounts for a desired rising effect . file : the horsford cookbook 1877 2227mq61j 0 6w924d079.tiff the horsford cookbook , 1877 file : the horsford 1887 almanac and cook book.tiff the horsford 1887 almanac and cook book , 1887 file : the rumford cook book 1910 cover front.tiff the rumford cook book , 1910 in 2015 , cook 's country , an american tv show and magazine , evaluated six baking powders marketed to consumers . in one test , six u.s . brands were used to bake white cake , cream biscuits , and chocolate cookies . depending on the brand , the thickness of the cakes varied by up to 20 % ( from 0.89 to 1.24 in ) . it was also found that the lower-rising products made what were judged to be better chocolate cookies . also , 30 % of the testers ( n 21 ) noted a metallic flavor in cream biscuits made with brands containing aluminum . . substituting in recipes . substitute acids . as described above , baking powder is mainly just baking soda mixed with an acid . in principle , a number of kitchen acids may be combined with baking soda to simulate commercial baking powders . vinegar ( dilute acetic acid ) , especially white vinegar , is also a common acidifier in baking ; for example , many heirloom chocolate cake recipes call for a tablespoon or two of vinegar . where a recipe already uses buttermilk or yogurt , baking soda can be used without cream of tartar ( or with less ) . alternatively , lemon juice can be substituted for some of the liquid in the recipe , to provide the required acidity to activate the baking soda . the main variable with the use of these kitchen acids is the rate of leavening .