Sassafras

description . sassafras trees grow from tall with many slender sympodial branches , and smooth , orange-brown bark or yellow bark . all parts of the plants are fragrant . the species are unusual in having three distinct leaf patterns on the same plant : unlobed oval , bilobed ( mitten-shaped ) , and trilobed ( three-pronged ) ; the leaves are hardly ever five-lobed . noble plant image gallery sassafras ( includes photo of five-lobed leaf ) three-lobed leaves are more common in sassafras tzumu and sassafras randaiense than in their north american counterparts , although three-lobed leaves do sometimes occur on sassafras albidum . the young leaves and twigs are quite mucilage , and produce a citrus-like scent when crushed . the tiny , yellow flowers are generally six-petaled ; sassafras albidum and sassafras hesperia are dioecious , with male and female flowers on separate trees , while sassafras tzumu and sassafras randaiense have male and female flowers occurring on the same trees . the fruit is a drupe , blue-black when ripe . file : sassafras albidum , sassafras pistillate flowers , howard county , md , helen lowe metzman 2017-07-25-20.11 ( 38413696475 ) . jpg pistillate ( female ) flowers file : sassafras albidum , sassafras staminate flowers , howard county , md , helen lowe metzman 2017-07-25-20.19 ( 24427586417 ) . jpg staminate ( male ) flowers the largest known sassafras tree in the world is in owensboro , kentucky , and is over high and in circumference . . taxonomy . the genus sassafras was first described by the bohemian botanist jan presl in 1825 . the name '' sassafras '' , applied by the botanist nicolas monardes in 1569 , comes from the french . some sources claim it originates from the latin or : '' stone-breaking '' ; '' rock '' + '' to break '' ) . sassafras trees are not within the family saxifragaceae . early european colonists reported that the plant was called winauk by native americans in delaware and virginia and pauane by the timucua . native americans distinguished between white sassafras and red sassafras , terms which referred to different parts of the same plant but with distinct colors and uses . sassafras was known as fennel wood ( german due to its distinctive aroma . . species . the genus sassafras includes four species , three extant and one extinct . sassafras plants are endemic to north america and east asia , with two species in each region that are distinguished by some important characteristics , including the frequency of three-lobed leaves ( more frequent in east asian species ) and aspects of their sexual reproduction ( north american species are dioecious ) . taiwanese sassafras , taiwan , is treated by some botanists in a distinct genus as yushunia randaiensis ( hayata ) kamikoti , though this is not supported by recent genetic evidence , which shows sassafras to be monophyletic . kamikoti , s . ( 1933 ) . ann . rep . taihoku bot . gard . 3 : 78 . north america . sassafras albidum ( nuttall ) nees – sassafras , white sassafras , red sassafras , or silky sassafras , eastern north america , from southernmost ontario , canada through the eastern united states , south to central florida , and west to southern iowa and east texas , formerly , wisconsin †sassafras hesperia ( berry ) – western north american , from the eocene klondike mountain formation of washington and british columbia ; extinct , known only from fossils . east asia . sassafras tzumu ( hemsl . ) hemsl . – chinese sassafras or tzumu , central and southwestern china sassafras randaiense ( hayata ) rehd . – taiwan . habitat and distribution . many lauraceae are aromatic , evergreen trees or shrubs adapted to high rainfall and humidity , but the genus sassafras is deciduous . deciduous sassafras trees lose all of their leaves for part of the year , depending on variations in rainfall . in deciduous tropical lauraceae , leaf loss coincides with the dry season in tropical , subtropical and arid regions . in temperate climates , the dry season is due to the inability of the plant to absorb water available to it only in the form of ice . sassafras is commonly found in open woods , along fences , or in fields . it grows well in moist , well-drained , or sandy loam soils and tolerates a variety of soil types , attaining a maximum in southern and wetter areas of distribution . sassafras albidum ranges from southern maine and southern ontario west to iowa , and south to central florida and eastern texas , in north america . sassafras tzumu may be found in anhui , fujian , guangdong , guangxi , guizhou , hubei , hunan , jiangsu , sichuan , yunnan , and zhejiang , china . sassafras randaiense is native to taiwan . . importance to wildlife . the leaves , bark , twigs , stems , and fruits are eaten by birds and mammals in small quantities . for most animals , sassafras is not consumed in large enough quantities to be important , although it is an important deer food in some areas . carey and gill rate its value to wildlife as fair , their lowest rating . sassafras leaves and twigs are consumed by white-tailed deer and porcupines . other sassafras leaf browsers include groundhogs , marsh rabbits , and american black bears . rabbits eat sassafras bark in winter . american beavers will cut sassafras stems . sassafras fruits are eaten by many species of birds , including bobwhite quail , eastern kingbirds , great crested flycatchers , phoebes , wild turkeys , grey catbirds , northern flickers , pileated woodpeckers , downy woodpeckers , thrushes , vireos , and northern mockingbirds . some small mammals also consume sassafras fruits . this section incorporates text from a public domain work of the us government : . human uses . all parts of sassafras plants , including roots , stems , twig leaves , bark , flowers , and fruit , have been used for culinary , medicinal , and aromatic purposes , both in areas where they are endemic and in areas where they were imported , such as europe . the wood of sassafras trees has been used as a material for building ships and furniture in china , europe , and the united states , and sassafras played an important role in the history of the european colonization of the american continent in the 16th and 17th centuries . sassafras twigs have been used as toothbrushes and fire starters . culinary uses . sassafras albidum is an important ingredient in some distinct foods of the united states . it is the main ingredient in traditional root beer and sassafras root tea , and ground leaves of sassafras are a distinctive additive in louisiana creole cuisine . ( see the article on filé powder , and a common thickening and flavoring agent in gumbo . ) methods of cooking with sassafras combine this ingredient native to america with traditional north american , as well as european , culinary techniques , to create a unique blend of creole cuisine , and are thought by some to be heavily influenced by a blend of cultures . sassafras is no longer used in commercially produced root beer since sassafras oil was banned for use in commercially mass-produced foods and drugs by the fda in 1960 due to health concerns about the carcinogenicity of safrole , a major constituent of sassafras oil , in animal studies . safrole : human health effects . toxnet : toxicology data network . sassafras leaves and flowers have also been used in salads , and to flavor fats or cure meats . . traditional medicinal uses . numerous native american tribes used the leaves of sassafras to treat wounds by rubbing the leaves directly into a wound and used different parts of the plant for many medicinal purposes such as treating acne , urinary disorders , and sicknesses that increased body temperature , such as high fevers . east asian types of sassafras such as sassafras tzumu ( chu mu ) and sassafras randaiense ( chu shu ) are used in chinese medicine to treat rheumatism and trauma . wikibooks : traditional chinese medicine/from sabal peregrina to syzygium samarangense some modern researchers conclude that the oil , roots and bark of sassafras have analgesic and antiseptic properties . different parts of the sassafras plant ( including the leaves and stems , the bark , and the roots ) have been used to treat scurvy , skin sores , kidney problems , toothaches , rheumatism , swelling , menstrual disorders and sexually transmitted diseases , bronchitis , hypertension , and dysentery . it is also used as a fungicide , dentifrice , rubefacient , diaphoretic , perfume , carminative and sudorific . tiffany leptuck , '' medical attributes of 'sassafras albidum ' – sassafras '' ] , kenneth m . klemow , ph.d . , wilkes-barre university , 2003 before the twentieth century , sassafras enjoyed a great reputation in the medical literature , but became valued for its power to improve the flavor of other medicines . keeler , h . l . ( 1900 ) . our native trees and how to identify them . charles scribner 's sons , new york . sassafras wood and oil were both used in dentistry . early toothbrushes were crafted from sassafras twigs or wood because of its aromatic properties . sassafras was also used as an early dental anesthetic and disinfectant . . uses of wood . sassafras albidum is often grown as an ornamental tree for its unusual leaves and aromatic scent . outside of its native area , it is occasionally cultivated in europe and elsewhere . u.s . forest service : sassafras albidum ( pdf file ) the durable and beautiful wood of sassafras plants has been used in shipbuilding and furniture-making in north america , in asia , and in europe ( once europeans were introduced to the plant ) . sassafras wood was also used by native americans in the southeastern united states as a fire-starter because of the flammability of its natural oils found within the wood and the leaves . . oil and aromatic uses . steam distillation of dried root bark produces an essential oil which has a high safrole content , as well as significant amounts of varying other chemicals such as camphor , eugenol ( including 5-methoxyeugenol ) , asarone , and various sesquiterpenes . many other trees contain similarly high percentages and their extracted oils are sometimes referred to as sassafras oil , which once was extensively used as a fragrance in perfumes and soaps , food and for aromatherapy . safrole is a precursor for the clandestine chemistry of the drugs mda and mdma , and as such , sales and import of sassafras oil ( as a safrole-containing mixture of above-threshold concentration ) are heavily restricted in the us . sassafras oil has also been used as a natural insect or pest deterrent , and in liqueurs ( such as the opium-based godfrey 's ) , and in homemade liquor to mask strong or unpleasant smells . sassafras oil has also been added to soap and other toiletries . it is banned in the united states for use in commercially mass-produced foods and drugs by the fda as a potential carcinogen . . commercial use . for a more detailed description of uses by indigenous peoples of north america , and a history of the commercial use of sassafras albidum by europeans in the united states in the 16th and 17th centuries , see the article on the extant north american species of sassafras , sassafras albidum . in modern times , the sassafras plant has been grown and harvested for the extraction of sassafras oil . it is used in a variety of commercial products or their syntheses , such as the insecticide synergistic compound piperonyl butoxide . robert l . metcalf '' insect control '' in ullmann ’ s encyclopedia of industrial chemistry '' wiley-vch , weinheim , 2002 . these plants are primarily harvested for commercial purposes in asia and brazil .