Ghost Dance

history . paiute influence . the northern paiutes living in mason valley , in what is now the u.s . state of nevada , were known collectively as the tövusi-dökadö ( tövusi- : '' cyperus bulb '' and dökadö : '' eaters '' ) at the time of european contact . the northern pa community at this time was thriving upon a subsistence pattern of fishing , hunting wild game , and foraging for pine nuts and roots such as cyperus esculentus . the tövusi-dökadö during this period lacked any permanent political organisation or officials , and tended to follow various spiritual leaders and community organizers . community events centered on the observance of seasonal ceremonies such as harvests or hunting . in 1869 , wodziwob , a paiute man , organized a series of community dances to announce a vision . he spoke of a journey to the land of the dead and of promises made to him by the souls of the recently deceased . they promised to return to their loved ones within a period of three to four years . wodziwob 's peers accepted this vision , likely due to his reputable status as a healer . he urged the populace to dance the common circle dance as was customary during a time of celebration . he continued preaching this message for three years with the help of a local '' weather doctor '' named tavibo , father of jack wilson . prior to wodziwob 's religious movement , a devastating typhoid fever epidemic struck in 1867 . this and other european diseases killed approximately one-tenth of the total population , kehoe , the ghost dance , p . 33 . resulting in widespread psychological and emotional trauma . the disruption brought disorder to the economic system and society . many families were prevented from continuing their nomadic lifestyle . round dance influence . a round dance is a circular community dance held , usually around an individual who leads the ceremony . round dances may be ceremonial or purely social . usually the dancers are accompanied by a group of singers who may also play hand drums in unison . the dancers join hands to form a large circle . the dancers move to their left ( or right , depending on nation or territory ) with a side-shuffle step to reflect the long-short pattern of the drum beat , bending their knees to emphasize the pattern . during his studies of the pacific northwest tribes the anthropologist leslie spier used the term '' prophet dances '' to describe ceremonial round dances where the participants seek trance , exhortations and prophecy . spier studied peoples of the columbia plateau ( a region including washington , oregon , idaho , and parts of western montana ) . by the time of his studies the only dances he was allowed to witness were social dances or ones that had already incorporated christian elements , making investigation of the round dance 's origin complicated . the '' prophet '' . jack wilson , the '' prophet '' otherwise known as wovoka , was believed to have had a vision during a solar eclipse on january 1 , 1889 . it was reportedly not his first time experiencing a vision ; but as a young adult , he claimed that he was then better equipped , spiritually , to handle this message . jack had received training from an experienced holy man under his parents ' guidance after they realized that he was having difficulty interpreting his previous visions . jack was also training to be a '' weather doctor '' , following in his father 's footsteps . he was known throughout mason valley as a gifted and blessed young leader . preaching a message of universal love , he often presided over circle dances , which symbolized the sun 's heavenly path across the sky . anthropologist james mooney conducted an interview with wilson prior to 1892 . mooney confirmed that his message matched that given to his fellow indians . this study compared letters between tribes . according to mooney , wilson 's letter said he stood before god in heaven and had seen many of his ancestors engaged in their favorite pastimes , and that god showed wilson a beautiful land filled with wild game and instructed him to return home to tell his people that they must love each other and not fight . he also stated that jesus was being reincarnated on earth in 1892 , that the people must work , not steal or lie , and that they must not engage in the old practices of war or the traditional self-mutilation practices connected with mourning the dead . he said that if his people abided by these rules , they would be united with their friends and family in the other world , and in god 's presence , there would be no sickness , disease , or old age . mooney writes that wilson was given the ghost dance and commanded to take it back to his people . he preached that if the five-day dance was performed in the proper intervals , the performers would secure their happiness and hasten the reunion of the living and deceased . wilson said that the creator gave him powers over the weather and that he would be the deputy in charge of affairs in the western united states , leaving current benjamin harrison as god 's deputy in the east . jack claims that he was then told to return home and preach god 's message . jack wilson claimed to have left the presence of god convinced that if every indian in the west danced the new dance to '' hasten the event '' , all evil in the world would be swept away , leaving a renewed earth filled with food , love , and faith . quickly accepted by his paiute brethren , the new religion was termed '' dance in a circle '' . because the first european contact with the practice came by way of the lakota , their expression '' spirit dance '' was adopted as a descriptive title for all such practices . this was subsequently translated as '' ghost dance '' . . spread of the prophet 's message . through indians and some white settlers , wilson 's message spread across much of the western portion of the united states . early in the religious movement , many tribes sent members to investigate the self-proclaimed prophet , while other communities sent delegates only to be cordial . regardless of their initial motivations , many left as believers and returned to their homeland preaching his message . the ghost dance was also investigated by many mormons from utah , for whom the concepts of the indian prophet were familiar and often accepted . kehoe , the ghost dance , p . 5 . while many followers of the ghost dance believed wovoka to be a teacher of pacifism and peace , others did not . an elaboration of the ghost dance concept was the development of ghost shirts , which were special clothing that warriors could wear . they were rumored to repel bullets through spiritual power . it is uncertain where this belief originated . scholars believe that in 1890 chief kicking bear introduced the concept to his people , the lakota , kehoe , the ghost dance , p . 13 . while james mooney argued that the most likely source is the mormon temple garment ( which mormons believe protect the pious wearer from evil ) . hittman , michael , wovoka and the ghost dance , pp . 84–88 , university of nebraska press , 1997 . the lakota interpretation drew from their traditional idea of a '' renewed earth '' in which '' all evil is washed away '' . this lakota interpretation included the removal of all european americans from their lands : john fire/lame deer & richard erdoes , lame deer , seeker of visions , chapter 14 : roll up the world ; simon & schuster , ny , 1972 . . political influence . in february 1890 , the united states government broke a lakota treaty by adjusting the great sioux reservation of south dakota ( an area that formerly encompassed the majority of the state ) and breaking it up into five smaller reservations . kehoe , the ghost dance , p . 15 . the government was accommodating white homesteaders from the eastern united states ; in addition , it intended to '' break up tribal relationships '' and '' conform indians to the white man 's ways , peaceably if they will , or forcibly if they must '' . wallace , anthony f . c . '' revitalization movements : some theoretical considerations for their comparative study '' , american anthropologist n.s . 58 ( 2 ) :264–81 . 1956 on the reduced reservations , the government allocated family units on plots for individual households . the lakota were expected to farm and raise livestock , and to send their children to boarding schools . with the goal of assimilation , the schools taught english and christianity , as well as american cultural practices . generally , they forbade inclusion of indian traditional culture and language . to help support the lakota during the period of transition , the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) was to supplement the lakota with food and to hire white farmers as teachers for the people . the farming plan failed to take into account the difficulty that lakota farmers would have in trying to cultivate crops in the semi-arid region of south dakota . by the end of the 1890 growing season , a time of intense heat and low rainfall , it was clear that the land was unable to produce substantial agricultural yields . unfortunately , this was also the time when the government 's patience with supporting the so-called '' lazy indians '' ran out . they cut rations for the lakota in half . with the bison having been virtually eradicated a few years earlier , the lakota were at risk of starvation . the people turned to the ghost dance ritual , which frightened the supervising agents of the bia . those who had been residing in the area for a long time recognized that the ritual was often held shortly before battle was to occur . kicking bear was forced to leave standing rock , but when the dances continued unabated , agent james mclaughlin asked for more troops . he claimed the hunkpapa spiritual leader sitting bull was the real leader of the movement . a former agent , valentine mcgillycuddy , saw nothing extraordinary in the dances and ridiculed the panic that seemed to have overcome the agencies , saying : '' the coming of the troops has frightened the indians . if the seventh-day adventists prepare the ascension robes for the second coming of the savior , the united states army is not put in motion to prevent them . why should not the indians have the same privilege ? if the troops remain , trouble is sure to come . '' nonetheless , thousands of additional u.s . army troops were deployed to the reservation . on december 15 , 1890 , sitting bull was arrested for failing to stop his people from practicing the ghost dance . kehoe , the ghost dance , p . 20 . during the incident , one of sitting bull 's men , catch the bear , fired at lieutenant '' bull head '' , striking his right side . he instantly wheeled and shot sitting bull , hitting him in the left side , between the tenth and eleventh ribs ; this exchange resulted in deaths on both sides , including that of sitting bull . wounded knee . december 29 , 1890 – spotted elk ( lakota : unpan glešká – also known as big foot ) was a miniconjou leader on the u.s . army 's list of 'trouble-making ' indians . he was stopped while en route to convene with the remaining lakota chiefs . u.s . army officers forced him to relocate with his people to a small camp close to the pine ridge agency . here the soldiers could more closely watch the old chief . that evening , december 28 , the small band of lakota erected their tipis on the banks of wounded knee creek . the following day , during an attempt by the officers to collect weapons from the band , one young , deaf lakota warrior refused to relinquish his arms . a struggle followed in which somebody 's weapon discharged into the air . one u.s . officer gave the command to open fire , and the lakota responded by taking up previously confiscated weapons ; the u.s . forces responded with carbine firearms and several rapid-fire light-artillery hotchkiss gun mounted on the overlooking hill . when the fighting had concluded , 25 u.s . soldiers lay dead , many killed by friendly fire . among the 153 dead lakota , most were women and children . kehoe , the ghost dance , p . 24 . following the massacre , chief kicking bear officially surrendered his weapon to general nelson a . miles . aftermath . outrage in the eastern united states emerged as the public learned about the deaths . the u.s . government had insisted on numerous occasions that the indian had already been successfully pacified . many americans felt the u.s . army actions were unduly harsh ; some related the massacre at wounded knee creek to the '' ungentlemanly act of kicking a man when he is already down '' . public uproar played a role in the reinstatement of the previous treaty 's terms , including full rations and more monetary compensation for lands taken away . twenty u.s . soldiers received medal of honor for their actions ( some sources state the number as 18 or 23 ) . american indian and human rights activists have referred to these as '' medals of dis-honor '' and called for the awards to be rescinded , but none of them have ever been revoked . following the wounded knee massacre , interest and participation in the ghost dance movement dropped dramatically for fear of continued violence against practitioners . like most indian ceremonies , it became clandestine rather than dying out completely . rejection . despite the widespread acceptance of the ghost dance movement , navajo leaders described the ghost dance as '' worthless words '' in 1890 . three years later , james mooney arrived at the navajo reservation in northern arizona during his study of the ghost dance movement and found the navajo never incorporated the ritual into their society . kehoe believed the movement did not gain traction with the tribe due to the navajo 's higher levels of social and economic satisfaction at the time . another factor was cultural norms among the navajo , which inculcated a fear of ghosts and spirits , based on religious beliefs . today . the wounded knee massacre was not the end of the ghost dance religious movement . instead , it went underground . wovoka continued to spread its message , along with kicking bear , short bull and other spiritual leaders . renee sansom flood , lost bird of wounded knee ( scribner , 2014 ) . during the wounded knee incident of 1973 , lakota men and women , including mary brave bird , did the ghost dance ceremony on the site where their ancestors had been killed . in her book , brave bird writes that ghost dances continue as private ceremonies . mary crow dog with richard erdoes , lakota woman ( grove weidenfeld , 1990 ) .