Karnak

overview . the complex is a vast open site and includes the karnak open air museum . it is believed to be the second most visited historical site in egypt ; only the giza pyramids near cairo receive more visits . it consists of four main parts , of which only the largest is currently open to the general public . the term karnak often is understood as being the precinct of amun-re only , because this is the only part most visitors see . the three other parts , the precinct of mut , the precinct of montu , and the dismantled temple of amenhotep & nbsp ; iv , are closed to the public . there also are a few smaller temples and sanctuaries connecting the precinct of mut , the precinct of amun-re , and the luxor temple . the precinct of mut is very ancient , being dedicated to an earth and creation deity , but not yet restored . the original temple was destroyed and partially restored by hatshepsut , although another pharaoh built around it in order to change the focus or orientation of the sacred area . many portions of it may have been carried away for use in other buildings . the key difference between karnak and most of the other temples and sites in egypt is the length of time over which it was developed and used . construction of temples started in the middle kingdom and continued into ptolemaic times . approximately thirty pharaohs contributed to the buildings , enabling it to reach a size , complexity , and diversity not seen elsewhere . few of the individual features of karnak are unique , but the size and number of features are overwhelming . the deities represented range from some of the earliest worshiped to those worshiped much later in the history of the ancient egyptian culture . although destroyed , it also contained an early temple built by amenhotep iv ( akhenaten ) , the pharaoh who later would celebrate a near monotheistic religion he established that prompted him to move his court and religious center away from thebes . it also contains evidence of adaptations , where the buildings of the ancient egyptians were used by later cultures for their own religious purposes . one famous aspect of karnak is the great hypostyle hall in the precinct of amun-re , a hall area of with 134 massive columns arranged in 16 rows . one hundred and twenty-two of these columns are tall , and the other 12 are tall with a diameter of over . the architraves on top of these columns are estimated to weigh 70 tons . these architraves may have been lifted to these heights using levers . this would be an extremely time-consuming process and also would require great balance to get to such great heights . a common alternative theory regarding how they were moved is that large ramps were constructed of sand , mud , brick or stone and that the stones were then towed up the ramps . if stone had been used for the ramps , they would have been able to use much less material . the top of the ramps presumably would have employed either wooden tracks or cobblestones for towing the megaliths . there is an unfinished pillar in an out-of-the-way location that indicates how it would have been finished . final carving was executed after the drums were put in place so that it was not damaged while being placed . egypt : engineering an empire engineering feats lehner , mark the complete pyramids , london : thames and hudson ( 1997 ) pp.202–225 . several experiments moving megaliths with ancient technology were made at other locations & nbsp ; – some of them are listed here . in 2009 ucla launched a website dedicated to virtual reality digital reconstructions of the karnak complex and other resources . '' ancient egypt brought to life with virtual model of historic temple complex '' , science daily , 30 april 2009 , retrieved 12 june 2009 the sun god 's shrine has light focused upon it during the winter solstice . brian handwerk ( december 21 , 2015 ) everything you need to know about the winter solstice national geographic . history . the history of the karnak complex is largely the history of thebes and its changing role in the culture . religious centers varied by region , and when a new capital of the unified culture was established , the religious centers in that area gained prominence . the city of thebes does not appear to have been of great significance before the eleventh dynasty and previous temple building there would have been relatively small , with shrines being dedicated to the early deities of thebes , the earth goddess mut and montu . early building was destroyed by invaders . the earliest known artifact found in the area of the temple is a small , eight-sided column from the eleventh dynasty , which mentions amun-re . amun ( sometimes called amen ) was long the local tutelary deity of thebes . he was identified with the ram and the goose . the egyptian meaning of amun is '' hidden '' or the '' hidden god '' . stewert , desmond and editors of the newsweek book division '' the pyramids and sphinx '' 1971 pp . 60–62 major construction work in the precinct of amun-re took place during the eighteenth dynasty , when thebes became the capital of the unified ancient egypt . almost every pharaoh of that dynasty added something to the temple site . thutmose i erected an enclosure wall connecting the fourth and fifth pylons , which comprise the earliest part of the temple still standing in situ . hatshepsut had monuments constructed and also restored the original precinct of mut , that had been ravaged by the foreign rulers during the hyksos occupation . she had twin obelisks , at the time the tallest in the world , erected at the entrance to the temple . one still stands , as the tallest surviving ancient obelisk on earth ; the other has broken in two and toppled . another of her projects at the site , karnak 's red chapel or chapelle rouge , was intended as a barque shrine and originally may have stood between her two obelisks . she later ordered the construction of two more obelisks to celebrate her sixteenth year as pharaoh ; one of the obelisks broke during construction , and thus , a third was constructed to replace it . the broken obelisk was left at its quarrying site in aswan , where it still remains . known as unfinished obelisk , it provides evidence of how obelisks were quarried . the unfinished obelisk by peter tyson march 16 , 1999 nova online adventure construction of the great hypostyle hall also may have begun during the eighteenth dynasty ( although most new building was undertaken under seti & nbsp ; i and ramesses & nbsp ; ii in the nineteenth ) . merneptah , also of the nineteenth dynasty , commemorated his victories over the sea peoples on the walls of the cachette court , the start of the processional route to the luxor temple . the last major change to the precinct of amun-re 's layout was the addition of the first pylon and the massive enclosure walls that surround the whole precinct , both constructed by nectanebo & nbsp ; i of the thirtieth dynasty . in 323 & nbsp ; ad , roman emperor constantine i recognised the christian religion , and in 356 constantius ii ordered the closing of pagan temples throughout the roman empire , into which egypt had been annexed in 30 bc . karnak was by this time mostly abandoned , and christian churches were founded among the ruins , the most famous example of this is the reuse of the festival hall of thutmose & nbsp ; iii 's central hall , where painted decorations of saints and coptic inscriptions can still be seen . european knowledge of karnak . thebes ' exact placement was unknown in medieval europe , though both herodotus and strabo give the exact location of thebes and how long up the nile one must travel to reach it . maps of egypt , based on the 2nd century ptolemy ' mammoth work geographia , had been circulating in europe since the late 14th century , all of them showing thebes ' ( diospolis ) location . despite this , several european authors of the 15th and 16th centuries who visited only lower egypt and published their travel accounts , such as joos van ghistele and andré thévet , put thebes in or close to memphis . the karnak temple complex is first described by an unknown venetian in 1589 , although his account gives no name for the complex . this account , housed in the biblioteca nazionale centrale di firenze , is the first known european mention , since ancient greek and roman writers , about a whole range of monuments in upper egypt and nubia , including karnak , luxor temple , the colossi of memnon , esna , edfu , kom ombo , philae , and others . karnak ( '' carnac '' ) as a village name , and name of the complex , is first attested in 1668 , when two capuchin missionary brothers , protais and charles françois d'orléans , travelled though the area . protais ' writing about their travel was published by melchisédech thévenot ( relations de divers voyages curieux , 1670s–1696 editions ) and johann michael vansleb ( the present state of egypt , 1678 ) . the first drawing of karnak is found in paul lucas ' travel account of 1704 , ( voyage du sieur paul lucas au levant ) . it is rather inaccurate , and can be quite confusing to modern eyes . lucas travelled in egypt during 1699–1703 . the drawing shows a mixture of the precinct of amun-re and the precinct of montu , based on a complex confined by the three huge ptolemaic gateways of ptolemy & nbsp ; iii euergetes / ptolemy & nbsp ; iv philopator , and the massive long , high and thick , first pylon of the precinct of amun-re . karnak was visited and described in succession by claude sicard and his travel companion pierre laurent pincia ( 1718 and 1720–21 ) , granger ( 1731 ) , frederick louis norden ( 1737–38 ) , richard pococke ( 1738 ) , james bruce ( 1769 ) , charles-nicolas-sigisbert sonnini de manoncourt ( 1777 ) , william george browne ( 1792–93 ) , and finally by a number of scientists of the napoleon expedition , including vivant denon , during 1798–1799 . claude-étienne savary describes the complex in rather great detail in his work of 1785 ; especially in light of the fact that it is a fictional account of a pretend journey to upper egypt , composed out of information from other travellers . savary did visit lower egypt in 1777–78 , and published a work about that too . main parts . precinct of amun-re . this is the largest of the precincts of the temple complex , and is dedicated to amun-re , the chief deity of the theban triad . there are several colossal statues , including the figure of pinedjem & nbsp ; i which is tall . the sandstone for this temple , including all of the columns , was transported from gebel silsila south on the nile river . time life lost civilizations series : ramses ii : magnificence on the nile ( 1993 ) pp . 53–54 it also has one of the largest obelisks , weighing 328 tonnes and standing tall . walker , charles , 1980 '' wonders of the ancient world '' pp24–7 '' the seventy wonders of the ancient world '' , edited by chris scarre ( 1999 ) thames & hudson , london . precinct of mut . located to the south of the newer amen-re complex , this precinct was dedicated to the mother goddess , mut , who became identified as the wife of amun-re in the eighteenth dynasty theban triad . it has several smaller temples associated with it and has its own sacred lake , constructed in a crescent shape . this temple has been ravaged , many portions having been used in other structures . following excavation and restoration works by the johns hopkins university team , led by betsy bryan ( see below ) the precinct of mut has been opened to the public . six hundred black granite statues were found in the courtyard to her temple . it may be the oldest portion of the site . in 2006 , betsy bryan presented her findings of one festival that included apparent intentional overindulgence in alcohol . '' sex and booze figured in egyptian rites '' nbcnews.com , oct 30 , 2006 , participation in the festival was great , including the priestesses and the population . historical records of tens of thousands attending the festival exist . these findings were made in the temple of mut because when thebes rose to greater prominence , mut absorbed the warrior goddesses , sekhmet and bast , as some of her aspects . first , mut became mut-wadjet-bast , then mut-sekhmet-bast ( wadjet having merged into bast ) , then mut also assimilated menhit , another lioness goddess , and her adopted son 's wife , becoming mut-sekhmet-bast-menhit , and finally becoming mut-nekhbet . temple excavations at luxor discovered a '' porch of drunkenness '' built onto the temple by the pharaoh hatshepsut , during the height of her twenty-year reign . in a later myth developed around the annual drunken sekhmet festival , ra , by then the sun god of upper egypt , created her from a fiery eye gained from his mother , to destroy mortals who conspired against him ( lower egypt ) . in the myth , sekhmet 's blood-lust was not quelled at the end of the battle and led to her destroying almost all of humanity , so ra had tricked her by turning the nile as red as blood ( the nile turns red every year when filled with silt during inundation ) so that sekhmet would drink it . the trick , however , was that the red liquid was not blood , but beer mixed with pomegranate juice so that it resembled blood , making her so drunk that she gave up slaughter and became an aspect of the gentle hathor . the complex interweaving of deities occurred over the thousands of years of the culture . precinct of montu . this portion of the site is dedicated to the son of mut and amun-re , montu , the war-god of the theban triad . it is located to the north of the amun-re complex and is much smaller in size . it is not open to the public . temple of amenhotep iv ( deliberately dismantled ) . the temple that akhenaten ( amenhotep & nbsp ; iv ) constructed on the site was located east of the main complex , outside the walls of the amun-re precinct . it was destroyed immediately after the death of its builder , who had attempted to overcome the powerful priesthood who had gained control over egypt before his reign . it was so thoroughly demolished that its full extent and layout is currently unknown . the priesthood of that temple regained their powerful position as soon as akhenaten died , and were instrumental in destroying many records of his existence . in popular culture . in transformers : revenge of the fallen , the final battle between optimus prime versus megatron , the fallen , and starscream takes place in the hypostyle hall at karnak . agatha christie 's death on the nile takes place mainly on the steamship s.s . karnak , as well as using the temple itself in one of its scenes . lara croft visited karnak for three levels in tomb raider : the last revelation ( temple of karnak , the great hypostyle hall , and sacred lake ) and it was featured in the level-editor package . in the movie the mummy returns , karnak is one of the places to which rick o'connell and the others must go , in order to ultimately reach the scorpion king . the british symphonic metal band bal-sagoth have a song called '' unfettering the hoary sentinels of karnak '' . the first-person shooter video game powerslave ( inspired by the iron maiden album powerslave and its title song ) is set in and around karnak . karnak is featured as a location for exploration in the pc game the sims 3 : world adventures . karnak is featured as a location in the pc game serious sam . karnak is featured in the james bond movie the spy who loved me . in watchmen , '' karnak '' is the name given by adrian '' ozymandias '' veidt to his secret antarctic lair , which he built based on its egyptian namesake . in the stargate sg-1 episode '' serpent 's song '' , apophis 's host was a scribe in the temple of amun at karnak . in the original battlestar galactica series , for the episode '' lost planet of the gods , part ii '' , some shots of the pyramids at kobol were actually filmed at the site of the great temple at karnak and the pyramids of giza . in final fantasy v , a fortified town/castle powered by the fire crystal is named karnak . a tour of karnak , including explanations of hieroglyphs and egyptian culture , is shown in the bbc documentary connections , written and hosted by james burke . karnak is a location featured in the '' the curse of the pharaohs '' for the video game assassin 's creed : origins . gallery . file : egyptian sculpture on avenue of sphinxes ( 45765061544 ) . jpg luxor dromos , an avenue of human headed sphinxes which once connected the temples of karnak and luxor . file : great lake at karnak temple.jpg the sacred lake of precinct of amun-re file : parvis karnak.jpg view of the first pylon of the temple of amun-re at karnak file : karnaktemple luxoregypt rams 2007feb9-08 bydanielcsorfoly.jpg ram-headed sphinx statues at karnak file : karnacs2.jpg hypostyle hall of the precinct of amun-re , as it appeared in 1838 in the holy land , syria , idumea , arabia , egypt , and nubia file : statue of ramesses ii in karnak temple in luxor egypt.jpg colossal statue of ramses ii file : karnak temple complex 1.jpg open papyrus umbel capitals of the hypostyle hall . luxor karnak-tempel 2016-03-21 große säulenhalle 02.jpg closed papyrus umbel capitals of the hypostyle hall . file : مسله من معبد الكرنك.jpg obelisk of thutmosis i in karnak file : karnak tempel skarabäus 01.jpg statue of khepri in karnak file : s10.08 karnak , image 9922.jpg egypt - karnak . gate and pylon . , n.d . , brooklyn museum archives file : lantern slide collection , karnak.jpg egypt - karnak . great statues . , n.d . , goodyear . brooklyn museum archives . see also . list of megalithic sites . references . further reading . . external links . cfeetk – centre franco-égyptien d'étude des temples de karnak ( en ) temple of amun , numerous photos & schemes ( comments in russian ) karnak images www.karnak3d.net : : '' web-book '' the 3d reconstruction of the great temple of amun in karnak . marc digital karnak ucla karnak temple picture gallery at remains.se