Baraka (film)

content . baraka is a documentary film with no narrative or voice-over . it explores themes via a compilation of natural events , life , human activities and technological phenomena shot in 24 countries on six continents over a 14-month period . the film is ron fricke 's follow-up to godfrey reggio 's similar non-verbal documentary film koyaanisqatsi . fricke was cinematographer and collaborator on reggio 's film , and for baraka he struck out on his own to polish and expand the photographic techniques used on koyaanisqatsi . shot in 70 mm , it includes a mixture of photographic styles including slow motion and time-lapse . two camera systems were used to achieve this . a todd-ao system was used to shoot conventional frame rates , but to execute the film 's time-lapse sequences fricke had a special camera built that combined time-lapse photography with perfectly controlled movements . locations featured include the church of the holy sepulchre in jerusalem , the ryōan temple in kyoto , lake natron in tanzania , burning oil fields in kuwait , the smouldering precipice of an active volcano , a busy subway terminal , the aircraft boneyard of davis–monthan air force base , tribal celebrations of the maasai in kenya , and chanting monks in the dip tse chok ling monastery . the film features a number of long tracking shots through various settings , including auschwitz and tuol sleng , over photos of the people involved , past skulls stacked in a room , to a spread of bones . it suggests a universal cultural perspective : a shot of an elaborate tattoo on a bathing japanese yakuza precedes a view of tribal paint . music . the score is by michael stearns and features music by , among others , dead can dance , l . subramaniam , ciro hurtado , inkuyo , brother , anugama & sebastiano , and david hykes . in 2019 , german composer mathias rehfeldt released the concept album baraka , inspired by the events of the movie . . reissue . following previous dvd releases , in 2007 the original 65 & nbsp ; mm negative was rescanned at 8k resolution with equipment designed specifically for baraka at fotokem . the automated 8k film scanner , operating continuously , took more than three weeks to finish scanning more than 150,000 frames ( taking approximately twelve to thirteen seconds to scan each frame ) , producing over thirty terabytes of image data in total . after a 16-month digital intermediate process , including a 96 & nbsp ; khz/24-bit audio remaster by stearns for the dts-hd master audio soundtrack of the film , the result was re-released on dvd and blu-ray disc in october 2008 . at the time , project supervisor andrew oran described the reissue of baraka as '' arguably the highest-quality dvd that 's ever been made '' . chicago sun-times critic roger ebert described the blu-ray release as '' the finest video disc i have ever viewed or ever imagined . '' . sequel . a sequel to baraka , samsara , made by the same filmmakers , premiered at the 2011 toronto international film festival and released internationally in august 2012 . also shot in 70 & nbsp ; mm , samsara explores an arguably darker , updated version of many of the same themes as baraka . reception . baraka holds a score of 81 % on rotten tomatoes out of twenty-six reviews . roger ebert included the film in his '' great movies '' list , writing : '' if man sends another voyager to the distant stars and it can carry only one film on board , that film might be baraka . '' . filming . the movie was filmed at 152 locations in twenty-four countries . some locations include : argentina , australia , brazil , cambodia , china , ecuador , egypt , france , india , indonesia , iran , italy , japan , israel , kenya , kuwait , nepal , poland , saudi arabia , tanzania , thailand , turkey , united states and vatican city . africa . egypt : cairo ; city of the dead ; giza pyramid complex ; karnak temple , luxor ; ramesseum kenya : lake magadi ; mara kichwan tembo manyatta ; mara rianta manyatta ; maasai mara tanzania : lake natron . united states . arizona : american express , phoenix ; canyon de chelly national monument , chinle ; davis–monthan air force base , tucson ; peabody coal mine , black mesa ; phoenix california : big sur ; los angeles ; santa cruz ( chicken farm scenes ) colorado : mesa verde national park hawaii : haleakalā national park , maui ; kona ; puʻu ʻōʻō , hawaiʻi volcanoes national park new york : empire state building , manhattan , new york city ; grand central terminal , manhattan , new york city ; helmsley building , manhattan , new york city ; mcgraw-hill building , manhattan , new york city ; world trade center , manhattan , new york city ; green haven correctional facility , beekman , new york ; stormville , new york utah : arches national park , moab ; canyonlands national park , moab others : shiprock , new mexico ; white house , washington , d.c . south america . argentina : iguazu falls , misiones brazil : carajás animal reserve , pará ; iguazu falls , paraná ; ipanema , favela da rocinha , rio de janeiro ; kayapo , pará ; porto velho , rondônia ; represa samuel , rondônia ; rio preto , minas gerais ; são paulo city , são paulo state ecuador : barrio mapasingue , guayaquil ; cementerio ciudad blanca ; galápagos islands ; guayaquil . asia . cambodia : angkor thom ; angkor wat ; angkor ; bayon ; phnom penh ; preah khan ; siem reap ; ta prohm ; tonle omm gate ; tuol sleng museum ; sonsam kosal killing fields china : beijing ; great hall of the people ; tiananmen square ; guilin ; river li , qin shi huang ; xi'an hong kong : kowloon walled city , kowloon india : calcutta , west bengal ; chennai , tamil nadu ; ganges river ; ghats ; kailashnath temple , varanasi ; national museum of india , new delhi ; varadharaja temple , varanasi indonesia : borobudur ; java ; candi nandi ; candi prambanan ; gudang garam cigarette factory ; kasunanan palace ; surakarta ; istiqlal mosque , jakarta ; kediri ; tabanan ; bali ; mancan padi ; mount bromo valley ; tampak siring ; tegallalang ; gunung kawi temple ; uluwatu iran : imam mosque ; imam reza shrine , mashhad ; isfahan ; persepolis ; shah chiragh ; shiraz japan : capsule hotel ; hokke-ji temple ; jvc yokosuka factory ; kyoto ; meiji shrine ; nagano ( city ) ; nara ; nittaku ; ryōan-ji temple ; sangho-ji temple ; shinjuku station ; tokyo ; shibuya station station layout ; tomoe shizung & hakutobo ; yamanouchi , nagano ; zōjō-ji temple jerusalem : church of the holy sepulchre ; western wall kuwait : ahmadi ; burgan field ; jahra road , mitla ridge ( farouk abdul-aziz researched and produced this segment ) nepal : bhaktapur ; boudhanath ; durbar square , kathmandu ; hanuman ; himalayas ; mount everest ; mount thamserku ; pasupati ; swayambhu saudi arabia : mecca thailand : ayutthaya province ; bang pa-in ; bangkok ; nmb factory ; patpong ; soi cowboy ; wat arun ; wat suthat . oceania . australia : bathurst island ; cocinda ; jim jim falls ; kakadu national park ; kunwarde hwarde valley ; uluru . europe . poland : oświęcim ( german auschwitz concentration camp ) ; sztutowo ( german stutthof concentration camp ) ; bytom france : chartres cathedral ; notre-dame de reims vatican city : st . peter 's basilica turkey : hagia sophia , istanbul ; mevlevi order . see also . abstract animation barakah chronos ( film ) cinéma pur cinéma vérité non-narrative film qatsi trilogy samsara ( 2011 film ) . references . external links . official website baraka at spirit of baraka