Ken Barlow

denise osbourne . ken was paired romantically with hairdresser denise osbourne ( denise black ) in 1994 , the romance scuppering the chances of a reconciliation between recent divorcees ken and deirdre . scriptwriters had actually been planning to reunite ken and deirdre , but when kirkbride fell ill and had to be written out , the scripts were changed and ken was paired with denise instead . black has suggested that the romance came out of nowhere . the official coronation street annual 1997 has described ken and denise as a '' mis-matched pair '' who were never destined to spend their lives together . in the storyline , ken fathered denise 's son daniel . they had an on/off relationship and a wedding was planned in 1996 ; however , in a plot twist , it was revealed to ken that denise , unable to '' hold her primitive lusts in check '' , was having an affair with her brother-in-law , brian . upon the discovery , ken 's happiness was snatched away in what has been described by sunday mail as '' harrowing circumstances '' , and one of the character 's worst moments . denise black has discussed her character 's ambivalence towards her relationship with ken , revealing why she believed denise engaged in infidelity : '' the thing is that she 's in love with both men . when she 's with brian she loves him . and she 's completely in love with ken when he 's with her . so she has two loves and all the guilt that goes along with that scenario . denise does n't mean to cause so much pain . her problem is that she just does n't know whether she 's coming or going . '' when ken discovered the truth the wedding was called off , with ken telling denise to '' get out before i kill you '' . following the revelation and amidst the fallout , denise absconded , leaving her son in ken 's custody . this facilitated black 's desire to have a six-month break from the serial . the character returned in the winter of 1996 , for the last part of her storyline , black having decided to quit the role . denise 's return storyline was scripted to coincide with coronation streets increase to four weekly episodes . it focused upon a custody battle for daniel between ken and denise after denise snatched daniel . a source at the time discussed the storyline and ken 's reaction to losing his son : '' ken is devastated when he returns home the week before christmas and finds his son gone . he simply ca n't believe he 's been snatched by the woman who dumped them . he immediately starts a custody battle . denise plays heavily on the fact that she is the mother , while ken claims that he is back in a relationship with his ex-wife deirdre . deirdre actually goes to court with him for support , but she gets angry when she finds out he tries to use their friendship as a lever to get daniel back . '' when denise was awarded custody , she left coronation street and ken lost contact with his son . denise was reintroduced for several months in 2007 , over a decade after she had last appeared . ken tracked down his son following marital unease with deirdre , which led to interactions with denise when he turned up unannounced for a visit . black was pleased to be invited back , saying '' i do n't think that you can have ken barlow ’ s baby and forget about it , can you ? '' denise 's return was used as a catalyst to cause further problems in ken and deirdre 's marriage , ken having grown discontented . it was only a brief return ; once denise 's advances towards ken were rejected , denise was written out again . denise briefly returned in 2017 as part of who attacked ken ? , for her son daniel was the attacker . martha fraser . in january 2009 , martha fraser ( played by stephanie beacham ) , a new love interest for ken , was introduced to the show . ken meets martha by the canal while he is walking his dog , eccles . martha reveals that she is a theatre actress who travels to performances on her barge . ken seeks her out again , and he helps her go through her lines . roache told what 's on tv that ken is happy to find a '' like-minded person '' who is easy to talk to . he enjoys telling martha about his problems , his son and his grandchildren , as she is not judgmental . when asked if ken mentions deirdre , roache said '' er . no . martha asks him about peter 's mum and ken tells her that she 's dead , which is the truth , so martha automatically assumes he 's a widower and he does n't put her right . '' ken also chooses not to mention martha to deirdre ; roache believed that she would be angry if she found out . roache revealed that ken is not thinking about having an affair with martha , but he is '' captivated '' by her , and does have feelings for her . during the storyline , roache 's wife , sara , died . roache was given compassionate leave from the soap , and writers were forced to rework ken 's storyline . ken and martha eventually consummate their relationship , and ken considers leaving deirdre and weatherfield . he changes his mind at the last minute , and martha leaves , alone . alison graham of radio times said martha was ken 's soulmate , because '' she 's the most perfectly bourgeois bit-on-the-side . '' graham said that martha allowed ken 's '' middle-class heart '' to sing after the pair bonded over a love of bbc radio 4 , books and plays . comparing ken 's relationships with martha and deirdre to a prison sentence , graham said martha offered ken a deserving parole from the '' years of breaking rocks in the prison yard of his marriage to deirdre . '' she hoped that ken and martha were '' soon in the throes of ecstasy '' , because ken deserved it . following the conclusion to ken 's relationship with martha , roache expressed an interest in having more girlfriends for ken introduced in the future . the actor said , '' i thought it was great last year having a girlfriend , especially at my age . a few more would be great . i 've lost count of romances i 've had in the show , not to mention the four weddings . '' ken and martha 's romance was later depicted in the coronation street musical , corrie ! . ben east of the stage said the romance was '' genuinely funny '' . . other relationships . ken 's first on-screen relationship was with susan cunningham ( shakesby ) , whom he dated throughout the first ten episodes . ashamed of his family and background , ken was constantly apologising to her . this frustrated susan , who actually liked coronation street . refmylife , p.117 . fifty years later , it transpired that their relationship had left susan pregnant , resulting in the birth of a son , lawrence . after susan , ken 's early love interests included marian lund ( patricia heneghan ) , a librarian eleven years his senior ; yvonne chappell ( alex marshall ) , a hotel receptionist he met en route to first wife valerie 's funeral ; norma ford ( diana davies ) , an impressionable young shop-assistant ; wendy nightingale ( susan tebbs ) , a married woman who moved in with ken , making them coronation streets first unmarried cohabiting couple ; refegan , pp.138–139 . and elaine . refmylife , pp.118–122 . roache believes that ken was in love with elaine , though her feelings for him were less intense . he recalls some discussion of re-introducing her to the series in 2009 ; however , this did not come to fruition . refmylife , p.121 . upon separating from elaine , ken confided in his friend rita ( knox ) that , '' there were other fellers more glamorous , more successful , more wealthy and more interesting than me . '' according to roache , the line offers insight into ken 's psyche , evidencing that he truly belongs on coronation street , despite his desires to the contrary . refmylife , p.122 . although the number of romances ken was involved in declined from the 1980s onwards , roache states that those relationships he did have '' tended to be bigger and more involved '' . his later love interests included wendy crozier ( kerr ) , alma sedgewick ( barrie ) and maggie redman ( kerman ) . . family . , p.25 . ken was bored with looking after the children , peter and susan , before valerie 's death . afterwards , further problems occurred and ken was no longer able to cope . the writers were initially uncertain whether to continue with ken as a single father , or dispatch the children and pursue a less-encumbered lifestyle . refmylife , p.107 roache said , '' ken tried to bring up the kids on his own , but he was n't doing so good . so he sent them up to glasgow to live with his mother-in-law . '' ken still remained in contact ; roache recalled ken often saying : '' right , i 'm off to scotland . ' '' roache has suggested that the subsequent problems in his children 's adulthood were ken 's fault : '' i blame ken for how they 've all turned out . he shoved his kids up in scotland , did n't really look after them . but you do n't want a happy family in the street . you want a wonderful dysfunctional one like the one i 've got , they 're great and deirdre is wonderful . '' the animosity between ken and his children has been explored throughout the programme 's duration . chris gascoyne , who took on the role of peter in the 2000s , has suggested that there is a lot of tension between ken and peter due to the dysfunctional nature of the barlow family . guilt over the twins ' upbringing led ken to dote on his youngest son , daniel , as he was keen to avoid repeating his past mistakes . their close relationship resulted in roache challenging the series producers when a script required ken to allow daniel to be taken away by his mother . the actor felt that ken would not accept this ; he would fight . the scriptwriters apologised , but it was too late to re-write the plot . refmylife , pp.189–190 . after valerie 's death , ken became responsible for looking after her uncle , albert , and he later became known as ken 's '' uncle albert '' . albert would often make attempts to interfere in ken 's life , as he had no one else . at one stage , ken was making plans to leave weatherfield . when albert revealed he could not pay his bills on his pension , ken opted to stay . the storyline has been called a turning point for ken—when he realised he belonged in coronation street and had to help the community and albert alike . reflittle , p.130 . ken moved in with him and albert gradually saw ken as '' the son he never had '' . roache enjoyed the opportunity to work closely with howarth , whom he first met as a schoolboy . he characterised ken and albert 's relationship as '' often a little bumpy and uncomfortable , but underlying all of that was an affection the two had for each other . '' refmylife , p.128 . ken had a largely antagonistic relationship with his '' acid-tongued '' mother-in-law blanche , deirdre 's mother , who has been described as a '' thorn in ken 's side '' . she would criticise his looks , and on one occasion she accused him of being homosexual . when ken 's affair with martha was exposed , blanche took her comments too far : she tormented deirdre for staying with him , which resulted in her being thrown out of the barlow household and forced to live with peter . however , she was seen as '' the glue '' of the barlow family in the modern era , holding them together . blanche was willing to put her wit aside and fight to ensure that ken and deirdre stayed together , although most of the time , she interfered in his life . even in death , blanche managed to make a final remark aimed at ken , through her will . the storyline was described as giving her the chance to have '' the last laugh '' . in 2010 , it was announced that roache 's own children , linus and james , would be joining the cast . they played his long-lost son and grandson , respectively . in the storyline , ken finds a letter which discloses he had a secret son with a short-term girlfriend . roache said he looked forward '' immensely '' to working with his children during the fiftieth-anniversary year . the reunion was short-lived due to a rift between lawrence and james . lawrence was a bigot who could not accept that the fact james was homosexual . the producers decided to run the storyline to highlight the fact homophobia still exists . gay rights activists approved of the storyline because the producers showed both sides of the issue . on-screen , ken was opposed to lawrence 's views and decided to embrace james ' sexuality . he urged him to be true to himself and ignore his father 's bigoted views . lawrence does not agree with ken 's liberal stance . in 2011 , james returned to stay with ken . ken was grateful for the chance to get to know him better . ken sees james as his '' intellectual match '' , and has a lot of respect for him because he is a '' well-educated , erudite young man '' . he became carried away and moved him in because ken has always '' longed for intelligent conversation '' . . feud with mike baldwin . television researcher helena robson has discussed the appeal of soap operas , and suggests that '' many soap stories are never finally resolved and conflicts between characters may run throughout the programme 's history '' . she uses the '' undying hatred '' between ken barlow and mike baldwin ( johnny briggs ) as an example of this , suggesting that viewers '' welcome the sense of stability this offers although the element of change offers as much enjoyment for viewers . '' it was suggested in an itv documentary in 2006 that ken and mike 's hatred was a clash of cultures : '' barlow the lefty do-gooder versus baldwin , the cut-and-thrust money grabber . '' briggs has claimed that ken was envious of mike because he was rich and successful while ken was not , and roache has claimed that the reason ken disliked mike was because he was a self-centred and self-made individual . ken 's feud with mike—spanning over 20 years—began in 1983 , when ken discovered that his wife , deirdre , was having an affair with baldwin . his dislike for mike pre-dated the affair , however , and roache has stated : of the love triangle storyline , briggs has said , '' the way it captured the nation was amazing . everyone was talking about it and the pubs were empty . men were shouting out : 'go on mike , give her one . ' people were disappointed when she went back to ken '' . alt url the storyline had significant cultural impact , with the press claiming that the country was divided between those who thought deirdre should remain with ken , and those who thought she should leave with mike . refc4 , p.46 . in her 2003 book , hobson suggested that ken '' spent at least nineteen years unable to cope with the sense of rejection and betrayal '' caused by mike and deirdre 's affair . scriptwriters capitalised on the rivalry between the characters when , in 1986 , mike married ken 's daughter susan , a union that ken strongly opposed . numerous fights between ken and mike were featured , and briggs has suggested that they became famous for their brawls . the first fight between the pair occurred in 1986 , when ken confronted mike in his factory about mike 's maltreatment of his daughter . of the confrontation , briggs has said , '' it was a classic & nbsp ; – baldwin getting it in his own territory , the factory . it took a lot to get ken angry but after the way mike had treated his daughter , he was furious . he marched into the office and let him have it . this was one of those rare times he caught mike off-guard . '' mike was shown to get revenge on ken , though it took a further four years before he could do so on-screen . in a scene which aired in 1990 , mike punched ken , knocking him over a table in the rovers return public house . briggs has suggested that he and roache became old hands at doing on-screen fistfights , and that both really enjoyed doing the stunts . according to briggs , no choreographers were ever used . in 1998 , one incident left briggs with an injury after he fell backwards . ken and mike were forced to work together in 2000 , when they were featured in a storyline dubbed the '' freshco siege '' . ken and mike were among several series regulars held up at gunpoint in the soap 's local supermarket , where ken had been working as a trolley pusher . the episode was broadcast after the 9 pm watershed due to its depiction of violence . ken and mike were bound together by armed robbers , which facilitated an end to their feud ; ken helped mike to combat a panic attack . the pair resolved to put the past behind them ; it was a temporary reprieve . mike had unknowingly fathered a son , adam , during his brief marriage to susan barlow ; she kept the baby a secret from him . mike discovered adam 's existence in 2001 ; susan attempted to flee , but was killed in a motor accident . then followed a battle between mike and ken for custody of adam , with ken adamant that mike should not look after his grandson . the storyline led to the fifth fistfight between ken and mike in the soap 's history , with the pair brawling at the funeral of susan . the feud came to an end on-screen in 2006 , when briggs quit the role of mike . mike was killed off , dying of alzheimer 's disease ; he died in ken 's arms . in the final scenes , a disorientated and dying mike was found wandering the streets by ken , and as ken cradled mike in his arms , the rivals talked about old times before mike died , signifying the end of their 20-year feud . to promote mike 's final scenes , radio times released a series of photographs with ken and mike re-enacting arthur devis 's ( 1807 ) painting of the death of horatio nelson—baldwin was shown surrounded by his nearest and dearest during his final moments , with ken prominently positioned next to him , taking on the role of captain hardy , nelson 's trusted colleague to whom nelson famously uttered '' kiss me '' before he died . producer maire tracey said , '' the fact that mike dies in ken 's arms says it all . for most of mike 's life , it was his battles with ken that kept him going . like two cowboys , they spent their lives sizing each other up . behind the scenes bill roache has even suggested to johnny briggs that they should make a version of brokeback mountain for the two elderly cowboys . both ken and mike will miss the bust-ups . '' reflecting on the feud in 2006 , roache gave reasons why he thinks ken and mike clashed so often : '' ken felt threatened when mike arrived on the street , but it made the part more exciting for bill . ken is a nice guy , a loyal guy , a reliable guy . but he is n't terribly exciting . so the exciting guy mike comes along and he 's a bit flash , is n't he ? but i 've always liked the physical side of acting , so my punch-ups with johnny were probably the best bits . i shall miss those terribly . '' . who attacked ken ? . in march 2017 , ken was at the centre of a '' whodunit '' storyline which saw an unknown assailant push him down the stairs of his house after striking him over the head with a blunt object . the suspect list was initially narrowed down to six : adam barlow ( sam robertson ) , peter barlow ( chris gascoyne ) , tracy barlow ( kate ford ) , daniel osbourne ( rob mallard ) , pat phelan ( connor mcintyre ) and sinead tinker ( katie mcglynn ) . however , other suspects such as amy barlow ( elle mulvaney ) , simon barlow ( alex bain ) , rob donovan ( marc baylis ) and chloe tipton ( jo-anne knowles ) were later added into the frame . . appearances in other media . in september 2010 , coinciding with the 50th anniversary of coronation street , bbc four aired a drama film titled the road to coronation street , which depicted tony warren 's struggle to get his soap opera commissioned , and the filming of its pilot . roache himself ( as well as playing the character ken barlow ) appeared in the film and was portrayed by roache 's son , james . in 2011 , itv filmed a spin-off , web-based series featuring ken and deirdre , entitled ken and deirdre 's bedtime stories . created by coronation street writer jonathan harvey , the webisodes featured ken and deirdre mulling over the events of their day while in bed . in 2010 a comedy play about coronation street was produced , titled corrie ! , penned by scriptwriter jonathan harvey . ken barlow was played by simon chadwick in the production . harvey has suggested that when he researched the play , in the top five storylines for each of the 50 years of coronation street , three characters regularly featured—ken , deirdre and gail platt . harvey therefore tried to shape the play around their journeys over the years . in february 2011 ken was among various coronation street characters to have his portrait auctioned for charity in the exhibition 'behind the street ' at manchester 's generation pop gallery . the black-and-white shots were taken by photographer rob evans , and raised £8,600 for charity . the highest bid on a photograph was for a shot of ken , standing amongst rubble after the weatherfield tram crash in 2010 , a storyline marking the show 's 50th anniversary . in 2010 itv began selling coronation street merchandise featuring ken , including gift wrap and novelty congratulations cards . a parody song written about the character , entitled '' ken ! '' , was included on harry hill 's debut album , funny times . the track features vocals from hill and roache . ken has been spoofed by jon culshaw in the impressions show , where he is having a secret affair with pat evans from eastenders , spoofed by debra stephenson . culshaw wanted to include his impression of ken in the show , saying '' we were just looking for an excuse to get him in '' , so he decided that ken and pat would have a '' secret romantic tryst at a motorway service station '' somewhere between weatherfield and the eastenders setting of walford . in may 2012 , trisha ward 's stage musical , street of dreams , debuted . the production , which is based on coronation street , featured roache playing his on-screen alias , ken , in a pre-recorded segment . roache was one of several actors from the television series to feature in the musical . others included julie goodyear , kevin kennedy and brian capron ( who played bet gilroy , curly watts and richard hillman respectively ) . . reception . for his portrayal of ken , roache won the lifetime achievement award at the british soap awards 1999 . in november 2010 , ken surpassed bob hughes ( don hastings ) from us soap opera as the world turns to become the longest-serving soap opera actor . roache was honoured at a guinness world records ceremony in new york . in 1983 , roache , kirkbride and briggs were named tv personalities of the year at the pye colour television awards , for their performances in the ken–deirdre–mike love triangle storyline . refmylife , p.25 . journalist brian viner of the independent has suggested that roache has not been given the accolades he has deserved as a performer because of his longevity in the role of ken . he felt that it may be a common assumption that roache is merely playing himself on-screen ; this notion diminishes a '' rather remarkable acting performance '' . he added , '' although the bouquets tend to go to actors who repeatedly display their versatility , it is in many ways even harder to inhabit one role for five decades . that said , for sheer staying power ken and bill are clearly indivisible : one has lived in the same street practically all his life , the other in the same role . that we have been able to watch the evolution of that young man into the ken barlow we know today , no less self-righteous but with 50 years of experiences behind him , is frankly one of the wonders of british television . '' ken has a reputation for being boring . the british band half man half biscuit highlighted this point in their 2001 song '' lark descending '' , comparing him unfavourably with a member of the us underground music scene , with the lyric : '' i could have been like lou barlow , but i 'm more like ken barlow '' . despite ken being fictional , critic jim shelley , writing for the daily mirror in 2009 , labelled ken '' the most boring man you could ever meet '' . roache sued for libel in 1990 when the sun newspaper ran an article branding ken boring and making allegations that roache was disliked among the cast of coronation street . roache said to the jury at the court case , '' i felt extremely distressed . i could not believe those words had been written , that they had raked into my past . i broke out in a sweat . they were saying that i was not doing my job , that i was a joke to the storyline writers , which is not true '' . roache added in regard to ken , '' if people find someone who has had 23 girlfriends and three wives boring , that 's fine by me . '' roache won the case and was awarded £50,000 ; however , he was forced to pay legal costs , which bankrupted him . brian viner has suggested that it is remarkable that ken has been labelled boring in spite of the many plots he has been involved with over the years . brian viner said , '' it is easy enough to see , despite the extraordinary number of broken relationships and personal crises in his wake , why ken tends not to make the pulse race when he opens his mouth . after all , he usually opens it only to drink halves of bitter , or to say something sensible or worthy . for 50 years he has been the nearest thing weatherfield , the fictional area of greater manchester where coronation street is located , has had to a social conscience . '' in a channel 4 televised poll that was broadcast in 2001 , ken barlow was voted the third most-hated tv character of all time , coming behind phil mitchell from eastenders and mr blobby . in a radio times poll of over 5,000 people in 2004 , 15 % chose ken as the soap character they would most like to see retired . he came second in the poll , behind eastenders den watts ( 17 % ) . television personality paul o'grady wrote the foreword to roache 's 2010 autobiography , 50 years on the street . in it , he hailed ken as '' one of the iconic british soap characters '' , an all-time great who has been integral to coronation street . refmylife , pp.11–13 in 2005 , grace dent of the guardian suggested that coronation street archetypes have influenced latter soap opera characters . on ken , she stated : '' another heavily plagiarised corrie stalwart is ken barlow , who as 'resident intellectual ' has been looking down his nose at the proletariat since 1960 . just like poor hangdog-faced ken , brainy people in soapland ( dr truman from eastenders , roy cropper , todd grimshaw both from coronation street , emmerdales ethan the curate ) are always miserable and brooding , due to the terrible burden of their mighty intellect in the face of so many simpletons . it rarely pays to be too clever or too rich in soapland as the majority of plotlines rely upon tragic shakespearian falls from grace which everyone laughs their socks off at . '' in 2009 , viewers complained to itv as well as the media regulator ofcom after coronation street broadcast scenes in which ken made derogatory comments about christianity . a spokesperson for the show defended the opinions expressed by ken in the scripts , saying , '' coronation street is a soap opera set in modern society and therefore represents views from all side of the religious spectrum '' . the guardian columnist nancy banks-smith spoke highly of ken 's affair with martha fraser in 2009 , calling it '' a muted ingenious storyline '' . gareth mclean of radio times was critical of the storyline : '' when it comes to self-delusion , ken takes the biscuit , claims the cake and wolfs down the éclair . nursing the notion that he 's been thwarted by life , he decides to leave deirdre to sail off into the sunset & nbsp ; – or possibly runcorn & nbsp ; – with martha . all these years and ken still does n't realise it 's not deirdre who 's the dead weight in his life , it 's he himself . '' the bbc has said of him : '' during his record-breaking time on the hit soap , roache 's character has led a life full of incident '' . holy soap suggested that ken being labelled a gigolo in the local newspaper after his client , babs , died halfway through eating her meal , was his most memorable moment . in her book soap opera , hobson said ken and his brother david initially represented the younger males of society . she noted that although ken had many relationships , '' he could hardly be described as an early 'dirty den ' '' , a character notable for his womanising in the soap opera eastenders . refdorothy , p.97 . references . bibliography . . external links . ken barlow on imdb ken barlow at stv ken barlow at tvnz ken barlow at holy soap ken barlow at what 's on tv