Problem of induction

formulation of the problem . in inductive reasoning , one makes a series of observations and infers a new claim based on them . for instance , from a series of observations that a woman walks her dog by the market at 8 & nbsp ; am on monday , it seems valid to infer that next monday she will do the same , or that , in general , the woman walks her dog by the market every monday . that next monday the woman walks by the market merely adds to the series of observations , it does not prove she will walk by the market every monday . first of all , it is not certain , regardless of the number of observations , that the woman always walks by the market at 8 & nbsp ; am on monday . in fact , david hume would even argue that we can not claim it is '' more probable '' , since this still requires the assumption that the past predicts the future . second , the observations themselves do not establish the validity of inductive reasoning , except inductively . bertrand russell illustrated this point in the problems of philosophy : . ancient and early modern origins . . pyrrhonism . the works of the pyrrhonism philosopher sextus empiricus contain the oldest surviving questioning of the validity of inductive reasoning . he wrote : sextus empiricus . outlines of pyrrhonism , book ii , chapter 15 section 204 trans . robert gregg bury ( loeb ed . ) ( london : w . heinemann , 1933 ) , p . 283 . the focus upon the gap between the premises and conclusion present in the above passage appears different from hume 's focus upon the circular reasoning of induction . however , weintraub claims in the philosophical quarterly weintraub , r . ( 1995 ) . what was hume 's contribution to the problem of induction ? the philosophical quarterly 45 ( 181 ) :460–470 that although sextus 's approach to the problem appears different , hume 's approach was actually an application of another argument raised by sextus : sextus empiricus . against the logicians , trans . robert gregg bury ( loeb ed . ) ( london : w . heinemann , 1935 ) , p . 179 although the regress argument applies to both deduction and induction , weintraub believes that sextus 's argument '' is precisely the strategy hume invokes against induction : it can not be justified , because the purported justification , being inductive , is circular . '' she concludes that '' hume 's most important legacy is the supposition that the justification of induction is not analogous to that of deduction . '' she ends with a discussion of hume 's implicit sanction of the validity of deduction , which hume describes as intuitive in a manner analogous to modern foundationalism . indian philosophy . the cārvāka , a materialist and skeptic school of indian philosophy , used the problem of induction to point out the flaws in using inference as a way to gain valid knowledge . they held that since inference needed an invariable connection between the middle term and the predicate , and further , that since there was no way to establish this invariable connection , that the efficacy of inference as a means of valid knowledge could never be stated . dr . s . radhakrishnan , indian philosophy vol i , p . 279 s . dasgupta , a history of indian philosophy , vol iii . pg 533 the 9th century indian skeptic , jayarāśi bhaṭṭa , also made an attack on inference , along with all means of knowledge , and showed by a type of reductio argument that there was no way to conclude universal relations from the observation of particular instances . piotr balcerowicz , '' jayarāśi '' franco , eli , 1987 , perception , knowledge and disbelief : a study of jayarāśi 's scepticism . medieval philosophy . medieval writers such as al-ghazali and william of ockham connected the problem with god 's absolute power , asking how we can be certain that the world will continue behaving as expected when god could at any moment miraculously cause the opposite . franklin , j . ( 2001 ) , the science of conjecture : evidence and probability before pascal ( baltimore : johns hopkins university press ) , 232–233 , 241 . duns scotus , however , argued that inductive inference from a finite number of particulars to a universal generalization was justified by '' a proposition reposing in the soul , 'whatever occurs in a great many instances by a cause that is not free , is the natural effect of that cause . duns scotus : philosophical writings , trans . a . wolter ( edinburgh : 1962 ) , 109–110 ; franklin , science of conjecture , 206 . some 17th-century jesuits argued that although god could create the end of the world at any moment , it was necessarily a rare event and hence our confidence that it would not happen very soon was largely justified . franklin , science of conjecture , 223–224 . . david hume . david hume , a scottish thinker of the enlightenment era , is the philosopher most often associated with induction . his formulation of the problem of induction can be found in an enquiry concerning human understanding , §4 . here , hume introduces his famous distinction between '' relations of ideas '' and '' matters of fact . '' relations of ideas are propositions which can be derived from deductive logic , which can be found in fields such as geometry and algebra . matters of fact , meanwhile , are not verified through the workings of deductive logic but by experience . specifically , matters of fact are established by making an inference about causes and effects from repeatedly observed experience . while relations of ideas are supported by reason alone , matters of fact must rely on the connection of a cause and effect through experience . causes of effects can not be linked through a priori reasoning , but by positing a '' necessary connection '' that depends on the '' uniformity of nature . '' hume situates his introduction to the problem of induction in a treatise of human nature within his larger discussion on the nature of causes and effects ( book i , part iii , section vi ) . he writes that reasoning alone can not establish the grounds of causation . instead , the human mind imputes causation to phenomena after repeatedly observing a connection between two objects . for hume , establishing the link between causes and effects relies not on reasoning alone , but the observation of '' constant conjunction '' throughout one 's sensory experience . from this discussion , hume goes onto present his formulation of the problem of induction in a treatise of human nature , writing '' there can be no demonstrative arguments to prove , that those instances , of which we have had no experience , resemble those , of which we have had experience . '' in other words , the problem of induction can be framed in the following way : we can not apply a conclusion about a particular set of observations to a more general set of observations . while deductive logic allows one to arrive at a conclusion with certainty , inductive logic can only provide a conclusion that is probably true . it is mistaken to frame the difference between deductive and inductive logic as one between general to specific reasoning and specific to general reasoning . this is a common misperception about the difference between inductive and deductive thinking . according to the literal standards of logic , deductive reasoning arrives at certain conclusions while inductive reasoning arrives at probable conclusions . hume 's treatment of induction helps to establish the grounds for probability , as he writes in a treatise of human nature that '' probability is founded on the presumption of a resemblance betwixt those objects , of which we have had experience , and those , of which we have had none '' ( book i , part iii , section vi ) . therefore , hume establishes induction as the very grounds for attributing causation . there might be many effects which stem from a single cause . over repeated observation , one establishes that a certain set of effects are linked to a certain set of causes . however , the future resemblance of these connections to connections observed in the past depends on induction . induction allows one to conclude that '' effect a2 '' was caused by '' cause a2 '' because a connection between '' effect a1 '' and '' cause a1 '' was observed repeatedly in the past . given that reason alone can not be sufficient to establish the grounds of induction , hume implies that induction must be accomplished through imagination . one does not make an inductive reference through a priori reasoning , but through an imaginative step automatically taken by the mind . hume does not challenge that induction is performed by the human mind automatically , but rather hopes to show more clearly how much human inference depends on inductive—not a priori—reasoning . he does not deny future uses of induction , but shows that it is distinct from deductive reasoning , helps to ground causation , and wants to inquire more deeply into its validity . hume offers no solution to the problem of induction himself . he prompts other thinkers and logicians to argue for the validity of induction as an ongoing dilemma for philosophy . a key issue with establishing the validity of induction is that one is tempted to use an inductive inference as a form of justification itself . this is because people commonly justify the validity of induction by pointing to the many instances in the past when induction proved to be accurate . for example , one might argue that it is valid to use inductive inference in the future because this type of reasoning has yielded accurate results in the past . however , this argument relies on an inductive premise itself—that past observations of induction being valid will mean that future observations of induction will also be valid . thus , many solutions to the problem of induction tend to be circular . nelson goodman 's new riddle of induction . nelson goodman 's fact , fiction , and forecast presented a different description of the problem of induction in the chapter entitled '' the new riddle of induction '' . goodman proposed the new predicate '' grue '' . something is grue if and only if it has been ( or will be , according to a scientific , general hypothesis goodman , nelson . fact , fiction , and forecast ( fourth edition ) . harvard university press , 1983 , p.74 , '' will each confirm the general hypothesis that all emeralds are grue '' goodman ’ s original definition of grue ) observed to be green before a certain time t , or blue if observed after that time . the '' new '' problem of induction is , since all emeralds we have ever seen are both green and grue , why do we suppose that after time t we will find green but not grue emeralds ? the problem here raised is that two different inductions will be true and false under the same conditions . in other words : given the observations of a lot of green emeralds , someone using a common language will inductively infer that all emeralds are green ( therefore , he will believe that any emerald he will ever find will be green , even after time t ) . given the same set of observations of green emeralds , someone using the predicate '' grue '' will inductively infer that all emeralds , which will be observed after t , will be blue , despite the fact that he observed only green emeralds so far . goodman , however , points out that the predicate '' grue '' only appears more complex than the predicate '' green '' because we have defined grue in terms of blue and green . if we had always been brought up to think in terms of '' grue '' and '' bleen '' ( where bleen is blue before time t , or green thereafter ) , we would intuitively consider '' green '' to be a crazy and complicated predicate . goodman believed that which scientific hypotheses we favour depend on which predicates are '' entrenched '' in our language . w . v . o . quine offers a practical solution to this problem reprinted in : quine ( 1969 ) , ontological relativity and other essays , ch . 5 . by making the metaphysics claim that only predicates that identify a '' natural kind '' ( i.e . a real property of real things ) can be legitimately used in a scientific hypothesis . r . bhaskar also offers a practical solution to the problem . he argues that the problem of induction only arises if we deny the possibility of a reason for the predicate , located in the enduring nature of something . for example , we know that all emeralds are green , not because we have only ever seen green emeralds , but because the chemical make-up of emeralds insists that they must be green . if we were to change that structure , they would not be green . for instance , emeralds are a kind of green beryl , made green by trace amounts of chromium and sometimes vanadium . without these trace elements , the gems would be colourless . notable interpretations . hume . although induction is not made by reason , hume observes that we nonetheless perform it and improve from it . he proposes a descriptive explanation for the nature of induction in §5 of the enquiry , titled '' skeptical solution of these doubts '' . it is by custom or habit that one draws the inductive connection described above , and '' without the influence of custom we would be entirely ignorant of every matter of fact beyond what is immediately present to the memory and senses '' . enquiry , §5.1 . the result of custom is belief , which is instinctual and much stronger than imagination alone . enquiry , §5.2 . . david stove and donald williams . david stove 's argument for induction , based on the statistical syllogism , was presented in the rationality of induction and was developed from an argument put forward by one of stove 's heroes , the late donald cary williams ( formerly professor at harvard ) in his book the ground of induction . , stove argued that it is a statistical truth that the great majority of the possible subsets of specified size ( as long as this size is not too small ) are similar to the larger population to which they belong . for example , the majority of the subsets which contain 3000 ravens which you can form from the raven population are similar to the population itself ( and this applies no matter how large the raven population is , as long as it is not infinite ) . consequently , stove argued that if you find yourself with such a subset then the chances are that this subset is one of the ones that are similar to the population , and so you are justified in concluding that it is likely that this subset '' matches '' the population reasonably closely . the situation would be analogous to drawing a ball out of a barrel of balls , 99 % of which are red . in such a case you have a 99 % chance of drawing a red ball . similarly , when getting a sample of ravens the probability is very high that the sample is one of the matching or '' representative '' ones . so as long as you have no reason to think that your sample is an unrepresentative one , you are justified in thinking that probably ( although not certainly ) that it is . d . stove , the rationality of induction , clarendon press , oxford , 1986 , ch . 6 . . biting the bullet : keith campbell and claudio costa . an intuitive answer to hume would be to say that a world inaccessible to any inductive procedure would simply not be conceivable . this intuition was taken into account by keith campbell by considering that , to be built , a concept must be reapplied , which demands a certain continuity in its object of application and consequently some openness to induction . '' one form of skepticism about induction '' , in richard swinburne ( ed . ) the justification of the induction . oxford , oxford university press , 1974 . recently , claudio costa has noted that a future can only be a future of its own past if it holds some identity with it . moreover , the nearer a future is to the point of junction with its past , the greater are the similarities tendentially involved . consequently , – contra hume – some form of principle of homogeneity ( causal or structural ) between future and past must be warranted , which would make some inductive procedure always possible . claudio costa : philosophical semantics : reintegrating theoretical philosophy , appendix to ch . v , csp , 2018 . . karl popper . karl popper , a philosophy of science , sought to solve the problem of induction . he argued that science does not use induction , and induction is in fact a myth . instead , knowledge is created by conjecture and criticism . the main role of observations and experiments in science , he argued , is in attempts to criticize and refute existing theories . according to popper , the problem of induction as usually conceived is asking the wrong question : it is asking how to justify theories given they can not be justified by induction . popper argued that justification is not needed at all , and seeking justification '' begs for an authoritarian answer '' . instead , popper said , what should be done is to look to find and correct errors . popper regarded theories that have survived criticism as better corroborated in proportion to the amount and stringency of the criticism , but , in sharp contrast to the inductivist theories of knowledge , emphatically as less likely to be true . logic of scientific discovery , section 43 popper held that seeking for theories with a high probability of being true was a false goal that is in conflict with the search for knowledge . science should seek for theories that are most probably false on the one hand ( which is the same as saying that they are highly falsifiable and so there are many ways that they could turn out to be wrong ) , but still all actual attempts to falsify them have failed so far ( that they are highly corroborated ) . wesley c . salmon criticizes popper on the grounds that predictions need to be made both for practical purposes and in order to test theories . that means popperians need to make a selection from the number of unfalsified theories available to them , which is generally more than one . popperians would wish to choose well-corroborated theories , in their sense of corroboration , but face a dilemma : either they are making the essentially inductive claim that a theory 's having survived criticism in the past means it will be a reliable predictor in the future ; or popperian corroboration is no indicator of predictive power at all , so there is no rational motivation for their preferred selection principle . david miller has criticized this kind of criticism by salmon and others because it makes inductivist assumptions . popper does not say that corroboration is an indicator of predictive power . the predictive power is in the theory itself , not in its corroboration . the rational motivation for choosing a well-corroborated theory is that it is simply easier to falsify : well-corroborated means that at least one kind of experiment ( already conducted at least once ) could have falsified ( but did not actually falsify ) the one theory , while the same kind of experiment , regardless of its outcome , could not have falsified the other . so it is rational to choose the well-corroborated theory : it may not be more likely to be true , but if it is actually false , it is easier to get rid of when confronted with the conflicting evidence that will eventually turn up . accordingly , it is wrong to consider corroboration as a reason , a justification for believing in a theory or as an argument in favor of a theory to convince someone who objects to it . thomas bullemore , '' some remarks on the pragmatic problem of induction '' , academia.edu . see also . a priori and a posteriori abductive reasoning bayesian inference consilience hasty generalization inductive logic programming law of large numbers solomonoff 's theory of inductive inference . notes . references . . external links . ( 1973 ) by david stove discovering karl popper by peter singer the warrant of induction by d . h . mellor hume and the problem of induction secular responses to the problem of induction , by james n . anderson the pragmatic problem of induction , by thomas bullemore understanding scientific progress , by nicholas maxwell . this book sets out to solve the problem of induction and related problems associated with scientific progress . the problem of induction and metaphysical assumptions concerning the comprehensibility and knowability of the universe by nicholas maxwell