Arundhati Roy

early life . arundhati roy was born in shillong , meghalaya , india , to mary roy , a malayali syrian christian women 's rights activist from kerala and rajib roy , a bengali hindu tea plantation manager from kolkata . siddhartha deb , '' arundhati roy , the not-so-reluctant renegade '' , the new york times , 5 march 2014 . accessed 5 march 2014 . when she was two , her parents divorced and she returned to kerala with her mother and brother . for some time , the family lived with roy 's maternal grandfather in ooty , tamil nadu . when she was five , the family moved back to kerala , where her mother started a school . roy attended school at corpus christi , kottayam , followed by the lawrence school , lovedale , in nilgiris , tamil nadu . she then studied architecture at the school of planning and architecture , delhi , where she met architect gerard da cunha . the two lived together in delhi , and then goa , before they separated . . personal life . roy returned to delhi , where she obtained a position with the national institute of urban affairs . in 1984 , she met independent filmmaker pradip krishen , who offered her a role as a goatherd in his award-winning movie massey sahib . later , the two married . they collaborated on a television series on india 's independence movement and on two films , annie and electric moon . disenchanted with the film world , roy experimented with various fields , including running aerobics classes . roy and krishen eventually separated . she became financially secure with the success of her novel the god of small things , published in 1997 . roy is a cousin of prominent media personality prannoy roy , the head of the indian television media group ndtv . she lives in delhi . . career . early career : screenplays . early in her career , roy worked in television and movies . she wrote the screenplays for in which annie gives it those ones ( 1989 ) , a movie based on her experiences as a student of architecture , in which she also appeared as a performer , and electric moon ( 1992 ) . '' arundhati roy , author-activist '' , india today . retrieved 16 june 2013 both were directed by her husband , pradip krishen , during their marriage . roy won the national film award for best screenplay in 1988 for in which annie gives it those ones . she attracted attention in 1994 when she criticised shekhar kapur 's film bandit queen , which was based on the life of phoolan devi . in her film review titled '' the great indian rape trick '' , she questioned the right to '' restage the rape of a living woman without her permission '' , and charged kapur with exploiting devi and misrepresenting both her life and its meaning . the great indian rape-trick sawnet -the south asian women 's network . retrieved 25 november 2011 . . the god of small things . roy began writing her first novel , the god of small things , in 1992 , completing it in 1996 . the book is semi-autobiographical and a major part captures her childhood experiences in aymanam . the publication of the god of small things catapulted roy to international fame . it received the 1997 booker prize for fiction and was listed as one of the new york times notable books of the year . it reached fourth position on the new york times bestsellers list for independent fiction . from the beginning , the book was also a commercial success : roy received half a million pounds as an advance . it was published in may , and the book had been sold in 18 countries by the end of june . the god of small things received stellar reviews in major american newspapers such as the new york times ( a '' dazzling first novel , '' '' extraordinary '' , '' at once so morally strenuous and so imaginatively supple '' ) and the los angeles times ( '' a novel of poignancy and considerable sweep '' ) , and in canadian publications such as the toronto star ( '' a lush , magical novel '' ) . it was one of the five best books of 1997 according to time . critical response in the united kingdom was less positive , and the awarding of the booker prize caused controversy ; carmen callil , a 1996 booker prize judge , called the novel '' execrable '' , and the guardian called the context '' profoundly depressing '' . in india , the book was criticised especially for its unrestrained description of sexuality by e . & nbsp ; k . nayanar , then chief minister of roy 's home state kerala , where she had to answer charges of obscenity . . later career . since the success of her novel , roy has written a television serial , the banyan tree , vir sanghvi , '' i think from a very early age , i was determined to negotiate with the world on my own '' , the rediff special , retrieved 18 april 2012 . and the documentary dam/age : a film with arundhati roy ( 2002 ) . in early 2007 , roy stated that she was working on a second novel . she contributed to we are one : a celebration of tribal peoples , a book released in 2009 , that explores the culture of peoples around the world , portraying their diversity and the threats to their existence . the royalties from the sale of this book go to the indigenous rights organisation survival international . she has written numerous essays on contemporary politics and culture . in 2014 , they were collected by penguin india in a five-volume set . in 2019 , her nonfiction was collected in a single volume , my seditious heart , published by haymarket books . my seditious heart : collected non-fiction . in october 2016 , penguin books and hamish hamilton announced that they would publish her second novel , the ministry of utmost happiness , in june 2017 . '' arundhati roy announces second book after 19 yrs ; to release in june 2017 '' . hindustan times . 3 october 2016 . retrieved 3 october 2016 . the novel was chosen for the man booker prize 2017 long list . book depository retrieved 27 july 2017 . the ministry of utmost happiness was nominated as a finalist for the national book critics circle award for fiction in january 2018 . . advocacy . since publishing the god of small things in 1997 , roy has spent most of her time on political activism and nonfiction ( such as collections of essays about social causes ) . she is a spokesperson of the anti-globalization/alter-globalization movement and a vehement critic of neo-imperialism and u.s . foreign policy . she opposes india 's policies toward nuclear weapons as well as industrialization and economic growth ( which she describes as '' encrypted with genocidal potential '' in listening to grasshoppers ) . she has also questioned the conduct of indian police and administration in the case of 2001 indian parliament attack and the batla house encounter case contending that the country has had a '' shadowy history of suspicious terror attacks , murky investigations , and fake encounters '' . . support for kashmiri separatism . in an august 2008 interview with the times of india , roy expressed her support for the kashmir conflict from india after the massive demonstrations in 2008 in favour of independence took place—some 500,000 separatists rallied in srinagar in the kashmir part of jammu and kashmir state of india for independence on 18 august 2008 , following the amarnath land transfer controversy . according to her , the rallies were a sign that kashmiris desired secession from india , and not union with india . she was criticised by the indian national congress and bharatiya janata party for her remarks . all india congress committee member and senior congress party leader satya prakash malaviya asked roy to withdraw her '' irresponsible '' statement , saying it was '' contrary to historical facts '' . it would do better to brush up her knowledge of history and know that the princely state of jammu and kashmir had acceded to the union of india after its erstwhile ruler maharaja hari singh duly signed the instrument of accession on 26 october 1947 . and the state , consequently has become as much an integral part of india as all the other erstwhile princely states have . she was charged with sedition along with separatist hurriyat leader syed ali shah geelani and others by delhi police for their '' anti-india '' speech at a 2010 convention on kashmir : '' azadi : the only way '' . . sardar sarovar project . roy has campaigned along with activist medha patkar against the narmada dam project , saying that the dam will displace half a million people with little or no compensation , and will not provide the projected irrigation , drinking water , and other benefits . roy donated her booker prize money , as well as royalties from her books on the project , to the narmada bachao andolan . roy also appears in franny armstrong 's drowned out , a 2002 documentary about the project . roy 's opposition to the narmada dam project was criticised as '' maligning gujarat '' by congress and bjp leaders in gujarat . the telegraph & nbsp ; – calcutta : nation . in 2002 , roy responded to a contempt notice issued against her by the supreme court of india with an affidavit saying the court 's decision to initiate contempt proceedings based on an unsubstantiated and flawed petition , while refusing to inquire into tehelka operation west end pleading an overload of cases , indicated a '' disquieting inclination '' to silence criticism and dissent using the power of contempt . the court found roy 's statement , which she refused to disavow or apologise for , constituted criminal contempt , sentenced her to a '' symbolic '' one day 's imprisonment , and fined her rs . 2500 . roy served the jail sentence and paid the fine rather than serve an additional three months for default . environmental historian ramachandra guha has been critical of roy 's narmada dam activism . while acknowledging her '' courage and commitment '' to the cause , guha writes that her advocacy is hyperbolic and self-indulgent , ramachandra guha , '' the arun shourie of the left '' , the hindu , 26 november 2000 . '' ms . roy 's tendency to exaggerate and simplify , her manichaean view of the world , and her shrill hectoring tone , have given a bad name to environmental analysis '' . ramachandra guha , '' perils of extremism '' , the hindu , 17 december 2000 . he faulted roy 's criticism of supreme court judges who were hearing a petition brought by the narmada bachao andolan as careless and irresponsible . roy counters that her writing is intentional in its passionate , hysterical tone : '' i am hysterical . i 'm screaming from the bloody rooftops . and he and his smug little club are going 'shhhh . you 'll wake the neighbours ! ' i want to wake the neighbours , that 's my whole point . i want everybody to open their eyes '' . gail omvedt and roy have had fierce yet constructive discussions in open letters on roy 's strategy for the narmada dam movement . the activists disagree on whether to demand stopping the dam building altogether ( roy ) or search for intermediate alternatives ( omvedt ) . . us foreign policy , war in afghanistan . in an opinion piece in the guardian titled '' the algebra of infinite justice '' , roy responded to the war in afghanistan ( 2001–present ) , finding fault with the argument that this war would be a retaliation for the september 11 attacks : '' the bombing of afghanistan is not revenge for new york and washington . it is yet another act of terror against the people of the world . '' according to her , u.s . president george w . bush and uk prime minister tony blair were guilty of orwellian doublethink : when he announced the air strikes , president george bush said : '' we 're a peaceful nation . '' america 's favourite ambassador , tony blair , ( who also holds the portfolio of prime minister of the uk ) , echoed him : '' we 're a peaceful people . '' so now we know . pigs are horses . girls are boys . war is peace . she disputes u.s . claims of being a peaceful and freedom-loving nation , listing china and 19 third world '' countries that america has been at war with—and bombed—since world war ii '' , as well as previous u.s . support for the taliban movement and the northern alliance ( whose '' track record is not very different from the taliban 's '' ) . she does not spare the taliban : '' now , as adults and rulers , the taliban beat , stone , rape , and brutalise women , they do n't seem to know what else to do with them . '' in the final analysis , roy sees american-style capitalism as the culprit : '' in america , the arms industry , the oil industry , the major media networks , and , indeed , u.s . foreign policy , are all controlled by the same business combines '' . she puts the attacks on the world trade center and on afghanistan on the same moral level , that of terrorism , and mourns the impossibility of beauty after 2001 : '' will it be possible ever again to watch the slow , amazed blink of a newborn gecko in the sun , or whisper back to the marmot who has just whispered in your ear—without thinking of the world trade centre and afghanistan ? '' in may 2003 she delivered a speech titled '' instant-mix imperial democracy ( buy one , get one free ) '' at riverside church in new york city , in which she described the united states as a global empire that reserves the right to bomb any of its subjects at any time , deriving its legitimacy directly from god . the speech was an indictment of the u.s . actions relating to the iraq war . in june 2005 she took part in the world tribunal on iraq , and in march 2006 , roy criticised president george w . bush 's visit to india , calling him a '' war criminal '' . . india 's nuclear weaponry . in response to india 's testing of nuclear weapons in pokhran , rajasthan , roy wrote the end of imagination ( 1998 ) , a critique of the indian government 's nuclear policies . it was published in her collection the cost of living ( 1999 ) , in which she also crusaded against india 's massive hydroelectric dam projects in the central and western states of maharashtra , madhya pradesh , and gujarat . anti-zionism . in august 2006 , roy , along with noam chomsky , howard zinn , and others , signed a letter in the guardian calling the 2006 lebanon war a '' war crime '' and accusing israel of '' state terror '' . in 2007 , roy was one of more than 100 artists and writers who signed an open letter initiated by queers undermining israeli terrorism and the south west asian , north african bay area queers calling on the frameline '' to honor calls for an international boycott of israeli political and cultural institutions , by discontinuing israeli consulate sponsorship of the lgbt film festival and not cosponsoring events with the israeli consulate '' . . 2001 indian parliament attack . roy has raised questions about the investigation into the 2001 indian parliament attack and the trial of the accused . according to her , mohammad afzal guru was being scapegoated pointing at irregularities in the judicial and investigative process in the case and maintains the stance that the case remains unsolved . in her book about the hanging of afzal guru , she had even suggested that there was evidence of state complicity in the terrorist attack . in an editorial in the hindu , journalist praveen swami questioned her asserted evidence of state complicity as having been '' cherry-picked for polemical effect '' . she had also called for the death sentence of mohammad afzal to be stayed while a parliamentary enquiry into these questions is conducted and denounced press coverage of the trial . arundhati roy , '' and his life should become extinct '' , outlook , 30 october 2006 . bjp spokesperson prakash javadekar criticised roy for calling convicted terrorist mohammad afzal a '' prisoner-of-war '' and called arundhati a '' prisoner of her own dogma '' . afzal was hanged in 2013 . . the muthanga incident . in 2003 , the adivasi gothra maha sabha , a social movement for adivasi land rights in kerala , organised a major land occupation of a piece of land of a former eucalyptus plantation in the wynad wildlife sanctuary , on the border of kerala and karnataka . after 48 days , a police force was sent into the area to evict the occupants . one participant of the movement and a policeman were killed , and the leaders of the movement were arrested . roy travelled to the area , visited the movement 's leaders in jail , and wrote an open letter to the then chief minister of kerala , a . & nbsp ; k . antony , saying '' you have blood on your hands . '' . comments on 2008 mumbai attacks . in an opinion piece for the guardian , roy argued that the november 2008 mumbai attacks can not be seen in isolation , but must be understood in the context of wider issues in the region 's history and society such as widespread poverty , the partition of india ( '' britain 's final , parting kick to us '' ) , the atrocities committed during the 2002 gujarat violence , and the ongoing kashmir conflict . despite this call for context , roy stated in the article that she believes '' nothing can justify terrorism '' and calls terrorism '' a heartless ideology '' . roy warned against war with pakistan , arguing that it is hard to '' pin down the provenance of a terrorist strike and isolate it within the borders of a single nation state '' , and that war could lead to the '' descent of the whole region into chaos '' . her remarks were strongly criticised by salman rushdie and others , who condemned her for linking the mumbai attacks with kashmir and economic injustice against islam in india ; rushdie specifically criticised roy for attacking the iconic status of the taj mahal palace and tower . indian writer tavleen singh called roy 's comments '' the latest of her series of hysterical diatribes against india and all things indian '' . . criticism of sri lankan government . in an opinion piece in the guardian , roy pled for international attention to what she called a possible government-sponsored genocide of tamils in sri lanka . she cited reports of camps into which tamils were being herded as part of what she described as '' a brazen , openly racist war '' . she also said that the '' government of sri lanka is on the verge of committing what could end up being genocide '' and described the sri lankan idp camps where tamil civilians are being held as concentration camps . ruvani freeman , a sri lankan writer called roy 's remarks '' ill-informed and hypocritical '' and criticised her for '' whitewashing the atrocities of the ltte '' . '' lankan writer slams arundhati roy '' , the indian express , 4 april 2009 . roy has said of such accusations : '' i can not admire those whose vision can only accommodate justice for their own and not for everybody . however i do believe that the ltte and its fetish for violence was cultured in the crucible of monstrous , racist , injustice that the sri lankan government and to a great extent sinhala society visited on the tamil people for decades '' . . views on the naxalites . roy has criticised the indian government 's armed actions against the naxalite-maoist insurgency in india , calling it '' war on the poorest people in the country '' . according to her , the government has '' abdicated its responsibility to the people '' karan thapar , '' india is a corporate , hindu state : arundhati '' , cnn-ibn , 12 september 2010 . and launched the offensive against naxals to aid the corporations with whom it has signed memoranda of understanding . '' govt at war with naxals to aid mncs : arundhati '' , ibnlive , 21 october 2009 . while she has received support from various quarters for her views , amulya ganguli , '' rooting for rebels '' , 11 may 2010 . dna india . roy 's description of the maoists as '' gandhism '' raised a controversy . '' walking with the comrades '' , outlook cover story , 29 march 2010 . '' cops should n't have used public bus : arundhati '' , the times of india , 19 may 2010 . in other statements , she has described naxalites as patriots '' of a kind '' who are '' fighting to implement the constitution , ( while ) the government is vandalising it '' . . sedition charges . in november 2010 , roy , syed ali shah geelani , and five others were brought up on charges of sedition by the delhi police . the filing of the first information report came following a directive from a local court on a petition filed by sushil pandit who alleged that geelani and roy made anti-india speeches at a conference on '' azadi-the only way '' on 21 october 2010 . in roy 's words , '' kashmir has never been an integral part of india . it is a historical fact . even the indian government has accepted this '' . a delhi city court directed the police to respond to the demand for a criminal case after the central government declined to charge roy , saying that the charges were inappropriate . . criticism of anna hazare . on 21 august 2011 , at the height of anna hazare 's anti-corruption campaign , roy criticised hazare and his movement in an opinion piece published in the hindu . i 'd rather not be anna : arundhati roy . the hindu , 21 august 2011 . retrieved 18 june 2012 . in the article , she questioned hazare 's secular credentials , pointing out the campaign 's corporate backing , its suspicious timing , hazare 's silence on private-sector corruption , expressing her fear that the lokpal will only end up creating '' two oligarchies , instead of just one '' . she stated that while '' his means may be gandhian , his demands are certainly not '' , and alleged that by '' demonising only the government they '' are preparing to call for '' more privatisation , more access to public infrastructure and india 's natural resources '' , adding that it '' may not be long before corporate corruption is made legal and renamed a lobbying fee '' . roy also accused the electronic media of blowing the campaign out of proportion . in an interview with kindle magazine , roy pointed out the role of media hype and target audience in determining how well hunger strikes '' work as a tool of political mobilization '' by noting the disparity in the attention hazare 's fast has received in contrast to the decade-long fast of irom sharmila '' to demand the repealing of a law that allows non-commissioned officers to kill on suspicion—a law that has led to so much suffering . '' roy 's comparison of the jan lokpal bill with the maoists , claiming both sought '' the overthrow of the indian state '' , met with resentment from members of team anna . medha patkar reacted sharply calling roy 's comments '' highly misplaced '' and chose to emphasise the '' peaceful , non-violent '' nature of the movement . mukherjee , vishwajoy ( 22 august 2011 ) . '' we are not like the maoists : medha patkar '' . tehelka . retrieved 29 august 2011 . roy also has stated that '' an 'anti-corruption ' campaign is a catch-all campaign . it includes everybody from the extreme left to the extreme right and also the extremely corrupt . no one 's going to say they are for corruption after all.i 'm not against a strong anti-corruption bill , but corruption is just a manifestation of a problem , not the problem itself . '' . views on narendra modi . in 2013 , roy called narendra modi 's nomination as prime minister a '' tragedy '' . she said business houses were supporting his candidacy because he was the '' most militaristic and aggressive '' candidate . she has argued that modi has control over india to a degree unrecognized by most people in the western world : '' he is the system . he has the backing of the media . he has the backing of the army , the courts , a majoritarian popular vote . every institution has fallen in line . '' she has expressed deep despair for the future , calling modi 's long-term plans for a highly centralized hindu state '' suicidal '' for the multicultural subcontinent . . comments on nrc and npr . on 25 december 2019 , while speaking at delhi university , roy urged people to mislead authorities during the upcoming enumeration by the national population register , which she said can serve as a database for the national register of citizens . the remarks were criticized across the political divide . complaint against her was registered under sections 295a , 504 , 153 and 120b of indian penal code at tilak marg police station , delhi . later , she claimed that her comments were misinterpreted . . awards . roy was awarded the 1997 booker prize for her novel the god of small things . the award carried a prize of approximately us 30,000 and a citation that noted , '' the book keeps all the promises that it makes '' . roy donated the prize money she received , as well as royalties from her book , to human rights causes . prior to the booker , roy won the national film award for best screenplay in 1989 , for the screenplay of in which annie gives it those ones , in which she captured the anguish among the students prevailing in professional institutions . in 2015 , she returned the national award in protest against religious intolerance and the growing violence by rightwing groups in india . in 2002 , she won the lannan foundation 's cultural freedom award for her work '' about civil societies that are adversely affected by the world 's most powerful governments and corporations '' , in order '' to celebrate her life and her ongoing work in the struggle for freedom , justice and cultural diversity '' . in 2003 , she was awarded '' special recognition '' as a woman of peace at the global exchange human rights awards in san francisco with bianca jagger , barbara lee , and kathy kelly . roy was awarded the sydney peace prize in may 2004 for her work in social campaigns and her advocacy of nonviolence . '' arundhati roy gets sydney peace prize '' , outlook , retrieved 1 april 2012 . '' peace ? . '' , outlook , retrieved 1 april 2012 . arundhati roy in january 2006 , she was awarded the sahitya akademi award , a national award from india 's academy of letters , for her collection of essays on contemporary issues , the algebra of infinite justice , but she declined to accept it '' in protest against the indian government toeing the us line by 'violently and ruthlessly pursuing policies of brutalisation of industrial workers , increasing militarisation and economic neo-liberalisation ' '' . '' sahitya akademi award : arundhati roy rejects honor '' , deccan herald , 16 january 2006 . '' award-winning novelist rejects a prize '' , the new york times , 17 january 2006 . retrieved 18 december 2011 . in november 2011 , she was awarded the norman mailer prize for distinguished writing . '' from norman mailer to arundhati roy '' . hamish hamilton . retrieved 13 december 2015 ) . roy was featured in the 2014 list of time 100 , the 100 most influential people in the world . . bibliography . fiction . the god of small things . flamingo , 1997 . the ministry of utmost happiness . hamish hamilton , 2017 . non-fiction . the end of imagination . kottayam : d.c . books , 1998 . the cost of living . flamingo , 1999 . the greater common good . bombay : india book distributor , 1999 . the algebra of infinite justice . flamingo , 2002 . power politics . cambridge : south end press , 2002 . war talk . cambridge : south end press , 2003 . an ordinary person 's guide to empire . consortium , 2004 . the checkbook and the cruise missile : conversations with arundhati roy . interviews by david barsamian . cambridge : south end press , 2004 . the shape of the beast . new delhi : penguin , 2008 . listening to grasshoppers . new delhi : penguin , 2010 . broken republic : three essays . new delhi : hamish hamilton , 2011 . walking with the comrades . new delhi : penguin , 2011 . kashmir : the case for freedom . verso , 2011 . capitalism : a ghost story . chicago : haymarket books , 2014 . things that can and can not be said : essays and conversations ( with john cusack ) . chicago : haymarket books , 2016 . the doctor and the saint : caste , race , and annihilation of caste , the debate between b.r . ambedkar and m.k . gandhi . chicago : haymarket books , 2017 . my seditious heart : collected non-fiction . chicago : haymarket books , 2019 . azadi : freedom , fascism , fiction . haymarket books , 2020 . see also . list of peace activists indian english literature naxalite–maoist insurgency iraq war . references . further reading . books and articles on roy . '' the politics of design '' , in . other . we , a political documentary about roy 's words . available online . arundhati roy denounces indian democracy by atul cowshish , asian tribune , 2006-07-06 carreira , shirley de s . g . '' a representação da mulher em shame , de salman rushdie , e o deus das pequenas coisas , de arundathi roy '' . in : monteiro , conceição & lima , tereza m . de o . ed . rio de janeiro : caetés , 2005 ch'ien , evelyn nien-ming , '' the politics of design '' in weird english . cambridge : harvard up , 2004 ; 154–199 . essay on roy 's language . external links . sawnet biography south asian women network , authors column archive at the guardian ; interviews and speeches '' arundhati roy '' & nbsp ; – interview by avi lewis on al jazeera fault lines , 2010-8-29 ( video , 23 mins ) come september & nbsp ; –interview with howard zinn , outlook , september 2008 how deep shall we dig & nbsp ; –full text of i.g . khan memorial lecture delivered at aligarh muslim university on 6 april 2004 , outlook , 6 may 2004