Iron(II) sulfate

uses . industrially , ferrous sulfate is mainly used as a precursor to other iron compounds . it is a reducing agent , and as such is useful for the reduction of chromate in cement to less toxic cr ( iii ) compounds . historically ferrous sulfate was used in the textile industry for centuries as a dye fixative . it is used historically to blacken leather and as a constituent of ink . british archaeology magazine . ( archive ) the preparation of sulfuric acid ( 'oil of vitriol ' ) by the distillation of green vitriol ( iron ( ii ) sulfate ) has been known for at least 700 years . medical use . together with other iron compounds , ferrous sulfate is used to fortify foods and to treat and prevent iron deficiency anemia . constipation is a frequent and uncomfortable side effect associated with the administration of oral iron supplements . stool softeners often are prescribed to prevent constipation . colorant . ferrous sulfate was used in the manufacture of inks , most notably iron gall ink , which was used from the middle ages until the end of the eighteenth century . chemical tests made on the lachish letters 588–586 & nbsp ; bce ) showed the possible presence of iron . torczyner , lachish letters , pp . & nbsp ; 188–95 it is thought that oak galls and copperas may have been used in making the ink on those letters . hyatt , the interpreter 's bible , 1951 , volume v , p . 1067 it also finds use in wool dyeing as a mordant . harewood , a material used in marquetry and parquetry since the 17th century , is also made using ferrous sulfate . two different methods for the direct application of indigo dye were developed in england in the eighteenth century and remained in use well into the nineteenth century . one of these , known as china blue , involved iron ( ii ) sulfate . after printing an insoluble form of indigo onto the fabric , the indigo was reduced to leuco-indigo in a sequence of baths of ferrous sulfate ( with reoxidation to indigo in air between immersions ) . the china blue process could make sharp designs , but it could not produce the dark hues of other methods . sometimes , it is included in canned black olives as an artificial colorant . ferrous sulfate can also be used to stain concrete and some limestones and sandstones a yellowish rust color . how to stain concrete with iron sulfate woodworkers use ferrous sulfate solutions to color maple wood a silvery hue . plant growth . iron ( ii ) sulfate is sold as ferrous sulfate , a soil amendment for lowering the ph of a high alkaline soil so that plants can access the soil 's nutrients . in horticulture it is used for treating iron chlorosis . koenig , rich and kuhns , mike : control of iron chlorosis in ornamental and crop plants . ( utah state university , salt lake city , august 1996 ) p.3 although not as rapid-acting as ferric edta , its effects are longer-lasting . it can be mixed with compost and dug into the soil to create a store which can last for years . it is also used as a lawn conditioner , and moss killer . other uses . in the second half of the 1850s ferrous sulfate was used as a photographic developer for collodion process images . ferrous sulfate is sometimes added to the cooling water flowing through the brass tubes of turbine condensers to form a corrosion-resistant protective coating . it is used in gold refining to precipitate metallic gold from auric chloride solutions ( gold dissolved in solution with aqua regia ) . it has been used in the purification of water by flocculation and for phosphate removal in municipal and industrial sewage treatment plants to prevent eutrophication of surface water bodies . it is used as a traditional method of treating wood panelling on houses , either alone , dissolved in water , or as a component of water-based paint . green vitriol is also a useful reagent in the identification of mushrooms . it is used as the iron catalyst component of fenton 's reagent . in the early 19th century , chemist friedrich accum discovered that in england the dark beer porter often contained iron ( ii ) sulfate as a frothing agent . it is one of the key ingredients in iron gall ink . hydrates . iron ( ii ) sulfate can be found in various states of hydrate , and several of these forms exist in nature . feso 4 ·h 2 o ( mineral : szomolnokite , relatively rare ) feso 4 ·4h 2 o ( mineral : rozenite , white , relatively common , may be dehydratation product of melanterite ) feso 4 ·5h 2 o ( mineral : siderotil , relatively rare ) feso 4 ·6h 2 o ( mineral : ferrohexahydrite , relatively rare ) feso 4 ·7h 2 o ( mineral : melanterite , blue-green , relatively common ) the tetrahydrate is stabilized when the temperature of aqueous solutions reaches . at these solutions form both the tetrahydrate and monohydrate . all mentioned mineral forms are connected with oxidation zones of iron-bearing ore beds ( pyrite , marcasite , chalcopyrite , etc . ) and related environments ( like coal fire sites ) . many undergo rapid dehydration and sometimes oxidation . numerous other , more complex ( either basic , hydrated , and/or containing additional cations ) fe ( ii ) -bearing sulfates exist in such environments , with copiapite being a good and common example . . production and reactions . in the finishing of steel prior to plating or coating , the steel sheet or rod is passed through pickling baths of sulfuric acid . this treatment produces large quantities of iron ( ii ) sulfate as a by-product . : fe + h 2 so 4 → feso 4 + h 2 another source of large amounts results from the production of titanium dioxide from ilmenite via the sulfate process . ferrous sulfate is also prepared commercially by oxidation of pyrite : :2 & nbsp ; fes 2 + 7 & nbsp ; o 2 + 2 & nbsp ; h 2 o → 2 & nbsp ; feso 4 + 2 & nbsp ; h 2 so 4 it can be produced by displacement of metals less reactive than iron from solutions of their sulfate : cuso 4 + fe → feso 4 + cu . reactions . upon dissolving in water , ferrous sulfates form the metal aquo complex fe ( h 2 o ) 6 2+ , which is an almost colorless , paramagnetic ion . on heating , iron ( ii ) sulfate first loses its water of crystallization and the original green crystals are converted into a white colored anhydrous solid . when further heated , the anhydrous material releases sulfur dioxide and white fumes of sulfur trioxide , leaving a reddish-brown iron ( iii ) oxide . decomposition of iron ( ii ) sulfate begins at about . :2 & nbsp ; feso 4 → fe 2 o 3 + so 2 + so 3 like all iron ( ii ) salts , iron ( ii ) sulfate is a reducing agent . for example , it reduces nitric acid to nitrogen monoxide and chlorine to chloride : :6 & nbsp ; feso 4 + 3 & nbsp ; h 2 so 4 + 2 & nbsp ; hno 3 → 3 & nbsp ; fe 2 ( so 4 ) 3 + 4 & nbsp ; h 2 o + 2 no :6 & nbsp ; feso 4 + 3 & nbsp ; cl 2 → 2 & nbsp ; fe 2 ( so 4 ) 3 + 2 & nbsp ; fecl 3 upon exposure to air , it oxidizes to form a corrosive brown-yellow coating of '' basic ferric sulfate '' , which is an adduct of iron ( iii ) oxide and iron ( iii ) sulfate : :12 & nbsp ; feso 4 + 3 & nbsp ; o 2 → 4 & nbsp ; fe 2 ( so 4 ) 3 + 2 & nbsp ; fe 2 o 3 this '' basic sulphate '' may then be decomposed by heating increasing the sulphur trioxide yield compared to direct decomposition of ferrous sulphate : 4 & nbsp ; fe 2 ( so 4 ) 3 + 2 & nbsp ; fe 2 o 3 → 12 & nbsp ; so 3 + 6 & nbsp ; fe 2 o 3 however , some of the sulphur trioxide may be lost to thermal decomposition : 2 & nbsp ; so 3 → 2 & nbsp ; so 2 + o 2 . see also . iron ( iii ) sulfate ( ferric sulfate ) , the other common simple sulfate of iron . copper ( ii ) sulfate ammonium iron ( ii ) sulfate , also known as mohr 's salt , the common double salt of ammonium sulfate with iron ( ii ) sulfate . chalcanthum ephraim seehl known as an early manufacturer of green vitriol . . references . external links . how to make copperas ( iron sulfate ) from pyrites