Islamic economics

definitions and descriptions . according to hasan raza , after more than six decades of its formal/ informal existence , a consensus on the definition of islamic economics has not yet emerged . some definitions that have been offered include : '' that branch of knowledge which helps to realize human well-being through an allocation and distribution of scarce resources that is in conformity with islamic teachings without unduly curbing individual freedom or creating continued macroeconomic and ecological imbalances . '' ( umar chapra ) ( similarly , the '' study of human behavior with regard to acquiring and using resources for the satisfaction of necessities , needs , and other desires , '' but '' based on the assumptions '' of the islamic '' outlook on life and humanity '' . ( monzer kahf ) ) islamic economics mkrdmie2003 : p.25 '' the study of an . economy which abides by the rules of the shariah '' , i.e . an islamic economy . ( a definition used by some , according to m . anas zarqa ) zarqa , m . anas . ( 2008 ) , duality of sources in islamic economics , and its methodological consequences . paper presented at 7th international conference on islamic economics , king abdulaziz university , 1–3 april , jeddah . p.30 wiwwie2013 : p.4 a discipline that goes beyond the practice of western economics—which seeks to make '' positive analysis '' and give an objective description of what is—to provide normative policy prescriptions of what ought to be and can be . and which seeks to achieve a '' transformation of human beings from followers of base desires to people concerned with achieving higher goals '' . ( feisal khan islamic economics in pakistan fkibp2015 : p.66 describing the ideas of m.r . zaman , and also m.u . chapra , and m.n . khan and m.i . bhatti . ) '' a discipline that is guided by the shariah and studies all human societies '' ( a definition used by others , according to m . anas zarqa ) '' restatements of islamic economic teachings '' , using '' modern economic jargon '' . ( what most of the knowledge content in the body of islamic economics amounts to according to economist muhammad akram khan ) wiwwie2013 : p.xv an ideology '' a revolutionary ideology '' to change '' the corrupt reality . into a pure one '' , and '' not a science of political economy '' or '' an objective analysis of existing reality '' . ( ayatollah murtaza mutahhari ) an '' ideological construct '' developed by 20th century islamists ( by abul a'la maududi , ayatollah muhammad baqir al-sadr , abolhassan banisadr , etc . ) taking basic prescriptions from sharia ( islamic law ) , and systematizing and conceptualizing them '' to construct a coherent and functional ensemble offering a middle ground between the two systems of the twentieth century , marxism and capitalism . '' ( social scientist olivier roy ) zaman ( 2015 ) argues that confusion regarding appropriate definition of islamic economics have arose because of attempts to mix western economics concepts with islamic ideals , when the two are diametrically opposed to each other in many dimensions . he proposes a definition based on purely islamic sources : '' islamic economics is the effort/struggle to implement the orders of allah pertaining to economic affairs in our individual lives ( micro ) , in our communities ( meso ) , and at the level of ummah ( macro ) . '' . fiqh and islamic economics . fiqh ( religious law ) has developed several traditional concepts having to do with economics . these included : zakat—the '' charitable taxing of certain assets , such as currency , gold , or harvest , with an eye to allocating these taxes to eight expenditures that are also explicitly defined in the quran , such as aid to those in need . '' gharar— '' uncertainty '' . the presence of any element of excessive uncertainty , in a contract is prohibited . riba— '' referred to as usury ( modern islamic economists reached consensus that riba is any kind of interest , rather than just usury ) '' is prohibited . another source lists '' general rules '' include prohibition of riba , gharar , and also qimar ( gambling ) and the encouragement of taa ’ won ( mutual cooperation ) , '' the overriding doctrine of fairness in commercial dealings is established . '' these concepts , like others in islamic law , came from study of the quran and hadith—or as one observer put it , were constructed on the basis of isolated prescriptions , anecdotes , examples , words of the prophet , all gathered together and systematized by commentators according to an inductive , casuistic method . '' in addition to quran and hadith , sometimes other sources such as al-urf ( custom ) , or al-ijma ( consensus of the ulama ) are employed , to create laws that determine whether actions were haram , makruh , mubah , mustahabb and fard for muslims . the different school of fiqh ( madhhab ) vary slightly in their rulings . works of fiqh are typically divided into different '' books '' such as a book of iman , of salah , zakat , taqwa , hajj , but not ` economics ` or ` economy ` . some brief works might contain almost nothing related to matters of property , sales , finance others do not gather questions on economic issues in one heading , the case in tawzih al-masa'il , a work of fatwa by ayatollah ruhollah khomeini , who although a pioneer of political islam approached the subject of economy '' as the classical ulamas do . the chapter on selling and buying ( kharid o forush ) comes after the one on pilgrimage and present economic questions as individual acts open to moral analysis : ` to lend without interest , on a note from the lender is among the good works that are particularly recommended in the verses of the quran and in the traditions . ` '' ( source : ruhollah khomeini , tawzih al-masa'il , p.543 ) other works divided the subjects of fiqh into four '' quarters '' : islamic economics 4itofm2014 : p.8 typically worship ( al- ` ibadat ) , marriage and family law ( al-munakahat ) , criminal law ( jinayat ) , commercial transaction law ( muamalat ) . at least one author ( m . kahf ) writes that mu'amalat is '' closely related '' to islamic economics . islamic economics mkrdmie2003 : p.46 ( however even with the '' quarters '' division of fiqh topics mu'amalat would not include inheritance or wedding dower ( mahr ) ( which at least often comes under marriage and family law ) , or calculation of alms ( zakat , which comes under al- ` ibadat ) ) . a number of scholars ( olivier roy , timur kuran , omar norman ) have noted the recentness of reflecting on economic issues in the islamic world , and the difference between economics the social science based on data , and islamic jurisprudence based on revealed truth . salman ahmed shaikh and monzer kahf insist on a clear distinction between the roles of fiqh and islamic economics , shaikh saying to be meritorious as a separate field of inquiry , islamic economics can not confine itself just to explaining and deducing laws in economic matters based on core principles . since this function is already performed by the discipline of islamic jurisprudence . m . kahf writes that mu'amalat and islamic economics '' often intermingle '' , islamic economics mkrdmie2003 : p.47 mu'amalat '' sets terms and conditions of conduct for economic and financial relationships in the islamic economy '' and provides the '' grounds on which new instruments '' of islamic financing are developed , but that the '' nature of fiqh imposes a concern about individual transactions and their minute legalistic characteristics '' , so that analyzing islamic economics in terms of fiqh '' risks losing '' the ability to provide a macro economic theory '' . islamic economics mkrdmie2003 : p.49 according to economist muhammad akram khan the '' main plank '' of islamic economics is the '' theory of riba '' , while '' another landmark '' is zakat , a tax on wealth and income . wiwwie2013 : p.xv-xvi according to another contemporary writer salah el-sheikh , '' islamic economic principles '' ( what he calls a '' fiqhiconomic model '' ) utilize the faqīh ( islamic jurisprudence ) as supporting material , but are grounded upon the ethical teachings within the qu'rān . sharīah 's basic tenets involve gharar and ( fadl māl bilā 'iwad ) . gharar insists all knowledge about a trade or transaction is known before two individuals complete a transaction and ( fadl māl bilā 'iwad ) warns against unjustified enrichment through trade and business . these tenets were '' among the first economic regulations '' and their philosophy can be seen today in modern capitalism . within sharīah , el-sheikh states , gharar functions as a divine deterrent against asymmetric information and allows trade to prosper . riba , ensures each transaction is conducted at a fair price , not allowing one party to benefit exceedingly , which shares a parallel philosophy with karl marx '' das kapital '' : seeking a greater outcome for the community . . history . pre-modern muslim thought on economics . classical scholars in the muslim world did however , make valuable contributions to islamic thought on issues involving production , consumption , income , wealth , property , taxation , land ownership , etc . are abu yusuf ( d . 798 ) , muhammad al-shaybani ( d . 805 ) , al-mawardi ( d . 1058 ) , ibn hazm ( d . 1064 ) , sarakhsi ( d . 1090 ) , tusi ( d . 1093 ) , ghazali ( d . 1111 ) , al-dimashqi ( d . after 1175 ) , ibn rushd ( d . 1187 ) , ibn taymiyyah ( d.1328 ) , ibn al-ukhuwwah ( d . 1329 ) , ibn al-qayyim ( d . 1350 ) , sayyid ali hamadani ( d . 1384 ) , al-shatibi ( d . 1388 ) , ibn khaldun ( d . 1406 ) , al-maqrizi ( d . 1442 ) , dawwani ( d . 1501 ) , aurangzeb ( d . 1707 ) , and shah waliullah dehlawi ( d . 1762 ) . abu yusuf ( d . 798 ) was author of the book al kharaj & mdash ; literally '' the return or revenue '' but was used by the author to mean '' public revenues and taxation '' & mdash ; which was a policy guide to harun al-rashid , the fifth abbasid caliph . islamic economics mkrdmie2003 : p.2 muhammad bin al-hasan ( d.805 ) wrote al iktisab fi al rizq al mustatab earned desired income , intended as advice to businessmen '' in their endeavors to create income opportunities '' . abu 'ubaid al qasim bin sallam ( d.839 ) was the author of al-amwal ( plural of '' wealth '' ) . perhaps the most well-known islamic scholar who wrote about economical issues was ibn khaldun , sobhi mahmassani ( 1932 ) . les idées economiques d'ibn khaldoun ( the economic thought of ibn khaldoun ) , bosc frères , m . et l . riou , lyon , is an early treatise on ibn khaldun 's economic thought . . hybrids . islamic banks have grown recently in the muslim world , but are a very small share of the global economy compared to the western debt banking paradigm . hybrid approaches , which applies classical islamic values but uses conventional lending practices , are much lauded by some proponents of modern human development theory . criticism and dispute . islamic economics has been disparaged for its alleged '' incoherence , incompleteness , impracticality , and irrelevance '' , driven by '' cultural identity '' rather than problem solving ( timur kuran , john foster ) ; kuran , '' the economic impact of islamic fundamentalism , '' in marty and appleby fundamentalisms and the state , u of chicago press , 1993 , pp . 302–41 '' the discontents of islamic economic mortality '' by timur kuran , american economic review , 1996 , pp . 438–42 being '' a hodgepodge of populist and socialist ideas '' in theory , and '' nothing more than inefficient state control of the economy and some almost equally ineffective redistribution policies '' in practice ( fred halliday ) ; halliday , fred , 100 myths about the middle east , saqi books , 2005 p . 89 in a political and regional context where islamist and ulema claim to have an opinion about everything , it is striking how little they have to say about this most central of human activities , beyond repetitious pieties about how their model is neither capitalism nor socialist . being little more than a mimicry of conventional economics embellished with verses of the quran and sunnah ( muhammad ahram khan ) ; claiming to call for a return to islamic practices that are actually an '' invented tradition '' ( timur kuran ) ; failing to achieve its goals of abolishing interest on money , establishing economic equality , and a superior business ethic ; but nonetheless '' spared critical scrutiny out of ignorance , misguided tolerance '' , and because its methods and objectives are considered '' too unrealistic to threaten prevailing economic structures '' ( timur kuran ) . ; islamic banking and finance one significant result of islamic economics ( and target of criticism ) is the creation of islamic banking and finance industry . mofrie2005 : p.34 according to several scholars it has bred a new '' power alliance '' of '' wealth and shari'ah scholarship '' , monzer kahf . '' islamic banks : the rise of a new power alliance of wealth and shari'ah scholarship , '' in clement henry and rodney wilson ( eds . ) . the politics of islamic finance edinburgh university press , 2004 , pp . 17-36 . mofrie2005 : p.27 wiwwie2013 : p.317 —wealthy banks and clients paying islamic scholars to provide bank products with islamic '' shariah compliance '' . journalist john foster , quotes an investment banker based in the islamic banking hub of dubai on the practice of '' fatwa shopping '' , '' we create the same type of products that we do for the conventional markets . we then phone up a sharia scholar for a fatwa seal of approval , confirming the product is shari'ah compliant . if he does n't give it to us , we phone up another scholar , offer him a sum of money for his services and ask him for a fatwa . we do this until we get sharia compliance . then we are free to distribute the product as islamic . '' foster explains that the fee for services provided by '' top '' scholars is '' often '' in six-figures , i.e . over us 100,000 . one critic ( muhammad o . farooq ) argues that this unfortunate situation has arisen because the '' preoccupation '' among supporters of islamic economics that any and all interest on loans is riba and forbidden by islam , and because profit and loss sharing to interest bearing loans originally envisioned for islamic banking have not proven feasible . with the elimination of interest being both the basis of the industry and impractical , shari ' a scholars have become '' entrapped in a situation '' where they are forced to approve transactions fundamentally similar to conventional loans but using '' hiyal '' manipulation to '' maintain an islamic veneer '' . mofrie2005 : p.36 ; justice instead of '' fixating '' on interest , farooq urges a focus on '' the larger picture '' of '' justice '' , and in economics on fighting exploitation from '' greed and profit , '' and the concentration of wealth . he quotes an ayat in support : '' what god has bestowed on his messenger ( and taken away ) from the people of the townships , - belongs to god , - to his messenger and to kindred and orphans , the needy and the wayfarer ; in order that it may not ( merely ) make a circuit between the wealthy among you . '' mofrie2005 : p.33 as an example of the neglect of this issue , farooq complains that one '' rather comprehensive '' bibliography of islamic economics and finance , contains '' not a single citation for exploitation or injustice '' among its 700 entries . mofrie2005 : p.31 a former director of pakistan institute of development economics and the head of pakistan 's economic affairs division , syed nawab haider naqvi , also called for '' comprehensive islamic reform to establish an exploitation-free economic system '' and not just '' mechanical substitution of profit for interest . '' syed nawab haider naqvi . ethics and economics : an islamic synthesis u.k . : the islamic foundation , 1981 , p.124 ; zakat on the issue of zakat , one of the pillars of islam , m.a.khan also criticizes the conservatism of islamic economics , complaining that '' the insistence of muslim scholars in implementing it in the same form in which it was in vogue in the days of the prophet and the first four caliphs . has made it irrelevant to the needs of a contemporary society . '' wiwwie2013 : p.xvi ; practicality a supporter of islamic economics ( asad zaman ) describes a '' major difficulty '' faced by islamic reformers of islamic economics and pointed out by other authors , namely that because a financial system is an '' integrated and coherent structure '' , to create an islamic system '' based on trust , community and no interest '' requires '' changes and interventions on several different fronts simultaneously '' . . see also . islamic economics in pakistan islamic philosophy economy of the oic female labor force in the muslim world law and economics state capitalism corporatism dirigisme economics of fascism economy of malaysia economy of brunei economy of azerbaijan economy of kazakhstan economy of iran economy of jordan economy of saudi arabia islamic banking and finance economic history of the ottoman empire christian finance zakat ; people muhammad taqi usmani nathif jama adam . references . notes . . citations . . books , articles . chaney e . ( 2019 ) religion , political power and human capital formation : evidence from islamic history . in : carvalho jp . , iyer s . , rubin j . ( eds ) advances in the economics of religion . international economic association series . palgrave macmillan . el-gamal , mahmoud , 2009 . '' islamic finance , '' the new palgrave dictionary of economics , online edition . abstract . _____ ( 2008 ) . '' islamic economic institutions , '' the new palgrave dictionary of economics , 2nd edition . abstract . kuran , timur . 2018 . '' islam and economic performance : historical and contemporary links . '' journal of economic literature , 56 ( 4 ) :1292-1359 . naghavi a . ( 2019 ) islam , trade , and innovation . in : carvalho jp . , iyer s . , rubin j . ( eds ) advances in the economics of religion . international economic association series . palgrave macmillan platteau jp . ( 2019 ) strategic interactions between religion and politics : the case of islam . in : carvalho jp . , iyer s . , rubin j . ( eds ) advances in the economics of religion . international economic association series . palgrave macmillan . presley , john r . , and john g . sessions ( 1994 ) . '' islamic economics : the emergence of a new paradigm , '' economic journal , 104 ( 424 ) , [ pp . 584–596 . . torts . a . basir bin mohamad . '' the islamic law of tort : a study of the owner and possessor of animals with special reference to the civil codes of the united arab emirates , lebanon , tunisia , morocco , sudan and iraq '' in arab law quarterly v.16 , n.4 2001 '' vicarious liability : a study of the liability of the guardian and his ward in the islamic law of tort '' arab law quarterly v . 17 , n.1 2002 immanuel naveh . '' the tort of injury and dissolution of marriage at the wife 's initiative in egyptian mahkamat al-naqd rulings '' in islamic law and society volume 9 , number 1 , 2002 islamic law of tort liaquat ali khan niazi , 1988 an outline of islamic law of tort abdul-qadir zubair , 1990 . external links . economic insaf , an islamic economics framework from grandestrategy . putting faith into finance , hsbc article on islamic finance . shamshad akhtar et al . , '' understanding islamic finance : local innovation and global integration '' , asia policy , july 2008 . mohammad omar farooq , riba , interest and six hadiths : do we have a definition or a conundrum ? mahmoud el-gamal , '' an economic explanation of the prohibition of riba in classical islamic jurisprudence '' , rice university , houston , texas . methodology of economics : secular versus islamic islamic economics booklist