Vizsla

description . appearance . the vizsla ( smooth-haired ) is a short-coated hunting dog of distinguished appearance and bearing . robust , but rather lightly built , they are lean dogs that have defined muscles . various breeds are often mistaken for vizslas and vice versa . redbone coonhounds , weimaraners and rhodesian ridgebacks are most commonly mixed up . the body structure of a vizsla is very similar in appearance to a weimaraner and a redbone coonhound , though the vizsla is typically leaner with a more defined musculature . however , weimaraners and rhodesian ridgebacks are larger than vizslas . the nose of the vizsla will always have a reddish color that blends with the coat color . black , brown , light pink , or another color nose is an indication of another breed . a vizsla 's eye and nail color should also blend with the coat color . . color and coats . the standard coat is french-row yellow in several shadings . the coat could also be described as a yellow , copper-brown color , russet gold , and dark sandy gold . solid , dark , mahogany red and pale yellow are considered faults and a disqualification in competitions . small areas of white on the fore-chest , neck , or tail are permissible but not preferred . some variations in the vizsla coat color along their back ( saddle-type marks ) are typical . the american kennel club ( akc ) breed standards for the vizsla states that the coat should be short , smooth , dense , and close-lying , without a woolly undercoat . the vizsla is not suited to being kept outside since , unlike most other breeds , it does not have an undercoat . they are self-cleaning dogs and rarely need to be bathed , if ever . they have little noticeable '' dog smell '' detectable by humans . after several forays into lakes and streams they will develop an aroma that is a weaker version of the 'wet dog ' smell . a quick bath and this odor will vanish . size . the vizsla is a medium-sized dog , the average height and weight : males height : weight : females height : weight : file : anzu.jpg vizslas are gentle-mannered dogs file : wyżeł węgierski gładkowłosy 500.jpg the vizsla is a short-coated hunting dog file : male vizsla.jpg vizsla portrait file : vizsla-profile.jpg five-month-old vizsla with the akc standard '' golden rust '' coat . tail . the american breed standard does call for the tail to be docked to two-thirds of its original length . breed standards in countries where docking is banned , such as the united kingdom , do not allow this and docking has been condemned by the american veterinary medical association , the american animal hospital association , and the canadian veterinary medical association . the vizsla holds its tail horizontal to the ground and wags it vigorously while charging through rough scrub and undergrowth . the docked tail of the vizsla is significantly longer than that of other dogs with traditionally docked tails such as the weimaraner , dobermann , boxer , and australian shepherd . since the tail is docked when the puppy is less than three days old , this longer dock can result in some variation in tail length among vizsla dogs from different breeding programs . temperament . vizslas are very high energy , gentle-mannered , loyal , caring , and very affectionate . they quickly form close bonds with their owners , children , and even strangers . often , they are referred to as '' velcro '' dogs because of their loyalty and affection . vizslas will cry or whine when they feel neglected or are otherwise unhappy . some will bark at strangers if they feel that they are invading the '' pack '' space . they are very good guard dogs when trained to be so . they are natural hunters with an excellent ability to take training . not only are they great pointers , but they are excellent retrievers as well . they will retrieve on land and in the water making the most of their natural instincts . however , they must be trained gently and without harsh commands or strong physical correction , as they have sensitive temperaments and can be easily damaged if trained too harshly . however the owner must show quiet authority in training , otherwise the dog is likely to take over the training session . vizslas thrives on attention , exercise , and interaction . they are intelligent dogs and need a lot of mental stimulation when young . if left alone for long hours , they can be bored and become destructive . with proper socialization and training , vizslas are very gentle dogs that can be great around children . the vizsla wants to be close to its owner as much as possible , and it is commonly observed that vizslas insist on sleeping under the covers in their owner 's bed at night . . health . the american kennel club states that a typical lifespan for the vizsla is between 12–14 years , while a 2008 vizsla club of america survey puts the average lifespan of the vizsla at 9.15 years . the vizsla is considered to be a robust dog but some localized breeding programs using a small number of dogs have led to heritable illnesses in some offspring including : hip dysplasia is very rare but remotely possible . canine epilepsy cancer ( mast cell tumors , hemangiosarcoma , lymphoma ) sebaceous adenitis responsible breeders do not select dogs for breeding if they have such inherent problems . vizslas can also suffer from hypothyroidism , dwarfism , persistent right aortic arch , tricuspid valve dysplasia , and progressive retinal atrophy . major risks include epilepsy and lymphosarcoma . vizslas can also be prone to skin and food allergies . unlike many other dogs , vizslas do not have an undercoat . therefore , they are unsuited for living outdoors . hungarian dog breeds . dr . sárkány pál – dr.ócsag imre . . history . the first written reference to the vizsla dog breed has been recorded in the illustrated vienna chronicle prepared on order of king louis i of hungary by the carmelites in 1357 . the vizsla has survived the ottoman hungary ( 1526–1696 ) , the hungarian revolution of 1848 , world war i , world war ii and the hungarian people 's republic . however , vizslas faced and survived several near-extinctions in their history , including being overrun by english pointers and german shorthaired pointers in the 1800s ( boggs , 2000:19 ) and again to near-extinction after world war ii . a careful search of hungary and a poll of hungarian sportsmen revealed only about a dozen vizslas of the true type still alive in the country . from that minimum stock , the breed rose to prominence once again . the various '' strains '' of the vizsla have become somewhat distinctive as individuals bred stock that suited their hunting style . outside hungary , vizslas were commonly bred in romania , austria , slovakia , and serbia . the vizsla started arriving in the united states at the close of world war ii . as interest in and devotion to the breed began to increase , owners formed the vizsla club of america in order to gain akc recognition . as a result of registering foundation stock with the akc , vizsla owners were able to obtain official recognition on 25 november 1960 , as the vizsla became the 115th breed recognized by the american kennel club . the vizsla was used in development of other breeds , most notably the weimaraner , wirehaired vizsla and german shorthaired pointer breeds . there is much conjecture about those same breeds , along with other pointer breeds , being used to reestablish the vizsla breed at the end of the 19th century . file : vizsla standing rosie harness.jpg the vizsla thrives on attention , exercise and interaction file : vizsla dog in grass.jpg . vizsla in the uk . approximately 4,520 vizsla puppies are registered with the kennel club of great britain ( kc ) each year , making the breed one of the top 50 most popular . the number is steadily rising year after year as more people recognize the breed . kc registration statistics . accessed 28 may 2007 . there are two breed clubs for the vizsla in britain , the hungarian vizsla club and the hungarian vizsla society . the winner of the best in show award at crufts 2010 was a vizsla named hungargunn bear it ' n mind . . see also . national symbols of hungary wirehaired vizsla , a separate breed from the vizsla . the wirehaired vizsla was developed in the 1930s by the interbreeding of the vizsla and the german wirehaired pointer to get a dog with a more substantial frame and a heavier coat , suitable for working in colder weather . references . further reading . boggs , b . c . the vizsla ; glenbrier publishing company ; revised edition , 1982 . coffman , marion i . versatile vizsla ; alpine blue ribbon books ; 2nd edition ( may 2004 ) . hart , ernest h . vizslas ; tfh publications , 1990 . pinney , chris c . , d.v.m . vizslas : a complete owner 's guide ; barron 's , 1998 . white , robert l . hungarian vizsla ; petlove books ( published in uk by interpret books ) . external links .