Fish farming

major species . the issue of feeds in fish farming has been a controversial one . many cultured fishes ( tilapia , carp , catfish , many others ) require no meat or fish products in their diets . top-level carnivores ( most salmon species ) depend on fish feed of which a portion is usually derived from wild-caught fish ( anchovies , menhaden , etc . ) . vegetable-derived proteins have successfully replaced fish meal in feeds for carnivorous fishes , but vegetable-derived oils have not successfully been incorporated into the diets of carnivores . research is underway to try to change this , such that even salmon and other carnivores could be successfully fed with vegetable products . the f3 challenge ( fish-free feed challenge ) , as explained by a report from wired in february 2017 , '' is a race to sell 100,000 metric tons of fish food , without the fish . earlier this month , start-ups from places like pakistan , china , and belgium joined their american competition at the google headquarters in mountain view , california , showing off feed made from seaweed extracts , yeast , and algae grown in bioreactors . '' not only do the feeds for carnivorous fish , like certain salmon species , remain controversial due to the containment of wild caught fish like anchovies , but they are not helping the health of the fish , as is the case in norway . between 2003 and 2007 , aldrin et al . , examined three infectious diseases in norwegian salmon fish farms—heart and skeletal muscle inflammation , pancreas disease , and infectious salmon anemia . in 2014 , martinez-rubio et al . , conducted a study in which cardiomyopathy syndrome ( cms ) , a severe cardiac disease in atlantic salmon ( salmo salar ) , was investigated pertaining the effects of functional feeds with reduced lipid content and increased eicosapentaenoic acid levels in controlling cms in salmon after infection with piscine myocarditis virus ( pmcv ) . functional feeds are defined as high-quality feeds that beyond purposes of nutrition , they are formulated with health promoting features that could be beneficial in supporting disease resistance , such as cms . in choosing a clinical nutrition approach using functional feeds could , potentially move away from chemotherapeutic and antibiotic treatments , which could lower the costs of disease treatment and management in fish farms . in this investigation three fishmeal-based diets were served—one made of 31 % lipid and the other two made of 18 % lipid ( one contained fishmeal and the other krill meal . results demonstrated a significant difference in the immune and inflammatory responses and pathology in heart tissue as the fish were infected with pmcv . fish fed with functional feeds with low lipid content demonstrated milder and delayed inflammatory response and therefore , less severe heart lesions at earlier and later stages after have pmcv infection . secondly , farmed fish are kept in concentrations never seen in the wild ( e.g . 50,000 fish in a area . ) . however , fish tend also to be animals that aggregate into large schools at high density . most successful aquaculture species are schooling species , which do not have social problems at high density . aquaculturists feel that operating a rearing system above its design capacity or above the social density limit of the fish will result in decreased growth rate and increased feed conversion ratio ( kg dry feed/kg of fish produced ) , which results in increased cost and risk of health problems along with a decrease in profits . stressing the animals is not desirable , but the concept of and measurement of stress must be viewed from the perspective of the animal using the scientific method . sea lice , particularly lepeophtheirus salmonis and various caligus species , including c . clemensi and c . rogercresseyi , can cause deadly infestations of both farm-grown and wild salmon . sea lice and salmon : elevating the dialogue on the farmed-wild salmon story watershed watch salmon society , 2004 . sea lice are ectoparasites which feed on mucus , blood , and skin , and migrate and latch onto the skin of wild salmon during free-swimming , planktonic nauplii and copepodid larval stages , which can persist for several days . peet , c . r . 2007 . thesis , university of victoria . large numbers of highly populated , open-net salmon farms can create exceptionally large concentrations of sea lice ; when exposed in river estuaries containing large numbers of open-net farms , many young wild salmon are infected , and do not survive as a result . adult salmon may survive otherwise critical numbers of sea lice , but small , thin-skinned juvenile salmon migrating to sea are highly vulnerable . on the pacific coast of canada , the louse-induced mortality of pink salmon in some regions is commonly over 80 % . in scotland , official figures show that more than nine million fish were lost to disease , parasites , botched treatment attempts and other problems on fish farms between 2016 and 2019 . a 2008 meta-analysis of available data shows that salmon farming reduces the survival of associated wild salmon populations . this relationship has been shown to hold for atlantic , steelhead , pink , chum , and coho salmon . the decrease in survival or abundance often exceeds 50 % . diseases and parasites are the most commonly cited reasons for such decreases . some species of sea lice have been noted to target farmed coho and atlantic salmon . such parasites have been shown to have an effect on nearby wild fish . one place that has garnered international media attention is british columbia 's broughton archipelago . there , juvenile wild salmon must '' run a gauntlet '' of large fish farms located off-shore near river outlets before making their way to sea . the farms allegedly cause such severe sea lice infestations that one study predicted in 2007 a 99 % collapse in the wild salmon population by 2011 . this claim , however , has been criticized by numerous scientists who question the correlation between increased fish farming and increases in sea lice infestation among wild salmon . because of parasite problems , some aquaculture operators frequently use strong antibiotic drugs to keep the fish alive , but many fish still die prematurely at rates up to 30 % . lymbery , p . ciwf trust report , '' in too deep – the welfare of intensively farmed fish '' ( 2002 ) additionally , other common drugs used in salmonid fish farms in north america and europe include anesthetic , chemotherapeutic , and anthelmintic agents . in some cases , these drugs have entered the environment . additionally , the residual presence of these drugs in human food products has become controversial . use of antibiotics in food production is thought to increase the prevalence of antibiotic resistance in human diseases . at some facilities , the use of antibiotic drugs in aquaculture has decreased considerably due to vaccinations and other techniques . however , most fish-farming operations still use antibiotics , many of which escape into the surrounding environment . the lice and pathogen problems of the 1990s facilitated the development of current treatment methods for sea lice and pathogens , which reduced the stress from parasite/pathogen problems . however , being in an ocean environment , the transfer of disease organisms from the wild fish to the aquaculture fish is an ever-present risk . the large number of fish kept long-term in a single location contributes to habitat destruction of the nearby areas . the high concentrations of fish produce a significant amount of condensed faeces , often contaminated with drugs , which again affects local waterways . aquaculture not only impact the fish on the farm , but it also involves environmental interactions with other species , which in return are attracted or repelled by the farms . mobile fauna , such as crustaceans , fish , birds , and marine mammals , interact with the process of aquaculture , but the long-term or ecological effects as a result of these interactions is still unknown . some of these fauna may be attracted or demonstrate repulsion . the attraction/ repulsion mechanism has various direct and indirect effects on wild organisms at individual and population levels . the interactions that wild organisms have with aquaculture may have implications on the management of fisheries species and the ecosystem in relation to how the fish farms are structured and organized . however , if the farm is correctly placed in an area with a strong current , the 'pollutants ' are flushed out of the area fairly quickly . not only does this help with the pollution problem , but water with a stronger current also aids in overall fish growth . concern remains that resultant bacterial growth strips the water of oxygen , reducing or killing off the local marine life . once an area has been so contaminated , the fish farms are moved to new , uncontaminated areas . this practice has angered nearby fishermen . other potential problems faced by aquaculturists are the obtaining of various permits and water-use rights , profitability , concerns about invasive species and genetic engineering depending on what species are involved , and interaction with the united nations convention on the law of the sea . in regards to genetically modified , farmed salmon , concern has been raised over their proven reproductive advantage and how it could potentially decimate local fish populations , if released into the wild . biologist rick howard did a controlled laboratory study where wild fish and gmo fish were allowed to breed . in 1989 , the aquabounty technologies developed the aqua advantage salmon . the concerns and critiques of cultivating this gmo fish in aquaculture are that the fish will escape and interact with other fish ultimately leading to the reproduction with other fishes . however , the fda , has determined that while net pens would not be the most appropriate to prevent escapes , that raising the salmon in panama waters would result effective in the prevention of escape because the water conditions there would fail to support long-term survival of the salmon in the case that they escaped . another method of preventing aqua advantage fish from impacting the ecosystems in the case they escape suggested by the fda was to create sterile triploid females . this way concerns on reproducing with other fishes would be out of the question . the gmo fish crowded out the wild fish in spawning beds , but the offspring were less likely to survive . the colorant used to make pen-raised salmon appear rosy like the wild fish has been linked with retinal problems in humans . . labeling . in 2005 , alaska passed legislation requiring that any genetically altered fish sold in the state be labeled . in 2006 , a consumer reports investigation revealed that farm-raised salmon is frequently sold as wild . in 2008 , the us national organic standards board allowed farmed fish to be labeled as organic provided less than 25 % of their feed came from wild fish . this decision was criticized by the advocacy group food & water watch as '' bending the rules '' about organic labeling . in the european union , fish labeling as to species , method of production and origin , has been required since 2002 . concerns continue over the labeling of salmon as farmed or wild-caught , as well as about the humane treatment of farmed fish . the marine stewardship council has established an eco label to distinguish between farmed and wild-caught salmon , while the rspca has established the freedom food label to indicate humane treatment of farmed salmon , as well as other food products . . indoor fish farming . an alternative to outdoor open ocean cage aquaculture , is through the use of a recirculating aquaculture system ( ras ) . a ras is a series of culture tanks and filters where water is continuously recycled and monitored to keep optimal conditions year round . to prevent the deterioration of water quality , the water is treated mechanically through the removal of particulate matter and biologically through the conversion of harmful accumulated chemicals into nontoxic ones . other treatments such as ultraviolet sterilization , ozonation , and oxygen injection are also used to maintain optimal water quality . through this system , many of the environmental drawbacks of aquaculture are minimized including escaped fish , water usage , and the introduction of pollutants . the practices also increased feed-use efficiency growth by providing optimum water quality . ( timmons et al . , 2002 ; piedrahita , 2003 ) . one of the drawbacks to recirculating aquaculture systems is the need for periodic water exchanges . however , the rate of water exchange can be reduced through aquaponics , such as the incorporation of hydroponically grown plants ( corpron and armstrong , 1983 ) and denitrification . ( klas et al . , 2006 ) both methods reduce the amount of nitrate in the water , and can potentially eliminate the need for water exchanges , closing the aquaculture system from the environment . the amount of interaction between the aquaculture system and the environment can be measured through the cumulative feed burden ( cfb kg/m3 ) , which measures the amount of feed that goes into the ras relative to the amount of water and waste discharged . the environmental impact of larger indoor fish farming system will be linked to the local infrastructure , and water supply . areas which are more drought-prone , indoor fish farms might flow out wastewater for watering agricultural farms , reducing the water affliction . from 2011 , a team from the university of waterloo led by tahbit chowdhury and gordon graff examined vertical ras aquaculture designs aimed at producing protein-rich fish species . however , because of its high capital and operating costs , ras has generally been restricted to practices such as broodstock maturation , larval rearing , fingerling production , research animal production , specific pathogen-free animal production , and caviar and ornamental fish production . as such , research and design work by chowdhury and graff remains difficult to implement . although the use of ras for other species is considered by many aquaculturalists to be currently impractical , some limited successful implementation of ras has occurred with high-value product such as barramundi , sturgeon , and live tilapia in the us , eels and catfish in the netherlands , trout in denmark and salmon is planned in scotland merrit , mike ( 13 january 2013 ) sea-change as farm grows fish on land the scotsman , retrieved 22 january 2013 and canada . shore , randy ( 17 november 2012 ) salmon farming comes ashore in land-based aquaculture the vancouver sun , retrieved 21 february 2013 . slaughter methods . tanks saturated with carbon dioxide have been used to make fish unconscious . their gills are then cut with a knife so that the fish bleed out before they are further processed . this is no longer considered a humane method of slaughter . methods that induce much less physiological stress are electrical or percussive stunning and this has led to the phasing out of the carbon dioxide slaughter method in europe . victoria braithwaite ( 2010 ) do fish feel pain ? , oxford university press , p . 180 . inhumane methods . according to t . håstein of the national veterinary institute , '' different methods for slaughter of fish are in place and it is no doubt that many of them may be considered as appalling from an animal welfare point of view . '' a 2004 report by the efsa scientific panel on animal health and welfare explained : '' many existing commercial killing methods expose fish to substantial suffering over a prolonged period of time . for some species , existing methods , whilst capable of killing fish humanely , are not doing so because operators do n't have the knowledge to evaluate them . '' following are some of the less humane ways of killing fish . air asphyxiation amounts to suffocation in the open air . the process can take upwards of 15 minutes to induce death , although unconsciousness typically sets in sooner . ice baths or chilling of farmed fish on ice or submerged in near-freezing water is used to dampen muscle movements by the fish and to delay the onset of post-death decay . however , it does not necessarily reduce sensibility to pain ; indeed , the chilling process has been shown to elevate cortisol . in addition , reduced body temperature extends the time before fish lose consciousness . co₂ narcosis exsanguination without stunning is a process in which fish are taken up from water , held still , and cut so as to cause bleeding . according to references in yue , this can leave fish writhing for an average of four minutes , and some catfish still responded to noxious stimuli after more than 15 minutes . immersion in salt followed by gutting or other processing such as smoking is applied to eel . . more humane methods . proper stunning renders the fish unconscious immediately and for a sufficient period of time such that the fish is killed in the slaughter process ( e.g . through exsanguination ) without regaining consciousness . percussive stunning involves rendering the fish unconscious with a blow on the head . electric stunning can be humane when a proper current is made to flow through the fish brain for a sufficient period of time . electric stunning can be applied after the fish has been taken out of the water ( dry stunning ) or while the fish is still in the water . the latter generally requires a much higher current and may lead to operator safety issues . an advantage could be that in-water stunning allows fish to be rendered unconscious without stressful handling or displacement . however , improper stunning may not induce insensibility long enough to prevent the fish from enduring exsanguination while conscious . whether the optimal stunning parameters that researchers have determined in studies are used by the industry in practice is unknown . gallery . file:2019-03-16 01 aquaculture in chile.jpg fish farming in the fjords of southern chile file : fish-farms-vietnam.jpg houseboat rafts with cages under for rearing fish near mỹ tho , vietnam file : fish-farming-vietnam.jpg transport boats moored at fish processing plant , mỹ tho file : zapotec fish farm in ixtlan oaxaca.png communal zapotec fish farm in ixtlán de juárez , mexico file : fish farm skardu.jpg fish farming traditionally takes place in purpose-built tanks in the skardu region in northern pakistan . file : complexo_de_piscicultura_do_acre.jpg pisciculture complex , outside rio branco , brazil