Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse

early years . raymond was a son of pons of toulouse and almodis de la marche . he received saint-gilles with the title of '' count '' from his father and displaced his niece philippa , countess of toulouse , his brother william iv 's daughter , in 1094 from inheriting toulouse . in 1094 , william bertrand of provence died and his margravial title to provence passed to raymond . a bull of urban 's dated 22 july 1096 names raymond comes nimirum tholosanorum ac ruthenensium et marchio provintie raimundus ( '' raymond , count of nîmes , toulouse and rouergue and margrave of provence '' ) . the first crusade . raymond was deeply religious , and wished to die in the holy land , and so when the call was raised for the first crusade , he was one of the first to take the cross . he is sometimes called '' the one-eyed '' ( monoculus in latin ) after a rumour that he had lost an eye in a scuffle with the doorkeeper of the church of the holy sepulchre during an earlier pilgrimage to jerusalem . the oldest and the richest of the crusaders , raymond left toulouse at the end of october 1096 , with a large company that included his wife elvira , his infant son ( who would die on the journey ) and adhemar of le puy , the papal legate . he ignored requests by his niece , philippa ( the rightful heiress to toulouse ) to grant the rule of toulouse to her in his stead ; instead , he left bertrand , his eldest son , to govern . he marched to durrës , and then east to constantinople along the same route used by bohemond of taranto . at the end of april 1097 , he was the only crusade leader not to swear an oath of fealty to byzantine emperor alexius i . instead , raymond swore an oath of friendship , and offered his support against bohemond , mutual enemy of both raymond and alexius . he was present at the siege of nicaea and the battle of dorylaeum in 1097 , but his first major role came in october 1097 at the siege of antioch . the crusaders heard a rumour that antioch had been deserted by the seljuk turks , so raymond sent his army ahead to occupy it , offending bohemond of taranto who wanted the city for himself . the city was , however , still occupied , and was taken by the crusaders only after a difficult siege in june 1098 . raymond took the palatium cassiani ( the palace of the emir , yaghi-siyan ) and the tower over the bridge gate . he was ill during the second siege of antioch by kerbogha which culminated in a controversial rediscovery of the holy lance by a monk named peter bartholomew . the '' miracle '' raised the morale of the crusaders , and to their surprise they were able to rout kerbogha outside antioch . the lance itself became a valuable relic among raymond 's followers , despite adhemar of le puy 's skepticism and bohemond 's disbelief and occasional mockery . raymond also refused to relinquish his control of the city to bohemond , reminding bohemond that he was obligated to return antioch to the court of emperor alexius , as he had sworn to do . a struggle then arose between raymond 's supporters and the supporters of bohemond , partly over the genuineness of the lance , but mostly over the possession of antioch . extending his territorial reach . many of the minor knights and foot soldiers preferred to continue their march to jerusalem , and they convinced raymond to lead them there in the autumn of 1098 . raymond led them out to besiege ma'arrat al-numan , although he left a small detachment of his troops in antioch , where bohemond also remained . as adhemar had died in antioch , raymond , along with the prestige given to him by the holy lance , became the new leader of the crusade . bohemond however , expelled raymond 's detachment from antioch in january 1099 . raymond then began to search for a city of his own . he marched from ma'arrat , which had been captured in december 1098 , into the emirate of tripoli , and began the siege of arqa on 14 february 1099 , apparently with the intent of founding an independent territory in tripoli that could limit the power of bohemond to expand the principality of antioch to the south . the siege of arqa , a town outside tripoli , lasted longer than raymond had hoped . although he successfully captured hisn al-akrad , a fortress that would later become the important krak des chevaliers , his insistence on taking tripoli delayed the march to jerusalem , and he lost much of the support he had gained after antioch . raymond finally agreed to continue the march to jerusalem on 13 may , and after months of siege the city was captured on 15 july . raymond was offered the crown of the new kingdom of jerusalem , but refused , as he was reluctant to rule in the city in which jesus had suffered . he said that he shuddered to think of being called '' king of jerusalem '' . it is also likely that he wished to continue the siege of tripoli rather than remain in jerusalem . however , he was also reluctant to give up the tower of david in jerusalem , which he had taken after the fall of the city , and it was only with difficulty that godfrey of bouillon was able to take it from him . raymond participated in the battle of ascalon soon after the capture of jerusalem , during which an invading army from egypt was defeated . however , raymond wanted to occupy ascalon himself rather than give it to godfrey , and in the resulting dispute ascalon remained unoccupied . it was not taken by the crusaders until 1153 . godfrey also blamed him for the failure of his army to capture arsuf . when raymond went north , in the winter of 1099–1100 , his first act was one of hostility against bohemond , capturing latakia from him ( bohemond had himself recently taken it from alexius ) . from laodicea he went to constantinople , where he allied with alexius i , bohemond 's most powerful enemy . bohemond was at the time attempting to expand antioch into byzantine territory , and blatantly refused to fulfill his oath to the byzantine empire . crusade of 1101 , siege of tripoli , and death . raymond was part of the doomed crusade of 1101 , where he was defeated at mersivan in anatolia . he escaped and returned to constantinople . in 1102 he traveled by sea from constantinople to antioch , where he was imprisoned by tancred , regent of antioch during the captivity of bohemond , and was only dismissed after promising not to attempt any conquests in the country between antioch and akko . he immediately broke his promise , attacking and capturing tartus , and began to build a castle on the mons peregrinus ( '' pilgrim 's mountain '' ) which would help in his siege of tripoli . he was aided by alexius i , who preferred a friendly state in tripoli to balance the hostile state in antioch . raymond died on february 28 , 1105 , before tripoli was captured . spouses and progeny . raymond iv of toulouse was married three times , and twice excommunicated for marrying within forbidden degrees of consanguinity . his first wife was the daughter of geoffrey i of provence . married in 1066 , she was repudiated in 1076 . their son was bertrand . his second wife was matilda ( mafalda ) , the daughter of count roger i of sicily . married in 1080 , mafalda died in 1094 . raymond 's third wife was elvira , the illegitimate daughter of king alfonso vi of león , the spanish king who also campaigned furiously against the moors . married in 1094 , elvira died after 1151 . their son was alfonso jordan . following raymond 's death , his nephew william-jordan in 1109 , with the aid of king baldwin i of jerusalem , finally captured tripoli and established the county of tripoli . william was deposed in the same year by raymond 's eldest son bertrand , and the county remained in the possession of the counts of toulouse throughout the 12th century . raymond of toulouse seems to have been driven both by religious and material motives . on the one hand he accepted the discovery of the holy lance and rejected the kingship of jerusalem , but on the other hand he could not resist the temptation of a new territory . raymond of aguilers , a clerk in raymond 's army , wrote an account of the crusade from raymond 's point of view .