1925 in literature

events . february 21 – the first issue of the new yorker magazine is published by harold ross . february 28 – the first story under the name b . traven ( identified variously as actor ret marut or otto feige ) is published , in vorwärts ( berlin ) . april – f . scott fitzgerald and ernest hemingway meet in the dingo bar , rue delambre , in the montparnasse quarter of paris , after the april 10 publication of fitzgerald 's the great gatsby and before hemingway departs on a trip to spain that he will fictionalize in the sun also rises . may 14 – virginia woolf 's novel mrs dalloway is published by the hogarth press in bloomsbury , london . woolf is beginning work on to the lighthouse . may 20 – c . s . lewis is elected a fellow of magdalen college , oxford , where he tutors in english language and literature until 1954 . summer – samuel beckett plays in the first of two first-class cricket matches , for dublin university against northamptonshire . july 22 – the first of ben travers ' '' aldwych farces '' , a cuckoo in the nest , opens at london 's aldwych theatre in a production by actor-manager tom walls featuring the brothers ralph lynn , gordon james and hastings lynn . october 1 – j . r . r . tolkien becomes rawlinson and bosworth professor of anglo-saxon at the university of oxford . december 24 – a . a . milne 's winnie-the-pooh story '' the wrong sort of bees '' appears in the london evening news . december 28 – the russian poet sergei yesenin ( born 1895 ) writes a farewell poem , '' goodbye , my friend , goodbye '' ( до свиданья , друг мой , до свиданья ) in his own blood before hanging himself at the angleterre hotel , leningrad . december – w . h . auden and christopher isherwood meet for the first time as adults in london . unknown dates miss riboet 's orion theatrical troupe is established in the dutch east indies . the first complete translation of the 14th-century romance of the three kingdoms ( 三國演義 ) from chinese into english is published by charles henry brewitt-taylor . leslie hotson publishes the first account from contemporary records of the murder of the dramatist christopher marlowe in 1593 , the death of christopher marlowe . claiming to have found the evidence while researching chaucer 's the nun 's priest 's tale in the archives of the english public records office in 1923–1924 . several different names had been mentioned in connection with marlowe 's death , two being '' one ingram '' and '' ffrancis ffrezer '' . hotson stumbled on '' ingram frizer '' and '' felt at once that i had come upon the man who killed christopher marlowe '' ( p . 23 ) . t . s . eliot leaves lloyds bank in london and joins the new publishers faber and faber , having been recommended to geoffrey faber by charles whibley . the modern library is taken over by bennett cerf and donald klopfer . new books . fiction . sherwood anderson – dark laughter sergei auslender – дни боевые ( dni boevye , fighting days ) andré billy – l'ange qui pleure james boyd – drums louis bromfield – possession d . k . broster – the flight of the heron ( first of her jacobite trilogy ) mihail bulgakov the fatal eggs ( роковые яйца ) the white guard ( белая гвардия ; partial serialization ) mary butts – ashe of rings willa cather – the professor 's house blaise cendrars – sutter 's gold andré chamson – roux le bandit arthur bowie chrisman – shen of the sea agatha christie – the secret of chimneys ivy compton-burnett – pastors and masters warwick deeping – sorrell and son maurice dekobra – la madone des sleepings ( the madonna of the sleeping-cars ) brian oswald donn-byrne – hangman 's house john dos passos – manhattan transfer theodore dreiser – an american tragedy lion feuchtwanger – jud süß ( translated as jew süss or power ) f . scott fitzgerald – the great gatsby ford madox ford – no more parades konstantine gamsakhurdia – the smile of dionysus david garnett – the sailor 's return william gerhardie – the polyglots andré gide – les faux-monnayeurs ellen glasgow – barren ground thea von harbou – metropolis l.p . hartley – simonetta perkins ernest hemingway – in our time ( short stories ) dubose heyward – porgy aldous huxley – those barren leaves mikheil javakhishvili – jaqo 's dispossessed franz kafka ( died 1924 ) – the trial ( der process , written 1914–15 ) sinclair lewis – arrowsmith anita loos – gentlemen prefer blondes compton mackenzie – coral w . somerset maugham – the painted veil thomas mofolo – chaka eugenio montale – ossi di seppia liam o'flaherty – the informer e . phillips oppenheim – gabriel samara , peacemaker baroness orczy the miser of maida vale a question of temptation william plomer – turbott wolfe marcel proust – albertine disparue jean-joseph rabearivelo – l'aube rouge ( the red dawn ) henry handel richardson ( et florence robertson ) – the way home ( second part of the fortunes of richard mahony ) willie riley – peter pettinger kate roberts – o gors y bryniau ( welsh short stories ) romain rolland – le jeu de l'amour et de la mort ( the game of love and death ) dorothy scarborough – the wind gertrude stein – the making of americans james stevens – paul bunyan etsu inagaki sugimoto - a daughter of the samurai sigrid undset – the master of hestviken , vol . 1 : the axe carl van vechten – firecrackers . a realistic novel edgar wallace the blue hand the fellowship of the frog the mind of mr . j . g . reeder the strange countess the three just men hugh walpole – portrait of a man with red hair hugo wast – stone desert h . g . wells – christina alberta 's father edith wharton – the mother 's recompense william carlos williams – in the american grain p . g . wodehouse – carry on , jeeves virginia woolf – mrs dalloway elinor wylie – the venetian glass nephew francis brett young – sea horses ernst zahn – frau sixta . children and young people . elinor brent-dyer – chalet school a . m . burrage – poor dear esme hugh lofting – doctor dolittle 's zoo ( 5th in a series of 13 books ) ruth plumly thompson – the lost king of oz ( 19th in the oz series overall and the fifth written by her ) else ury – nesthäkchen with white hair ( nesthäkchen im weißen haar ) . drama . j . r . ackerley – the prisoners of war arnolt bronnen – the bird of youth ( geburt der jugend ) mikhail bulgakov – zoyka 's apartment ( written ) noël coward – hay fever ( first performed ) and fallen angels joseph jefferson farjeon – number 17 federico garcía lorca – the billy-club puppets ( los títeres de cachiporra ) patrick hastings – the river hugo von hofmannsthal – the tower ( der turm ) zora neale hurston – color struck george kelly – craig 's wife john howard lawson – processional ben travers – a cuckoo in the nest john van druten – young woodley franz werfel – juarez und maximilian stanisław ignacy witkiewicz – the beelzebub sonata ( sonata belzebuba ) carl zuckmayer – the merry vineyard ( der fröhliche weinberg ) . poetry . t . s . eliot – the hollow men f . w . harvey – september and other poems . non-fiction . max aitken – politicians and the press alice bailey – a treatise on cosmic fire edwin burtt – the metaphysical foundations of modern physical science g . k . chesterton – the everlasting man maurice halbwachs – la mémoire collective ( on collective memory ) adolf hitler – mein kampf walter lippmann – the phantom public dmitry merezhkovsky the birth of gods : tutankhamen in crete ( rozhdenīe bogov : tutankamon na kritie ) the mystery of the three : egypt and babylon ( taĭna trekh : egipet i vavilon ) arthur e . powell – the etheric double and allied phenomena franz roh – nach expressionismus – magischer realismus : probleme der neuesten europäischen malerei ( after expressionism – magical realism : problems of the newest european painting ) george saintsbury , ed . – the receipt book of mrs . anne blencowe ( manuscript 1694 ) clare sheridan – across europe with satanella ( motorcycle tour ) j . r . r . tolkien – '' the devil 's coach horses '' hendrik willem van loon – tolerance h . g . wells – a year of prophesying . anthologies . alain locke ( editor ) – the new negro . births . january 7 – gerald durrell , indian-born british naturalist and author ( died 1995 ) january 8 – james saunders , english dramatist ( died 2004 ) january 11 – william styron , american writer ( died 2006 ) january 14 – yukio mishima ( 三島 由紀夫 , kimitake hiraoka ) , japanese author and political activist ( died 1970 ) january 17 – robert cormier , american young-adult novelist ( died 2000 ) january 20 – ernesto cardenal , nicaraguan catholic priest and poet january 26 – miep diekmann , dutch writer of children 's literature ( died 2017 ) february 18 – jack gilbert , american poet and educator ( died 2012 ) february 20 – alex la guma , south african novelist and political activist ( died 1985 ) february 22 edward gorey , american illustrator and writer ( died 2000 ) gerald stern , american poet and academic march 14 – john wain , english novelist and short-story writer ( died 1994 ) march 16 – ismith khan , trinidad-born novelist ( died 2002 ) march 21 – peter brook , english theatre director march 25 – flannery o'connor , american author ( died 1964 ) march 27 – john bayley , indian-born english literary critic ( died 2015 ) may 25 – rosario castellanos , mexican writer ( died 1974 ) june 16 – jean d'ormesson , french writer ( died 2017 ) july 26 – ana maría matute , spanish novelist ( died 2014 ) august 1 – pam gems , born iris pamela price , english playwright ( died 2011 ) august 12 – donald justice , american poet and educator ( died 2004 ) august 17 – john hawkes , american novelist ( died 1998 ) august 18 – brian aldiss , english science fiction author and editor ( died 2017 ) august 28 – arkady strugatsky , russian science fiction writer ( died 1991 ) september 4 – forrest carter , american speechwriter and author ( died 1979 ) september 6 – andrea camilleri , italian novelist and playwright ( died 2019 ) october 1 christine pullein-thompson , english children 's novelist ( died 2005 ) diana pullein-thompson , english children 's novelist ( died 2015 ) october 3 – gore vidal , american writer ( died 2012 ) october 8 – andrei sinyavsky , russian writer and dissident ( died 1997 ) october 11 – elmore leonard , american novelist and screenwriter ( died 2013 ) october 25 – romek marber , polish-born book designer ( died 2020 ) october 26 – jan wolkers , dutch writer and artist ( died 2007 ) december 19 – tankred dorst , german dramatist ( died 2017 ) . deaths . january 4 – elisabeth von heyking , german novelist , travel writer and diarist ( born 1861 ) january 27 – friedrich von hügel , austrian theologian ( born 1852 ) january 31 – george washington cable , american writer ( born 1844 ) february 16 – francisco díaz-silveira , cuban journalist and poet ( born 1871 ) march 2 – luigj gurakuqi , albanian writer and politician ( born 1879 ) march 26 – hugo bettauer , austrian journalist and writer ( born 1872 ) april 7 – gerhard gran , norwegian literary historian , essayist and biographer ( born 1856 ) may 12 – amy lowell , american poet ( born 1874 ) june 6 – pierre louÿs , french poet ( born 1870 ) july 16 – pyotr gnedich , russian writer ( born 1855 ) july 15 – mary cholmondeley , english novelist ( born 1859 ) august 15 – george barbu știrbei , romanian journalist , biographer and patron of the arts ( born 1828 ) september 11 – gustav kastropp , german poet and librettist ( born 1844 ) october 31 – josé ingenieros , argentine positivist philosopher , essayist and physician ( born 1877 ) october 7 – felix liebermann , german-jewish historian ( born 1851 ) c . november – percy hetherington fitzgerald , irish literary biographer , drama critic and sculptor ( born 1834 ) december 5 – władysław reymont , polish novelist , nobel prize winner ( born 1867 ) december 28 – sergei yesenin , russian poet ( born 1895 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : liam o'flaherty , the informer james tait black memorial prize for biography : geoffrey scott , the portrait of zelide newbery medal for children 's literature : charles finger , tales from silver lands nobel prize for literature : george bernard shaw ( awarded in 1926 ) prix goncourt : maurice genevoix , raboliot pulitzer prize for drama : sidney howard , they knew what they wanted pulitzer prize for poetry : edwin arlington robinson , the man who died twice pulitzer prize for the novel : edna ferber , so big . references .