Laurel Clark

early and personal life . clark was born in ames , iowa , but considered racine , wisconsin to be her home town . clark was a member of the gamma phi beta sorority at the university of wisconsin - madison . she held a federal communications commission ( fcc ) issued technician class amateur radio license with the call sign kc5zsu . she is survived by her husband , fellow nasa flight surgeon dr . jonathan clark ( who was part of an official nasa panel that prepared the final 400-page report about the space shuttle columbia disaster ) , and son , iain , who was born in 1996 . lost astronaut 's husband not giving up on space - milwaukee news story - wisn milwaukee . education . 1979 : graduated from william horlick high school , racine , wisconsin 1983 : received bachelor of science degree in zoology from the university of wisconsin–madison 1987 : received doctorate in medicine from the university of wisconsin–madison . organizations . clark was a member of the aerospace medical association and the society of u.s . naval flight surgeons . she was also a member of the olympia brown unitarian universalist church in racine , wisconsin . . military career . during medical school , clark did active duty training with the diving medicine department at the united states navy experimental diving unit in march 1987 . after completing medical school , she underwent postgraduate medical education in pediatrics from 1987 to 1988 at the national naval medical center . the following year she completed navy undersea medical officer training at the naval undersea medical institute in groton , connecticut , and diving medical officer training at the naval diving and salvage training center in panama city , florida . clark was designated a radiation health officer and undersea medical officer . she was then assigned as the submarine squadron 14 medical department head in holy loch , scotland . during that assignment , she dove with navy divers and united states navy seals , and performed many medical evacuations from us submarines . after two years of operational experience she was designated as a naval submarine medical officer and diving medical officer . clark underwent six months of aeromedical training at the naval aerospace medical institute at nas pensacola in pensacola , florida , and was designated as a naval flight surgeon . she was stationed at mcas yuma , arizona , and assigned as flight surgeon marine attack squadron 211 ( vma-211 ) , a marine corps av-8b harrier squadron . she made several deployments , including one overseas to the western pacific , practiced medicine in austere environments , and flew on multiple aircraft . her squadron won the marine attack squadron of the year award for its successful deployment . she was then assigned as the group flight surgeon for marine aircraft group 13 ( mag-13 ) . before her selection as an astronaut candidate she served as a flight surgeon for training squadron 86 ( vt-86 ) , the naval flight officer advanced training squadron for tactical jets at nas pensacola . clark was board certified by the national board of medical examiners and held a wisconsin medical license . her military qualifications included radiation health officer , undersea medical officer , diving medical officer , submarine medical officer , and naval flight surgeon . she was a basic life support instructor , advanced cardiac life support provider , advanced trauma life support provider , and hyperbaric chamber advisor . nasa career . selected by nasa in april 1996 , clark reported to the johnson space center in houston , texas in august 1996 . after completing two years of training and evaluation , she was qualified for flight assignment as a mission specialist . from july 1997 to august 2000 clark worked in the astronaut office payloads/habitability branch . clark flew aboard sts-107 , logging 15 days , 22 hours and 21 minutes in space . . space flight experience . 250px sts-107 columbia – the 16-day flight was a dedicated science and research mission . working 24 hours a day , in two alternating shifts , the crew successfully conducted approximately 80 experiments . clark 's bioscience experiments included gardening in space , as she discussed only days before her death in an interview with milwaukee media near her wisconsin hometown . the sts-107 mission ended abruptly on february 1 , 2003 , when columbia disintegrated and her crew perished during re-entry , 16 minutes before scheduled landing . clark also recorded inside the cockpit during columbias descent into the earth 's atmosphere on a small digital camera . clark 's final message to her friends and family was through an email sent from columbia . letter home from space january 31 , 2003 . in the released text of the email , clark called the planet magnificent , and explained that while she spends much of the time working back in spacehab and away from the sights of earth , '' whenever i do get to look out , it is glorious . '' she found that taking photos of the earth was challenging , '' keeping my fingers crossed that they 're in sharp focus . '' clark also shared some of the intriguing effects of micro gravity on human physiology , such as constant challenge to stay adequately hydrated due to an '' almost non-existent '' sense of thirst . . awards and decorations . clark was awarded numerous insignia and personal decorations including : . qualification insignia . astronaut badge naval flight surgeon diver insignia submarine medical officer . personal decorations . defense distinguished service medal † navy and marine corps commendation medal with 2 gold award stars ( 3 awards ) congressional space medal of honor † nasa distinguished service medal † nasa space flight medal † national defense service medal overseas service ribbon the † symbol indicates a posthumous award . tributes . asteroid 51827 laurelclark was named for clark . clark hill in the columbia hills on mars was named for clark . l . clark , an interior crater of the lunar crater apollo , was named for clark . clark hall , in the columbia village suites at the florida institute of technology , is named after her . the apartments were initially planned to be named the crane creek suites , but were renamed in 2008 to commemorate the columbia crew . the laurel salton clark memorial fountain in racine , wisconsin is named for her . in 2004 , the naval aerospace medicine institute named its aerospace medicine academic center in pensacola after clark and david m . brown clark auditorium at walter reed national military medical center , bethesda , maryland is named for her and displays uniforms , training manuals , and personal items that belonged to her . the scottish band runrig pays tribute to clark on the 2016 album the story . the final track , '' somewhere '' , ends with a recording of her voice . clark was a runrig fan and had a wake up call with runrig 's '' running to the light '' . she took their 2001 the stamping ground cd into space with her . when the shuttle exploded the cd was found back on earth , and was presented to the band by her family .