1951 in music

specific locations . 1951 in british music 1951 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1951 in country music 1951 in jazz . events . january 29 – nilla pizzi wins the first annual sanremo music festival with '' grazie dei fiori '' . anon . '' riviera dei fiori '' ; anon . '' sanremo 1951 '' , sanremo festival website ( accessed november 30 , 2009 ) . february 22 – the first complete performance of charles ives 's symphony no . 2 , written between 1897 and 1902 , is given in carnegie hall by the new york philharmonic orchestra , conducted by leonard bernstein . henry cowell , '' current chronicle : new york '' ( subscription access ) , the musical quarterly 37 , no . 3 ( july ) : 396–402 . citation is on pp . 399–400 . march 3-5 – jackie brenston '' and his delta cats '' ( actually ike turner 's kings of rhythm ) record '' rocket 88 '' at sam phillips ' sun studio in memphis , tennessee , a candidate for the first rock and roll record ( released in april ) . march 5 – the suk trio , consisting of josef suk ( violinist ) , jiří hubička ( pianist ) and saša večtomov ( cellist ) , make their debut , at the rudolfinum hall in prague ( czechoslovakia ) . april 4 – frankie laine , newly signed by columbia records , becoming the highest paid vocalist of his day , immediately justifies his new contract by recording the double-sided megahit '' jezebel '' / '' rose , rose , i love you '' , the latter being the only major popular music chart hit in the united states written by a chinese composer ( chen gexin ) . april 18 – an article entitled '' the fight against formalism in art and literature , for a progressive german culture '' appears in the tägliche rundschau , official daily of the soviet government in germany , promulgating the new cultural policy of the ddr . everett helm , '' current chronicle : berlin '' ( subscription access ) , the musical quarterly 37 , no . 4 ( october ) : 590–97 . may 9–26 – the queen elisabeth competition for violin is held ( for the first time under that name ) in brussels , belgium . leonid kogan is awarded first prize . '' queen elisabeth competition 1951–2008 '' , p . 3 . june 9 – joseph haydn 's opera l'anima del filosofo , better known by its alternative title orfeo ed euridice and written in 1791–92 , is given its world premiere at the maggio musicale fiorentino . anonymous , 'first performance of a haydn opera ' , the times , issue 52024 ( monday , june 10 , 1951 ) : p . 4 , col g . june 14 – bill haley and his comets record their version of '' rocket 88 '' , combining the rhythm and blues arrangement of the version recorded in early march by jackie brentson with country music trappings . june 22 – july 10 – darmstädter ferienkurse held in darmstadt . july 2–14 – the seventh annual cheltenham music festival is held in cheltenham , england , with a performance of brian easdale 's opera the sleeping children , premieres of the first symphonies of malcolm arnold , john gardner and arnold van wyk , franz reizenstein 's serenade for winds and maurice jacobson 's symphonic suite , as well as performances of works by humphrey searle , robert masters , benjamin frankel and philip sainton . a . j . , '' cheltenham festival '' , the musical times 92 , no . 1303 ( sep . , 1951 ) : 416–17 . july 11 – disc jockey and music promoter alan freed broadcasts his first rhythm and blues radio programme from station wjw in cleveland , ohio . freed uses the term rock and roll to describe r & b , in an effort to introduce the music to a broader white audience . july 14–21 – the haslemere music festival , consisting of six concerts of early music , takes place in haslemere , england . anon . , '' the haslemere festival '' , the musical times 92 , no . 1301 ( july 1951 ) : 312 . july 29 – the annual bayreuth festival resumes for the first time since the world war ii , now under the general direction of wieland wagner , with an opening concert of beethoven 's symphony no . 9 conducted by wilhelm furtwängler , followed by productions of der ring des nibelungen , parsifal and die meistersinger . adolf aber , '' tradition and revolution at bayreuth '' , the musical times 92 , no . 1304 ( october 1951 ) : 453–57 . august – the annual salzburg festival takes place in salzburg , austria , featuring four opera productions from the vienna state opera : mozart 's idomeneo and die zauberflöte and verdi 's otello , all conducted by wilhelm furtwängler , and berg 's wozzeck , conducted by karl böhm , as well as seven orchestral concerts by the vienna philharmonic orchestra ( two conducted by wilhelm furtwängler and one each by edwin fischer , rafael kubelík , eugen jochum , karl böhm , and leopold stokowski ) , six choral concerts , four chamber-music concerts , three solo recitals , and a number of smaller events . david cherniavsky , '' the salzburg festival '' , the musical times 92 , no . 1305 ( november 1951 ) : 517–18 . september 5 – opening of the month-long berlin festival of the arts , with a performance in the new schillertheater of beethoven 's symphony no . 9 by the berlin philharmonic conducted by wilhelm furtwängler . subsequent musical events include performances of gian carlo menotti 's the consul , benjamin britten 's let 's make an opera and the first german performance of oklahoma ! . anonymous , 'berlin festival of the arts : turn of western culture ' , the times , issue 52091 ( tuesday , august 28 , 1951 ) : p . 3 , col g . september 11 – the rake 's progress , an opera by igor stravinsky with libretto by w . h . auden and chester kallman , premieres in venice , conducted by the composer . september 17–22 – the fourth annual swansea festival of music and the arts opens in swansea , wales , with a controversial speech by one of wales 's leading composers , daniel jones . the festival is the final component in the festival of britain and consists of seven programmes , featuring welsh composer arwel hughes 's new oratorio st . david and appearances by victoria de los ángeles , zino francescatti , andré navarra , walter susskind and jean martinon . margaret reece-evans , '' the swansea festival '' , musical times 92 , no . 1305 ( november ) : 516 . october 6–7 – the donaueschingen festival features the world premieres of ernst krenek 's double concerto for viola , piano , and small orchestra , rolf liebermann 's piano sonata , pierre boulez 's polyphonie x for 18 solo instruments , hermann reutter 's der himmlische vagant , lyrische portrait des f . villon von klabund for alto and baritone voices and instrumental ensemble , and marcel mihalovici 's étude en deux parties for piano and ensemble , as well as german first performances of works by messiaen , guido turchi , harsányi , jelinek , and honegger , and a performance of henze 's third symphony . donaueschinger musiktage : programme seit 1921 . october 21 – opening of a '' festival of music and the arts '' at wexford in ireland , the forerunner of wexford festival opera . october 22 – reopening of the royal opera house , london , with a production of puccini 's turandot , conducted by sir john barbirolli and with gertrude grob-prandl in the title role . anonymous , 'royal opera house : '' turandot '' ' , the times , issue 52139 ( tuesday , october 23 , 1951 ) : p . 6 , col f . november 29 – december 3 – the hamburg radio symphony orchestra , conducted by hans schmidt-isserstedt , plays four concerts in london as part of a thirteen-concert tour of england and ireland . anonymous , 'visit of hamburg radio orchestra : series of concerts ' , the times , issue 52164 ( wednesday , november 21 , 1951 ) : p . 2 , col f . november – dinah shore begins her first tv series , the dinah shore show , which will run for 5½ years . december 7 – opening of the opera season at la scala in milan , three weeks earlier than the traditional date of december 26 , with a double-bill consisting of verdi 's i vespri siciliani and stravinsky 's the rake 's progress . anonymous , 'opening of the season at la scala : two first performances ' , the times , issue 52179 ( saturday , december 8 , 1951 ) : p . 5 , col c . teresa brewer leaves the london label for coral records . georgia gibbs leaves coral to sign with mercury records , where she will have all of her biggest hits . albums released . ballin ' the jack – georgia gibbs beloved hymns – bing crosby bing and the dixieland bands – bing crosby bing sing victor herbert – bing crosby blue period – miles davis country style – bing crosby dig – miles davis down memory lane – bing crosby folk song favorites – patti page go west , young man – bing crosby historically speaking – gerry mulligan hoop-de-doo – the ames brothers i 'll see you in my dreams – doris day in the evening by the moonlight – the ames brothers let 's polka – frankie yankovic ( pontiac records plp-520 ) lullaby of broadway – doris day music , maestro please – frankie laine on moonlight bay – doris day one for my baby – frankie laine porgy and bess – various artists precious memories – bill kenny sentimental me – the ames brothers sweet leilani – the ames brothers teresa brewer – teresa brewer two tickets to broadway – dinah shore way back home – bing crosby wonderful words – the mills brothers . us no 1 hit singles . these singles reached the top of us billboard magazine 's charts in 1951 . 1 '' the cantata was written in 1944 by poet andrejs eglitis and composer lucija garuta . during the nazi occupation of the baltic state latvia only small portions of the work could be performed . eglitis later escaped to sweden , but of garuta nothing was ever heard . a new musical score was written by bruno skulte while he was in a german displaced persons camp . '' 2 broadcast date of radio recording , nwdr cologne . first public performance did not occur until 22 october 1971 , by saschko gawriloff and aloys kontarsky at a concert of the smip in paris . rudolf frisius , karlheinz stockhausen ii : die werke 1950–1977 ; gespräch mit karlheinz stockhausen , '' es geht aufwärts '' ( mainz , london , berlin , madrid , new york , paris , prague , tokyo , toronto : schott musik international , 2008 ) : 30 . 3 although previously performed in a radio broadcast in 1943 , this was the first public performance . . compositions . jean absil contes for trumpet and piano , op . 76 les météores , ballet for orchestra op . 77 murray adaskin – ballet symphony for orchestra yasushi akutagawa ballata for violin and piano kappa ballet for orchestra shitsuraku-en ( paradise lost ) ballet for orchestra hugo alfvén – sängen till folkare for baritone and piano or male choir and piano or male choir unaccompanied hendrik andriessen aubade for brass quartet choral no . 4 for organ ( revised version ) liederen ( 3 ) , for choir sonata for unaccompanied cello suite for brass quartet wind quintet jurriaan andriessen – flute concerto istván anhalt arc en ciel ballet for two pianos funeral music for ten instruments piano sonata psalm 19 : a benediction for baritone and piano songs of love ( 3 ) for ssa choir george antheil accordion dance for orchestra fragments from shelley ( 8 ) for choir and piano nocturne in skyrockets for orchestra sonata for flute and piano sonata for trumpet and piano denis apivor the goodman of paris ballet for orchestra , op . 18 a mirror for witches ballet for orchestra , op.19 suite concertante for piano and small orchestra , op.18a boris arapov – russian suite for orchestra violet archer – fantasy in the form of a passacaglia for brass josé ardévol – symphonic variations for cello and orchestra malcolm arnold oboe sonatina , op . 28 clarinet sonatina , op . 29 machines , symphonic study , op . 30 a sussex overture , op . 31 concerto for piano four-hands ( arnold ) , op . 32 english dances , set 2 , op . 33 alexander arutiunian – concertino for piano and orchestra georges auric – chemin de lumière ballet ( also orchestral suite ) milton babbitt du for soprano and piano the widow 's lament in springtime , for soprano and piano jesús bal y gay – concerto grosso luciano berio deus meus for voice and three instruments due liriche di garcia lorca for bass and orchestra due pezzi for violin and piano opus no . zoo for reciter and wind quintet sonatina for wind quartet withdrawn pierre boulez – polyphonie x martin boykan – duo for violin and piano benjamin britten – six metamorphoses after ovid for oboe and piano earle brown – three pieces for piano john cage imaginary landscape no . 4 music of changes elliott carter – string quartet no . 1 carlos chávez – '' happy birthday '' , for a cappella chorus henry cowell clown dance music for piano duet for sidney with love from henry for violin and cello her smile is as sweet as a rose for unaccompanied voice scherzo for soprano and alto recorders signature of light for voice and piano tenth anniversary for piano george crumb pieces ( 3 ) for piano prelude and toccata for piano dimitrie cuclin – sinfonia no . 13 luigi dallapiccola – tartiniana david diamond the midnight meditation song cycle for voice and piano mizmor l'david , sacred service for tenor , choir , and organ piano trio string quartet no . 4 henri dutilleux – symphony no . 1 george enescu – string quartet no . 2 , op . 22 , no . 2 morton feldman extensions i , for violin and piano intersection , for tape intersection i for orchestra marginal intersection for orchestra projection ii , for 5 instruments projection iii , for two pianos projection iv , for violin and piano projection v , for 9 instruments songs ( 4 ) , for soprano , cello , and piano structures for string quartet howard ferguson – piano concerto in d gerald finzi '' god is gone up '' , from 3 anthems op . 27 all this night , op . 33 muses and graces , op . 34 let us now praise famous men , op . 35 lukas foss – piano concerto no . 2 roberto gerhard sardana no . 3 for winds and percussion piano concerto reinhold glière – horn concerto karel goeyvaerts sonata for two pianos nummer 2 for thirteen instruments bengt hambraeus cantata pro defunctis for baritone and organ concerto for organ and harpsichord ( revised version ) liturgia pro organo howard hanson – fantasy-variations on a theme of youth for piano and strings roy harris cumberland concerto for orchestra fantasy for piano and '' pops '' orchestra red cross hymn for choir and band paul hindemith – die harmonie der welt symphony vagn holmboe – symphony no . 8 ( holmboe ) alan hovhaness concerto no . 1 ( '' arevakal '' ) for orchestra , op . 88 concerto no . 2 for violin and strings , op . 89 , no . 1 fantasy on an ossetin tune for piano , op . 85 four motets , for satb choir , op . 87 from the end of the earth for satb choir and organ ( or piano ) , op . 187 gamelan and jhala for carillon , op . 106 hanna for 2 clarinets and 2 pianos , op . 101 hymn to a celestial musician for piano , op . 111 , no . 2 jhala for piano , op . 103 make haste , motet for satb choir , op . 86 khaldis concerto for 4 trumpets , piano , and percussion , op . 91 khirgiz suite for violin and piano , op . 73 , no . 1 lullaby ( a.k.a . slumber song for piano , op . 52 , no . 2 sing aloud for satb choir , op . 68 suite for violin , piano and percussion , op . 99 talin concerto for viola and strings , op . 93 , no . 1 toccata and fugue on a kabardin tune for piano , op . 6 , no . 2 upon enchanted ground for flute , cello , harp , and tam-tam , op . 90 , no . 1 akira ifukube – drumming of japan andré jolivet – piano concerto wojciech kilar – sonatina for flute and piano three preludes for piano variations on a theme by paganini for piano gail kubik – symphony concertante 1952 pulitzer györgy ligeti – concert românesc douglas lilburn – symphony no . 2 witold lutosławski jesień polskich pieśni ludowych na tematy żołnierskie ( 10 ) for male choir recitative and arioso for violin and piano silesian tryptich gian francesco malipiero – sinfonia dello zodiaco frank martin – violin concerto bohuslav martinu piano trio no . 3 serenade for two clarinets and string trio stowe pastorals peter mennin – string quartet no . 2 darius milhaud le candélabre à sept branches , op . & nbsp ; 315 concertino d'automne for two pianos and eight instruments , op . & nbsp ; 309 concertino d'été for viola and chamber orchestra , op . & nbsp ; 311 les miracles de la foi , cantata for tenor , chorus and orchestra , op . & nbsp ; 314 josé pablo moncayo – muros verdes for piano xavier montsalvatge cuarteto indiano poema concertante for violin and orchestra luigi nono composizione no . 1 for orchestra polifonica – monodia – ritmica , for flute , clarinet , bass clarinet , saxophone , horn , piano , and percussion vincent persichetti – symphony no . 4 allan pettersson – seven sonatas for two violins walter piston – string quartet no . 4 henri pousseur missa brevis for four mixed voices sept versets des psaumes de la pénitence for four solo voices or mixed choir sergei prokofiev – symphony-concerto for cello and orchestra peter racine fricker – symphony no . 2 joaquín rodrigo – sonatas de castilla guy ropartz – string quartet no . 6 ned rorem cycle of holy songs ( psalms 134 , 142 , 148 , 150 ) for vice and piano from an unknown past song cycle for voice and piano love in a life for voice and piano the nightingale for voice and piano seven choruses for a cappella choir to a young girl for voice and piano edmund rubbra – string quartet no . 2 hermann schroeder – ave maria zart chorale-prelude for organ mátyás seiber – concertino for clarinet and ensemble roger sessions – string quartet no . 2 dmitri shostakovich – preludes and fugues ( 24 ) for piano reginald smith brindle – concertino for guitar and chamber orchestra karlheinz stockhausen – kreuzspiel virgil thomson chromatic double harmonies : portrait of sylvia marlowe in nine etudes for piano de profundis ( psalm 30 ) , satb choir ( revised version ) for a happy occasion ( happy birthday for mrs . zimbalist ) for piano eduard tubin – sonata for alto saxophone solo david van vactor – violin concerto heitor villa-lobos guitar concerto quinteto ( em forma de chôros ) , version for conventional wind quintet with horn instead of cor anglais rudá ( dio d'amore ) , symphonic poem and ballet string quartet no . 13 symphony no . 9 frank wigglesworth – summer scenes for flute , oboe , and strings . opera . benjamin britten – billy budd , with libretto by e . m . forster and eric crozier ( 1 december , covent garden ) stephen williams , '' premiere of britten 's billy budd stirs london '' , new york times ( sunday , 9 december ) : 133 . paul dessau – the trial of lucullus , with libretto by bertolt brecht ( march 18 , berlin ) , despite rumours that the work would be forbidden by the east german authorities . everett helm , '' current chronicle : berlin '' , the musical quarterly 37 , no . 4 ( october ) : 590–97 . citation on p . 594 . jean françaix – l'apostrophe , libretto based on balzac ( 1 july , amsterdam , netherlands opera ) anon . , '' holland hears 2 french operas : premiere of ' l'apostrophe ' is given in amsterdam—work by milhaud on program '' ( 2 july ) : 15 . joseph haydn – orfeo et euridice ( 9 june , teatro della pergola , florence , at the fourteenth maggio musicale fiorentino ) . howard taubman , '' florence stages haydn 's orpheus : world premiere of 160-year-old opera is presented at music festival in italy '' , the new york times ( 10 june ) : 22 . marcel landowski – le rire de nils halerius jan meyerowitz – eastward in eden , libretto adapted by dorothy gardner from her own play ( 16 november , detroit , wayne state university theatre ) . anon . , '' new american opera unveiled in detroit '' , new york times ( 17 november ) : 10 . gian-carlo menotti – amahl and the night visitors 24 december , nbc television broadcast , live from radio city studio h-8 ( new york ) . olin downes , '' menotti opera , the first for tv , has its premiere ; boy , 12 , is star '' , the new york times ( 25 december ) : 1 . igor stravinsky – the rake 's progress , with libretto by w . h . auden and chester kallman , venice , teatro la fenice , 11 september . peter tranchell – the mayor of casterbridge , libretto adapted from the novel by thomas hardy ( 30 july , cambridge , arts theatre ) . anon . , '' hardy novel as an opera '' , times ( 16 january 1951 ) : 6 . ralph vaughan williams – the pilgrim 's progress wilfrid mellers , '' current chronicle : london '' ( subscription access ) , the musical quarterly 37 , no . 4 ( october ) : 580–8 . egon wellesz – incognita , from a novel by william congreve ( december , oxford ) . andrew porter , '' new wellesz opera : 'incognita , ' based on congreve story , has its first performance at oxford '' , new york times ( 16 december ) : 117 . . jazz . musical theater . and so to bed ( vivian ellis ) london production opened at the new theatre on october 17 and ran for 323 performances borscht capades flahooley ( e . y . harburg and sammy fain ) broadway production opened at the broadhurst theatre on may 14 and ran for 40 performances . gay 's the word london production opened at the saville theatre on february 16 and ran for 504 performances the king and i ( richard rodgers and oscar hammerstein ii ) – broadway production kiss me , kate ( cole porter ) – london production opened at the coliseum on march 8 and ran for 501 performances the lyric revue & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production make a wish ( hugh martin ) broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on april 18 and ran for 102 performances . starred nanette fabray . a month of sundays broadway production . oklahoma ! first german production ( berlin ) paint your wagon ( alan jay lerner and frederick loewe ) – broadway production opened at the shubert theatre on november 12 and ran for 289 performances penny plain & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production see you later ( sandy wilson ) london production opened at the watergate theatre on october 3 . seventeen broadway production opened at the broadhurst theatre on june 21 and ran for 182 performances south pacific ( rodgers & hammerstein ) – london production top banana broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on november 1 and ran for 350 performances . a tree grows in brooklyn broadway production opened at the alvin theatre on april 19 and ran for 267 performances two on the aisle & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre on july 19 and ran for 279 performances zip goes a million & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production opened at the palace theatre on october 20 and ran for 544 performances . musical films . alice in wonderland ( original disney animated film ) an american in paris starring gene kelly , leslie caron , oscar levant , georges guétary and nina foch call me mister starring betty grable and dan dailey excuse my dust starring red skelton , monica lewis , sally forrest , macdonald carey and william demarest . dirested by roy rowland . the great caruso ( starring mario lanza ) here comes the groom released september 20 starring bing crosby and jane wyman . the lemon drop kid starring bob hope and marilyn maxwell . lullaby of broadway starring doris day and gene nelson mr . imperium starring lana turner and ezio pinza on moonlight bay starring doris day and gordon macrae on the riviera starring danny kaye , gene tierney and corinne calvet purple heart diary starring frances langford , judd holdren , ben lessy and tony romano . directed by richard quine . rich , young and pretty starring jane powell , danielle darrieux , wendell corey , vic damone and una merkel royal wedding starring fred astaire and jane powell show boat ( directed by george sidney based on the stage musical the strip starring mickey rooney and featuring louis armstrong two tickets to broadway released november 20 starring janet leigh , tony martin , gloria dehaven , ann miller and bob crosby . births . january 6 – kim wilson , blues singer ( the fabulous thunderbirds ) january 9 – crystal gayle , country singer january 19 dewey bunnell ( america ) martha davis ( the motels ) january 20 – ian hill judas priest january 26 david briggs , australian guitarist , songwriter and producer roy goodman , english violinist and conductor andy hummel , american singer-songwriter and bass player ( d . 2010 ) christopher north , american keyboard player january 27 brian downey , drummer ( thin lizzy ) seth justman ( the j . geils band ) january 30 – phil collins , drummer , singer and actor ( genesis ) january 31 k.c . ( harry wayne casey ) , singer ( k.c . and the sunshine band ) phil manzanera , guitarist ( roxy music ) february 4 – phil ehart , american drummer ( kansas ) february 7 – andy chapin , english keyboard player ( the association ) ( d . 1985 ) february 9 – dennis thomas ( kool and the gang ) february 12 – gil moore ( triumph ) february 14 – sylvain sylvain , glam rock/protopunk guitarist ( new york dolls ) ( d . 2021 ) february 15 – melissa manchester , singer february 22 – ellen greene , singer and actress february 27 – steve harley , singer ( cockney rebel ) march 4 – chris rea , singer-songwriter march 5 – willis alan ramsey , american singer-songwriter and guitarist march 9 – zakir hussain , indian tabla player , music producer , film actor and soundtrack composer march 17 – scott gorham ( thin lizzy ) march 20 – jimmie vaughan ( the fabulous thunderbirds ) march 21 russell thompkins , jr . , vocalist ( the stylistics ) conrad lozano ( los lobos ) nigel dick , british music video director , film director , writer and musician march 23 – phil keaggy , guitarist , singer april 3 – mel schacher ( question mark & the mysterians , grand funk railroad ) april 6 – pascal rogé , pianist april 7 – janis ian , singer-songwriter april 8 – joan sebastian , born josé figueroa , singer-songwriter ( d . 2015 ) april 12 – alex briley ( village people ) april 13 peabo bryson , singer max weinberg , drummer and bandleader ( late night with conan o'brien ) april 14 – julian lloyd webber , cellist april 20 – luther vandross , soul singer ( d . 2005 ) april 22 – paul carrack , singer , songwriter and multi-instrumentalist april 27 – ace frehley ( kiss ) may 3 – christopher cross , singer-songwriter ( michael mcdonald band , alan parsons project ) may 4 jackie jackson , vocalist ( the jackson five ) mick mars ( mötley crüe ) may 8 – philip bailey , vocalist ( earth , wind & fire ) may 10 ronald banks ( the dramatics ) john magnar bernes , norwegian singer and harmonica player may 16 – jonathan richman may 19 – joey ramone , singer ( ramones ) ( d . 2001 ) june 3 – deniece williams , singer june 6 – dwight twilley , american singer-songwriter and producer june 8 – bonnie tyler , singer june 10 – ed mctaggart ( daniel amos , the road home ) june 12 bun e . carlos ( cheap trick ) brad delp ( boston ) ( d . 2007 ) june 15 – steve walsh , progressive rock singer-songwriter ( kansas ) june 19 patty larkin , american singer-songwriter , guitarist and producer karen young , canadian singer-songwriter june 26 – tony currenti , drummer ( ac/dc ) june 30 – steve waller , guitarist ( d . 2000 ) july 1 – fred schneider ( the b-52s ) july 7 – blondie chaplin , guitarist and singer july 11 – bonnie pointer ( the pointer sisters ) july 12 – sylvia sass , operatic soprano july 15 – gregory isaacs , reggae musician ( d . 2010 ) july 22 – richard bennett , american guitarist and producer ( the notorious cherry bombs ) august 2 – andrew gold , singer-songwriter ( d . 2011 ) august 3 – johnny graham ( earth , wind & fire ) august 4 – lois v vierk , composer august 13 – dan fogelberg , singer-songwriter , composer and multi-instrumentalist ( d . 2007 ) august 19 – john deacon , bass guitarist ( queen ) august 23 jimi jamison ( survivor ) mark hudson ( the hudson brothers ) august 25 – rob halford ( judas priest ) august 28 – wayne osmond , vocalist , multi-instrumentalist and songwriter ( the osmonds ) september 2 – mik kaminski ( electric light orchestra ) september 6 – šaban šaulić , serbian folk singer ( d . 2019 ) september 7 – chrissie hynde , singer ( the pretenders ) september 12 – olga breeskin , violinist , dancer and actress september 19 – daniel lanois , record producer , guitarist and singer-songwriter september 22 – david coverdale , vocalist ( deep purple , whitesnake ) september 25 – peter dvorský , operatic tenor october 2 – sting , singer october 5 – bob geldof , singer ( the boomtown rats ) , social campaigner & organizer of liveaid october 6 – kevin cronin ( reo speedwagon ) october 7 – john mellencamp , singer-songwriter , artist and actor october 13 – john ford coley , singer , pianist , guitarist , actor and author october 19 – lilia vera , venezuelan folk singer october 20 – al greenwood , rock keyboardist ( foreigner ) october 23 – charly garcía , singer-songwriter and pianist october 26 – maggie roche ( the roches ) ( d . 2017 ) october 27 – k . k . downing ( judas priest ) november 1 – ronald bell ( kool & the gang ) ( d . 2020 ) november 13 – bill gibson ( huey lewis and the news ) november 14 – alec john such , american bass player ( bon jovi ) november 15 – joe puerta , american singer and bass player ( ambrosia ) november 18 – heinrich schiff , austrian cellist and conductor ( d . 2016 ) november 27 – kevin kavanaugh ( southside johnny and the asbury jukes ) november 29 – barry goudreau ( boston ) december 4 – gary rossington ( lynyrd skynyrd , rossington-collins band ) december 10 – johnny rodriguez , country singer december 16 robben ford , guitarist mark heard , singer-songwriter ( d . 1992 ) december 21 – nick gilder , singer and songwriter december 23 – johnny contardo ( sha na na ) december 25 – barbara dever , operatic soprano december 26 paul quinn , heavy metal guitarist ( saxon ) john scofield , jazz guitarist and composer december 29 – yvonne elliman , singer december 31 tom hamilton ( aerosmith ) george thorogood , blues musician date unknown – lorenzo ferrero , composer . deaths . january 20 – alexander chuhaldin , violinist , conductor , composer , and music educator , 58 february 3 – fréhel , french singer , actress , 59 february 9 – eddy duchin , pianist and bandleader , 41 ( leukaemia ) february 20 – howard brockway , composer , 80 february 28 – giannina russ , operatic soprano , 77 march 5 – leo singer , vaudeville impresario , 73 march 6 – ivor novello , operetta composer , entertainer , 58 ( coronary thrombosis ) march 12 – harold bauer , pianist and violinist , 77 march 25 – sid catlett , jazz drummer , 41 ( heart attack ) april 21 – olive fremstad , operatic soprano , 80 may 29 fanny brice , us actress , comedian and singer josef bohuslav foerster , czech classical composer ( born 1859 ) robert kahn , composer , 85 june 4 – serge koussevitzky , double-bassist , conductor and composer , 76 june 26 – frank ferera , hawaiian musician ( born 1885 ) july 9 giannina arangi-lombardi , operatic soprano , 60 egbert van alstyne , us songwriter jorgen bentzon , danish composer july 13 – arnold schoenberg , austrian composer , 76 august 15 – artur schnabel , pianist , 69 august 21 – constant lambert , composer , 45 ( pneumonia and undiagnosed diabetes ) september 2 – pietro frosini , accordionist , 67 september 3 – leo sheffield , d'oyly carte star , 77 september 14 – fritz busch , conductor , 61 september 17 – jimmy yancey , us jazz pianist november 4 – oscar natzka , opera singer , 39 november 9 – sigmund romberg , composer november 11 – césar vezzani , operatic tenor , 63 november 13 – nikolai medtner , pianist and composer , 71 december 1 – edward joseph collins , pianist , conductor and composer december 26 – vic berton , jazz drummer , 55 date unknown giuseppina huguet , operatic soprano ( born 1871 ) margot ruddock , actress and singer vince courtney songwriter and performer . notes .