A Perfect Murder

plot . steven taylor is a wall street financier married to emily , a much younger ( over 20 years ) translator for the united nations . when his risky personal investments start unraveling , he intends to access emily 's personal fortune of 100 million to cover his losses . meanwhile , emily enjoys an affair with painter david shaw and is considering leaving steven . steven meets david at a gala , and asks to visit david 's studio in brooklyn . steven arrives at david 's studio the next day . he reveals that he knows about the affair , and used his influence to investigate david 's criminal past as an ex-convict who cons rich women out of their money . steven offers david 500,000 to murder emily . when david responds that he and emily are in love , steven reminds him his next arrest will mean 15 years imprisonment . steven hides the door key from emily 's keyring outside the service entrance to their lavish manhattan co-op apartment . david is to use the key , kill her , and make it look like a robbery . at his card game , steven takes a break and uses his cellphone to make a call to an automated bank system , adding to his alibi , while using a second phone to call emily . emily answers in the kitchen and is attacked by a masked assailant , but stabs him in the neck with a meat thermometer . steven returns expecting emily to be dead , but finds the assailant 's body . he takes the key from the body and puts it back on emily 's keychain . police arrive , led by detective karaman . they remove the assailant 's mask and karaman notices that steven is surprisedthe body is not david 's . outside , david watches the body being removed from the building in a black bag and assumes it to be emily . steven takes emily to stay at her mother 's . a sobbing david receives a call from emily telling him she is fine , and will be back soon . steven calls david afterwards and organizes a meet on a ferry . emily visits her coworker , raquel , and tells her she has decided to leave steven . emily uses her connections to speak to a bank executive , learning of steven 's financial troubles . she then informs karaman , who says that steven 's alibi is solid , though there is the minor concern that the dead assailant did not have keys of any kind on his body . still losing money , steven receives a call from david , who plays an audio tape of the two conspiracy ( criminal ) emily and demands the full 500,000 or he will turn steven in . emily returns to her apartment for the first time , but her key does not work . this spurs her to go to the apartment of the assailant , discovering that her key unlocks his door . emily confronts steven with this and his financial problems . steven responds with david 's sordid past and accuses him of being a blackmailer conning her and threatening him . when he saw the dead body in their kitchen , he assumed it was david and took the key from his pocket so as not to implicate emily . steven goes to david 's loft with the cash , but finds a note directing him to a park . david 's phone rings , and steven answersit is a ticketing agent , confirming david 's train to montreal . steven meets david in a park and swaps the money for the audio tape . reaching the private compartment on the train , david opens the bathroom door ; steven lunges out and stabs him , taking david 's gun and the money . a dying david laughs , revealing he mailed a copy of the tape to emily via courier service . steven rushes home and finds the mail still unopened . he hides the money , gun , and audio tape in his safe before emily enters the room . steven showers then dresses for dinner , but emily suggests they stay in instead . as she heads out to pick up food , she mentions that they should have the locks changed since her key is missing . steven checks the service entrance , finds the key he hid for david , and realizes that the attacker had put it back after unlocking the door . emily suddenly appears , revealing that she knows everything now , having found the tape in the safe while he showered . when she turns to leave , steven attacks her . a brief fight ensues , ending when emily uses david 's gun ( from the safe ) to kill steven . karaman and his officers arrive . emily plays david 's tape , then explains what happened after she told steven , to which karaman replies : '' what else could you do ? '' . cast . comparisons to the original film . in hitchcock 's dial m for murder , the characters played by ray milland and grace kelly are depicted as living in a modest london flat , although it is implied that they are quite wealthy , as milland 's character , tony wendice , is a retired tennis champion . michael douglas and gwyneth paltrow 's characters are also shown as an extremely wealthy couple . both kelly and paltrow 's characters are shown as striking blondes . both films make use of the mystery of the fact that no key was found on the dead man when he was killed by both kelly and paltrow 's characters , as both their husbands had removed them in an attempt to pin the crime on their wives . toward the beginning of dial m for murder , when kelly and robert cummings are shown together in the wendice flat , and milland comes home , kelly greets him with '' there you are ! '' and kisses him . presumably in homage to the original film , douglas 's character greets paltrow exactly the same way when she arrives home to their apartment at the beginning of a perfect murder . throughout the film , emily carries an hermès kelly bag , named after grace kelly who was often photographed carrying the model of purse . the title a perfect murder matches the translation that was made in some countries of hitchcock 's film , known in italian as il delitto perfetto and in spanish as crimen perfecto ; in french it was le crime était presque parfait . production . principal photography began on october 14 , 1997 . filming took place in & around the city of new york . the location of steven & emily 's apartment was filmed at the convent of the sacred heart building in manhattan . the bradford mansion was filmed at the salutation house in long island . filming ended on january 13 , 1998 . alternate ending . an alternate ending exists and is presented , with optional commentary , on the original blu-ray disc release . in this version , steven comes back from finding the key replaced where he had hidden it and emily confronts him in the kitchen rather than in their foyer . the scene plays out with the same dialogue , but steven never physically attacks her . he still tells her that the only way she 'll leave him is dead , and she shoots him . steven then says '' you wo n't get away with this '' before dying and emily purposely injures herself , making it look like self-defense . reception . box office . the film opened in second place at the box office behind the truman show , grossing 16,615,704 during its first weekend . it ended up with a total worldwide gross of 128,038,368 . . critical response . the film received mixed reviews from critics : stephen holden of the new york times called it a '' skillfully plotted update of frederick knott 's play '' . owen glelberman of entertainment weekly commented , '' i ’ ve seen far worse thrillers than “ a perfect murder , ” but the movie is finally more competent than it is pleasurable . all that lingers from it is the color of money . '' rita kempley of the washington post noted , '' the trouble is , we do n't really much care about this philandering billionaire glamour puss , who seems perfectly capable of taking care of herself . we do n't care about her husband or lover either . the story 's most compelling character , an arab american detective ( the superb british actor david suchet ) , becomes a minor player here . nevertheless , like john williams in the hitchcock film , suchet commits the film 's only believable crime : he steals the show . '' paul clinton of cnn observed , '' this production is stylishly mounted . douglas is an excellent actor and a gifted producer . however , he should hang up his spurs when it comes to playing a romantic lead with women in their twenties . '' roger ebert , who gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , wrote '' it works like a nasty little machine to keep us involved and disturbed ; my attention never strayed '' . meanwhile , james berardinelli wrote that the film '' has inexplicably managed to eliminate almost everything that was worthwhile about dial m for murder , leaving behind the nearly-unwatchable wreckage of a would-be '90s thriller . '' a perfect murder holds a 57 % '' rotten '' rating on rotten tomatoes from 53 reviews and a score of 50/100 , based on 22 reviews ( '' mixed or average reviews '' ) from metacritic . . references . external links .