Sinkhole

formation . natural processes . sinkholes may capture surface drainage from running or standing water , but may also form in high and dry places in specific locations . sinkholes that capture drainage can hold it in large limestone caves . these caves may drain into tributaries of larger rivers . the formation of sinkholes involves natural processes of erosion or gradual removal of slightly soluble bedrock ( such as limestone ) by percolation water , the collapse of a cave roof , or a lowering of the water table . sinkholes often form through the process of suffosion . for example , groundwater may dissolve the carbonate cement holding the sandstone particles together and then carry away the lax particles , gradually forming a void . occasionally a sinkhole may exhibit a visible opening into a cave below . in the case of exceptionally large sinkholes , such as the minyé sinkhole in papua new guinea or cedar sink at mammoth cave national park in kentucky , an underground stream or river may be visible across its bottom flowing from one side to the other . sinkholes are common where the rock below the land surface is limestone or other carbonate rock , halite , or in other soluble rocks , such as gypsum , that can be dissolved naturally by circulating ground water . sinkholes also occur in sandstone and quartzite terrains . as the rock dissolves , spaces and caverns develop underground . these sinkholes can be dramatic , because the surface land usually stays intact until there is not enough support . then , a sudden collapse of the land surface can occur . on 2 july 2015 , scientists reported that active pits , related to sinkhole collapses and possibly associated with outbursts , were found on the comet 67p/churyumov-gerasimenko by the rosetta space probe . . artificial processes . collapses , commonly incorrectly labeled as sinkholes also occur due to human activity , such as the collapse of abandoned mines and salt cavern storage in salt domes in places like louisiana , mississippi and texas . more commonly , collapses occur in urban areas due to water main breaks or sewer collapses when old pipes give way . they can also occur from the overpumping and extraction of groundwater and subsurface fluids . sinkholes can also form when natural water-drainage patterns are changed and new water-diversion systems are developed . some sinkholes form when the land surface is changed , such as when industrial and runoff-storage ponds are created ; the substantial weight of the new material can trigger a collapse of the roof of an existing void or cavity in the subsurface , resulting in development of a sinkhole . classification . solution sinkholes . solution or dissolution sinkholes form where water dissolves limestone under a soil covering . dissolution enlarges natural openings in the rock such as joints , fractures , and bedding planes . soil settles down into the enlarged openings forming a small depression at the ground surface . . cover-subsidence sinkholes . cover-subsidence sinkholes form where voids in the underlying limestone allow more settling of the soil to create larger surface depressions . . cover-collapse sinkholes . cover-collapse sinkholes or '' dropouts '' form where so much soil settles down into voids in the limestone that the ground surface collapses . the surface collapses may occur abruptly and cause catastrophic damages . new sinkhole collapses can also form when human activity changes the natural water-drainage patterns in karst areas . . pseudokarst sinkholes . pseudokarst sinkholes resemble karst sinkholes but formed by processes other than the natural dissolution of rock . . human accelerated sinkholes . the u.s . geological survey notes that '' it is a frightening thought to imagine the ground below your feet or house suddenly collapsing and forming a big hole in the ground . '' human activities can accelerate collapses of karst sinkholes , causing collapse within a few years that would normally evolve over thousands of years under natural conditions . soil-collapse sinkholes , which are characterized by the collapse of cavities in soil that have developed where soil falls down into underlying rock cavities , pose the most serious hazards to life and property . fluctuation of the water level accelerates this collapse process . when water rises up through fissures in the rock , it reduces soil cohesion . later , as the water level moves downward , the softened soil seeps downwards into rock cavities . flowing water in karst conduits carries the soil away , preventing soil from accumulating in rock cavities and allowing the collapse process to continue . induced sinkholes occur where human activity alters how surface water groundwater recharge . many human-induced sinkholes occur where natural diffused recharge is disturbed and surface water becomes concentrated . activities that can accelerate sinkhole collapses include timber removal , ditching , laying pipelines , sewers , water lines , storm drains , and drilling . these activities can increase the downward movement of water beyond the natural rate of groundwater recharge . the increased runoff from the impervious surfaces of roads , roofs , and parking lots also accelerate man-induced sinkhole collapses . some induced sinkholes are preceded by warning signs , such as cracks , sagging , jammed doors , or cracking noises , but others develop with little or no warning . however , karst development is well understood , and proper site characterization can avoid karst disasters . thus most sinkhole disasters are predictable and preventable rather than “ acts of god ” . the american society of civil engineers has declared that the potential for sinkhole collapse must be a part of land-use planning in karst areas . where sinkhole collapse of structures could cause loss of life , the public should be made aware of the risks . the most likely locations for sinkhole collapse are areas where there is already a high density of existing sinkholes . their presence shows that the subsurface contains a cave system or other unstable voids . where large cavities exist in the limestone large surface collapses can occur , such the winter park , florida sinkhole collapse . recommendations for land uses in karst areas should avoid or minimize alterations of the land surface and natural drainage . since water level changes accelerate sinkhole collapse , measures must be taken to minimize water level changes . the areas most susceptible to sinkhole collapse can be identified and avoided . in karst areas the traditional foundation evaluations ( bearing capacity and settlement ) of the ability of soil to support a structure must be supplemented by geotechnical site investigation for cavities and defects in the underlying rock . since the soil/rock surface in karst areas are very irregular the number of subsurface samples ( borings and core samples ) required per unit area is usually much greater than in non-karst areas . in 2015 , the u.s . geological survey estimated the cost for repairs of damage arising from karst-related processes as at least 300 million per year over the preceding 15 years , but noted that this may be a gross underestimate based on inadequate data . the greatest amount of karst sinkhole damage in the united states occurs in florida , texas , alabama , missouri , kentucky , tennessee , and pennsylvania . the largest recent sinkhole in the usa is possibly one that formed in 1972 in montevallo , alabama as a result of man-made lowering of the water level in a nearby rock quarry . this '' december giant '' or '' golly hole '' sinkhole measures 425 feet long , 350 feet wide and 150 feet deep . . occurrence . sinkholes tend to occur in karst landscapes . karst landscapes can have up to thousands of sinkholes within a small area , giving the landscape a pock-marked appearance . these sinkholes drain all the water , so there are only subterranean rivers in these areas . examples of karst landscapes with numerous massive sinkholes include khammouan mountains ( laos ) and mamo plateau ( papua new guinea ) . the largest known sinkholes formed in sandstone are sima humboldt and sima martel in venezuela . some sinkholes form in thick layers of homogenous limestone . their formation is facilitated by high groundwater flow , often caused by high rainfall ; such rainfall causes formation of the giant sinkholes in the nakanaï mountains , on the new britain island in papua new guinea . powerful underground rivers may form on the contact between limestone and underlying insoluble rock , creating large underground voids . in such conditions , the largest known sinkholes of the world have formed , like the deep xiaozhai tiankeng ( chongqing , china ) , giant sótanos in querétaro and san luis potosí states in mexico and others . unusual processes have formed the enormous sinkholes of sistema zacatón in tamaulipas ( mexico ) , where more than 20 sinkholes and other karst formations have been shaped by volcanically heated , acidic groundwater . this has produced not only the formation of the deepest water-filled sinkhole in the world—zacatón—but also unique processes of travertine sedimentation in upper parts of sinkholes , leading to sealing of these sinkholes with travertine lids . the u.s . state of florida in north america is known for having frequent sinkhole collapses , especially in the central part of the state . underlying limestone there is from 15 to 25 million years old . on the fringes of the state , sinkholes are rare or non-existent ; limestone there is around 120,000 years old . the murge area in southern italy also has numerous sinkholes . sinkholes can be formed in retention ponds from large amounts of rain . . human uses . sinkholes have been used for centuries as disposal sites for various forms of waste . a consequence of this is the pollution of groundwater resources , with serious health implications in such areas . the maya civilization sometimes used sinkholes in the yucatán peninsula ( known as cenotes ) as places to deposit precious items and human sacrifices . when sinkholes are very deep or connected to caves , they may offer challenges for experienced cavers or , when water-filled , divers . some of the most spectacular are the zacatón cenote in mexico ( the world 's deepest water-filled sinkhole ) , the boesmansgat sinkhole in south africa , sarisariñama tepuy in venezuela , the sótano del barro in mexico , and in the town of mount gambier , south australia . sinkholes that form in coral reefs and islands that collapse to enormous depths are known as blue holes and often become popular diving spots . . local names . large and visually unusual sinkholes have been well known to local people since ancient times . nowadays sinkholes are grouped and named in site-specific or generic names . some examples of such names are listed below . aven - in the south of france this name means pit cave in occitan . black holes – this term refers to a group of unique , round , water-filled pits in the bahamas . these formations seem to be dissolved in carbonate mud from above , by the sea water . the dark color of the water is caused by a layer of phototropic microorganisms concentrated in a dense , purple colored layer at depth ; this layer '' swallows '' the light . metabolism in the layer of microorganisms causes heating of the water . one of them is the black hole of andros . blue holes – this name was initially given to the deep underwater sinkholes of the bahamas but is often used for any deep water-filled pits formed in carbonate rocks . the name originates from the deep blue color of water in these sinkholes , which is created by the high clarity of the water and the great depth of the sinkholes ; only the deep blue color of the visible spectrum can penetrate such depth and return after reflection . cenotes – this refers to the characteristic water-filled sinkholes in the yucatán peninsula , belize and some other regions . many cenotes have formed in limestone deposited in shallow seas created by the chicxulub meteorite 's impact . sótanos – this name is given to several giant pits in several states of mexico . tiankengs – these are extremely large sinkholes , typically deeper and wider than , with mostly vertical walls , most often created by the collapse of caverns . the term means sky holes in chinese ; many of this largest type of sinkhole are located in china . tomo – this term is used in new zealand karst country to describe pot holes . . piping pseudokarst . the 2010 guatemala city sinkhole formed suddenly in may of that year ; torrential rains from tropical storm agatha and a bad drainage system were blamed for its creation . it swallowed a three-story building and a house ; it measured approximately wide and deep . a similar hole had formed nearby in february 2007 . this large vertical hole is not a true sinkhole , as it did not form via the dissolution of limestone , dolomite , marble , or any other water-soluble rock . instead , they are examples of '' piping pseudokarst '' , created by the collapse of large cavities that had developed in the weak , crumbly quaternary volcanic deposits underlying the city . although weak and crumbly , these volcanic deposits have enough cohesion to allow them to stand in vertical faces and to develop large subterranean voids within them . a process called '' soil piping '' first created large underground voids , as water from leaking water mains flowed through these volcanic deposits and mechanically washed fine volcanic materials out of them , then progressively eroded and removed coarser materials . eventually , these underground voids became large enough that their roofs collapsed to create large holes . . crown hole . a crown hole is subsidence due to subterranean human activity , such as mining and military trenches . examples have included , instances above world war i trenches in ypres , near mines in nitra , slovakia , limestone mine in dudley , england , above an old gypsum mine in magheracloone , ireland . . notable examples . some of the largest sinkholes in the world are : . in africa . blue hole – dahab , egypt . a round sinkhole or blue hole , deep . it includes an archway leading out to the red sea at , which has been the site for many freediving and scuba attempts , the latter often fatal . boesmansgat – south african freshwater sinkhole , approximately deep . lake kashiba – zambia . about 3.5 hectares ( 8.6 acres ) in area and about deep . in asia . akhayat sinkhole is in mersin province , turkey . its dimensions are about 150 m ( 490 f ) in diameter with a maximum depth of 70 & nbsp ; m ( 230 & nbsp ; ft ) . bimmah sinkhole ( hawiyat najm , the falling star sinkhole , dibab sinkhole ) – oman , approximately deep . the baatara gorge sinkhole and the baatara gorge waterfall next to tannourine in lebanon dashiwei tiankeng in guangxi , china , is deep , with vertical walls . at the bottom is an isolated patch of forest with rare species . dragon hole the deepest known underwater ocean sinkhole in the world . shaanxi tiankeng cluster , in the daba mountains of southern shaanxi , china , covers an area of nearly 5019 square kilometers with the largest sinkhole being 520 meters in diameter and 320 meters deep . teiq sinkhole ( taiq , teeq , tayq ) in oman is one of the largest sinkholes in the world by volume : . several perennial wadis fall with spectacular waterfalls into this deep sinkhole . xiaozhai tiankeng – chongqing municipality , china . double nested sinkhole with vertical walls , deep . . in the caribbean . dean 's blue hole – bahamas . the second deepest known sinkhole under the sea , depth . popular location for world championships of free diving , as well as recreational diving . in central america . great blue hole – belize . spectacular , round sinkhole , deep . unusual features are tilted stalactites in great depth , which mark the former orientation of limestone layers when this sinkhole was above sea level . 2007 guatemala city sinkhole 2010 guatemala city sinkhole . in europe . hranice abyss , moravia , czech republic , is the deepest known underwater cave in the world , the lowest confirmed depth ( as of 27 september 2016 ) is 473 m ( 404 m below the water level ) . pozzo del merro , near rome , italy . at the bottom of an conical pit , and approximately deep , it is among the deepest sinkholes in the world ( see sótano del barro below ) . red lake – croatia . approximately deep pit with nearly vertical walls , contains an approximately deep lake . padirac cave – france . it is 103 & nbsp ; m ( 338 & nbsp ; ft ) deep , with a diameter of 33 metres ( 108 & nbsp ; ft ) . visitors descend 75 m via a lift or a staircase to a lake allowing a boat tour after entering into the cave system which contains a 55 & nbsp ; km subterranean river . vouliagmeni – greece . the sinkhole of vouliagmeni is known as '' the devil well '' , because it is considered extremely dangerous . four scuba divers are known to have died in it . maximum depth of and horizontal penetration of . water end swallow holes in hertfordshire , england . grünloch - austria , in 1932 the lowest temperatures in central europe were recorded here . pouldergaderry – ireland . this sinkhole is located in the townland of kilderry near miltown , co . kerry at . the sinkhole , which is located in an area of karst bedrock , is approximately in diameter and deep with many mature trees growing on the floor of the hole . at the level of the surrounding ground , the sinkhole covers an area of approximately 1.3 acres . its presence is indicated on ordnance survey maps dating back to 1829 . . in north america . . mexico . cave of swallows – san luis potosí . deep , round sinkhole with overhanging walls . sima de las cotorras – chiapas . across , deep , with thousands of green parakeets and ancient rock paintings . sótano de la lucha – chiapas . bigger than sima de las cotorras and with lush vegetation on the floor . it can be reached through a cave . sótano del barro – querétaro . deep , with nearly vertical walls . zacatón – tamaulipas . deepest water-filled sinkhole in world , deep . cenotes mexico – top list cenotes in the riviera maya from méxico guia de cenotes en méxico . united states . amberjack hole - a blue hole located off the coast of sarasota , florida . bayou corne sinkhole – assumption parish , louisiana . about 25 acres in area and deep . the blue hole – santa rosa , new mexico . the surface entrance is only 80 feet ( 24 m ) in diameter , it expands to a diameter of 130 feet ( 40 m ) at the bottom . daisetta sinkholes – daisetta , texas . several sinkholes have formed , the most recent in 2008 with a maximum diameter of and maximum depth of . devil 's millhopper – gainesville , florida . deep , wide . twelve springs , some more visible than others , feed a pond at the bottom . golly hole or december giant , calera , alabama , appeared 2 december 1972 . approximately by and deep . '' nation 's largest sinkhole may be near montevallo '' ( 29 march 1973 ) the tuscaloosa news grassy cove – tennessee . in area and deep , a national natural landmark . green banana hole - a blue hole located off the coast of sarasota , florida . gypsum sinkhole – utah , in capitol reef national park . nearly in diameter and approximately deep . kingsley lake – florida . in area , deep and almost perfectly round . lake peigneur – new iberia , louisiana . original depth , currently at diamond crystal salt mine collapse . winter park sinkhole , in central florida , appeared 8 may 1981 . it was approximately 35 feet ( 107 & nbsp ; m ) wide and 7,005 feet ( 23 & nbsp ; m ) deep . it was notable as one of the largest recent sinkholes to form in the united states . it is now known as lake rose . . in oceania . harwood hole – abel tasman national park , new zealand , deep . minyé sinkhole – east new britain , papua new guinea . deep , with vertical walls , crossed by a powerful stream . in south america . sima humboldt – venezuela . largest sinkhole in sandstone , deep , with vertical walls . unique , isolated forest on bottom . in the western part of cerro duida , venezuela , there is a complex of canyons with sinkholes . deepest sinkhole is deep ( from lowest rim within canyon ) ; total depth . see also . . references . notes bibliography . external links . us geological survey water science school page about sinkholes daily telegraph slide show of 31 sinkholes video of sinkhole forming in texas ( 8 may 2008 ) google map of deepest '' hole '' for each state ( andy martin ) tennessee sinkholes 54,000+ sinkholes