1976 in sports

alpine skiing . alpine skiing world cup men 's overall season champion : ingemar stenmark , sweden women 's overall season champion : rosi mittermaier , west germany . american football . january 18 – super bowl x : the pittsburgh steelers ( afc ) won 21−17 over the dallas cowboys ( nfc ) location : miami orange bowl attendance : 80,187 mvp : lynn swann , wr ( pittsburgh ) lee roy selmon is selected as the first overall pick in the nfl draft . ( april 8 ) seattle seahawks founded . tampa bay buccaneers founded . orange bowl ( 1975 season ) : the oklahoma sooners won 14–6 over the michigan wolverines to win the college football national championship tony dorsett is awarded the heisman trophy ( november 30 ) . association football . fa cup – southampton won 1–0 over manchester united stevenage f.c . were established italy – torino win serie a for the first time since the superga air disaster wiped out the team 27 years before . uefa euro 1976 – czechoslovakia beat west germany 5–3 on penalties to win , after the game had ended 2-2 after extra time . athletics . july – athletics at the 1976 summer olympics held at montreal . australian rules football . victorian football league hawthorn wins the 80th vfl premiership ( hawthorn 13.22 ( 100 ) d north melbourne 10.10 ( 70 ) ) brownlow medal awarded to graham moss ( essendon ) . baseball . april 17 – mike schmidt of the philadelphia phillies hits four consecutive home runs in a game against the chicago cubs . april 25 – chicago cubs outfielder rick monday rescues an american flag just as two protesters are about to burn it in the outfield during a game at dodger stadium . sparky lyle of the new york yankees breaks hoyt wilhelm 's american league record of 154 career saves . world series – the cincinnati reds ( aka the '' big red machine '' ) sweep the new york yankees , 4 games to 0 , to win their second straight championship . basketball . ncaa division i men 's basketball championship – indiana wins 86–68 over michigan nba finals – boston celtics win 4 games to 2 over the phoenix suns 1976 aba playoffs – new york nets defeat denver nuggets 4 games to 2 american basketball association merges with the national basketball association . of the seven remaining teams in the aba , the virginia squires fold , kentucky colonels and spirits of st . louis are bought out , and the remaining four teams ( san antonio spurs , denver nuggets , new york nets , and indiana pacers ) join the nba . boxing . may 22 – death of oscar bonavena ( 34 ) , argentinian heavyweight , who was shot in reno , nevada september 28 in yankee stadium , bronx , new york muhammad ali won a controversial 15-round decision over ken norton to keep his world heavyweight title . october 8 in são paulo , brazil , former world featherweight champion eder jofre fought his last fight , outpointing mexico 's octavio ( famoso ) gomez in ten rounds . canadian football . grey cup – ottawa rough riders won 23–20 over the saskatchewan roughriders vanier cup – western ontario mustangs won 29–13 over the acadia axemen . cycling . giro d'italia won by felice gimondi of italy tour de france – lucien van impe of belgium uci road world championships – men 's road race – freddy maertens of belgium . dogsled racing . iditarod trail sled dog race – gerald riley won with lead dogs : puppy & sugar . field hockey . olympic games ( men 's competition ) in montreal won by new zealand women 's world cup in berlin won by west germany . figure skating . world figure skating championships – men 's champion : john curry , britain ladies ' champion : dorothy hamill , united states pair skating champions : irina rodnina & alexander zaitsev , soviet union ice dancing champions : lyudmila pakhomova & alexandr gorshkov , soviet union . golf . men 's professional masters tournament – raymond floyd u.s . open – jerry pate british open – johnny miller pga championship – dave stockton pga tour money leader – jack nicklaus – 266,439 men 's amateur british amateur – dick siderowf u.s . amateur – bill sander women 's professional lpga championship – betty burfeindt u.s . women 's open – joanne carner lpga money leader – judy rankin – 150,734 , she is the first to ever earn more than 100,000 in a season . harness racing . united states pacing triple crown races – cane pace – keystone ore little brown jug – keystone ore messenger stakes – windshield wiper united states trotting triple crown races – hambletonian – steve lobell yonkers trot – steve lobell kentucky futurity – quick pay australian inter dominion harness racing championship – pacers : carclew trotters : bay johnny . horse racing . steeplechases cheltenham gold cup – royal frolic grand national – rag trade flat races australia – melbourne cup won by van der hum canada – queen 's plate won by norcliffe france – prix de l'arc de triomphe won by ivanjica ireland – irish derby stakes won by malacate english triple crown races : 2,000 guineas stakes – wollow the derby – empery st . leger stakes – crow united states triple crown races : kentucky derby – bold forbes preakness stakes – elocutionist belmont stakes – bold forbes . ice hockey . art ross trophy as the nhl 's leading scorer during the regular season : guy lafleur , montreal canadiens hart memorial trophy for the nhl 's most valuable player : bobby clarke – philadelphia flyers stanley cup – montreal canadiens win 4 games to 0 over the philadelphia flyers world hockey championship – men 's champion : czechoslovakia defeated the soviet union avco world trophy – winnipeg jets win 4 games to 0 over the houston aeros ncaa men 's ice hockey championship – university of minnesota-twin cities golden gophers defeat michigan technological university huskies 6–4 in denver , colorado . motorsport . rugby league . 29 june – the world club challenge concept is trialled as english champions st . helens travel to sydney to play australian champions sydney roosters . easts defeat st helens 25–2 in the one-off match . 18 august – the 1976 amco cup tournament culminates in balmain 's 21–7 win over north sydney in the final 18 september – the 1976 nswrfl season culminates in manly-warringah 's 13–10 win over parramatta in the grand final . rugby union . 82nd six nations championship series is won by wales who complete the grand slam . snooker . world snooker championship – ray reardon beats alex higgins 27-16 world rankings are introduced . ray reardon becomes the first world number one , for 1976/77 . swimming . july 18 to july 25 – xxi olympic games , held in montreal august 14 – united states 's jonty skinner sets the first official world record in the 50m freestyle in philadelphia , clocking 23.86 . tennis . grand slam in tennis men 's results : australian open – mark edmondson french open – adriano panatta wimbledon championships – björn borg us open – jimmy connors grand slam in tennis women 's results : australian open – evonne goolagong french open – sue barker wimbledon championships – chris evert us open – chris evert davis cup – italy wins 4–1 over chile in world tennis . water polo . water polo at the 1976 summer olympics in montréal won by hungary . general sporting events . 1976 summer olympics takes place in montreal , quebec , canada ussr wins the most medals ( 125 ) , and the most gold medals ( 49 ) . 1976 winter olympics takes place in innsbruck , austria ussr wins the most medals ( 27 ) , and the most gold medals ( 13 ) . fifth pan arab games held in damascus , syria . awards . associated press male athlete of the year – caitlyn jenner ( then bruce ) , track and field associated press female athlete of the year – nadia comăneci , gymnastics abc 's wide world of sports athlete of the year : nadia comăneci , gymnastics . notes . references .