Isaac Babel

rehabilitation . on december 23 , 1954 , during the khrushchev thaw , a typed half sheet of paper ended the official silence . it read , '' the sentence of the military collegium dated 26 january 1940 concerning babel , i.e . , is revoked on the basis of newly discovered circumstances and the case against him is terminated in the absence of elements of a crime . '' the complete works of isaac babel , page 27 . babel 's works were once again widely published and praised . his public rehabilitation as a writer was initiated with the help of his friend and admirer konstantin paustovsky , and a volume of babel 's selected works was published in 1957 with a laudatory preface by ilya ehrenburg . new collections of selected works by babel were published in 1966 , 1989 and 1990 . still , certain '' taboo '' parts such as mentions of trotsky were censored until the glasnost period shortly before the dissolution of the soviet union . the first collections of the complete works of babel were prepared and published in russia in 2002 and 2006 . lost writings . after his rehabilitation , antonina pirozhkova spent almost five decades campaigning for the return of babel 's manuscripts . these included babel 's translations of sholem aleichem 's writings from yiddish into russian , as well as several unpublished short stories and novellas . according to pirozhkova , as babel put it , he worked on sholem aleichem to '' feed his soul . '' other '' food for the soul '' came from writing new stories and the novella '' kolya topuz . '' he told me , '' i 'm writing a novella in which the main character is a former odessa gangster like benya krik . his name is kolya topuz and so far , at least , that 's also the name of the novella . i want to show how this sort of man adapts to soviet reality . kolya topuz works on a collective farm during collectivization , and then he goes to work in a donbass coal mine . but since he has the mentality of a gangster , he 's constantly breaking out of the limits of normal life , which leads to numerous funny situations . '' babel spent a great deal of time writing , and he finished many works . only his arrest prevented his new works from coming out . '' at his side , page 107 . however , even requests by ilya ehrenburg and the union of soviet writers produced no answers from the soviet state . the truth was not revealed until the advent of perestroika . according to pirozhkova , '' in 1987 , when so much was changing in our country , i again made an official request that the kgb search for babel 's manuscripts in its underground storage areas . in response to my request , i was visited by two kgb agents who informed me that the manuscripts had been burned . 'and so you 've come in person to avoid giving me a written response to my request , am i correct ? ' 'how could you think such a thing ? we came here to commiserate . we understand how precious babel 's manuscripts would be . ' '' at his side , page 154 . . legacy . after her husband 's return to moscow in 1935 , yevgenia gronfein babel remained unaware of his other family with antonina pirozhkova . based upon statements made by ilya ehrenburg , yevgenia further believed that her husband was still alive and living in exile . in 1956 , however , ehrenburg told her of her husband 's execution while visiting paris . after also informing mrs . babel of her husband 's daughter with antonina pirozhkova , ehrenburg asked yevgenia to sign a false statement attesting to a pre-war divorce from her husband . enraged , yevgenia babel spat in ehrenberg 's face and then fainted . her daughter , nathalie babel brown , believes that ehrenburg did this under orders from the kgb . with two potential contenders for the role of babel 's widow , the soviet state clearly preferred babel 's common-law wife antonina to his legal wife yevgenia , who had emigrated to the west . although babel 's play maria was very popular at western european colleges during the 1960s , it was not performed in babel 's homeland until 1994 . the first english translation appeared in 1966 in a translation by michael glenny in three soviet plays ( penguin ) under the title '' marya '' . marias american premiere , directed by carl weber , took place at stanford university in 2004 . michelle keller : babel ’ s ‘ maria ’ makes u.s . debut at pigott the stanford daily , 27 february 2004 . although she was too young to have many memories of her father , nathalie babel brown went on to become one of the world 's foremost scholars of his life and work . when w.w . norton published babel 's complete works in 2002 , nathalie edited the volume and provided a foreword . she died in washington , d.c . in 2005 . several american writers have valued babel 's writings . hubert selby has called babel '' the closest thing i have to a literary influence . '' james salter has named babel his favorite short-story writer . '' he has the three essentials of greatness : style , structure , and authority . '' george saunders , when asked for a literary influence said '' there 's a russian writer named isaac babel that i love . i can drop in anywhere in his works , read a few pages , and go , oh yeah , language . it 's almost like if you were tuning a guitar and you heard a beautifully tuned one and you say , yeah , that 's what we want . we want something that perfect . when i read him , it recalibrates my ear . it reminds me of the difference between an ok sentence and a really masterful sentence . babel does it for me . '' lydia babel , the daughter of isaac babel and antonina pirozhkova , also emigrated to the united states and currently resides in silver spring , maryland . ibid british writer bernard kops wrote a poem , and later a play , about babel : '' whatever happened to isaac babel ? '' brazilian writer rubem fonseca wrote a novel about the search for a lost manuscript from babel : '' vastas emoções e pensamentos imperfeitos '' ( 1988 ) . fonseca , rubem . vastas emoções e pensamentos imperfeitos . são paulo : companhia das letras , 1988 . english translation : vast emotions and imperfect thoughts ( translated by clifford landers ) . new york : ecco press publisher , 1998 . . memorial in odessa . a memorial to isaac babel was unveiled on the north-west corner of the intersection of ( v ) ulitsa rishelyevskaya and ( v ) ulitsa zhukovskogo in odessa in early september 2011 , and , in conjunction with the inauguration of the memorial , a commemorative reading of three of his stories held , with musical interludes from the works of isaac schwartz , in the philharmonic hall in ( v ) ulitsa pushkinskaya on september 6 , 2011 . the city also has an already existing ( v ) ulitsa babelya ( '' babel street '' ) in the moldavanka . bibliography . books : конармейский дневник 1920 года , english translation : 1920 diary , конармия , ( 1926 ) , english translation : red cavalry , одесские рассказы , odessa tales ( published as book 1926 ) закат , sunset , play ( written 1926 , performed 1927 , published 1928 ) benya krik , screenplay ( 1926 ) ( filmed in ukraine and available on dvd from national center for jewish film ) мария , maria , play ( published 1935 , not performed in ussr ) you must know everything , stories 1915-1937 , trans . max hayward , ed . with notes by nathalie babel , farrar straus and giroux , new york , 1966 . the complete works of isaac babel , trans . peter constantine , ed . nathalie babel , intro . cynthia ozick , norton , new york , 2002 . ' 'isaac babel 's selected writings . norton critical edition . gregory freidin , ed . , intro . , annot . , chrono ; peter constnatine , trans . w.w . norton , 2009 short stories : '' crossing the zbruch '' ( as '' i . babiel '' ) ( 1926 ) . references . further reading . isaac babel and nathalie babel brown , isaac babel : the lonely years 1925-1939 : unpublished stories and private correspondence , david r godine , 1995 . jerome charyn , savage shorthand : the life and death of isaac babel , random house , 2005 . antonina n . pirozhkova , at his side : the last years of issac babel , steerforth press , 1998 . vitaly shentalinsky , the kgb 's literary files , harvill , 1995 gregory freidin , ed . the enigma of isaac babel : life , history , context . stanford university press , 2009 konstantin paustovsky , '' reminiscences of babel '' , 1962 adrien le bihan , '' isaac babel , l'écrivain condamné par staline '' , 346 p . , perrin , paris , 2015 . sam sacks , '' a masterpiece worth revisiting '' ( review of isaac babel , red cavalry , translated from the russian by boris dralyuk , london , pushkin press , 219 pp . ) , the wall street journal , 30 april 2015 . nicholas lezard , “ criminally good ” ( review of isaac babel , odessa stories , translated from the russian by boris dralyuk , london , pushkin press , 221 pp . ) , the guardian , 1 november 2016 . charles king , “ you want him to keep talking ” ( review of isaac babel , odessa stories , translated from the russian by boris dralyuk , london , pushkin press , 221 pp . ) , times literary supplement , 29 march 2017 . gary saul morson , '' the horror , the horror '' ( review of isaac babel , the essential fictions , edited and translated from the russian by val vinokur , northwestern university press , 404 pp . ; isaac babel , red cavalry , translated from the russian by boris dralyuk , london , pushkin press , 219 pp ; and isaac babel , odessa stories , translated from the russian by boris dralyuk , london , pushkin press , 221 pp . ) , the new york review of books , vol . lxv , no . 2 ( 8 february 2018 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 28 , 30 . external links . babel 's biography ( pdf ) by gregory freidin ( a version of this essay in critical biography was published in european writer of the 20th century ny : scribners , 1990 ) isaac babel workshop ( 2004 ) at stanford university includes the bibliography page with efraim sicher 's '' checklist of works of isaac babel 's works and criticism '' ( 2008 ) gregory freidin 's isaac babel page at stanford university prose in original russian language at lib.ru tough guys reading the collected stories of isaac babel by tom teicholz konarmiya , norman davies describes babel in sarmatian review , issue 3 , 1995 review of the complete works of isaac babel in january 2007 issue of jewish currents bibliography at bookrags ( isaac babel 's daughter and editor ) finding babel documentary film that profiles isaac babel 's life and impact , with readings by liev schreiber