USS Pennsylvania (BB-38)

description . part of the standard-type battleship series , the pennsylvania-class ships were significantly larger than their predecessors , the . pennsylvania had an length overall of , a beam of ( at the waterline ) , and a draft of at deep load . this was longer than the older ships . she displaced at standard and at deep load , over more than the older ships . the ship had a metacentric height of at deep load . the ship had four direct-drive curtis steam turbine sets , each of which drove a propeller in diameter . they were powered by twelve babcock & wilcox water-tube boilers . the turbines were designed to produce a total of , for a designed speed of . she was designed to normally carry of fuel oil , but had a maximum capacity of . at full capacity , the ship could steam at a speed of for an estimated with a clean bottom . she had four turbo generators . pennsylvania carried twelve 45-caliber guns in triple gun turrets . the turrets were numbered from i to iv from front to rear . the guns could not elevate independently and were limited to a maximum elevation of +15° which gave them a maximum range of . the ship carried 100 shells for each gun . defense against torpedo boats was provided by twenty-two 51-caliber guns mounted in individual casemates in the sides of the ship 's hull . positioned as they were they proved vulnerable to sea spray and could not be worked in heavy seas . at an elevation of 15° , they had a maximum range of . each gun was provided with 230 rounds of ammunition . the ship mounted four 50-caliber three-inch guns for anti-aircraft defense , although only two were fitted when completed . the other pair were added shortly afterward on top of turret iii . pennsylvania also mounted two torpedo tubes submerged , one on each broadside , and carried 24 torpedoes for them . the pennsylvania-class design continued the all-or-nothing principle of armoring only the most important areas of the ship begun in the nevada class . the waterline belt armor of krupp armor measured thick and covered only the ship 's machinery spaces and magazines . it had a total height of , of which was below the waterline ; beginning below the waterline , the belt tapered to its minimum thickness of . the transverse bulkheads at each end of the ship ranged from 13 to 8 & nbsp ; inches in thickness . the faces of the gun turrets were thick while the sides were thick and the turret roofs were protected by of armor . the armor of the barbettes was thick . the conning tower was protected by of armor and had a roof eight inches thick . the main armor deck was three plates thick with a total thickness of ; over the steering gear the armor increased to in two plates . beneath it was the splinter deck that ranged from in thickness . the boiler uptakes were protected by a conical mantlet that ranged from in thickness . a three-inch torpedo bulkhead was placed inboard from the ship 's side and the ship was provided with a complete double bottom . testing in mid-1914 revealed that this system could withstand of tnt . service history . construction and world war i . the keel for pennsylvania was laid down on 27 october 1913 at the newport news shipbuilding and dry dock company of newport news , virginia . her completed hull was launched on 16 march 1915 , thereafter beginning fitting-out . work on the ship finished in mid-1916 , and she was commissioned on 12 june under the command of captain henry b . wilson . the ship was assigned to the atlantic fleet and then completed final fitting out from 1 to 20 july . pennsylvania then began sea trials in 20 july , steaming first to the southern drill grounds off the virginia capes and then north to the coast of new england . rear admiral austin m . knight and officers from the naval war college came aboard on 21 august to observe fleet training exercises . three days later , the ship was visited by franklin delano roosevelt , then the assistant secretary of the navy . rear admiral henry t . mayo transferred to pennsylvania on 12 october , making her the flagship of the atlantic fleet . at the end of the year , she went into drydock at the new york navy yard for maintenance . after emerging from the shipyard in january 1917 , she steamed south to join fleet exercises in the caribbean sea , during which she stopped in : culebra , puerto rico ; santo domingo , dominican republic ; and port-au-prince , haiti . while in port-au-prince , pennsylvania again hosted roosevelt , who met with the president of haiti aboard the ship . the battleship arrived back in yorktown , virginia on 6 april , the same day the united states declared war on germany , bringing the country into world war i . since pennsylvania was oil-fired , she did not join the ships of battleship division nine , as the british had asked for coal-burning battleships to reinforce the grand fleet . as a result , she stayed in american waters and saw no action during the war . in august , pennsylvania took part in a naval review for president woodrow wilson . foreign naval officers visited the ship in september , including the japanese vice admiral isamu takeshita and the russian vice admiral alexander kolchak . for the rest of the year and into 1918 , pennsylvania was kept in a state of readiness through fleet exercises and gunnery training in chesapeake bay and long island sound . she was preparing for night battle training on 11 november 1918 , when the armistice with germany came into effect , ending the fighting . she thereafter returned for another stint in the new york navy yard for maintenance that was completed on 21 november . she began the voyage to brest , france , on 2 december by way of tomkinsville , new york , in company with the transport ship that carried wilson to france to take part in the peace negotiations ; they were escorted by ten destroyers . the ships arrived on 13 december and the next day , pennsylvania began the trip back to new york with battleship divisions nine and six . the battleships reached their destination on 26 december , where they took part in victory celebrations . inter-war period . . 1919–1924 . pennsylvania and the rest of the atlantic fleet departed on 19 february , bound for the caribbean for another round of exercises in cuban waters . the ship arrived back in new york on 14 april , and while there on 30 june , mayo was replaced by vice admiral henry wilson . on 8 july at tomkinsville , a delegation consisting of : vice president thomas r . marshall ; josephus daniels , the secretary of the navy ; carter glass , the secretary of the treasury ; william b . wilson , the secretary of labor ; newton d . baker , the secretary of war ; franklin k . lane , the secretary of the interior ; and senator champ clark came aboard the ship for a cruise back to new york . the fleet conducted another set of maneuvers in the caribbean from 7 january to april 1920 , pennsylvania returning to her berth in new york on 26 april . training exercises in the area followed , and on 17 july she received the hull number bb-38 . on 17 january 1921 , pennsylvania left new york , passed through the panama canal to balboa , panama , where she joined the pacific fleet , which together with elements of the atlantic fleet was re-designated as the battle fleet , with pennsylvania as its flagship . on 21 january , the fleet left balboa and steamed south to callao , peru , where they arrived ten days later . the ships then steamed north back to balboa on 2 february , arriving on 14 february . pennsylvania crossed back through the canal to take part in maneuvers off cuba and on 28 april she arrived in hampton roads , virginia , where president warren g . harding , edwin denby , the secretary of the navy , theodore roosevelt jr . , the assistant secretary of the navy , and admiral robert coontz , the chief of naval operations ( cno ) , came aboard the ship . further training was held from 12 to 21 july in the caribbean , after which she returned to new york . on 30 july , she proceeded on to plymouth , massachusetts for a visit that lasted until 2 august . anothery drydock period in new york lasted from 5 to 20 august . pennsylvania departed new york thereafter , bound for the pacific ; she passed through the panama canal on 30 august and remained at balboa for two weeks . on 15 september , she resumed the voyage and steamed north to san pedro , california , which she reached on 26 september . the ship spent most of 1922 visiting ports along the us west coast , including san francisco , seattle , port angeles , and san diego , and from 6 march to 19 april , she underwent a refit at the puget sound navy yard . she won the battle efficiency award for the 1922 training year . she went back to puget sound on 18 december , and remained there into 1923 . she left the shipyard on 28 january and steamed south to san diego , where she stayed from 2 to 8 february , before continuing on to the panama canal . after passing through , she steamed to culebra for a short visit . the ship then passed back through the canal and arrived back in san pedro on 13 april . beginning in may , she visited various ports in the area over the course of the rest of 1923 , apart from a round of fleet training from 27 november to 7 december . she ended the year with another stint in puget sound from 22 december until 1 march 1924 . 1924–1931 . the ship arrived in san francisco on 3 march , where she loaded ammunition before joining the battle fleet in san diego on 9 march . the fleet cruised south to the gulf of fonseca , then continued south and passed through the panama canal to limon bay . the ships visited several ports in the caribbean , including in the us virgin islands and puerto rico before returning to the pacific in early april . pennsylvania arrived back in san pedro on 22 april , where she remained until 25 june , when she steamed north to seattle . by this time , she was serving as the flagship of battle division 3 of the battle fleet . while in the seattle area , she took part in training exercises with the ships of her division that lasted until 1 september . further training exercises took place from 12 to 22 september off san francisco . she thereafter took part in joint training with the coastal defenses around san francisco from 26 to 29 september . the ship underwent a pair of overhauls from 1 to 13 october and 13 december to 5 january 1925 . pennsylvania then steamed to puget sound on 21 january for a third overhaul that lasted from 25 january to 24 march . pennsylvania returned to san pedro on 27 march and then joined the fleet in san francisco on 5 april . the ships then steamed to hawaii for training exercises before departing on 1 july for a major cruise across the pacific to australia . they reached melbourne on 22 july , and on 6 august pennsylvania steamed to wellington , new zealand , where she stayed from 11 to 22 august . on the voyage back to the united states , they stopped in pago pago in american samoa and hawaii , before reaching san pedro on 26 september . pennsylvania went to san diego for target practice from 5 to 8 october , thereafter returning to san pedro , where she remained largely idle for the rest of 1925 . she left san pedro with the battle fleet on 1 february 1926 for another visit to balboa , during which the ships conducted tactical training from 15 to 27 february . pennsylvania spent early march in california before departing for puget sound on 15 march for another refit that lasted until 14 may , at which point she returned to san pedro . another tour of west coast ports began on 16 june and ended on 1 september back in san pedro . pennsylvania remained at san pedro from 11 december to 11 january 1927 when she left for another refit at puget sound that lasted until 12 march . she returned to san francisco on 15 march and then moved to san pedro the next day . she left to join training exercises off cuba on 17 march ; she passed through the canal between 29 and 31 march and arrived in guantanamo bay on 4 april . on 18 april , she left cuba to visit gonaïves , haiti before steaming to new york , arriving there on 29 april . after touring the east coast in may , she departed for the canal , which she crossed on 12 june . she remained in balboa until 12 june , at which point she left for san pedro , arriving on 28 june . the ship spent the rest of 1927 with training , maintenance , and a tour of the west coast . she went to puget sound for a refit on 1 april 1928 that lasted until 16 may , after which she went to san francisco . she left that same day , however , and steamed back north to visit victoria , british columbia . she remained there from 24 to 28 may and then returned to san francisco . she spent june visiting various ports , and in august she embarked dwight f . davis , the secretary of war , in san francisco ; she carried him to hawaii , departing on 7 august and arriving on the 13th . pennsylvania returned to seattle on 26 august . another cruise to cuba took place in january 1929 , after which she went to the philadelphia navy yard on 1 june for a major refit and modernization . she received a number of modifications , including increased deck and turret roof armor , anti-torpedo bulges , new turbo-generators , new turbines , and six new three-drum boilers . her main battery turrets were modified to allow them to elevate to 30 & nbsp ; degrees , significantly increasing the range of her guns , and her secondary battery was revised . the number of 5-inch guns was reduced to twelve , and her 3-inch anti-aircraft guns were replaced with eight 5-inch /25 guns . her torpedo tubes were removed , as were her lattice masts , which were replaced with sturdier tripod masts . her bridge was also enlarged to increase the space available for an admiral 's staff , since she was used as a flagship . her living space was increased to 2,037 & nbsp ; crew and marines , and she was fitted with two catapults for seaplanes . pennsylvania returned to service on 1 march 1931 and she conducted trials in delaware bay in march and april . she then steamed south to cuba on 8 may for a training cruise before returning to philadelphia on 26 may . another cruise to cuba followed on 30 july ; the ship arrived there on 5 august and this time she steamed across the caribbean to the panama canal , which she transited on 12 august to return to the battle fleet . she reached san pedro on 27 august , where she remained for the rest of the year . she toured the west coast in january 1932 and before crossing over to pearl harbor , where she arrived on 3 february . there , she took part in extensive fleet maneuvers as part of fleet problem xiii . she returned to san pedro on 20 march , remaining there until 18 april , when she began another cruise along the coast of california . she returned to san pedro on 14 november and remained there until the end of the year . 1932–1941 . the ship departed san pedro on 9 february to participate in fleet problem xiv , which lasted from 10 to 17 february . she returned to san francisco on 17 february and then went to san pedro on 27 february , remaining there until 19 june . another west coast cruise followed from 19 june to 14 november , and after returning to san pedro , pennsylvania stayed there inactive until early march 1934 . from 4 to 8 march , she made a short visit to hunters point naval shipyard in san francisco and then returned to san pedro . from there , she went to join the fleet for fleet problem xv , which was held in the caribbean this year ; she passed through the canal on 24 april , the maneuvers having already started on the 19th . they lasted until 12 may , at which point pennsylvania went to gonaïves with the rest of the fleet , which then continued on to new york , where it arrived on 31 march . there , pennsylvania led the fleet in a naval review for now-president franklin d . roosevelt . on 15 june , admiral joseph m . reeves took command of the fleet aboard pennsylvania , which was once again the fleet flagship . on 18 june , pennsylvania left new york for the pacific , stopping in hampton roads on 20 june on the way . she passed through the canal on 28 june and reached san pedro on 7 july . she then went to puget sound for a refit that lasted from 14 july to 2 october . the ship left the shipyard on 16 october and returned to san francisco two days later , beginning a period of cruises off the coast of california and visits to cities in the state . she ended the year in san pedro , remaining there or in san francisco until 29 april 1935 , when she took part in fleet problem xvi in the hawaiian islands . the maneuvers lasted until 10 june , and were the largest set of exercises conducted by the us navy at the time . the ship then returned to san pedro on 17 june and embarked on a cruise of the west coast for several months ; on 16 december , she went to puget sound for another overhaul that lasted from 20 december to 21 march 1936 . fleet problem xvii followed from 27 april to 7 june , this time being held off balboa . she returned to san pedro on 6 june and spent the rest of the year with training exercises off the west coast and hawaii , ending the training program for the year in san pedro on 18 november . the ship remained in port until 17 february , when she departed for san clemente , california at the start of a tour along the west coast . she participated in fleet problem xviii , which lasted from 16 april to 28 may . another stint in puget sound began on 6 june and concluded on 3 september , when she returned to san pedro . she spent the rest of the year alternating between there and san francisco , seeing little activity . she made a short trip to san francisco in february 1938 and took part in fleet problem xix from 9 march to 30 april . another period in san pedro followed until 20 june , after which she embarked on a two-month cruise along the west coast that concluded with another stay at puget sound on 28 september . after concluding her repairs on 16 december , she returned to san pedro by way of san francisco , arriving on 22 december . fleet problem xx occurred earlier the year than it had in previous iterations , taking place from 20 to 27 february 1939 in cuban waters . during the exercises , franklin roosevelt and admiral william d . leahy , the cno , came aboard pennsylvania to observe the maneuvers . the ship then went to culebra on 27 february , departing on 4 march to visit port-au-prince , haiti from 6 to 11 march . a stay in guantanamo bay followed from 12 to 31 march , after which she went to visit the us naval academy in annapolis on 5 april . pennsylvania began the voyage back to the pacific on 18 april and passed through the canal at the end of the month , ultimately arriving back in san pedro on 12 may . another tour of the west coast followed , which included stops in san francisco , tacoma , and seattle , and ended in san pedro on 20 october . she went to hawaii to participate in fleet problem xxi on 2 april 1940 . the exercises lasted until 17 may , after which the ship remained in hawaii until 1 september , when she left for san pedro . the battleship then went to puget sound on 12 september that lasted until 27 december ; during the overhaul , she received another four 5-inch /25 guns . she returned to san pedro on 31 december . fleet problem xxii was scheduled for january 1941 , but the widening of world war ii by this time led the naval command to cancel the exercises . on 7 january , pennsylvania steamed to hawaii as part of what was again the pacific fleet , based at pearl harbor . over the course of the year , she operated out of pearl harbor and made a short voyage to the west coast of the united states from 12 september to 11 october . world war ii . . attack on pearl harbor . on the morning of 7 december , pennsylvania was in dry dock no . 1 in pearl harbor undergoing a refit ; three of her four screws were removed . the destroyers and were also in the dock with her . when it became clear that the port was under air attack from the japanese fleet , pennsylvanias crew rushed to their battle stations , and between 08:02 and 08:05 , her anti-aircraft gunners began engaging the hostile aircraft . japanese torpedo bombers unsuccessfully attempted to torpedo the side of the drydock to flood it ; having failed , several aircraft then strafed pennsylvania . at 08:30 , several high-altitude bombers began a series of attacks on the ship ; over the course of the following fifteen minutes , five aircraft attempted to hit her from different directions . one of the japanese bombers hit downes and one scored a hit on pennsylvania that passed through the boat deck and exploded in casemate no . 9 . pennsylvanias anti-aircraft gunners fired at all of these aircraft but failed to hit any of them , apparently owing to incorrect fuse settings that caused the shells to explode before they reached the correct altitude . the gunners did manage to shoot down a low-flying aircraft that attempted to strafe the ship ; they claimed to have shot down another five aircraft , but the after-action investigation noted that only two aircraft were likely hit by pennsylvanias guns . by 09:20 , both destroyers were on fire from bomb hits and the fire had spread to pennsylvania , so the drydock was flooded to help contain the fire . ten minutes later , the destroyers began to explode as the fires spread to ammunition magazines , and at 09:41 , downes was shattered by an explosion that scattered parts of the ship around the area . one of her torpedo tubes , weighing , was launched into the air , striking pennsylvanias forecastle . as part of her crew battled the fire in her bow , other men used the ship 's boats to ferry anti-aircraft ammunition from stores in the west loch of pearl harbor . beginning at 14:00 , the crew began preparatory work to repair the bomb damage ; a 5-inch /25 gun and a 5-inch /51 casemate gun were taken from the damaged battleship to replace weapons damaged aboard pennsylvania . in the course of the attack , pennsylvania had 15 men killed ( including her executive officer ) , 14 missing , and 38 wounded . on 12 december , pennsylvania was refloated and taken out of the drydock ; having been only lightly damaged in the attack , she was ready to go to sea . she departed pearl harbor on 20 december and arrived in san francisco nine days later . she went into drydock at hunter 's point on 1 january 1942 for repairs that were completed on 12 january . the ship left san francisco on 20 february and began gunnery training before returning to san francisco the next day . further training followed in march , and from 14 april to 1 august , she took part in extensive maneuvers off the coast of california ; during this period , she underwent an overhaul at the mare island naval shipyard in san francisco . the work involved considerably strengthening the ship 's anti-aircraft capabilities , with ten 40 mm bofors naval and fifty-one oerlikon 20 mm single mounts . the tripod mainmast was removed , with the stump replaced by a deckhouse above which the aft main battery director cupola was housed . one of the new cxam-1 radars was installed above the cupola . in addition the secondary 5-inch armament was replaced with rapid fire 5-inch /38 cal guns in eight twin mounts for a total of 16 new dual purpose guns . these guns could elevate to 85 degrees and fire at a rate of one round every four seconds . they replaced the older 5-inch /51 cal anti-ship and 5-inch /25 cal anti-aircraft guns . she briefly went to sea during the battle of midway as part of task force 1 , commanded by vice admiral william s . pye , but the ships did not see action during the operation . aleutians and makin atoll . on 1 august , pennsylvania left san francisco , bound for pearl harbor . she arrived there on 14 august and took part in further training , including guard tactics for aircraft carrier task forces . another overhaul followed in san francisco from 3 to 10 january 1943 . after further training and tests at san francisco and long beach that lasted into april , she departed to join the aleutian islands campaign on 23 april . she bombarded holtz bay and chichagof harbor on 11–12 may to support the forces that went ashore on the island of attu . while she was leaving the area on the 12th , the japanese submarine launched a torpedo at the ship , which was observed by a patrolling pby catalina flying boat . the catalina radioed pennsylvania , which took evasive maneuvers and escaped unharmed ; a pair of destroyers then spent the next ten hours hunting the submarine before severely damaging her and forcing her to surface . i-31 was later sunk by another destroyer the next day . pennsylvania returned to holtz bay on 14 may to conduct another bombardment in support of an infantry attack on the western side of the bay . she continued operations in the area until 19 may , when she steamed to adak island for another amphibious assault . while en route , one of her gasoline stowage compartments exploded , which caused structural damage , though no one was injured in the accident . she was forced to leave adak on 21 may for repairs at puget sound that lasted from 31 may to 15 june ; during the overhaul , another accidental explosion killed one man and injured a second . she left port on 1 august , bound for adak , which she reached on 7 august . there , she became the flagship of admiral francis w . rockwell , commander of the task force that was to attack kiska . the troops went ashore on 15 august but met no resistance , the japanese having evacuated without us forces in the area having becoming aware of it . pennsylvania patrolled off kiska for several days before returning to adak on 23 august . two days later , the battleship departed adak for pearl harbor , arriving there on 1 september . she embarked a contingent of 790 & nbsp ; passengers before steaming on 19 september , bound for san francisco . she arrived there six days later and debarked her passengers before returning to pearl harbor on 6 october to take part in bombardment training from 20–23 october and 31 october – 4 november . now the flagship of rear admiral richmond k . turner , the commander of the fifth amphibious force , itself part of the northern attack force , pennsylvania left pearl harbor on 10 november to lead the assault on makin atoll , part of the gilbert islands . she was joined by three other battleships , four cruisers , three escort carriers , and numerous transports and destroyers ; they arrived off makin on 20 november , and pennsylvania opened fire on butaritari island that morning at a range of , beginning the battle of makin . early on the morning of 24 november , the ship was rocked by an explosion off her starboard bow ; lookouts reported that the escort carrier had been torpedoed and had exploded . japanese torpedo bombers conducted repeated nighttime attacks on 25 and 26 november , but they failed to score any hits on the american fleet . pennsylvania left the area on 30 november to return to pearl harbor . marshalls and marianas campaigns . at the start of 1944 , pennsylvania was at pearl harbor ; over the course of the first two weeks of january , she took part in maneuvers in preparation for landings on kwajalein in the marshall islands . she departed pearl harbor on 22 january in company with the invasion fleet , and on 31 january she began her preparatory bombardment of the atoll to start the battle of kwajalein . troops went ashore the next day , and pennsylvania remained offshore to provide artillery support to the marines as they fought to secure the island . by the evening of 3 february , the japanese defenders had been defeated , allowing the ship to depart to majuro atoll to replenish her ammunition supply . she left shortly thereafter , on 12 february , to support the next major attack on eniwetok in the marshalls ; five days later she arrived off the island , the battle of eniwetok already underway , and over the course of 20 and 21 february , she shelled the island heavily to support the men fighting ashore . on 22 february , she supported the landing on parry island , part of the eniwetok atoll . on 1 march , pennsylvania steamed back to majuro before proceeding south to havannah harbor on efate island in the new hebrides . she remained there until 24 april , when she left for a short visit to sydney , australia from 29 april to 11 may , when she returned to efate . she thereafter steamed to purvis bay on nggela islands , in the solomons , to participate in amphibious assault exercises . after replenishing ammunition and supplies at efate , she left on 2 june , bound for roi , arriving there six days later . on 10 june , she joined a force of battleships , cruisers , escort carriers , and destroyers that had assembled for the marianas campaign . while en route that night , one of the escorting destroyers reported a sonar contact and the ships of the fleet took evasive maneuvers ; in the darkness , pennsylvania accidentally collided with the troop transport . pennsylvania incurred only minor damage and was able to continue with the fleet , but talbot had to return to eniwetok for emergency repairs . pennsylvania began her bombardment of saipan on 14 june to prepare the island for the assault that came the next day . she continued shelling the island while cruising off tinian on 15 june as the assault craft went ashore . on 16 june , she attacked japanese positions at orote point on guam before returning to saipan . she left the area on 25 june to replenish at eniwetok , returning to join the preparatory bombardment of guam on 12 july . the shelling continued for two days , and late on 14 july , she steamed to saipan to again replenish her ammunition . back on station three days later , she continued to blast the island through 20 july . this work also included suppressing guns that fired on demolition parties that went ashore to destroy landing obstacles . on the morning of 21 july , pennsylvania took up her bombardment position off orote point as the assault craft prepared to launch their attack . the ship operated off the island supporting the men fighting there for the next two weeks . operations in the philippines . pennsylvania left guam on 3 august to replenish at eniwetok , arriving there on 19 august . from there , she steamed to espiritu santo in the new hebrides before joining landing training off guadalcanal . the ship left on 6 september as part of the bombardment and fire support group for the battle of peleliu . she bombarded the island from 12 to 14 september and supported the landings the next day . she shelled anguar island on 17 september and remained there for three days , departing on 20 september . she then steamed to seeadler harbor on manus , one of the admiralty islands for repairs . on 28 september , she arrived there and entered a floating dry dock on 1 october for a week 's repairs . pennsylvania left on 12 october in company with the battleships , , , , and west virginia , under the command of rear admiral jesse b . oldendorf . these ships , designated task group 77.2 , formed the fire support group for the upcoming operations in the philippines . they arrived off leyte on 18 october and took up bombardment positions ; over the next four days , they covered underwater demolition teams , beach reconnaissance operations , and minesweepers clearing the way for the landing force . on 24 october , reports of japanese naval forces approaching the area led oldendorf 's ships to prepare for action at the exit of the surigao strait . vice admiral shōji nishimura 's southern force steamed through the surigao strait to attack the invasion fleet in leyte gulf ; his force comprised battleship division 2—the battleships and , the heavy cruiser , and four destroyers—and vice admiral kiyohide shima 's second striking force—the heavy cruisers and , the light cruiser , and four more destroyers . as nishimura 's flotilla passed through the strait on the night of 24 october , they came under attack from american pt boats , followed by destroyers , initiating the battle of surigao strait . one of these destroyers torpedoed fusō and disabled her , though nishimura continued on toward his objective . in the early hours of 25 october , the southern force came into contact with oldendorf 's battleships , which had positioned themselves to crossing the t . at 03:53 , west virginia opened fire , followed by some of the other battleships , though pennsylvania had trouble locating a target in the darkness with her search radar . her older mark 3 radar was not as effective as the more modern sets on west virginia and some of the other battleships . task group 77.2 's battleships effectively annihilated battleship division 2 ; shima 's second striking force had fallen behind and had not yet entered the fray . yamashiro was set on fire and then exploded ; she turned to flee , covered by a salvo of torpedoes from the burning mogami , but the american battleships were able to evade them without damage . despite having disengaged from oldendorf 's battleships , yamashiro was hit by more torpedoes and capsized and sank around 04:20 . shima 's ships passed the still-floating fusō and realized that nishimura had entered a trap , so he reversed course to flee ; in the confusion , his flagship nachi collided with mogami , damaging her and slowing her to be attacked by american light forces . she was later sunk , as were three of the four destroyers . later on 25 october , pennsylvanias anti-aircraft gunners helped to shoot down four aircraft that attacked a nearby destroyer . late on 28 october , pennsylvania shot down a torpedo bomber . the ship remained on station off leyte until 25 november , when she departed for manus , from which she steamed to kossol roads off palau on 15 december to refill her magazines . she conducted gunnery training on 22 december , and on 1 january 1945 , pennsylvania re-joined oldendorf 's fire support group on the way to lingayen gulf for the next major operation in the philippines . over the course of 4–5 january , japanese aircraft repeatedly attacked the ships , including kamikazes that destroyed the escort carrier . pennsylvania began bombarding japanese positions on santiago island at the entrance to lingayen gulf on 6 january before entering the gulf that night to suppress japanese guns while minesweepers cleared the area . the next morning , the rest of oldendorf 's ships joined her in the gulf to begin the main preparatory bombardment , which continued through the 8th . on 9 january , the amphibious assault began as troops from the sixth united states army went ashore . japanese aircraft struck the invasion fleet on 10 january , and four bombs landed close to pennsylvania , though she was undamaged . later that day , a fire control party directed pennsylvania to shell a group of japanese tanks that were massing to launch a counterattack on the beachhead . the ship patrolled outside the gulf from 10 to 17 january , when she returned to the gulf ; she saw no further action , however , and she departed on 10 february for maintenance at manus . from there , she left on 22 february for san francisco , stopping in the marshalls and at pearl harbor on the way . after arriving on 13 march , she underwent a thorough overhaul , including the replacement of her worn-out main battery and secondary guns . she also received more modern radar and fire control equipment and additional close-range anti-aircraft guns . with the work done , she went on sea trials off san francisco , followed by training at san diego . she left san francisco on 12 july and arrived in pearl harbor on the 18th , where she engaged in further training from 20 to 23 july . the next day , she departed to join the invasion fleet off okinawa . while transiting the pacific , she stopped to bombard wake island on 1 august . in the artillery duel with japanese coastal guns , one of their shells detonated close enough that fragments disabled one of the ship 's fire control directors for her 5-inch guns . one of her curtiss sc seahawks was damaged in heavy seas , and the destroyer recovered the pilot . pennsylvania loaded ammunition at saipan before continuing on to okinawa , arriving there on 12 august where she became flagship of task force 95 . that night , while moored next to tennessee in buckner bay , a japanese torpedo bomber managed to penetrate the allied defensive screen undetected ; the aircraft launched its torpedo at pennsylvania and hit her aft , causing serious damage . the torpedo opened a hole approximately in diameter , causing the ship to take on a considerable amount of water and begin to settle by the stern . damage control teams were able to contain the flooding . twenty men were killed and another ten were injured in the attack , including oldendorf , who was aboard at the time . pennsylvania was the last major us warship to be damaged in the war . the next day , salvage tugs towed her to shallow water where temporary repairs could be effected . on 15 august , the japanese surrendered , ending the war . post-war . pennsylvania was taken under tow by a pair of tugboats on 18 august , bound for apra harbor , guam , where they arrived on 6 september . the next day , she was taken into a floating drydock , where a large steel patch was welded over the torpedo hole , which would allow the ship to make the voyage back for permanent repairs . the battleship relieved pennsylvania as flagship on 15 september , and on 2 october , she was able to leave the drydock . two days later , pennsylvania steamed out of guam , bound for puget sound , where repairs would be effected . she was escorted by the light cruiser and the destroyer . while still en route on 17 october , the ship 's number 3 propeller shaft slipped aft . divers were sent to cut the shaft loose ; pennsylvania now had just one operational screw , and the open propeller shaft was now allowing water to leak into the hull . she nevertheless completed the voyage to puget sound , arriving on 24 october . the ship received the navy unit commendation for her wartime service there on 3 november . on 16 january 1946 , pennsylvania was designated to be expended as a target ship for the operation crossroads atomic bomb tests at bikini atoll to be carried out later that year . repairs were completed enough to allow her to sail to the marshall islands , and she left puget sound on 24 february . after stopping in pearl harbor , she arrived in bikini atoll on 31 may , where she was anchored along with another eighty-three warships . the first explosion , test able , took place on 1 july , and was an air burst . after tests determined that the ship had not been contaminated with radiation , the crew returned to the ship from 3 to 24 july . the second blast , test baker , was done the next day . this was an underwater detonation , and pennsylvania was moored just from ground zero . she was only lightly damaged from the blast , but the surge of water caused significant radioactive contamination ; work parties came aboard the ship from 17 to 21 august to prepare the ship to be towed , and on the 21st she was taken under tow by the transport , which took her to kwajalein , where she was decommissioned on 29 august . various radiological and structural studies were completed over the next year and a half until she was scuttled off kwajalein on 10 february 1948 . she was officially stricken from the naval vessel register on 19 february . the ship 's bell is on display at the pennsylvania state university near the main entrance of the wagner building , home of the university 's rotc programs . it has been on permanent loan to the university from the department of the navy since 1955 . two of the ship 's 14-inch guns that had been replaced during the 1945 overhaul are on outdoor display at the pennsylvania military museum in boalsburg , pennsylvania . footnotes .