1934 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1934 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . january 26 – samuel goldwyn ( formerly of metro-goldwyn-mayer ) purchases the film rights to the wonderful wizard of oz from the l . frank baum estate for 40,000 . february 19 – bob hope marries dolores hope . april 19 – fox film releases stand up and cheer ! , with five-year-old shirley temple in a relatively minor role . shirley steals the film and fox , which had been near bankruptcy , finds itself owning a goldmine . may 18 – paramount releases little miss marker , with shirley temple , on loan from fox , in the title role . june 13 – an amendment to the production code establishes the production code administration , and requires all films to obtain a certificate of approval before being released . july 28 – canadian-born actress marie dressler , best known for starring in films such as min and bill and emma , dies from cancer in santa barbara , california at the age of 65 . for her performance in min and bill , dressler received the academy award for best actress . october 12 – fred astaire and ginger rogers wham audiences again in their first joint starring roles with the gay divorcee grossing 1.8 million richard jewel , 'rko film grosses : 1931–1951 ' , historical journal of film radio and television , vol 14 no 1 , 1994 p55 to add to the 1.5 million earned by flying down to rio released at the end of 1933 november 12 – the musical babes in toyland debuts , starring stan laurel and oliver hardy as comic relief . december 11 – fox releases the sol m . wurtzel production of bright eyes , starring their hot new property , shirley temple . shirley sings '' on the good ship lollipop '' , and wins the first academy award ever given to a child , for her endearing portrayal of shirley blake . academy awards . the 7th academy awards was held on february 27 , 1935 , at the biltmore hotel in los angeles . they were hosted by irvin s . cobb . for the first time , the academy standardized the practice – still in effect – that the award eligibility period for a film would be the preceding calendar year . most nominations : one night of love ( columbia pictures ) – 6 major awards best picture : it happened one night – columbia pictures best director : frank capra – it happened one night best actor : clark gable – it happened one night best actress : claudette colbert – it happened one night most awards : it happened one night – 5 it happened one night became the first film to perform a '' clean sweep '' of the top five award categories : best picture , best director , best actor , best actress , and best screenplay . this feat would later be duplicated by one flew over the cuckoo 's nest in 1976 and the silence of the lambs in 1992 . it also was the first romantic comedy to be named best picture . 1934 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1934 6 january the big shakedown 19 january frontier marshal 22 january the lucky texan 26 january four frightened people you ca n't buy everything unknown colonel blood february 1934 1 february all of me 2 february carolina 3 february dark hazard i 've got your number 9 february les misérables ( france ) the rise of catherine the great ( gb ) six of a kind the tars ( netherlands ) 10 february mandalay 14 february fashions of 1934 16 february the cat and the fiddle the lost patrol 22 february it happened one night 23 february bolero death takes a holiday 25 february managed money march 1934 3 march david harum 17 march jimmy the gent 30 march riptide spitfire 31 march gambling lady wonder bar . april–june . april 1934 5 april you 're telling me ! 7 april the house of rothschild 10 april viva villa ! whirlpool 15 april city limits 16 april tarzan and his mate 26 april we 're not dressing 27 april liliom may 1934 1 may the last round-up little man , what now ? 2 may le grand jeu 3 may twentieth century 4 may manhattan melodrama stand up and cheer ! 9 may sadie mckee 15 may the man from utah 18 may the black cat born to be bad thirty-day princess 25 may the thin man 26 may twenty million sweethearts 31 may the key june 1934 1 june little miss marker 2 june fog over frisco operator 13 4 june red ensign 6 june are we civilized ? 8 june now i 'll tell 13 june the circus clown 28 june of human bondage the world moves on 30 june baby take a bow . july–september . july 1934 6 july charlie chan 's courage 13 july kiss and make-up the old fashioned way we 're rich again 20 july grand canary 21 july here comes the navy 30 july the cat's-paw august 1934 3 august the girl from missouri 4 august the man with two faces 6 august one more river 13 august everybody 's woman ( italy ) 15 august bulldog drummond strikes back jane eyre 16 august cleopatra dames 17 august treasure island 19 august the count of monte cristo 23 august unfinished symphony 24 august hide-out 30 august crime without passion 31 august now and forever peck 's bad boy she loves me not september 1934 1 september chained 5 september one night of love 11 september maniac 12 september l'atalante ( france ) charlie chan in london 14 september death on the diamond 15 september the scarlet empress 17 september young and beautiful 19 september a lost lady 21 september the barretts of wimpole street belle of the nineties the richest girl in the world 22 september the case of the howling dog 28 september judge priest the pursuit of happiness . october–december . october 1934 2 october our daily bread 4 october jew süss 8 october the return of bulldog drummond 12 october the gay divorcee 13 october madame du barry 18 october man of aran ( gb ) 19 october forbidden territory what every woman knows 22 october the captain hates the sea great expectations the trail beyond november 1934 2 november the merry widow ( france/us ) 3 november gambling 9 november evelyn prentice 10 november the st . louis kid 16 november the white parade 17 november girl o ' my dreams it 's a gift 23 november anne of green gables the painted veil 26 november imitation of life 29 november road house ( gb ) 30 november babes in toyland the iron duke the private life of don juan ( gb ) december 1934 7 december a wicked woman 9 december lieutenant kijé 10 december something always happens ( gb ) 11 december limehouse blues le roi des champs-élysées ( france ) 14 december the dream car the gay bride 21 december the silver streak 23 december forsaking all others the mighty barnum the scarlet pimpernel ( gb ) 27 december broadway bill 28 december bright eyes here is my heart kid millions the little minister 31 december evergreen ( gb ) . notable films released in 1934 . united states unless stated . 0-9 . 1860 – ( italy ) . a . all of me , starring miriam hopkins and fredric march amok , directed by fedor ozep – ( france ) angèle , directed by marcel pagnol , starring fernandel – ( france ) anne of green gables , starring anne shirley are we civilized ? , starring william farnum l'atalante , directed by jean vigo , starring michel simon – ( france ) . b . babes in toyland , starring laurel and hardy baby take a bow , starring shirley temple the barretts of wimpole street , starring norma shearer , fredric march and charles laughton the battle , starring merle oberon , charles boyer and john loder – ( gb/france ) belle of the nineties , starring mae west and johnny mack brown the big road ( dalu ) , directed by sun yu – ( china ) the big shakedown , starring bette davis and charles farrell the black cat , starring boris karloff and bela lugosi bolero , starring george raft and carole lombard boots ! boots ! , starring george formby – ( gb – first film by mancunian films ) born to be bad , starring cary grant , loretta young , jackie kelk bright eyes , starring shirley temple broadway bill , directed by frank capra , starring warner baxter and myrna loy bulldog drummond strikes back , starring ronald colman . c . the captain hates the sea , starring victor mclaglen and john gilbert in his last film role carolina , starring janet gaynor and lionel barrymore the case of the howling dog , starring warren william ( as perry mason ) the cat and the fiddle , starring ramón novarro and jeanette macdonald the cat's-paw , starring harold lloyd chained , starring joan crawford and clark gable chapayev – winner of national board of review '' best foreign film '' award in 1935 – ( u.s.s.r . ) charlie chan in london , starring warner oland and ray milland charlie chan 's courage , starring warner oland the circus clown , starring joe e . brown city limits cleopatra , directed by cecil b . demille , starring claudette colbert and warren william colonel blood , starring frank cellier the count of monte cristo , starring robert donat crime without passion , starring claude rains . d . dames , choreographed by busby berkeley , starring joan blondell , dick powell and ruby keeler david harum starring will rogers dark hazard , starring edward g . robinson death on the diamond starring robert young death takes a holiday , starring fredric march the dream car – ( hungary ) nezlobte dědečka ( nezlobte dědečka ) – ( czechoslovakia ) . e . evelyn prentice , starring william powell and myrna loy evergreen , directed by victor saville , starring jessie matthews – ( gb ) everybody 's woman ( la signora di tutti ) , directed by max ophüls , starring isa miranda – ( italy ) . f . fashions of 1934 , starring william powell and bette davis ferdowsi , starring abdolhossein sepanta and ardeshir irani ( iran ) frontier marshal , starring george o ' brien fog over frisco , starring bette davis forbidden territory , starring gregory ratoff , ronald squire , binnie barnes – ( gb ) forsaking all others , starring joan crawford , clark gable and robert montgomery . g . gambling , starring george m . cohan gambling lady , starring barbara stanwyck the gay bride , starring carole lombard the gay divorcee , starring fred astaire and ginger rogers the girl from missouri , starring jean harlow girl o ' my dreams , starring mary carlisle , edward j . nugent , lon chaney jr . , sterling holloway the goddess ( shen nu ) – ( china ) grand canary , starring warner baxter le grand jeu ( the great game ) , directed by jacques feyder – ( france ) great expectations , starring henry hull and jane wyatt . h . here comes the navy , starring james cagney and pat o'brien here is my heart , starring bing crosby and kitty carlisle hide-out , starring robert montgomery and margaret sullavan hollywood party , starring stan laurel , oliver hardy , jimmy durante and lupe vélez the house of rothschild , starring george arliss and loretta young . i . i 've got your number , starring joan blondell and pat o'brien imitation of life , starring claudette colbert and warren william the iron duke , starring george arliss it happened one night , directed by frank capra , starring clark gable and claudette colbert – winner of 5 academy awards it 's a gift , starring w . c . fields . j . jane eyre , starring virginia bruce and colin clive jew suss , starring conrad veidt jimmy the gent , starring james cagney and bette davis jolly fellows ( vesyolye rebyata ) – the first russian musical juárez y maximiliano ( juarez and maximilian ) – ( mexico ) judge priest , starring will rogers . k . the key , starring william powell and edna best kid millions , starring eddie cantor kiss and make-up , starring cary grant , helen mack . l . the lady is willing , starring leslie howard and cedric hardwicke – ( gb ) the last round-up , starring randolph scott lieutenant kijé – ( u.s.s.r . ) liliom , directed by fritz lang , starring charles boyer – ( france ) limehouse blues , starring george raft and jean parker little man , what now ? , starring margaret sullavan and douglass montgomery the little minister , starring katharine hepburn and john beal little miss marker , starring shirley temple a lost lady , starring barbara stanwyck the lost patrol , starring victor mclaglen , boris karloff and wallace ford the lucky texan , starring john wayne . m-n . madame du barry , starring dolores del río maniac , starring horace b . carpenter the man from utah , starring john wayne man of aran ( documentary ) , directed by robert flaherty – ( gb ) the man who knew too much , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring leslie banks , edna best and peter lorre – ( gb ) the man with two faces , starring edward g . robinson managed money , starring shirley temple mandalay , starring kay francis manhattan melodrama , starring clark gable , william powell and myrna loy the merry widow ( la veuve joyeuse ) , directed by ernst lubitsch , starring maurice chevalier and jeanette macdonald – ( france/us ) les misérables , directed by raymond bernard , starring harry baur and charles vanel – ( france ) the mighty barnum , starring wallace beery murder at monte carlo , starring errol flynn – ( gb ) mauvaise graine , directed by billy wilder – ( fr ) now and forever , starring gary cooper and carole lombard now i 'll tell , starring spencer tracy . o . of human bondage , starring leslie howard and bette davis the old curiosity shop , directed by thomas bentley – ( gb ) the old fashioned way , starring w . c . fields one more river , directed by james whale one night of love , starring grace moore operator 13 , starring marion davies and gary cooper our daily bread , directed by king vidor , starring karen morley and tom keene . p . the painted veil , starring greta garbo and herbert marshall pardon my pups , a shirley temple short peck 's bad boy , directed by edward f . cline , starring jackie cooper plunder of peach and plum ( taoli jie ) – ( china ) the private life of don juan , directed by alexander korda , starring douglas fairbanks and merle oberon – ( gb ) the pursuit of happiness , directed by alexander hall . r . radio parade of 1935 , starring will hay – ( gb ) red ensign , starring leslie banks – ( gb ) the return of bulldog drummond , starring ralph richardson and ann todd – ( gb ) the richest girl in the world , starring miriam hopkins , joel mccrea and fay wray riptide , starring norma shearer and robert montgomery the rise of catherine the great , starring elisabeth bergner and douglas fairbanks , jr . – ( gb ) road house , directed by maurice elvey , starring violet loraine and gordon harker ( gb ) le roi des champs-élysées ( the king of the champs-élysées ) , starring buster keaton – ( france ) . s . sadie mckee , starring joan crawford the scarlet empress , directed by josef von sternberg , starring marlene dietrich and john lodge the scarlet pimpernel , starring leslie howard and merle oberon – ( gb ) servants ' entrance , starring janet gaynor she loves me not , starring miriam hopkins and bing crosby shirin and farhad starring roohangiz saminejad . ( iran ) the silver streak , starring charles starrett sing as we go , starring gracie fields and stanley holloway – ( gb ) six of a kind , starring charles ruggles , mary boland and w . c . fields something always happens , directed by michael powell , starring , ian hunter , nance o'neil , peter gawthorne , muriel george – ( gb ) the song of ceylon , documentary directed by basil wright – ( gb ) song of the fishermen ( yu guang qu ) – ( china ) spitfire , starring katharine hepburn the st . louis kid , starring james cagney stand up and cheer ! starring warner baxter and madge evans , featuring 5-year-old shirley temple . a story of floating weeds ( ukikusa monogatari ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) . t . the tars – ( netherlands ) tarzan and his mate , starring johnny weissmuller and maureen o'sullivan the thin man , directed by w . s . van dyke , starring william powell and myrna loy thirty-day princess , starring sylvia sydney and cary grant those were the days , directed by thomas bentley , starring will hay and john mills – ( gb ) the trail beyond , starring john wayne treasure island , starring wallace beery and jackie cooper twentieth century , directed by howard hawks , starring john barrymore and carole lombard twenty million sweethearts , starring pat o'brien , dick powell and ginger rogers . u-v . unfinished symphony , directed by anthony asquith ( gb/austria ) viva villa ! , starring wallace beery , leo carrillo and fay wray . w . waltzes from vienna , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring esmond knight and jessie matthews – ( gb ) we 're not dressing , starring bing crosby and carole lombard we 're rich again , starring edna may oliver and billie burke what every woman knows , starring helen hayes whirlpool , starring jack holt and jean arthur the white parade , starring loretta young a wicked woman , starring mady christians , jean parker and charles bickford the woman of the port ( la mujer del puerto ) – ( mexico ) wonder bar , starring al jolson workers , let 's go ( hej rup ! ) , directed by martin frič – ( czechoslovakia ) . y-z . you ca n't buy everything , starring may robson and jean parker you 're telling me ! , starring w . c . fields young and beautiful zouzou , directed by marc allégret , starring jean gabin and josephine baker – ( france ) . serials . burn 'em up barnes ( released june 16 ) ( 12-chapter mascot pictures action ) , starring frankie darro and ( as barnes ) jack mulhall mystery mountain ( released december 3 ) ( 12-chapter mascot pictures western ) , starring ken maynard the lost jungle the law of the wild , starring rin tin tin pirate treasure the red rider ( released july 16 ) ( 15-chapter universal pictures western ) , starring buck jones tailspin tommy ( released october 29 ) ( 12-chapter universal pictures action ) , starring maurice murphy the vanishing shadow young eagles . comedy film series and shorts . : harold lloyd ( 1913–1938 ) the cat's-paw : lupino lane ( 1915–1939 ) my old duchess ( directed by ) : buster keaton ( 1917–1944 ) the gold ghost ( short , directed by ) allez oop ( short , directed by ) le roi des champs-élysées ( feature ) : laurel and hardy ( 1921–1945 ) oliver the eighth ( short ) hollywood party ( feature ) going bye-bye ! ( short ) them thar hills ( short ) babes in toyland ( feature ) the live ghost ( short ) : our gang ( 1922–1944 ) hi'-neighbor ! for pete 's sake ! the first round-up honky donkey mike fright washee ironee : harry langdon ( 1924–1936 ) circus hoodoo ( short ) petting preferred ( short ) counsel on de fence ( short ) as darrow langdon shivers ( short ) as ichabod somerset crop : wheeler & woolsey ( 1929–1937 ) hips , hips , hooray ! cockeyed cavaliers kentucky kernels : the three stooges ( 1933–1962 ) woman haters ( may 5 ) punch drunks ( july 13 ) men in black ( september 28 ) aan screen snapshots ( september 29 ) screen snapshots ( october 26 ) the captain hates the sea ( november 28 ) § three little pigskins ( december 8 ) . animated short film series . krazy kat ( 1925–1940 ) the autograph hunter southern exposure tom thumb cinder alley bowery daze busy bus masquerade party the trapeze artist the katnips of 1940 krazy 's waterloo goofy gondolas oswald the lucky rabbit ( 1927–1938 ) chicken reel the candy house the county fair the toy shoppe kings up wolf ! wolf ! the ginger bread boy goldielocks and the three bears annie moved away wax works william tell chris columbus , jr . the dizzy dwarf ye happy pilgrims sky larks spring in the park mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) shanghaied camping out – known as '' camping troubles '' in releases outside the united states . playful pluto gulliver mickey hollywood party ( guest appearance ) mickey 's steam roller – first appearance of mickey 's nephews . orphan 's benefit – first time donald duck from the wise little hen appears in a mickey cartoon . first appearance of clara cluck . last black and white appearance of clarabelle cow and horace horsecollar . first cartoon were mickey wears a shirt . mickey plays papa the dognapper babes in toyland ( guest appearance in live action ; costumed character ) two-gun mickey – last black and white appearance of minnie mouse . silly symphonies ( 1929–1939 ) the china shop the grasshopper and the ants funny little bunnies the big bad wolf the wise little hen the flying mouse peculiar penguins the goddess of spring screen songs ( 1929–1938 ) keeps rainin ' all the time let 's all sing like the birdies sing tune up and sing lazy bones this little piggie went to market she reminds me of you love thy neighbor let 's sing with popeye looney tunes and merrie melodies ( 1930–1969 ) buddy the gob pettin ' in the park honeymoon hotel buddy and towser buddy 's garage beauty and the beast those were wonderful days buddy 's trolley troubles goin ' to heaven on a mule buddy of the apes how do i know it 's sunday buddy 's bearcats why do i dream those dreams the girl at the ironing board the miller 's daughter shake your powder puff buddy the detective rhythm in the bow buddy the woodsman buddy 's circus those beautiful dames buddy 's adventures pop goes your heart viva buddy buddy the dentist terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) scrappy ( 1931–1941 ) betty boop ( 1932–1939 ) she wronged him right red hot mamma ha ! ha ! ha ! betty in blunderland betty boop 's rise to fame betty boop 's trial betty boop 's lifeguard poor cinderella ( first and only betty boop cartoon in colour ) there 's something about a soldier betty boop 's little pal betty boop 's prize show keep in style when my ship comes in popeye ( 1933–1957 ) willie whopper ( 1933-1934 ) comicolor cartoons ( 1933–1936 ) cubby bear ( 1933-1934 ) the little king ( 1933-1934 ) happy harmonies ( 1934–1938 ) cartune classics ( 1934–1935 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) amos ' n ' andy ( 1934 ) . births . january 6 – sylvia syms , english actress january 14 – richard briers , english actor january 20 – tom baker , british actor january 22 – bill bixby , american actor ( d . 1993 ) february 11 – tina louise , american actress february 12 – valerio ruggeri , italian actor and voice actor ( d . 2015 ) february 13 – george segal , american actor and musician february 17 – barry humphries , austrian comedian , actor , satirist , artist and author february 21 – rue mcclanahan , american actress ( d . 2010 ) march 5 – nicholas smith , english comedy actor ( d.2015 ) march 22 – may britt , swedish actress march 26 – alan arkin , american actor march 27 – peter schamoni , german director ( d . 2011 ) march 31 – shirley jones , american singer and actress april 24 – shirley maclaine , american actress may 3 – ivan andonov , bulgarian film director ( d . 2011 ) may 10 – jeanine basinger , american film historian may 24 – kiril gospodinov , bulgarian actor ( d . 2003 ) may 29 – marina cicogna , italian producer june 1 – pat boone , american singer and actor june 16 – eileen atkins , british actress june 21 – maro kontou , greek actress , politician july 1 jamie farr , american actor jean marsh , english actress ( upstairs , downstairs ) ester pajusoo , estonian actress eesti draamateater retrieved 30 november 2016 . july 5 – nikolay binev , bulgarian actor ( d . 2003 ) july 8 – marty feldman , english comedian and actor ( d . 1982 ) july 15 – eva krížiková , slovak actress july 22 – eric del castillo , mexican actor july 29 – sergio fiorentini , italian actor and voice actor ( d . 2014 ) august 7 – marija kohn , croatian actress ( d . 2018 ) august 24 – kenny baker , english-born actor ( d . 2016 ) august 30 – helen craig , english children 's author and illustrator ( angelina ballerina ) september 11 – ian abercrombie , english-american actor and comedian ( d . 2012 ) september 20 sophia loren , italian actress karen sharpe , american actress september 28 – brigitte bardot , french actress october 19 – glória menezes , brazilian actress october 20 – timothy west , english actor november 5 – kira muratova , russian director ( d . 2018 ) november 11 – nadine trintignant , french director , producer and screenwriter november 13 – garry marshall , american director , actor , producer , writer and voice artist ( d . 2016 ) november 28 – jaakko pakkasvirta , finnish film director and screenwriter ( d . 2018 ) december 9 – judi dench , english actress december 28 – maggie smith , english actress december 30 – russ tamblyn , american actor . deaths . march 21 – lilyan tashman , 34 , american actress ( cancer ) may 31 – lew cody , 50 , american actor june 8 – dorothy dell , 19 , american actress ( road accident ) july 6 – harry a . pollard , 55 , american actor & director july 28 – marie dressler , 65 , canadian-born american academy award winning actress ( cancer ) . debuts . gene autry – in old santa fe donald duck – the wise little hen alice faye – george white 's scandals alec guinness – evensong rita hayworth – cruz diablo bob hope – going spanish margaret lockwood – lorna doone keye luke – the painted veil ann miller – anne of green gables anne revere – double door rosalind russell – evelyn prentice ann rutherford – student tour george sanders – love , life and laughter ann sheridan – search for beauty james stewart – art trouble robert taylor – handy andy . references .