University of the Philippines Diliman

culture , sports and traditions . the diliman community is sometimes referred to as the diliman republic and a '' microcosm of the philippines '' . it is the only university in metro manila that has its own jeepney transportation system due to its sheer size . the university also has a congressional franchise to operate two radio stations ( am and fm ) as well as a television station . currently , the university only operates dzup 1602 , a community am radio station . the campus encompasses a number of residential areas and many students claim a sense of solidarity with the residents of these immediate communities . on the other hand , the philippine collegian is the official student publication of the university , and one of only three tertiary-level campus publications in the philippines released weekly . u.p . diliman represents the u.p . system in the university athletic association of the philippines ( uaap ) and participates in all events . the fighting maroons have perennially placed in the top three in the overall points race of the uaap . one of the most popular athletic teams in the program is the up pep squad , a heavyweight in the annual uaap cheerdance competition . two of the most-awaited events inside the campus are the lantern parade , held in the last week before the christmas break , and the u.p . fair , held every february . during the lantern parade , the individual colleges as well as groups within u.p.d . create christmas lanterns and floats and parade around the academic oval , culminating in a lengthy program held in front of the amphitheater capped off by a massive fireworks display . in recent years the event has become so popular even outside of up that media outlets and major manila television networks regularly send crews to broadcast the event live . the u.p . fair , organized by the up diliman university student council , is a week-long event held at the sunken garden that features evening music concerts , booths , and amusement park rides . typically falling during the third week of february , students and youth even from outside the u.p . system flock to the nightly concerts . centennial celebration . on january 8 , 2008 , the university of the philippines system , with 7 constituent universities and 12 campuses offering 258 undergraduate and 438 graduate programs , began its centennial celebration at the diliman campus . the university has produced 7 of 15 presidents , 12 chief justices of the supreme court , 34 of 35 national scientists and 36 of 57 national artists , and an estimated 250,000 alumni ( 15,000 doctors , 8,000 lawyers and 23,000 teachers ) . of the senators serving in the 2010–2013 term , 14 were from up . fernando javier , 100 , of baguio , oldest living u.p . alumnus ( civil engineering from the university of the philippines manila , 1933 ) , began the 100-torch relay at the u.p . academic oval in diliman , quezon city . the 99th torchbearer was michael reuben dumlao , youngest , a 6th-grader from the university of the philippines integrated school in u.p . diliman . then u.p . president emerlinda r . roman , also its first woman president , ignited the centennial cauldron in front of the u.p . oblation plaza . the cauldron featured three pillars representing the university 's core values of excellence , leadership , and service and 7 flowers representing the constituent universities , to wit , u.p . manila , u.p . diliman ( together with u.p . pampanga , its extension campus ) , u.p . los baños , u.p . baguio , u.p . visayas , u.p . mindanao , and u.p . open university . www.mb.com.ph , up alumni light the perpetual flame at centennial rites the centennial celebration came with a massive fund-raising campaign for the u.p . system , and generous donations from alumni came pouring in . one of the largest was the gt-toyota asian cultural ( acc ) center , a gleaming 100-million-peso , one-hectare complex envisioned to be a major hub of campus activity as well as the main site of the asian center 's different collaborations . . upaa 2008 centennial yearbook . the university of the philippines alumni association announced its launching of a special three-volume u.p.a.a . 2008 centennial yearbook on june 21 , 2008 , at the u.p.a.a . grand alumni-faculty homecoming and reunion at the araneta coliseum , cubao , quezon city . the theme was “ u.p . alumni : excellence , leadership , and service in the next 100 years , ” with the three cover designs showing the works of national artists napoleon abueva , abdul imao , and benedicto cabrera . chief justice reynato puno was the yearbook 's most distinguished alumnus awardee ( among 47 other awardees ) . . alumni . the university of the philippines has numerous notable alumni and faculty . up graduated many leading figures in the country . in the country 's political history , up has produced president of the philippines , josé p . laurel and ferdinand marcos ; statesmen benigno aquino jr . ; arturo tolentino , gerardo roxas , and doy laurel ; prominent jurists such as former chief justices querube makalintal , enrique fernando ; incumbent senators francis pangilinan and richard j . gordon ; and incumbent congressmen martin romualdez , roman romulo , and jesus crispin remulla . in business , up graduated billionaire and araneta patriarch jorge l . araneta . see list of university of the philippines college of law alumni . student organizations . the fraternities and sororities in up diliman are up delta lambda sigma sorority ( which produced senator pia cayetano ) , up portia sorority ( which produced up law dean fides cordero-tan and chief justices maria lourdes sereno and teresita de castro ) , alpha phi beta fraternity ( which produced chief justice reynato puno and governor francis escudero ) , and up sigma rho ( which produced justice antonio carpio , presidential spokesperson salvador panelo , and sonny angara ) , alpha sigma fraternity ( which produced up law dean and sitting judge of the international criminal court raul pangalangan ) , alpha sigma nu sorority , alpha phi omega ( which produced comelec chair haydee yorac and vice president jejomar binay ) , pi sigma fraternity ( which produced bases conversion and development authority ceo arnel casanova ) , up vanguard fraternity ( which produced atty . philip sigfrid fortun , the founding partner of the law firm fortun , narvasa and salazar ) , upsilon sigma phi ( which produced president ferdinand marcos , president jose p . laurel , vice president doy laurel , vice president arturo tolentino , senate president gil puyat , senator ninoy aquino , senator richard gordon , senator francis pangilinan , senator joker arroyo , senator gerardo roxas , senator sotero laurel , senator domocao alonto , senator mamintal a.j . tamano , senator estanislao fernandez , senator juan liwag , chief justice querube makalintal , chief justice enrique fernando , ten associate justices , abs-cbn vice president jake almeda lopez , abs founder ( later part of a merger to form abs-cbn ) antonio quirino , and famous lawyer estelito mendoza ) , pan xenia fraternity ( which produced manny villar ) , beta sigma , tau alpha , scintilla juris , and tau gamma phi . each of these groups can boast of prominent alumni of the college as among its members . to gain membership , candidates must undergo initiation rites to determine a candidate 's emotional stability , physical endurance , and mental capacity . office of the dean of students , university of the philippines diliman , june 2006 .