Ethical code

code of ethics or code of conduct ? ( corporate or business ethics ) . many companies use the phrases ethical code and code of conduct interchangeably but it may be useful to make a distinction . a code of ethics will start by setting out the values that underpin the code and will describe a company 's obligation to its stakeholders . the code is publicly available and addressed to anyone with an interest in the company 's activities and the way it does business . it will include details of how the company plans to implement its values and vision , as well as guidance to staff on ethical standards and how to achieve them . however , a code of conduct is generally addressed to and intended for employees alone . it usually sets out restrictions on behavior , and will be far more compliance or rules focused than value or principle focused . code of practice ( professional ethics ) . a code of practice is adopted by a profession or by a governmental or non-governmental organization to regulate that profession . a code of practice may be styled as a code of professional responsibility , which will discuss difficult issues , difficult decisions that will often need to be made , and provide a clear account of what behavior is considered '' ethical '' or '' correct '' or '' right '' in the circumstances . in a membership context , failure to comply with a code of practice can result in expulsion from the professional organization . in its 2007 international good practice guidance , defining and developing an effective code of conduct for organizations , the international federation of accountants provided the following working definition : '' principles , values , standards , or rules of behavior that guide the decisions , procedures and systems of an organization in a way that ( a ) contributes to the welfare of its key stakeholders , and ( b ) respects the rights of all constituents affected by its operations . '' listed below are a few example statements from the professional codes of the fourth estate public benefit corporation ( fourth estate ) , public relations society of america ( prsa ) , and the society of professional journalists ( spj ) : ; fourth estate 's journalism code of practice : '' accuracy : accuracy , more-so than exclusivity or timeliness , is the overriding value of journalism . '' : '' independence : independence from state control , business interests , market forces , or any other vested interest or outside pressure is a hallmark of dispassionate , critical , and reliable journalism . it bolsters legitimacy and credibility in the eyes of the public . '' : '' impartiality : impartiality means not being prejudiced towards or against any particular ideology , idea , or preconception . impartiality requires fairness and balance that follows the weight of evidence : it allows the journalist to make sense of events through dispassionate analysis of all relevant facts and perspectives . '' : '' integrity : integrity in journalism ensures that people and organizations uphold the values of journalism , always strive to do the right thing in all situations , even to their personal or organizational detriment , and put their obligations to the public first . '' : '' harm minimization : journalists must always remember that they are dealing with human lives . the potential for public good must sufficiently outweigh the potential for harm that may come from the activity of journalism . '' : '' engagement : engagement with the public ensures that journalism remains open , accessible , collaborative , and participatory while keeping the journalist accountable to the highest standards of accuracy , independence , impartiality , and integrity . '' : '' accountability : accountability is essential to the ethical practice of journalism and the maintenance of the public trust . being accountable for news-gathering practices and reporting means making firm commitments and taking responsibility for your journalism and the journalism of your peers . '' ; prsa code of ethics : '' loyalty : we are faithful to those we represent , while honoring our obligation to serve the public interest . '' : '' fairness : we deal fairly with clients , employers , competitors , peers , vendors , the media , and the general public . we respect all opinions and support the right of free expression . '' ; spj code of ethics : '' minimize harm … balance the public ’ s need for information against potential harm or discomfort . pursuit of the news is not a license for arrogance or undue intrusiveness . … balance a suspect ’ s right to a fair trial with the public ’ s right to know . consider the implications of identifying criminal suspects before they face legal charges . … '' : '' act independently … avoid conflicts of interest , real or perceived . disclose unavoidable conflicts . '' . general notes . ethical codes are often adopted by management , not to promote a particular moral theory , but rather because they are seen as pragmatic necessities for running an organization in a complex society in which moral concepts play an important part . they are distinct from moral codes that may apply to the culture , education , and religion of a whole society . it is debated whether the politicians should apply a code of ethics , or whether it is a profession entirely discretionary , just subject to compliance with the law : however , recently codes of practice have been approved in this field . often , acts that violate ethical codes may also violate a law or regulation and can be punishable at law or by government agency remedies . even organizations and communities that may be considered criminal in nature may have ethical codes of conduct , official or unofficial . examples could include black-hat hacker , bands of thieves , and street gangs . codes seek to define and delineate the difference between conduct and behavior that is malum in se , malum prohibitum , and good practice . sometimes ethical codes include sections that are meant to give firm rules , but some offer general guidance , and sometimes the words are merely aspirational . in sum , a code of ethics is an attempt to codify '' good and bad behavior '' . . examples . ; medical workers and physicians : code of conduct for the international red cross and red crescent movement and ngos in disaster relief : declaration of geneva : hippocratic oath : percival 's medical ethics : psychiatry ethics ; military , warfare , and other armed conflict : bushidō ( japanese samurai ) : code of the u.s . fighting force : international code of conduct against ballistic missile proliferation ( '' icoc '' or '' hague code of conduct '' ) : israel defense forces code of conduct : pirate code : uniform code of military justice ( united states ) : warrior code ; religious : code of ma'at ( ancient egypt ) : eight precepts ( buddhism ) : five precepts ( buddhism ) : golden rule / ethic of reciprocity ( various ) : seven laws of noah ( judaism ) : patimokkha ( buddhism ) : quran ( islam ) : rule of st . benedict ( christian monasticism ) : ten commandments ( abrahamic religions ) : ten precepts ( buddhism ) : ten precepts ( taoism ) : yamas and niyama ( hindu scriptures ) ; others : applied ethics : media ethics : aviators model code of conduct : global civics : icc cricket code of conduct : institute of internal auditors , code of ethics : journalist 's creed : moral code of the builder of communism . see also . medical ethics public sector ethics . references . . sources . . external links . the fourteen principles of ethical conduct for federal employees the code of medical ethics of the american medical association