Coureur des bois

evolution . while french immigrants had lived and traded alongside indigenous people since the earliest days of new france , coureurs des bois reached their apex during the second half of the 17th century . after 1681 , the independent coureur des bois was gradually replaced by state-sponsored voyageurs , who were workers associated with licensed fur traders . they traveled extensively by canoe . coureurs des bois lost their importance in the fur trade by the early 18th century . yet , even while their numbers were dwindling , the coureur des bois developed as a symbol of the colony , creating a lasting myth that would continue to define new france for centuries . . 1610–1630 : early explorers and interpreters . shortly after founding a permanent settlement at quebec city in 1608 , samuel de champlain sought to ally himself with the local native peoples or first nations . he decided to send french boys to live among them to learn their languages in order to serve as interpreters , in the hope of persuading the natives to trade with the french rather than with the dutch , who were active along the hudson river and atlantic coast . the boys learned native languages , customs , and skills , and tended to assimilate quickly to their new environments . a year after leaving étienne brûlé in 1610 , with a huron tribe , champlain visited him , and was surprised to find the young man attired completely in native clothing and able to converse fluently in the huron language . early explorers such as brûlé educated the french colonists on the complex trading networks of the natives , served as interpreters , and encouraged the burgeoning fur trade . between 1610 and 1629 , dozens of frenchmen spent months at a time living among the natives . over time , these early explorers and interpreters played an increasingly active role in the fur trade , paving the way for the emergence of the coureurs des bois proper in the mid-17th century . 1649–1681 : rise . the term '' coureur des bois '' is most strongly associated with those who engaged in the fur trade in ways that were considered to be outside of the mainstream . . food en route needed to be lightweight , practical and non-perishable . relationships with the natives . the business of a coureur des bois required close contact with the indigenous peoples . native peoples were essential because they trapped the fur-bearing animals ( especially beaver ) and prepared the skins . relations between coureurs and natives were not always peaceful , and could sometimes become violent . in general , trade was made much easier by the two groups maintaining friendly relations . trade was often accompanied by reciprocal gift-giving ; among the algonquin and others , exchanging gifts was customary practice to maintain alliances . pierre-esprit radisson and his companions , for instance , '' struck agreeable relations with natives inland by giving european goods as gifts '' . , with one husband marrying two or more women . sexual relationships with coureurs des bois therefore offered native women an alternative to polygamy in a society with few available men . to french military commanders , who were often also directly involved in the fur trade , such marriages were beneficial in that they improved relations between the french and the natives . native leaders also encouraged such unions , particularly when the couple formed lasting , permanent bonds . jesuits and some upper-level colonial officials viewed these relationships with disdain and disgust . french officials preferred coureurs des bois and voyageurs to settle around quebec city and montreal . they considered the lasting relationships with native women to be further proof of the lawlessness and perversion of the coureurs des bois . . myths . the role and importance of the coureurs des bois have been exaggerated over the course of history . this figure has achieved mythological status , leading to many false accounts , and to the coureurs des bois being assimilated with '' canadiens '' ( canadians ) . the myth-making followed two paths ; initially , people in france judged the colonies according to the fears and apprehensions which they had of the ancien régime . if order and discipline were proving difficult to maintain in continental europe , it seemed impossible that the colonies would fare any better , and it was presumed things would become even worse . accounts of young men choosing a life where they would '' do nothing '' , be '' restrained by nothing '' , and live '' beyond the possibility of correction '' played into the french aristocracy 's fears of insubordination which only served to confirm their ignorance ; and coureurs des bois became emblematic of the colony for those in the metropolis . the myth of the coureurs des bois as representative of the canadians was stimulated by the writings of 18th-century jesuit priest f-x . charlevoix and the 19th-century american historian francis parkman ; their historical accounts are classified as belonging to popular rather than academic history . charlevoix was particularly influential in his writings , because he was a trusted source of information , as he was a jesuit priest who had journeyed in canada . but his '' historical '' work has been criticized by historians for being too '' light '' and for relying too heavily on other authors ' material ( i.e . plagiarizing ) , rather than his own first-hand account . critics of charlevoix have also noted that in his account , he confuses different periods of time , and therefore does not differentiate between voyageurs and coureurs des bois , misrepresenting the importance of the latter in terms of number and proportion in terms on influence on trading . but charlevoix was influential ; his work was often cited by other authors , which further propagated the myth of the canadian as a coureur des bois . finally , roman du terroir ( rural novels ) also added to the myth of the coureurs des bois by featuring them out of proportion to their number and influence . the coureurs des bois were portrayed in such works as extremely virile , free-spirited and of untameable natures , ideal protagonists in the romanticized novels of important 19th-century writers such as chateaubriand , jules verne and fenimore cooper . . notable examples . most coureurs des bois were primarily or solely fur-trade entrepreneurs and not individually well known . the most prominent coureurs des bois were also explorers and gained fame as such . étienne brûlé was the first european to see the great lakes . he traveled to new france with samuel de champlain . jean nicolet ( nicollet ) de belleborne ( ca . 1598 – 1 november 1642 ) was a french coureur des bois noted for exploring green bay in what is now the u.s . state of wisconsin . nicolet was born in normandy , france in the late 1590s and moved to new france in 1618 . in that same year , he was recruited by samuel de champlain , who arranged for him to live with a group of algonquians , designated as the '' nation of the isle '' , to learn native languages and later serve as an interpreter . butterfield , 28 the natives quickly adopted nicolet as one of their own , even allowing him to attend councils and negotiate treaties . in 1620 , nicolet was sent to make contact with the nipissing , a group of natives who played an important role in the growing fur trade . after having established a good reputation for himself , nicolet was sent on an expedition to green bay to settle a peace agreement with the natives of that area . médard chouart des groseilliers ( 1618–1696 ) was a france explorer and fur trader in canada . in the early 1640s , des groseilliers relocated to quebec , and began to work around huronia with the jesuit missions in that area . there he learned the skills of a coureur des bois and in 1653 married his second wife , margueritte . caesars , 39 her brother , pierre-esprit radisson , also became a notable figure in the fur trade and is often mentioned in the same breath as des groseilliers . radisson and des grosseilliers would also travel and trade together , as they did throughout the 1660s and 1670s . together , they explored west into previously unknown territories in search of trade . having incurred legal problems in new france because of their trade , the two explorers went to france in an attempt to rectify their legal situation . when this attempt failed , the pair turned to the english . through this liaison with the english and thanks to their considerable knowledge and experience in the area , the pair are credited with the establishment of the hudson 's bay company . fournier 278 pierre-esprit radisson ( 1636–1710 ) was a french-canadian fur trader and explorer . his life as explorer and trader is crucially intertwined with that of his brother-in-law , médard des groseilliers . radisson came to new france in 1651 , settling in trois-rivières . nute , 43 that same year , he was captured by the mohawks while duck hunting . although two of his companions were killed during this exchange , the natives spared radisson 's life and adopted him . radisson through this adoption , radisson learned native languages that would later serve him well as an interpreter . he worked throughout the 1660s and 1670s with his brother-in-law , des groseilliers , on various trade and exploration voyages into the west of the continent . much of radisson 's life during this period is wrapped up in the story of des groseilliers . together they are credited with the establishment and shaping of the hudson 's bay company . daniel greysolon , sieur du lhut ( 1639–1710 ) was a french soldier and explorer who is the first european known to have visited the area where the city of duluth , minnesota is now located and the headwaters of the mississippi river near grand rapids . jacques la ramee ( 1784–1821 ) pierre de la vérendrye ( 1685–1749 ) louis-joseph de la vérendrye and his three brothers , the sons of the vérendrye mentioned above ( 1717–1761 ) françois baby ( 1733–1820 ) jacques baby ( 1731–1789 ) horace bélanger ( 1836–1892 ) jean-marie ducharme ( 1723–1807 ) dominique ducharme ( 1765–1853 ) luc de la corne ( 1711–1784 ) jacques de noyon ( 1668–1745 ) martin chartier ( 1655–1718 ) accompanied joliet and lasalle , became an outlaw , and eventually traded for furs in tennessee , ohio and pennsylvania . peter bisaillon ( 1662–1742 ) jacques le tort ( c . 1651 - c . 1702 ) . in literature , television , and film . the 1910 victor herbert operetta naughty marietta featured the male-chorus marching song tramp tramp tramp ( along the highway ) , which included the words , '' blazing trails along the byway / couriers de bois are we '' sic . ( some later versions change rida johnson young 's lyric to '' for men of war are we . '' ) in james a . michener 's 1974 historical novel , centennial and the 1978–1979 nbc television mini-series of the same name , the colorful , french canadian or french metis , coureur des bois , from montreal , quebec , canada , named pasquinel , was introduced as an early frontier mountain man and trapper , in 1795 colorado , louisiana ( new spain ) of mexico , now the present-day state of colorado . pasquinel was portrayed in the miniseries by american tv actor robert conrad . the fictional character of pasquinel was loosely based on the lives of french-speaking fur traders jacques la ramee and ceran st . vrain . in a 1990 skit called '' trappers , '' the canadian comedy troupe the kids in the hall depict two trappers , jacques ( dave foley ) and françois ( kevin mcdonald ) , canoeing through high-rise offices and cubicles to trap businessmen wearing designer italian suits as a parody of this moment in canadian colonial history . more recently , in 2015 , the revenant , directed by alejandro gonzález iñárritu , depicts a group of uncharacteristically violent , anti-indian coureurs des bois in north dakota , which was contrary to these trappers , who embraced the culture and way of life of native americans . frontier ( 2016 tv series ) chronicles the north american fur trade in late 1700s canada , and follows declan harp , a part-irish , part-cree outlaw who is campaigning to breach the hudson 's bay company 's monopoly on the fur trade in canada . several fictional coureurs des bois are featured in this realistic action-drama filmed mostly on location in newfoundland and labrador , nova scotia , and ontario , canada . . see also . european colonization of the americas canadian canoe routes ( early ) . references . further reading . brown , craig , editor . the illustrated history of canada . toronto : lester & orpen dennys ltd . , 1987 . dechêne , l . habitants and merchants in seventeenth-century montreal . montreal , que : mcgill-queen 's university press , 1992 . jacquin , p . les indiens blancs : français et indiens en amérique du nord , xvie-xviiie siècle . montréal : libre expression , 1996 . podruchny , carolyn . making the voyageur world : travelers and traders in the north american fur trade . toronto : university of toronto press , 2006 . external links . canadian vignettes : voyageurs . a film board of canada vignette illinois brigade , voyageur educators out of the midwest