Catacombs of Rome

etymology . the word catacombs comes from the latin root word catatumbas meaning either “ among the tombs ” or , according to other translations from the original late latin , “ next to the quarry ” . the later translation stems from the first excavations done to create the catacombs system , which was conducted outside of rome near the quarry . “ catacombs of rome – useful information – rome & vatican museums ” . rome museum , www.rome-museum.com/catacombs-of-rome.php . . precursors . the etruscan civilization , which dominated a territory including the area which now includes rome from perhaps 900 to 100 bc , like many other european peoples , had buried its dead in excavated underground chambers , such as the tomb of the capitals , and less complex tumuli . in contrast , the original roman custom had been cremation of the human body , after which the burnt remains were kept in a pot , urn or ash-chest , often deposited in a columbarium or dovecote . from about the 2nd century ad , inhumation ( burial of unburnt human remains ) became customary , either in graves or , for those who could afford them , in sarcophagi , often elaborately carved . by the 4th century , burial had overtaken cremation as the usual practice , and the construction of tombs had grown greater and spread throughout the empire . jews and christians preferred burial due to the idea of preserving the dead body for resurrection . considerable tracts of the ancient roads leading out of rome and other roman cities , like the via appia to this day , had monumental tombs running alongside them . these would inevitably cost a fortune to construct , whereas clearly in digging out of the catacombs would be less expensive . despite widespread popular modern ideas , these tunnels were probably not used for regular worship at first , but simply for burial . however , extending pre-existing roman customs , memorial services and celebrations of the anniversaries of christian martyrs took place there . there are sixty known subterranean burial chambers in rome . they were built outside the walls along main roman roads , like the via appia , the via ostiense , the via labicana , the via tiburtina , and the via nomentana . names of the catacombs – like st calixtus and st sebastian , which is alongside via appia – refer to martyrs that may have been buried there . however , about 80 % of the excavations used for christian burials date to after the time of the persecutions . f . van der meer , early christian art , faber and faber , 1967 , p . 19 . discoveries . through research , it has been found that the population 's diet consisted of freshwater fish . sample d9-w-xvi-8 , considered to be a two-year-old child , shows that children in ancient rome were breastfed and this child , in particular , had not yet been weaned off its mother . this results from the fact that the δ15n values had not begun to decline . fish had intertwined secular and religious aspects in roman society . for one thing , it was a staple of the daily diet . it also had a variety of significance for christians , for whom it was not only a common food , as for other romans , but featured as a symbol in christian iconography and was consumed at meals held to commemorate the dead . christian catacombs . roman law forbade burial places within city limits and so all burial places , including the catacombs , were located outside the walls of the city . the first large-scale catacombs in the vicinity of rome were dug from the 2nd century onwards . they were carved in tufa , a type of volcanic rock which is relatively soft to dig into but subsequently hardens , christian catacombs existed as a burial ground for early christians accompanied by inscriptions and early wall art . although catacombs were of jewish origin in the first century , by the end of the sixth century there were over 60 christian catacombs . these catacombs served as a connector for various christian communities through the underlying concepts of socio-economic status shown within the art . additionally , the art showed a story of how christians in the first couple of centuries viewed the world and their idealistic view of how it should be . christian art in the catacombs is split into three categories : iconographic , stylistic , and technical . from the first to the sixth century , the art in roman christian catacombs progressively went into phases as well : an early phase , an old testament phase , and a new testament phase . excavators ( fossors ) , who were most likely slaves , built vast systems of galleries and passages on top of each other . they lie below the surface in an area of more than . narrow steps that descend as many as four stories join the levels . passages are about . burial niches ( loculi ) were carved into walls . they are high and long . bodies were placed in chambers in stone sarcophagi in their clothes and bound in linen . then the chamber was sealed with a slab bearing the name , age and the day of death . the fresco decorations provide the main surviving evidence for early christian art , and initially show typically roman styles used for decorating homes – with secular iconography adapted to a religious function . the catacomb of saint agnes is a small church . some families were able to construct cubicula which would house various loculi and the architectural elements of the space would offer a support for decoration . another excellent place for artistic programs were the arcosolia . history of original tunnelling . the complex system of tunnels that would later be known as the catacombs were first excavated by the etruscan people that lived in the region predating the romans . these tunnels were first excavated in the process of mining for various rock resources such as limestone and sandstone . these quarries became the basis for later excavation , first by the romans for rock resources and then by the christians and jews for burial sites and mass graves . . decline and rediscovery . in 380 , gratianus empire and religion . at first , many still desired to be buried in chambers alongside the martyrs . however , the practice of catacomb burial declined slowly , and the dead were increasingly buried in church cemeteries . in the 6th century catacombs were used only for martyrs ’ memorial services , though some paintings were added as late as the 7th century , for example a saint stephen in the catacomb of commodilla . apparently ostrogoths , vandals and lombards that sacked rome also violated the catacombs , presumably looking for valuables . by the 10th century catacombs were practically abandoned , and holy relics were transferred to above-ground basilicas . in the intervening centuries they remained forgotten until they were accidentally rediscovered in 1578 , after which antonio bosio spent decades exploring and researching them for his roma sotterranea ( 1632 ) . archeologist giovanni battista de rossi ( 1822–1894 ) published the first extensive professional studies about catacombs . in 1956 and 1959 italian authorities found more catacombs near rome . the catacombs have become an important monument of the early christianity . . today . responsibility for the christian catacombs lies with the holy see , which has set up active official organizations for this purpose : the pontifical commission of sacred archaeology ( pontificia commissione di archeologia sacra ) directs excavations and restoration works , while study of the catacombs is directed in particular by the pontifical academy of archaeology . the administration of some sites is entrusted on a day-to-day basis to local clergy or religious orders who have an activity on or adjacent to the site . the supervision of the catacombs of st . callixtus by the salesian fathers is well known . in the last years , with the growth of the internet , updated information is often available online , with indication of current street address , opening hours , fees , availability of guides in the different languages , size of groups permitted and public transport . like other historical sites in italy , the catacombs are often not accessible at certain times of the day or on certain days of the week and may require online prebooking . typology . roman catacombs are made up of underground passages ( ambulacra ) , in the walls of which horizontal niches ( loculi ) were dug . these loculi , generally laid out in sequences ( pilae ) one above the other from floor or waist level , could each contain one or more bodies . a loculus large enough to contain two bodies was referred to as a bisomus . another type of burial , typical of roman catacombs , was the arcosolium , consisting of a curved niche , enclosed under a carved horizontal marble slab . cubicula ( burial rooms containing loculi all for one family ) and cryptae ( chapels decorated with frescoes ) are also commonly found in catacomb passages . when space began to run out , other graves were also dug in the floor of the corridors – these graves are called formae . list of catacombs in rome . the roman catacombs , of which there are forty in the suburbs or former suburbs , were built along the consular roads out of rome , such as the via appia , the via ostiensis , the via labicana , the via tiburtina , and the via nomentana . with the exception of the via ostiensis ( italian : via ostiense ) , these ancient latin terms are also the current italian names for these roads . catacombs of marcellinus and peter . these catacombs are situated on the ancient via labicana , today via casilina in rome , italy , near the church of santi marcellino e pietro ad duas lauros . their name refers to the christian martyrs marcellinus and peter who , according to tradition , were buried here , near the body of st . tiburtius . catacombs of domitilla . close to the catacombs of san callisto are the large and impressive catacombs of domitilla catacombs of domitilla ( named after saint domitilla ) , spread over of caves . in the beginning of 2009 , at the request of the vatican , the divine word missionaries , a roman catholic society of priests and brothers , assumed responsibility as administrator of st . domitilla catacombs . divine word missionaries . catacombs of commodilla . these catacombs , on the via ostiensis , contain one of the earliest images of a bearded christ . they originally held the relics of saints felix and adauctus . excavations on the commodilla were conducted by franciscan archaeologist bellarmino bagatti ( 1933–34 ) . catacombs of generosa . located on the campana road , these catacombs are said to have been the resting place , perhaps temporarily , of simplicius , faustinus and beatrix , christian martyrs who died in rome during the diocletian persecution ( 302 or 303 ) . comitato catacombe di generosa . catacombs of praetextatus . these are found along the via appia , and were built at the end of 2nd century . they consist of a vast underground burial area , at first in pagan then in christian use , housing various tombs of christian martyrs . in the oldest parts of the complex may be found the '' cubiculum of the coronation '' , with a rare depiction for that period of christ being crowned with thorns , and a 4th-century painting of susanna and the old men in the allegorical guise of a lamb and wolves . catacombs of priscilla . the catacomb of priscilla , situated at the via salaria across from the villa ada , probably derives its name from the name of the landowner on whose land they were built . they are looked after by the benedictine nuns of priscilla . catacombs of san callisto . sited along the appian way , these catacombs were built after ad 150 , with some private christian hypogea and a funeral area directly dependent on the catholic church . it takes its name from the deacon saint callixtus , proposed by pope zephyrinus in the administration of the same cemetery – on his accession as pope , he enlarged the complex , that quite soon became the official one for the roman church . the arcades , where more than fifty martyrs and sixteen pontiffs were buried , form part of a complex graveyard that occupies fifteen hectares and is almost long . catacombs of san lorenzo . built into the hill beside san lorenzo fuori le mura , these catacombs are said to have been the final resting place of st . lawrence . the church was built by pope sixtus iii and later remodeled into the present nave . sixtus also redecorated the shrine in the catacomb and was buried there . sacred destinations – san lorenzo . catacombs of san pancrazio . established underneath the san pacrazio basilica which was built by pope symmachus on the place where the body of the young martyr saint pancras , or pancratius , had been buried . in the 17th century , it was given to the discalced carmelites , who completely remodeled it . the catacombs house fragments of sculpture and pagan and early christian inscriptions . catacombs of san sebastiano . one of the smallest christian cemeteries , this has always been one of the most accessible catacombs and is thus one of the least preserved ( of the four original floors , the first is almost completely gone ) . on the left hand end of the right hand wall of the nave of the primitive basilica , rebuilt in 1933 on ancient remains , arches to end the middle of the nave of the actual church , built in the 13th century , are visible , along with the outside of the apse of the chapel of the relics ; whole and fragmentary collected sarcophagi ( mostly of 4th century date ) were found in excavations . via a staircase down , one finds the arcades where varied cubicula ( including the cubiculum of giona 's fine four stage cycle of paintings , dating to the end of the 4th century ) . one then arrives at the restored crypt of s . sebastiano , with a table altar on the site of the ancient one ( some remains of the original 's base still survive ) and a bust of saint sebastian attributed to bernini . from here one reaches a platform , under which is a sandstone cavity ad catacumbas which once may have been named '' ad catacumbas '' , thus giving this and all other tombs of this type their name . 3 mausolea of the second half of the 2nd century ( but also in later use ) open off the platform . the first one on the right , decorated on the outside with paintings of funereal banquets and the miracle of the calling out of cerasa 's demons , on the inside contains paintings ( including a ceiling painting of a gorgon 's head ) and inhumation burials and has a surviving inscription reading '' marcus clodius hermes '' , the name of its owner . the second , called by some '' tomb of the innocentiores '' ( a burial club which owned it ) , has a refined stucco ceiling , latin inscriptions in greek characters , and a graffito with the initials of the greek words for '' ichthys '' . on the left is the mausoleum of ascia , with an exterior wall painting of vine shoots rising from kantharos up trompe-l'œil pillars . a room called the '' triglia '' rises from the platform , roughly in the middle of the basilica and cut into from above by the present basilica . this covered room was used for funereal banquets ; the plastered walls have hundreds of graffiti by the devotees at these banquets , carved in the second half of the 3rd to the beginnings of the 4th century , with appeals to the apostles peter and paul . from the '' trigilia '' one passed into an ancient ambulatory , which turns around into an apse : here is a collection of epitaphs and a model of all the mausolei , of the '' triglia '' and of the constantine i basilica . from here one descends into the '' platonica '' , a construction at the rear of the basilica that was long believed to have been the temporary cemetery for peter and paul , but was in fact ( as proved by excavation ) a tomb for the martyr quirinus , bishop of sescia in pannonia , whose remains were brought here in the 5th century . to the right of the '' platonica '' is the chapel of honorius iii , adapted as the vestibule of the mausoleum , with interesting 13th-century paintings of peter and paul , the crucifixion , saints , the massacre of the innocents , madonna ( art ) , and other subjects . on the left is an apsidal mausoleum with an altar built against the apse : on the left wall a surviving graffito reading '' domus petri '' either hints at peter having been buried here or testifies to the belief at the time the graffito was written that peter was buried here . catacombs of san valentino . these catacombs were dedicated to saint valentine . in the 13th century , the martyr 's relics were transferred to santa prassede . catacombs of sant'agnese . built for the conservation and veneration of the remains of agnes of rome . agnes ' bones are now conserved in the church of sant'agnese fuori le mura in rome , built over the catacomb . her skull is preserved in a side chapel in the church of sant'agnese in agone in rome 's piazza navona . catacombs of via anapo . on the via salaria , the catacombs of via anapo are datable to the end of the 3rd or the beginning of the 4th century , and contain diverse frescoes of biblical subjects . jewish catacombs . there are six known jewish catacombs in rome , two of which are open to the public : vigna randanini and villa torlonia . the jewish catacombs were discovered in 1918 , and archaeology continued for twelve years . the structure has two entrances , one on via syracuse and the other inside villa torlonia . the catacombs extend for more than , and date back to the period between the 2nd and 3rd centuries , and possibly remained in use until the 5th century . there are almost a century of epitaphs , but these do not show any examples of a particular relief , beyond some rare frescoes showing the classic jewish religious symbols . jewish catacombs are distinguished from their christian counterparts by various signs as well as the fact that jewish people did not visit the dead in the catacombs . parts of the old testament and the symbol of a menorah ( temple ) have been spotted on the walls of jewish catacombs . due to high levels of humidity and temperature , bone preservation has been negatively affected in the catacombs . scientists are unable to identify the sex of the dead due to the lack of preservation in the bones . the other catacombs are not open to the public because of the instability of their structure and the presence of radon . gallery of paintings from the catacombs of rome . in the catacombs of rome , there are many different pieces of artwork . most artworks are religious in nature some depicting important christian rites such as baptism , or religious scenes and stories such as the story of '' the three hebrews and the fiery furnace '' or biblical figures such as adam and eve . file : baptism - saint calixte.jpg file : jonah thrown into the sea.jpg file : virgennino.jpg file : fiery furnace 01.jpg file : agape feast 07.jpg file : good shepherd 01 small.jpg file : good shepherd 02b close.jpg file : adam & eve 01b.jpg file : paul philosopher.jpg . see also . antonio bosio , ( c . 1575-1576–1629 ) was an italian scholar , the first systematic explorer of subterranean rome catacomb saints , corpses from the roman catacombs that were decorated and presented as relics of christian saints depictions of jesus list of ancient monuments in rome . notes . references . l'abbe jean-joseph gaume , les trois rome , journal d'un voyage en italie , gaume freres , 1847 benjamin scott , the contents and teachings of the catacombs at rome . a vindication of pure and primitive christianity etc . , longmans , 1853 dean arthur stanley , lectures on the history of the eastern church , john murray , 1861 rev . william henry withrow , the catacombs of rome and their testimony relative to primitive christianity , nelson & phillips , 1874 rev . william henry withrow , valeria , the martyr of the catacombs , william briggs , 1882 james stevenson , the catacombs : rediscovered monuments of early christianity ( ancient peoples and places series ) , thames & hudson , 1978 james stevenson , the catacombs : life and death in early christianity , thomas nelson , 1985 jocelyn toynbee , death and burial in the roman world , jhu press , 1996 reprint , , 9780801855078 , google books . external links . about the saint sebastian catacombs about the saint callistus catacombs catacombe roma . urbanadventure.org with some short videos taken in the catacombs or rome rome catacombs the catacombs of st callixtus the catacombs culte des reliques à l'époque moderne the vatican : spirit and art of christian rome , a book from the metropolitan museum of art libraries ( fully available online as pdf ) , which contains material on the catacombs