Molly Malone

history . the song tells the fictional tale of a fishwife who plied her trade on the streets of dublin and died young , of a fever . in the late 20th century a legend grew up that there was a historical molly , who lived in the 17th century . she is typically represented as a hawker by day and part-time sex-worker by night . siobhán marie kilfeather , dublin : a cultural history , oxford university press us , 2005 , p . 6 . in contrast she has also been portrayed as one of the few chaste female street-hawkers of her day . there is no evidence that the song is based on a real woman , of the 17th century or any other time . the name '' molly '' originated as a familiar version of the names mary and margaret . while many such '' molly '' malones were born in dublin over the centuries , no evidence connects any of them to the events in the song . nevertheless , the dublin millennium commission in 1988 endorsed claims made for a mary malone who died on 13 june 1699 , and proclaimed 13 june to be '' molly malone day '' . the song is not recorded earlier than 1876 , when it was published in boston , massachusetts . its placement in the section of the book titled '' songs from english and german universities '' suggests an irish origin . it was also published by francis brothers and day in london in 1884 as a work written and composed by james yorkston , of edinburgh , with music arranged by edmund forman . the london edition states that it was reprinted by permission of kohler and son of edinburgh , implying that the first edition was in scotland , though no copies of it have been found . according to siobhán marie kilfeather , the song is from the music hall style of the period , and while one can not wholly dismiss the possibility that it is '' based on an older folk song '' , '' neither melody nor words bear any relationship to the irish tradition of street ballads . '' she calls the story of the historical molly '' nonsense '' . the song is in a familiar tragicomic mode popular in its period , and probably influenced by earlier songs with a similar theme , such as percy montrose 's '' oh my darling , clementine '' , which was written in about 1880 . a variant , '' cockles and mussels '' , with some different lyrics , appeared in students ' songs : comprising the newest and most popular college songs as now sung at harvard , yale , columbia , . union , etc in 1884 . a copy of apollo 's medley , dating from around 1790 , published in doncaster and rediscovered in 2010 , contains a song referring to '' sweet molly malone '' on page 78 that ends with the line '' och ! i 'll roar and i 'll groan , my sweet molly malone , till i 'm bone of your bone , and asleep in your bed . '' other than this name and the fact that she lives in howth , near dublin , this song bears no resemblance to molly malone . the song was later reprinted in the collection the shamrock : a collection of irish songs ( 1831 ) and was published in the edinburgh literary journal that year with the title '' molly malone '' . some elements of the song appear in several earlier songs . a character named molly malone appears in at least two other songs . the song '' widow malone , '' published as early as 1809 , refers to the title character alternately as '' molly malone , '' '' mary malone '' and '' sweet mistress malone '' . an american song , '' meet me miss molly malone '' , was published as early as 1840 . the song '' pat corney 's account of himself '' , published as early as 1826 , begins , '' now it 's show me that city where the girls are so pretty '' and ends , '' crying oysters , and cockles , and mussels for sale . '' during the 19th century , the expression '' dublin 's fair city '' was used regularly in reference to dublin , and the phrase '' alive , alive o '' is known to have been shouted by street vendors selling oysters , mussels , fish and eels . . lyrics . : in dublin 's fair city , : where the girls are so pretty , : i first set my eyes on sweet molly malone , : as she wheeled her wheel-barrow , : through streets broad and narrow , : crying , '' cockles and mussels , alive , alive , oh ! '' : '' alive , alive , oh , : alive , alive , oh , '' : crying '' cockles and mussels , alive , alive , oh '' . : she was a fishmonger : but sure 't was no wonder : for so were her father and mother before : and they each wheel 'd their barrow : through streets broad and narrow : crying '' cockles and mussels alive , alive oh ! '' : ( chorus ) : she died of a fever , : and no one could save her , : and that was the end of sweet molly malone . : but her ghost wheels her barrow , : through streets broad and narrow , : crying , '' cockles and mussels , alive , alive , oh ! '' : ( chorus ) ×2 . '' cockles and mussels '' in students ' songs ( 1884 ) . : in dublin city where the girls they are so pretty , : 't was there i first met with sweet molly malone ; : she drove a wheel-barrow , thro ' streets broad and narrow , : crying '' cockles and mussels , alive , all alive ! '' : alive , alive-o ! alive , alive-o ! : crying '' cockles and mussels , alive , all alive ! '' : she was a fish-monger and that was the wonder , : her father and mother were fishmongers too ; : they drove wheelbarrows thro ' streets broad and narrow , : crying '' cockles and mussels , alive , all alive ! '' : ( chorus ) : she died of the fever , and nothing could save her , : and that was the end of sweet molly malone ; : but her ghost drives a barrow thro ' streets broad and narrow , : crying '' cockles and mussels , alive , all alive ! '' : ( chorus ) . '' molly malone '' in apollo 's medley ( 1791 ) . : by the big hill of howth , : that 's a bit of an oath , : that to swear by i 'm loth , : to the heart of a stone , : but be poison my drink , : if i sleep snore or wink , : once forgetting to think , : of your lying alone , : och it 's how i 'm in love , : like a beautiful dove , : that sits cooing above , : in the boughs of a tree ; : it 's myself i 'll soon smother , : in something or other , : unless i can bother , : your heart to love me , : sweet molly , sweet molly malone , : sweet molly , sweet molly malone : i can see if you smile , : though i 'm off half a mile , : for my eyes all the while , : keep along with my head , : and my head on must know , : when from molly i go , : takes his leave with a bow , : and remains in my stead , : ( chorus ) : like a bird i could sing , : in the month of the spring , : but it 's now no such thing , : i 'm quite bothered and dead , : och i 'll roar and i 'll groan , : my sweet molly malone , : till i 'm bone of your bone , a reference to genesis 2:23 : and asleep in your bed : ( chorus ) . statue . molly is commemorated in a statue commissioned by jurys inn and designed by jeanne rynhart , erected to celebrate the city 's first millennium in 1988 . originally placed at the bottom of grafton street in dublin , this statue is known colloquially as '' the tart with the cart '' or '' the trollop with the scallop ( s ) '' . the statue portrays molly as a busty young woman in 17th-century dress . her low-cut dress and large breasts were justified on the grounds that as '' women breastfed publicly in molly 's time , breasts were popped out all over the place . '' the statue was later removed and kept in storage to make way for the new luas tracks . in july 2014 , it was placed outside the dublin tourist office on suffolk street . in popular culture . fair city derives its title from the opening line of the song : '' in dublin 's fair city , where the girls are so pretty . '' in the movie a clockwork orange , a drunk tramp sings molly malone in a tunnel before getting assaulted by the droogs . a uso singer sings molly malone in m a s h season 10 episode 1 '' that 's show biz '' . recordings . artists who have recorded versions of molly malone include the dubliners , heino , danny kaye , pete seeger , alfred deller , the limeliters , frank harte , sinéad o'connor , johnny logan , ian mcculloch , paul harrington , damien leith , burl ives , patty gurdy and u2 . bing crosby and rosemary clooney recorded an updated version of the song titled '' the daughter of molly malone '' on their album that travelin ' two-beat ( 1965 ) . crosby also sang the song on the album a little bit of irish recorded in 1966 . operatic baritone bryn terfel has recorded a highly operatic version of the tune , sung in a somewhat upbeat fashion . versions of the song have also been recorded in russian ( as душа моя , молли or '' molly , my soul '' ) , french , and in dutch ( as '' kokkels en mossels '' ) . see also . statues in dublin street cries roud folk song index 16932 . references . external links . lyrics with chords an article about molly malone