Nation of Islam and antisemitism

charges of antisemitism . the anti-defamation league , the southern poverty law centre , the american jewish committee , the american jewish congress , and the stephen roth institute have condemned the nation of islam as antisemitic . scholars of comparative religion have argued that the nation of islam is antisemitic and advocates holocaust denial . for instance , in the global journal of classical theology , professor richard v . pierard writes : a report by the stephen roth institute for studying anti-semitism and racism states the following : british home secretary jack straw and lawyers for the home office have also described farrakhan ’ s views as '' anti-semitic and racially divisive '' , and as a result he has been banned from the united kingdom since 1986 . farrakhan still barred from britain a catholic magazine , this rock , has described the nation of islam as both antisemitic and anti-catholic . this rock , dragnet : well-rounded bigotry , november 1995 . a number of prominent secular humanism have written that the noi is antisemitic . hating in the name of god , by benjamin radford ( council for secular humanism website ) , and madeline weld 's address to the 1995 annual meeting of the humanist association of canada are examples of such criticism . farrakhan calls jews '' satanic '' and compares jews to termites . louis farrakhan said in a 2014 speech that '' the satanic jews that control everything , and mostly everybody , if they are your enemy , you must , must be somebody . '' in an october 2018 speech , farrakhan referred to jews as termites : '' so when they talk about farrakhan , call me a hater , you know what they do , call me an anti-semite . stop it , i ’ m anti-termite . '' . jews '' control the economy '' . for many years certain nation of islam ( noi ) ministers have been preaching that '' the jews '' control the american economy and the world economy . statements to this effect can be found in its newspaper the final call and in speeches given in their temples and on college campuses . for example , the dallas observer recorded this dialogue between nation-of-islam leader louis farrakhan and an audience to which he was speaking : . alleged major role of jews in slave trade . the secret relationship between blacks and jews is a book published in 1991 by the nation of islam . the book alleges that jews dominated the atlantic slave trade . austen , pp . 131–133 the book has been labeled an antisemitic canard by historians including saul s . friedman , who has written that jews had a minimal role in new world slave trade . jews and the american slave trade , saul s . friedman , transaction publishers , 1999 , pp . 2 , 40 henry louis gates , head of the department of afro-american studies at harvard university , called the book '' the bible of new anti-semitism '' and added , '' the book massively misinterprets the historical record , largely through a process of cunningly selective quotations of often reputable sources . '' kepel , gilles . allah in the west : islamic movements in america and europe . stanford university press , 1997 pp . 68–69 . criticisms of perceived jewish '' control '' . elijah muhammad , louis farrakhan , khalid abdul muhammad , and other noi ministers are frequently critical of what they perceive as the jewish control over african american society , their beliefs frequently approaching conspiracy theory . for example : farrakhan gave a speech attacking then national security advisor sandy berger , secretary of state madeleine albright , treasury secretary robert rubin , and presidential advisor rahm emanuel . in regards to their names , he stated that '' every jewish person that is around the president is a dual citizen of israel and the united states of america.and sometimes , we have to raise the question , are you more loyal to the state of israel than you are to the best interests of the united states of america ? '' news conference at the national press club , october 19 , 1998 . references to jews as '' bloodsuckers '' . some noi ministers have called jews bloodsuckers . for example , in his saviours ' day speech in chicago , illinois , february 25 , 1996 , louis farrakhan stated : one former noi minister khalid abdul muhammed referred to jews as bloodsuckers . quotes from khalid abdul muhammad , the spokesperson until 1993 : . response to charges of antisemitism . the nation of islam has repeatedly denied charges of antisemitism . farrakhan and the jewish rift ; a historic reference louis farrakhan has stated , '' the adl . uses the term 'anti-semitism ' to stifle all criticism of zionism and the zionist policies of the state of israel and also to stifle all legitimate criticism of the errant behavior of some jewish people toward the non-jewish population . '' the final call , february 16 , 1994 in a letter responding to anti-defamation league ( adl ) director abraham foxman 's insistence that black leaders distance themselves from the nation of islam , hip hop mogul russell simmons wrote : '' simply put , you are misguided , arrogant , and very disrespectful of african americans and most importantly your statements will unintentionally or intentionally lead to a negative impression of jews in the minds of millions of african americans , '' he continued , '' for over 50 years , minister farrakhan has labored to resurrect the downtrodden masses of african americans up out of poverty and self-destruction '' and indicated that he had personally witnessed farrakhan affirm , ' a muslim can not hate a jew . we are all members of the family of abraham and all of us should maintain dialogue and mutual respect . ' '' . jews , nazis , and the holocaust . farrakhan stated at the mosque maryam in chicago on march 19 , 1995 that the jews financed the holocaust : . relationship with white supremacists . elijah muhammad 's pro-separation views were compatible with those of some white supremacist organizations in the 1960s . herbert berg , elijah muhammad and islam , nyu press , 2009 , p . 41 . he reportedly met with leaders of the ku klux klan in 1961 to work toward the purchase of farmland in the deep south . marable , manning , along the color line , reprinted in the columbus free press , january 17 , 1997 . he eventually established temple farms , now muhammad farms , on a tract in terrell county , georgia . rolinson , mary , grassroots garveyism , p . 193 , unc press books , 2007 . george lincoln rockwell , founder of the american nazi party once called muhammad '' the hitler of the black man . '' '' the messenger passes '' , time magazine , march 10 , 1975 . at the 1962 saviours ' day celebration in chicago , rockwell addressed nation of islam members . many in the audience booed and heckled him and his men , for which muhammad rebuked them in the april 1962 issue of muhammad speaks . . see also . african american–jewish relations conspiracy theory islam and antisemitism islam and judaism . notes . further reading . the secret relationship between blacks and jews by historical research department of the nation of islam , 1991 . '' an historian critiques the book the secret relationship between blacks and jews '' by david walter leinweber , h net : humanities and social sciences online , retrieved april 3 , 2005 . external links . b'nai brith audit of antisemitic incidents msn encarta : louis farrakhan ( archived 2009-11-01 ) anti-semitism worldwide 1997/8 : minister louis farrakhan and the nation of islam equal opportunity and social : justice african american-jewish relations rev . farrakhan and the nation of islam from the public eye the new anti-semitism . anti-defamation league documents and webpages . nation of islam adl focus on nation of islam anti-defamation league report nation of islam . final call/nation of islam webpages . farrakhan and the jewish rift ; how it all started zionism , not farrakhan is the problem , rabbis say minister farrakhan and jewish delegation meet in chicago interview with uic professor michael lieb nation of islam leader pays historic visit to synagogue review of '' the secret relationship between blacks and jews , volume one '' by donald muhammad , the final call , november 18 , 1991 finalcall.com interview with ashahed m . muhammad , author of '' the synagogue of satan '' . jude wanniski 's polyconomics webpages . an interview with nation of islam leader louis farrakhan , pt . 1 - on relations with jewish community an interview with nation of islam leader louis farrakhan , pt . 2 - on relations with jewish community an interview with nation of islam leader louis farrakhan , pt . 3 - on relations with jewish community memo : to howard p . berkowitz , national chair , anti-defamation league judaism is a gutter religion another view of blacks and jews