1955 in music

specific locations . 1955 in british music 1955 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1955 in country music 1955 in jazz . events . january 1 – rca victor announces a marketing plan called '' operation tnt . '' the label drops the list price on lps from 5.95 to 3.98 , eps from 4.95 to 2.98 , 45 eps from 1.58 to 1.49 and 45 's from 1.16 to . 89 . other record labels follow rca 's lead and begin to drop prices as well . january 7 marian anderson is the first african american singer to perform at the metropolitan opera in new york city . '' rock around the clock '' by bill haley & his comets first appears on the british charts . january 14 – in new york city , alan freed produces the first rock and roll concert . january 27 – michael tippett 's opera the midsummer marriage is premiered at the royal opera house , covent garden in london , conducted by john pritchard , with designs by barbara hepworth and choreography by john cranko ; it arouses controversy . february 19 – dot records introduces a new singer , pat boone , with an advertisement in billboard magazine calling him '' a great new voice '' . his first record for dot records was two hearts , two kisses , one love february 24 – carlisle floyd 's opera susannah is premiered in the ruby diamond auditorium of florida state university , tallahassee with phyllis curtin in the title role . february 26 – for the first time since their introduction in 1949 , 45 rpm discs begin to outsell standard 78s . february – kay starr leaves capitol to sign with rca . march 3 – italian soprano mirella freni makes her operatic debut as micaëla in carmen at the teatro municipale in her native modena . march 7 – the broadway production of peter pan , starring mary martin , is presented on american television for the first time by nbc-tv with its original cast , as an installment of producers ' showcase . it is also the first time that a stage musical is presented in its entirety on tv almost exactly as it was performed on stage . this program gains the largest viewership of a tv special up to this time and becomes one of the first great tv family musical classics . march 15 – colonel tom parker becomes elvis presley 's de facto manager . march 19 – the film blackboard jungle is premièred in new york city , featuring bill haley & his comets ' '' rock around the clock '' over the opening credits , the first use of a rock and roll song in a major film . march 22 – decca records signs dj alan freed as an a & r man . march 26 – bill hayes tops the us charts for five weeks with '' the ballad of davy crockett '' and starts a ( fake ) coonskin cap craze . april 14 – imperial records in the united states release '' ai n't that a shame '' by fats domino ( co-written with dave bartholomew ) . it reaches 1 in the r & b chart and becomes over time a million seller , bringing domino to prominence and giving his work covers by white artists : pat boone makes this song a billboard number-one single of 1955 for jukebox play . may 13 – first riot at an elvis presley concert takes place in jacksonville , florida . may 21 – chuck berry records his first single , '' maybellene '' , for chess records in chicago . may 22 – bridgeport , connecticut , authorities cancel a rock concert to be headlined by fats domino for fear of a riot breaking out . june the 29th international society for contemporary music festival takes place in baden-baden . the newly formed netherlands chamber orchestra gives its first performance at the holland festival . june 2 – italian singers natalino otto and flo sandon 's marry . june 16 – glenn gould completes his recording of bach 's goldberg variations . fleming , colin ( 28 november 2003 ) . '' reissues : glenn gould – ' a state of wonder : the complete goldberg variations 1955 & 1981 ' review '' . goldmine 29 ( 24 ) : 63 . june 18 pearl carr & teddy johnson marry in the u.k . pierre boulez 's influential composition le marteau sans maître ( '' the hammer without a master '' ) , for contralto and six instrumentalists , is premiered ( in its first revised version ) at the international society for contemporary music festival in baden-baden at the insistence of heinrich strobel . july 9 – '' rock around the clock '' becomes the first rock and roll single to reach number one on the american charts . july 13 – the beaux arts trio make their debut at the berkshire music festival . august 8 – luigi nono marries arnold schoenberg 's daughter nuria in venice . august 19 – wins radio station in new york city adopts a policy of not playing white cover versions of black r & b songs . august 31 – a londoner is fined for '' creating an abominable noise '' for playing '' shake , rattle , and roll '' at top volume . september 3 – little richard records '' tutti frutti '' in new orleans with significantly cleaned up lyrics ( originally '' tutti frutti , good booty '' among other things ) ; it is released in october . september 26 – '' america 's sweethearts '' , singers eddie fisher and debbie reynolds , marry . october 15 – elvis presley plays a concert in lubbock , texas . opening act is local duo buddy and bob , buddy being future rock star buddy holly . october 20 – disc jockey bill randle of were ( cleveland ) is the key presenter of a concert at brooklyn high school ( ohio ) , featuring pat boone and bill haley & his comets and opening with elvis presley , not only elvis 's first performance north of the mason–dixon line , but also his first filmed performance , for a documentary on randle titled the pied piper of cleveland . october 29 – dmitri shostakovich 's violin concerto no . 1 , originally completed in 1948 , is premiered by the leningrad philharmonic orchestra with its dedicatee , david oistrakh , as soloist . november 4 – william schuman 's orchestral piece credendum : article of faith , commissioned by unesco , is premiered in cincinnati . november 12 – billboard magazine dj poll names elvis presley as the most promising new country and western singer . november 20 – bo diddley makes his debut tv appearance on the ed sullivan show on cbs television . november 22 – colonel tom parker signs elvis presley to rca records . november 29 – juan josé castro conducts the uk première of carlos chávez 's symphony no . 3 at the maida vale studios with the london symphony orchestra . december 15 – sun records releases '' folsom prison blues '' recorded by johnny cash on july 30 . christmas – the temperance seven is founded as a jazz band , initially comprising three members from the chelsea school of art in london . paul simon and art garfunkel write their first song , '' the girl for me '' ( copyrighted with the library of congress in 1956 ) , and begin singing together as a duo while still in high school in new york city . nine-year-old al green forms a gospel quartet , the green brothers . clyde mcphatter launches a solo career . renato carosone and nicola salerno meet and start their songwriting partnership . astor piazzolla , returning to argentina from his studies with nadia boulanger , forms his string orchestra ( orquesta de cuerdas ) and octet ( octeto buenos aires ) and introduces the nuevo tango style . indian santoor player shivkumar sharma gives his first public performance in bombay . etta james makes her debut with '' the wallflower ( dance with me henry ) '' which tops the r & b chart but is considered too risqué for pop radio . the song is subsequently covered by georgia gibbs in a sanitized version where the line '' roll with me henry '' is changed to '' dance with me henry '' publication of neue mozart-ausgabe begins . albums released . in 1955 , 1,615 albums and 4,542 pop singles were released in the us . and i thought about you - patti page at the cafe bohemia , vol . 1 – art blakey at the cafe bohemia , vol . 2 – the jazz messengers day dreams – doris day blue moods – miles davis christmas with patti page - patti page clifford brown with strings – clifford brown cloud 7 – tony bennett concert by the sea – erroll garner dinner in caracas – aldemaro romero doris day in hollywood – doris day eddie fisher sings academy award winning songs – eddie fisher especially for you . – teresa brewer four brothers – the ames brothers happy holiday – jo stafford the hi-lo 's , i presume – the hi-lo's i cry for you – johnnie ray i love you – eddie fisher in a blue mood – kay starr in a romantic mood – oscar peterson in the land of hi-fi – sarah vaughan in the wee small hours – frank sinatra jazz spectacular – frankie laine & buck clayton julie is her name – julie london love me or leave me – doris day lovers ' laine – frankie laine meet betty carter and ray bryant – betty carter and ray bryant memory songs – jo stafford moments to remember – the four lads music ala carte – the crew-cuts the musings of miles – miles davis noël coward at las vegas – noël coward oklahoma ! – original broadway cast oscar peterson plays count basie – oscar peterson the one , the only kay starr – kay starr quintet/sextet – miles davis rain or shine – dick haymes rock around the clock – bill haley & his comets romance on the range – patti page satch plays fats – louis armstrong shake , rattle and roll – bill haley & his comets shostakovitch : symphony no . 10 in e minor , op . 93 . new york philharmonic , dimitri mitropoulos , conductor . 12-inch lp . columbia masterworks ml 4959 . so smooth – perry como soft and sentimental – jo stafford songs of scotland – jo stafford songs from pete kelly 's blues – peggy lee , ella fitzgerald starring sammy davis jr . – sammy davis , jr . study in brown – clifford brown and max roach swingin ' down yonder – dean martin thelonious monk plays duke ellington – thelonious monk voice of our choice – guy mitchell the waltz queen - patti page . biggest hit singles . the following singles achieved the highest chart positions in the set of charts available for 1955 . 1 a second version for clarinet and chamber orchestra is recorded this year by alojcy szulc and the polish national radio symphony conducted by jan krenz , though it does not receive a concert premiere until the 1963 aldeburgh festival . 2 official premieres . in fact , klavierstücke vii and viii had been performed already by david tudor in new york on 15 december 1954 . martin iddon , new music at darmstadt : nono , stockhausen , cage , and boulez music since 1900 ( cambridge and new york : cambridge university press , 2013 ) : 163 . mercenier claimed not to have performed vi at all , though a recording of the performance in the darmstadt archives includes a truncated version of it , as well as a failed attempt at vii disrupted by a sustained audience disturbance after three pages . after an intervention by luigi nono . mercenier made a second attempt to perform the piece , but was once again obliged to stop when she could not hear what she was playing because of the audience uproar . michael kurtz , stockhausen : a biography , translated by richard toop ( london and boston : faber and faber , 1992 ) : 76–77 , 241n21 . . compositions . milton babbitt – sonnets ( 2 ) , for baritone voice , clarinet , viola , and cello jean barraqué – séquence luciano berio mimusique no . 2 for orchestra mutazione for tape quartetto variazione for chamber orchestra arthur bliss meditations on a theme by john blow , op . 118 violin concerto , op . 111 ernest bloch – proclamation , b.91 pierre boulez – le marteau sans maître york bowen – rhapsody for viola and piano in g major mario castelnuovo-tedesco tre preludi mediterranei , op . 176 escarramán , op . 177 eric coates – the dam busters march henry cowell – symphony no . 12 george crumb diptych for orchestra sonata for solo cello mario davidovsky quintet for clarinet and strings suite sinfonica para '' el payaso '' for orchestra einar englund – piano concerto no . 1 ferenc farkas – bukki varlatok gerald finzi – cello concerto henryk górecki – four preludes , op . 1 toccata , op . 2 , for two pianos camargo guarnieri poemas afro-brasileiros ( 3 ) , for voice and orchestra ponteios , vol . 3 , for piano sonata no . 2 , for cello and piano songs ( 2 ) , for voice and piano howard hanson – symphony no . 5 , op . 43 , sinfonia sacra ( premiered february 18 in philadelphia ) hans werner henze – symphony no . 4 vagn holmboe string quartet no . 5 , op . 66 cantata no . 9 alan hovhaness – symphony no . 2 mysterious mountain wojciech kilar small overture ( little overture ) for symphony orchestra symphony for strings zoltán kodály – nemzeti dal osvaldo lacerda – miniaturas de adelmar tavares ( 4 ) , for voice and piano witold lutosławski – dance preludes ( 2nd version for clarinet and chamber group ) bohuslav martinů gilgameš ( choral work based on the epic of gilgamesh ) the frescoes of piero della francesca ( les fresques de piero della francesca , orchestral ; composed ) oboe concerto darius milhaud – symphony no . 6 luigi nono canti per tredeci for 13 instruments incontri for 24 instruments per nørgård symphony no . 1 sinfonia austera trio no . 1 , op . 15 walter piston – symphony no . 6 edmund rubbra – piano concerto william schuman – credendum john serry , sr . – american rhapsody – for stradella accordion petite tango – for stradella accordion tarantella – for stradella accordion revised . karlheinz stockhausen – klavierstücke v–viii igor stravinsky – canticum sacrum alexandre tansman concerto for orchestra capriccio for orchestra michael tippett piano concerto ( composition completed ) sonata for four horns ernst toch – symphony no . 3 ralph vaughan williams – symphony no . 8 in d minor heitor villa-lobos string quartet no . 16 symphony no . 11 william walton johannesburg festival overture score for richard iii ( film ) franz waxman – sinfonietta for strings and timpani iannis xenakis metastaseis for orchestra ( premiered october 16 at donaueschingen festival ) pithoprakta for orchestra ( composition commences ) . opera . carlisle floyd – susannah ( premiered february 24 at florida state university , tallahassee ) lukas foss – griffelkin ( opera in three acts , libretto by a . reed after h . foss , premiered november 6 on nbc television in the united states ) dmitry kabalevsky – nikita vershinin ( premiered november 26 at bolshoi theatre , moscow ) darius milhaud – agamemnon and les choëphores ( from the oresteia trilogy , premiered may 29 at landestheater darmstadt , germany ) alexis roland-manuel – jeanne d'arc michael tippett – the midsummer marriage ( premiered january 27 at royal opera house , covent garden , london ) . jazz . musical theater . the amazing adele – philadelphia production ankles aweigh – broadway production catch a star – broadway production damn yankees ( richard adler and jerry ross ) – broadway production kismet – london production opens at the stoll theatre on april 20 and runs for 648 performances the pajama game ( richard adler and jerry ross ) – london production opens at the coliseum on october 13 and runs for 501 performances phoenix '55 – broadway production pipe dream ( rodgers and hammerstein ) – broadway production plain and fancy – broadway production romance in candlelight – london production opens at the piccadilly theatre on september 15 and runs for 53 performances seventh heaven – broadway production opens at the anta playhouse on may 26 and runs for 44 performances shoestring revue – broadway production silk stockings – broadway production wonderful town ( leonard bernstein , betty comden and adolph green ) – london production opens at the princes theatre on february 24 and runs for 207 performances . musical films . artists and models released november 7 starring dean martin and jerry lewis as long as they 're happy starring jack buchanan , janette scott , jeannie carson , jerry wayne , diana dors and joan sims the benny goodman story daddy long legs gentlemen marry brunettes the girl rush starring rosalind russell , fernando lamas , eddie albert and gloria dehaven guys and dolls released november 3 starring frank sinatra and marlon brando it 's always fair weather jupiter 's darling starring howard keel , esther williams , marge champion and gower champion king 's rhapsody starring anna neagle and errol flynn kismet lady and the tramp – animated feature released june 22 featuring the songs and voice of peggy lee love me or leave me oklahoma ! ( rodgers and hammerstein ) released october 11 pete kelly 's blues the seven little foys . musical television . heidi – television production our town – television production together with music – cbs television production by noël coward . births . january 3 – helen o'hara , british rock violinist ( dexys midnight runners ) january 4 – mark hollis , english rock singer-songwriter ( talk talk ) ( d . 2019 ) january 8 – mike reno , canadian rock drummer and lead singer ( loverboy and moxy january 10 – michael schenker , german guitarist , songwriter , and producer january 13 trevor rabin , rock guitarist and vocalist ( yes ) and film composer fred white ( earth wind & fire ) january 17 – steve earle , folk singer ( del mccoury band ) january 19 – sir simon rattle , orchestral conductor january 26 – eddie van halen , rock guitarist and songwriter ( d . 2020 ) january 27 – richard young ( kentucky headhunters ) february 12 – bill laswell , american bass guitarist and producer ( massacre , material , tabla beat science , painkiller and praxis ) february 18 – riff regan , lead singer of rock band london february 23 – howard jones , pop keyboardist and singer-songwriter march 2 – jay osmond , singer and songwriter ( the osmonds ) march 4 – boon gould , guitarist ( level 42 ) march 10 – bunny debarge , soul singer-songwriter ( debarge ) march 15 – dee snider , rock singer-songwriter ( twisted sister and bent brother march 28 – reba mcentire , country singer march 31 – angus young , rock guitarist and songwriter ( ac/dc ) april 10 – lesley garrett , soprano april 13 – louis johnson , bass guitarist ( the brothers johnson ) april 17 – pete shelley , rock singer , songwriter and guitarist ( buzzcocks ) ( d . 2018 ) may 4 – lynne spears , american mother of musician and singer-songwriters jamie lynn spears and britney spears may 9 – anne sofie von otter , operatic mezzo-soprano may 12 – kix brooks , country singer ( brooks & dunn ) may 13 – garry bushell newspaper columnist , rock music journalist and singer , television presenter , writer and political activist may 16 – hazel o'connor , new wave singer-songwriter may 20 steve george , keyboardist ( mr . mister ) zbigniew preisner , composer may 21 – stan lynch , songwriter and drummer ( tom petty & the heartbreakers ) may 23 – mary black , folk singer may 29 – pascal dusapin , france composer may 30 – topper headon , rock drummer ( the clash ) june 7 jon balke , norwegian pianist and orchestra leader joey scarbury , singer june 23 – glenn danzig , lead singer of danzig june 26 – mick jones , rock guitarist and singer-songwriter ( the clash ) june 28 – thomas hampson , operatic baritone july 1 nikolai demidenko , classical pianist keith whitley , country music singer ( d . 1989 ) july 4 – john waite , rock singer , bass guitarist and songwriter july 10 – stan munsey , songwriter and keyboardist ( shenandoah ) july 18 – terry chambers , rock drummer ( xtc ) july 21 howie epstein , american bass guitarist , songwriter and producer ( tom petty and the heartbreakers ) ( d . 2003 ) henry priestman , english singer-songwriter , keyboardist and producer ( the christians , it 's immaterial and yachts ) july 25 – jem finer , folk rock banjoist , composer ( the pogues ) and multimedia artist july 29 – eusèbe jaojoby , salegy composer and singer august 6 – eric paulin , drummer ( the meetles ) august 17 colin moulding , english bass guitarist , songwriter and vocalist ( xtc ) kevin welch , american singer-songwriter and guitarist august 25 – john mcgeoch guitarist ( magazine , pil and siouxsie and the banshees ) ( d . 2004 ) august 28 – beres hammond , reggae singer august 29 – diamanda galás , singer , composer , pianist and performance artist september 3 – steve jones , rock guitarist and singer ( the sex pistols ) september 9 – ivan nikolayevich smirnov , guitarist september 13 – andreas staier , harpsichordist and fortepianist september 18 – sid griffin , bluegrass singer-songwriter and popular music historian september 25 – zucchero fornaciari , singer-songwriter and blues musician september 26 – carlene carter , american singer-songwriter and guitarist october 2 – philip oakey , singer ( the human league ) october 7 – yo-yo ma , cellist october 16 – leonid desyatnikov , composer october 18 – hiromi go , singer october 21 fred hersch , american jazz pianist rich mullins , american christian singer-songwriter ( d . 1997 ) october 25 – matthias jabs , german rock guitarist ( scorpions ) october 29 kevin dubrow , american rock singer ( quiet riot ) ( d . 2007 ) roger o'donnell , english rock keyboardist november 21 – kyle gann , american composer , teacher and critic november 23 – ludovico einaudi , italian composer and pianist november 30 – billy idol , rock singer december 6 – bright sheng , composer december 8 – kasim sulton , american singer-songwriter , bass player , and producer december 15 – paul simonon , bass guitarist ( the clash ) date unknown – susan addison , sackbut player . deaths . january 10 – annette mills , partner of '' muffin the mule '' , 60 january 27 – maurice frigara , french conductor , 80 february 14 – charles cuvillier , composer of operettas , 77 march 12 – charlie parker , jazz saxophonist , 34 ( lobar pneumonia , bleeding ulcer and cirrhosis of liver ) april 10 – oskar lindberg , composer , 67 april 12 – w . h . anderson , composer , 72 may 4 – george enescu , composer , 73 may 15 – oskar adler , violinist and music critic , 79 may 17 – francesco balilla pratella , composer and musicologist , 75 may 22 – albert valsien , composer and conductor , 73 june 11 – marcel samuel-rousseau , organist , composer and opera producer , 72 june 19 – willy burkhard , composer , 55 june 28 – göta ljungberg , wagnerian soprano , 56 july 4 – ruth vincent , operatic soprano , 78 july 7 – franco casavola , futurist composer , 63 july 25 isaak dunayevsky , conductor and composer , 55 ilmari hannikainen , composer , 62 ( drowned ) august 5 – carmen miranda , singer and dancer , 46 ( heart attack ) august 13 – florence easton , soprano , 72 august 22 – olin downes , music critic , 69 august 24 – edgar henrichsen , organist and composer , 76 october 7 – frieda hempel , operatic soprano , 70 october 14 – harry parr-davies , composer and songwriter , 41 ( perforated ulcer ) october 20 – adolf mišek , double bassist and composer , 80 october 27 – bernardo de muro , operatic tenor , 73 november 11 – jerry ross , songwriter , 29 ( bronchiectasis ) november 22 – guy ropartz , composer and conductor , 91 november 27 – arthur honegger , composer , 63 november 30 – josip štolcer-slavenski , composer , 58 december 5 – lucien durosoir , violinist and composer , 67 december 11 – franz syberg , composer , 51 december 21 – gladys ripley , operatic contralto , 47 date unknown bessie brown , blues singer , c.65 vernon isley , original isley brother , 13 ( road accident )