Ancistrus

taxonomy . the type species is ancistrus cirrhosus . this genus is the largest genus within the tribe ancistrini . the name ancistrus derives from the ancient greek agkistron '' hook '' & nbsp ; – a reference to the form of the cheek odontodes . the genera pristiancistrus , thysanocara and xenocara are now synonyms of ancistrus . . description . left thumb ancistrus species show all the typical features of the loricariidae . this includes a body covered in bony plates and a ventral suckermouth . the feature most commonly associated with the genus are the fleshy tentacles found on the head in adult males ; females may possess tentacles along the snout margin but they are smaller and they lack tentacles on the head . tentacules , tentacles directly associated with odontodes , develop on the pectoral fin spine of the males of some species . males also have evertible cheek odontodes which are less developed or absent in females . they also lack odontodes along the snout . in comparison with a typical loricariid ( pleco ) , a bristlenose is typically shorter ( 4–6 inches or 15 & nbsp ; cm or less ) , more flattened and fatter with a comparatively wider head . colouration is typically mottled brown , grey or black . small white or yellow spots are common . in contrast to many other loricariid 'plecos ' ( many of which regularly exceed a foot in captivity ) , the bristlenose plecos do not usually exceed six inches in length ; they can thus be kept in relatively small tanks , contributing to their popularity in the aquarium hobby . ancistrus species are unusual among vertebrates in possessing an x0 sex-determination system , which is the prevailing method in many lineages of arthropod but is very rare elsewhere in the animal kingdom . anderson , luís alves ; oliveira , claudio ; nirchio , mauro ; granado , ángel and foresti , fausto ; ‘ karyotypic relationships among the tribes of hypostominae ( siluriformes : loricariidae ) with description of xo sex chromosome system in a neotropical fish species ’ ; genetica , vol . 128 ( 2006 ) ; pp . 1-9 . distribution and habitat . ancistrus is one of the widest ranging loricariid genera , and representatives are found in most areas where the family in general is present . many species are found in the rivers and floodplain areas of the amazon basin , but there are also species elsewhere in tropical south america , as well as two species , a . centrolepis and a . chagresi in panama . three species are true cavefish ( troglobites ) : a . cryptophthalmus , a . galani and a . formoso . romero , a . ( 2001 ) : the biology of hypogean fishes . developments in environmental biology of fishes . these are the only known loricariids that possess adaptions for a subterranean lifestyle , such as reduced pigmentation ( appearing overall whitish ) and eyes . . species . there are currently 76 recognized species in this genus : . ecology . thumb the diet of this genus is typical for a loricariid & nbsp ; – algae and aufwuchs . bristlenoses do not school but hide when not feeding , juveniles however are typically found in brightly lit shallows at the water margin making them susceptible to predation by birds . ancistrus species have the capability of obtaining oxygen through their modified stomach . this allows them to survive in conditions with low oxygen levels . breeding takes place in hollows , caves and mud holes in banks . males may clean the inside of the cavity with their suckermouth before allowing the female to approach and inspect the nest . courtship includes expanding the dorsal and caudal fins and attempts by the male to escort the female to the nest . while the female inspects the nest , the male keeps close contact . the female may lay 20–200 adhesive eggs , usually to the ceiling of the cavity . the female plays no role in parental care ; the male takes care of its young . males will clean the eggs and the cavity with its fins and mouth . males inspect eggs to remove diseased or infertile eggs , and aerates the clutch by fanning them with its pectoral and pelvic fins . during this time , a male usually will not leave the cavity to feed , or will leave only occasionally and quickly return . the eggs hatch in 4–10 days over a period of 2–6 hours ; the male guards the eggs for 7–10 days after hatching . the fry remain in the cave , attaching to the walls and ceiling with their mouths , absorbing their yolk sac in 2–4 days and becoming free swimming . males of these species are competitive and territorial . males display to each other by positioning themselves parallel to each other , head to tail , with dorsal and caudal fins erect and cheek odontode spines everted . if this escalates to combat , the males will circle each other and direct attacks at the head . if an intruding male manages to evict another male from the nest , it may cannibalize the other male 's young . a male bristlenose may guard several clutches of eggs simultaneously . females prefer males that are already protecting eggs and may prefer males that are protecting larvae ; it has been suggested that the tentacles may act as a fry mimic to attract females , which would allow males without eggs in their nest to compete with males guarding eggs . several clutches in various states of development from eggs to free-swimming larvae can be found in one nest . . in the aquarium . 250px these fish are often kept by aquarists , as they are dutiful algae-eaters and smaller in adult size than the common plecos usually seen in pet shops . they reach up to 15 & nbsp ; cm in males , and 12 & nbsp ; cm in females . their recommended temperature 23–27 degrees celsius . their lifespan is up to 12 years . they are hardy animals , tolerant to a wide range of water conditions . they breed easily in captivity , and are compatible with most other freshwater fish . though typically mottled brown or black-and-grey spotted in color , other species are more exotic & nbsp ; – spots of bright yellow on a dark background being a common pattern . albino variants are also common . the albino morph is not caused by exposure to light during development , it is a morph controlled by genetics . historically , commonly available species of ancistrus were ancistrus cirrhosus and ancistrus temminckii ; other species are now available , though exact identification is difficult . feeding is easy , bristlenoses will graze on algae/ algae wafers and other surface growing organisms as well as eating algae wafers or tablets , flake food , squash , spinach , cucumber , zucchini , green beans peas and even sliced carrots . they have also been known to accept frozen bloodworms as part of their diet . aquarium specimens may starve for lack of algae or other plant matter ; algae wafers or other low-protein foods are recommended . keepers should watch for the abdomen to take on a sunken appearance , indicating insufficient nutrition . like other plecos , they benefit from the addition of bogwood , which they will rasp at and use as a hiding place & nbsp ; – in the absence of other plant matter ( sources of fibre ) , wood may be essential to the survival of these fish in the aquarium , as it helps digestion of typically high protein fish food . sexing is very easy as the female will only occasionally have bristles , around the edge of the chin , whereas the male will have them up the center of the head . breeding is also possible . males attract females to a small cave or hollow , then guard eggs after fertilization through hatching ( 4–8 days ) until fry are free swimming ( 4–6 days after hatching ) ; the aquarist need only supply a suitable cave , food , and one of each sex . caution should be taken with the spines ( odontodes ) & nbsp ; ; although the risk of personal injury is small with this genus , the hooked nature of the odontodes means that a bristlenose may become trapped in non-natural material such as sponge filters and netting . see also . list of freshwater aquarium fish species . references .