Theobald of Bec

early life . family and background . theobald 's family was from the area around thierville near le bec-hellouin , in the risle valley . barlow thomas becket p . 11 the modern historian frank barlow speculates that theobald may have been a distant relative of his successor as archbishop , thomas becket , as becket 's family came from the same part of normandy . barlow thomas becket p . 23 the exact date of theobald 's birth is unknown ; the only clue to his age is that when he died in 1161 contemporaries considered him an old man , saltman theobald pp . 3–4 suggesting a birth date of perhaps around 1090 to one modern historian . his father was supposedly a knight , but no contemporary reference gives his name . barlow '' theobald '' oxford dictionary of national biography his brother walter also became a priest , and later a bishop . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 401 theobald entered the abbey of bec in normandy as a benedictine monk in the late 11th or early 12th century , while william was the third abbot . but as william was abbot from 1096 to 1124 , that leaves a wide range of possible entry dates . theobald was the 266th monk admitted under william , out of 346 . the historian avrom saltman suggests that , if admissions were spaced regularly throughout william 's abbacy , theobald would have become a monk in about 1117 , but qualifies his estimate with the statement that 1117 '' seems to be rather late '' . . life at bec . in 1127 theobald was made prior of bec , after boso succeeded william as abbot . theobald became abbot in 1137 , davis king stephen p . 27 following boso 's death in june 1136 . the monks of bec unanimously elected him to be their new abbot without first consulting the archbishop of rouen , hugh de boves , who consequently threatened to void the result . audoen , the bishop of evreux , and brother of thurstan , the archbishop of york , intervened with hugh and persuaded him to ratify the election . another problem then arose when hugh demanded a written profession of obedience from theobald , which theobald refused to provide ; no previous abbot had made such a profession . theobald resisted for 14 months before a compromise was reached through the intercession of peter the venerable , abbot of cluny , allowing theobald to give a verbal profession to hugh . saltman theobald p . 5 no documents survive from theobald 's tenure as abbot , nor is there any information on the administration of the monastery during his period of office , except that 47 monks were admitted to bec while he was abbot . theobald travelled to england on business for his abbey at least once during his abbacy , to supervise the monastery 's lands in england , a trip that took place shortly before his selection as the new archbishop of canterbury in 1138 . saltman theobald p . 6 . appointment to canterbury . in 1138 king stephen chose theobald to fill the vacant archbishopric of canterbury over stephen 's own brother henry , the bishop of winchester , who had helped stephen gain the throne of england . stephen feared that henry would be too powerful as archbishop , and would attempt to control the king . barlow english church pp . 94–97 the election took place on 24 & nbsp ; december ; stephen was present with the papal legate , alberic of ostia , and a small group of barons and bishops , but henry was absent overseeing the ordination of deacons . most historians consider that stephen arranged the election 's timing to ensure henry 's absence . henry believed that theobald had been elected not only because of stephen 's concerns but also because waleran of meulan , the patronage of bec , was attempting to put his own man in one of the most powerful positions in england . waleran and his twin brother robert , earl of leicester , were henry 's chief rivals for stephen 's favour , and henry disliked both of them intensely . crouch reign of king stephen pp . 91–92 although theobald was pious and well-educated , he had only become abbot the year before , and his election was probably influenced by the reputation of his monastery , which had already produced two archbishops of canterbury , lanfranc and anselm . appleby troubled reign of king stephen pp . 60–61 theobald had no important family connections to advance his career , and few clerical allies . matthew king stephen p . 87 . archbishop . early years . theobald was consecrated on 8 january 1139 by the legate , alberic of ostia . he went to rome for his pallium and took part in the second lateran council . barlow english church pp . 110–112 as archbishop his behaviour was less political in comparison to that of his main rival , henry of blois . henry was appointed a papal legate on 1 march 1139 , greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : winchester : bishops which meant that henry could now call church councils in england and had power equal to or exceeding that of theobald . saltman theobald pp . 15–16 theobald swore fealty to stephen upon his election to canterbury , recognising stephen as the king of england . soon after his election theobald selected his brother walter to be archdeacon of canterbury , and in 1148 promoted him to be bishop of rochester . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 411 theobald attended the council held by stephen in june 1139 that deprived roger of salisbury , bishop of salisbury , and his nephews nigel , bishop of ely , and alexander , bishop of lincoln , of their castles . appleby troubled reign of king stephen p . 72 according to most historians , theobald took little part in the controversy that followed the council , which eventually ended with roger 's death in 1139 and nigel and alexander 's restoration to favour . bollerman and nederman '' king stephen '' journal of medieval history pp . 441–442 recently however , that view has been challenged by two historians who argue that theobald took a more active role in the council . they base their view on a vita , or life of the 12th-century mystic christina of markyate , which narrates the events and gives a more central role to theobald , instead of henry of blois , in challenging stephen 's arrest of the three bishops . . civil war . theobald 's actions in the next few years are intertwined with the history of stephen 's ascension to the throne . following king henry i 's death in 1135 the succession was disputed between the king 's nephews—stephen and his elder brother , theobald ii , count of champagne—and henry 's surviving legitimate child matilda , usually known as the empress matilda because of her first marriage to the german emperor , henry v . king henry 's only legitimate son , william , had died in 1120 . after matilda was widowed in 1125 , she returned to her father , who married her to geoffrey , count of anjou . all the magnates of england and normandy were required to declare fealty to matilda as henry 's heir , but when henry i died , stephen rushed to england and had himself crowned before either theobald ii or matilda could react . the norman barons accepted stephen as duke of normandy , and theobald ii contented himself with his possessions in france . but matilda was not resigned to the loss , and secured the support of the scottish king , david , her maternal uncle , and in 1138 the support of her half-brother , robert , earl of gloucester , an illegitimate son of henry i . huscroft ruling england pp . 71–73 after the battle of lincoln in 1141 , with stephen in captivity in bristol , theobald did not immediately join the empress . he claimed that he needed to talk to stephen before switching his oath of fealty . after consulting in person with stephen , he secured permission to accept the current conditions , and then joined henry of blois , who had switched sides , at winchester in april for a synod held to depose stephen and crown matilda as queen . attendance at the council was sparse however , and the empress could not be crowned because she did not hold london . davis king stephen p . 52 after the unsuccessful attempt to crown matilda , those gathered at winchester had to flee before stephen 's forces ; one of matilda 's chief supporters , her half-brother robert of gloucester , was captured . during their flight theobald and his fellow bishops were robbed of their horses and ecclesiastical vestments . theobald then took a leading part in the negotiations that led to the exchange of robert for stephen , which happened in november 1141 . henry of blois , having switched sides again , then held another legatine council in westminster , which reaffirmed stephen as king . theobald ceremonially crowned stephen at canterbury during the christmas court held there . saltman theobald pp . 17–18 matilda remained in england until 1148 . the disorders were at their peak between 1142 and 1148 , but her cause could never secure enough support to enable her to be crowned . nor could stephen decisively defeat matilda 's forces , which meant that england remained divided in allegiance between the two rivals . but while matilda was in england , her husband geoffrey was conquering normandy , which he finally overran in 1144 . huscroft ruling england pp . 74–75 . difficulties with henry of blois . theobald 's dealings with henry of blois , the bishop of winchester , his suffragan bishop , were strained because of henry 's position as papal legate . henry supported the appointment of william of york as archbishop of york in 1141 , which theobald opposed . davis king stephen pp . 101–103 although theobald spoke out against the manner of election , he took little active part in the subsequent electoral disputes , which resulted eventually in the deposition of fitzherbert and his replacement at york by henry murdac . saltman theobald pp . 90–91 greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 6 : york : archbishops but in september 1143 , henry 's legatine powers lapsed when pope innocent ii , who had made the legatine appointment , died . celestine ii was elected on 26 & nbsp ; september 1143 , but he was an opponent of stephen , and thus was not favourably inclined towards stephen 's brother henry either . to secure appointment as legate , theobald travelled to rome in december 1143 , arriving shortly before celestine 's death on 8 march 1144 . theobald was probably accompanied by nigel , bishop of ely , and roger de clinton , bishop of coventry . saltman theobald pp . 19–22 before his death , celestine forbade theobald '' to allow any change to be made in the position of the english crown , since the transfer of it had been justly denounced , and the matter was still under dispute '' . quoted in davis king stephen p . 62 this became the papal policy , and was a significant change from the recognition of stephen as king by pope innocent ii soon after stephen 's coronation in 1135 . davis king stephen p . 62 it essentially forbade theobald from crowning any successor to stephen , especially while stephen was still alive . saltman theobald p . 37 after celestine 's death theobald returned to england , stopping at st denis abbey in paris to help suger , the abbot , consecrate the newly rebuilt abbey church and its altars . theobald was the only bishop present at the ceremony whose diocese was not in france . meanwhile , henry of blois had arrived in rome and begun negotiations with the new pope , lucius ii , over the elevation of the bishopric of winchester to an archbishopric . it appears that lucius appointed a legate , cardinal icmar , the bishop of tusculum , to travel to england and oversee the project , but lucius died before anything was accomplished . . disputes with stephen . theobald was back in paris in may 1147 to meet with the new pope , eugene iii ; among the issues probably discussed was theobald 's dispute with bernard of st david 's . relations at this time between theobald and stephen seem to have been good , saltman theobald p . 24 but when eugene summoned the english bishops to the council of rheims in april 1148 the king forbade all of them from attending except for three he nominated : chichester , hereford and norwich . despite having been specifically refused permission theobald sneaked away in a fishing boat , presumably accompanied by gilbert foliot , who attended the council with him . barlow english church p . 99 theobald had a number of reasons for defying the king : chiefly his obedience to the pope 's order commanding his attendance , but also to keep the papacy from favouring the newly elected archbishop of york , henry murdac , in the disputes between york and canterbury . murdac was known to be close to his fellow cistercian eugene . matthew king stephen pp . 197–201 bethune , the bishop of hereford , died during the council , and eugene nominated foliot as his successor at theobald 's urging . crouch reign of king stephen p . 305 one of the council 's last acts was to suspend the non-attending bishops from their offices . the only english bishop specifically named was henry of blois , but the others who did not attend were presumably also suspended although not named . henry of blois was singled out for special handling , as the papacy ordered that he could not be reinstated by theobald ; eugene reserved to himself the power to restore henry . theobald appears to have reinstated most of the bishops quickly , as foliot wrote later in 1148 that only the bishops of winchester , durham , worcester , bath and exeter were still suspended . theobald forgave the bishops of exeter , worcester and bath on 11 & nbsp ; november 1148 , according to the later chronicler gervase of canterbury . gervase also lists hilary of chichester as one of those forgiven by theobald on that date , but as hilary attended the council it is likely that this is an error . durham may have been omitted because he was a suffragan bishop of the archbishop of york , and his reinstatement was in his archbishop 's hands . saltman theobald pp . 26–27 the king was angry with theobald for attending the council , even though the archbishop intervened with eugene , who was displeased with the king for forbidding the bishops ' attendance . theobald persuaded eugene against excommunicating stephen , asking the pope to allow the king to make amends for his behaviour . but stephen was unimpressed with theobald 's intercession ; he confiscated theobald 's property and banished the archbishop . in september 1148 , the pope put england under interdict , which was ignored except in canterbury . at first theobald was in exile at st omer , where he consecrated gilbert foliot as bishop of hereford . saltman theobald p . 28 he then returned to england and set himself up in framlingham , which was held by hugh bigod , an adherent of the empress . from there he conducted the ecclesiastical business of england , but theobald 's presence in the country posed a threat to stephen 's authority , and stephen quickly settled the differences between the two . henry of blois had lost his legateship before celestine became pope , but it was not until about 1150 that theobald was appointed legate by eugene iii , perhaps owing to the exhortations of bernard of clairvaux . theobald held the legatine powers in england until his death in 1161 . in 1151 theobald held a synod in london . barlow english church p . 131 the council was attended by the king and eustace , the king 's eldest son , as well as other members of the nobility . the council decreed eight canons , or ecclesiastical statutes , including ones condemning the pillaging of church properties and the imposition of financial levies on the clergy . another canon of the council stated that bishops should no longer pursue violators of church property in the royal courts , but should use ecclesiastical courts instead . the other canons dealt with procedural matters arising from excommunications for abusing church property . the next year , the archbishop refused to crown eustace and was again exiled by stephen , crouch normans p . 273 who was attempting to secure the succession for his son by imitating the capetian dynasty of france , which usually saw the king 's heir crowned during his father 's lifetime . although theobald claimed papal authority for refusal , based on the prohibition by celestine , it was more probable that he and the bishops had no desire to prolong the civil war . huscroft ruling england p . 135 stephen demanded in april 1152 that theobald crown eustace , but the archbishop once again refused , and went into exile in flanders . theobald claimed that stephen had gained the throne through perjury , implying that if the archbishop crowned eustace , theobald would be perpetuating this crime . leedom '' english settlement '' history p . 354 the king and the archbishop reached a truce in august . in january 1153 henry of anjou , matilda 's son , invaded england in pursuit of his claim to the throne , and with the death of eustace in august 1153 , stephen gave up . theobald was instrumental in the negotiations between henry and stephen that resulted in the treaty of wallingford , securing henry 's succession to the throne . theobald was also present when henry of anjou met with stephen 's second son william , probably after eustace 's death , to settle william 's lands and status after henry succeeded stephen . amt accession of henry ii p . 16 pope eugene iii forced stephen to reverse the sentence of banishment , and theobald returned to his see . barlow english church pp . 100–102 later it was mainly theobald and henry of blois who negotiated the treaty ending the civil war , as neither stephen nor henry of anjou was interested in a compromise . davis king stephen p . 118 henry of blois and theobald , who had previously found working together difficult , managed to secure an end to the disorders in england . amt accession of henry ii p . 13 . under henry ii . theobald was present at stephen 's deathbed in october 1154 , and stephen named him as regent until henry could take up the crown . crouch normans p . 278 during the six weeks before henry arrived , the archbishop had little difficulty in keeping the peace . amt accession of henry ii p . 21 after henry 's arrival , theobald crowned henry and his wife eleanor of aquitaine on 19 december 1154 warren henry ii p . 53 powell and wallis house of lords p . 73 at westminster abbey . for most of the remainder of theobald 's life he was occupied with ecclesiastical affairs in his diocese , as well as attending the royal court when henry was in england . in january 1155 theobald helped to secure the chancellorship for his protégé , thomas becket , an action that barlow speculates happened because theobald hoped to secure more influence with the king through becket . if this was his hope , barlow notes that it did not materialise . although the king and the archbishop occasionally clashed when their interests conflicted , both appear to have wished to minimise the disputes and were willing to compromise to secure good relations . as an example , when pope adrian iv died in september 1159 , two rival claimants for the papal throne emerged . king henry , following the custom of his grandfather henry i , forbade the bishops from recognising either claimant . saltman theobald pp . 41–45 eventually , after henry weighed the political factors , he recognised pope alexander iii , and it was only then that theobald also recognised alexander as pope . saltman theobald pp . 51–52 however , not everything was always harmonious between the king and the archbishop . in 1156 , theobald supported the efforts of osbert de bayeux , who was accused of poisoning william the archbishop of york , to secure a trial for his alleged crimes in an ecclesiastical court rather than in the royal court . the crime had taken place during stephen 's reign , but stephen 's death had prevented osbert from being tried in 1154 . the delay allowed the benefit of clergy to the church courts , which henry opposed . although theobald 's position displeased the king no open rupture ensued . alexander '' becket controversy '' journal of british studies pp . 2–4 theobald himself admitted to the papacy in 1154 that english custom was to try clergy for crimes in the secular courts . alexander '' becket controversy '' journal of british studies p . 12 theobald called a church council at london in june 1160 , which dealt partly with the issues of the papal schism ; his health was poor and he had to be taken to the council in a litter . a further cause of distress to theobald was what he saw as the ingratitude of becket , who did not visit the ailing archbishop . . relations with his cathedral clergy . theobald 's cathedral chapter was composed of monks , and he was considered the abbot of the monastery of christ church cathedral . because of his episcopal duties , the regular running of the cathedral was the responsibility of the prior . at the time of theobald 's election there were about 140 monks in the chapter , and they seem to have expected that theobald , being a monk himself , would take their side in disputes and continue to support their needs . theobald began well , sending a party of monks from the cathedral to dover priory at dover , which had been settled with canons instead of monks . theobald replaced the canons with the monks . theobald also refounded a collegiate church at south malling near lewes to provide benefices for his cathedral chapter . fonge '' patriarchy and patrimony '' foundations of medieval english ecclessiastical history p . 78 theobald worked with his first prior , jeremiah , to eliminate clerical marriage in the diocese . but jeremiah had been elected during the vacancy before theobald 's election , and the monks had not secured papal permission for the election of a new prior , so eventually theobald decided to remove jeremiah and install his own choice as prior . jeremiah appealed to the papacy , but theobald deposed him while the appeal was ongoing , and appointed walter durdent as prior . innocent ii , however , appointed henry of blois to hear the case , and henry sided with jeremiah and ordered jeremiah 's reinstatement . theobald then refused to perform any services in the cathedral until jeremiah was removed by the chapter . the lack of services would have deprived the monks of income , and theobald 's threat had the desired effect , as jeremiah resigned his office and left christ church for st augustine 's abbey , canterbury . durdent was reinstalled as prior and remained in that position until he became bishop of coventry in october 1149 . saltman theobald pp . 56–59 at easter , 1151 , theobald took over the management of the chapter 's estates , as the new prior , walter parvus , was not up to the task . at first , there were no disputes , but soon the monks felt that theobald was cheating them and imposing too rigorous a definition of poverty , and asked that the stewardship of the estates be restored to parvus . theobald refused and the monks attempted to appeal to the papacy . their envoys , however , were caught by agents of the archbishop and the appeal went nowhere . theobald then deposed parvus and appointed a new prior . theobald 's relations with the monks after this point seem to have been without incident . saltman theobald pp . 59–62 . relations with other monastic houses . theobald also had a dispute with st augustine 's abbey over the right of the archbishop to receive annual payments , and whether those payments were for sacraments performed by the archbishop , which would have been uncanonical , or were for other reasons . the dispute was eventually settled by a compromise in which st augustine 's continued to make the payments but they were specifically stated not to be for sacraments . saltman theobald pp . 66–69 another dispute with st augustine 's concerned the right of the archbishops to have a say in the election of new abbots and whether or not the abbots would make a profession of obedience to the archbishops . this was eventually settled by a papal mandate of 1144 instructing the abbots to profess obedience . saltman theobald pp . 73–75 the conflict re-surfaced in 1149 , when some of the monks of st augustine 's , led by their prior and sacrist , refused to obey the interdict placed on england by theobald and pope eugene iii . theobald had the two officials excommunicated and publicly flogged . when the previous abbot of st augustine 's died in 1151 , the prior , silvester , paid the king for the right to administer the abbey and to hold a free election for a new abbot . the monks then proceeded to elect silvester as the new abbot , but theobald refused to confirm the election , accusing silvester of buying the office . eventually , however , pope eugene iii ordered theobald to allow silvester to take up the office , which theobald did in august 1152 . theobald and st augustine 's also came into conflict over the abbey 's claims of exemption from the archbishops ' oversight , because it owed obedience directly to the pope . papal documents held at rome backed the abbey , but there were no english royal charters that gave the abbey its liberty from the archbishops . theobald attempted to end the confusion by legal actions both at rome and in england , but the record was mixed . the documents at rome clearly favoured the abbey , but at a royal council held at northampton in 1157 , henry ii ruled in favour of theobald . as part of the settlement silvester , as abbot , was required to make a formal profession of obedience to theobald , something he had been attempting to avoid since his election . hayward '' some reflections '' historical research p . 157 the struggle with silvester was just one event in the long history of the dispute between canterbury and st augustine's . knowles monastic order p . 588 as well as st augustine 's , the abbots of a number of other monasteries in the diocese of canterbury are known to have professed obedience to theobald , as the documents recording the events survive . not only abbots and priors from within canterbury , but some from other dioceses swore to obey theobald , although normally such oaths would have gone to their diocesan bishop instead . most of these exceptions occurred because the monastic house claimed exemption from the oversight of their diocesan bishop , and had a tradition of making those oaths to canterbury instead . besides these events , theobald also intervened in the elections of some abbots , although not always successfully . he attempted to secure the right of gilbert foliot to remain abbot of gloucester after foliot 's election as bishop of hereford , but a new abbot was elected by the monks of gloucester . theobald was more successful in securing the election of william , who had previously been a monk at christ church , to be abbot of evesham over the objections of some of the monks of evesham . saltman theobald pp . 81–85 theobald also became embroiled in the dispute between hilary , the bishop of chichester , and walter de lucy , the abbot of battle abbey , over hilary 's claims to jurisdiction over the abbey and the abbey 's counter-claims that it was exempt from episcopal supervision . the abbey had never received a papal exemption , but relied instead on its royal foundation by king william i of england and its status as an eigenkirche , or proprietary church of the king . warren henry ii pp . 429–432 under king stephen , the abbey 's claims prevailed , but after stephen 's death hilary excommunicated the abbot , who appealed to the papacy . theobald supported the bishop , who eventually secured a trial before king henry ii . it was a minor setback for theobald when the case was eventually decided in battle 's favour , mainly on the basis of charters that were thought at the time to be genuine , but modern historians have come to believe were forged . searle '' battle abbey '' english historical review pp . 449–480 . relations with other bishops . theobald was instrumental in securing the subordination of the welsh bishoprics to canterbury . his first act in this area was the consecration of meurig as bishop of bangor in 1140 , during which meurig made a profession of obedience like those made by other bishops subject to canterbury . bernard , bishop of st david 's , contested theobald 's right to consecrate meurig and instead asserted that st david 's should be considered an archbishopric , and that bernard should receive a pallium . this went against the last half-century of precedent that canterbury had jurisdiction over the four welsh sees , a precedent that dated back to anselm 's days when anselm had consecrated urban as bishop of llandaff in 1107 . also in 1140 , theobald consecrated uhtred as bishop of llandaff , with uhtred also swearing to obey theobald . likewise , when theobald consecrated gilbert as bishop of st asaph in 1142 , a similar profession of obedience was made . saltman theobald pp . 92–94 along with these consecrations , theobald 's legal efforts enabled him to withstand the attempts of bernard to turn st david 's into an archbishopric , and when bernard was succeeded by david fitzgerald in 1148 , theobald secured the new bishop 's profession of obedience to canterbury , thus ending the efforts to remove wales from canterbury 's jurisdiction . also in 1148 , pope eugene decided in favour of canterbury and against the claims of st david 's , securing canterbury 's jurisdiction over wales . duggan '' from the conquest to the death of john '' english church and the papacy pp . 101–102 theobald even maintained the theoretical claim of canterbury to jurisdiction over irish sees by consecrating patrick as bishop of limerick in 1140 . saltman theobald p . 95 that , however , was the last assertion of the claim , as in 1152 the papal legate giovanni paparo reorganised the irish dioceses and settled the issue by appointing the archbishop of armagh the primate of ireland . relations with bishops in england remained good , with little activity in the long-running canterbury–york dispute over the primacy of britain . theobald obtained a vague confirmation of his see 's primacy from celestine ii in 1143–1144 , but at the council of reims in 1148 eugene clarified that this primacy did not affect the claims of york to be independent of canterbury . because of the unsettled election disputes during the 1140s over the see of york , when it was contested between william of york and henry murdac , theobald faced little challenge from either william or murdac as to the traditional dispute between canterbury and york . when william of york died in 1154 , theobald secured york for his protégé , roger de pont l'evêque . further peace between the two sees was ensured when theobald consecrated roger without requiring a profession of obedience , which had previously been a major bone of contention between the two . . patronage and household . theobald 's household included many young men of ability , including his successor thomas becket . theobald was instrumental in the early spread of roman law to england , inviting the bologna-schooled jurist vacarius to join his administration and advise on legal matters . helmholz oxford history of the laws of england 1 p . 121 lyon constitutional and legal history of medieval england p . 186 whether vacarius actually started a school in theobald 's household is unclear , but in the 1140s he taught briefly at oxford . turner '' roman law '' journal of british studies p . 6 theobald was instrumental in fostering the teaching of canon law in england ; the conflict that later arose between henry ii and thomas becket had its roots in disputes that were exposed during theobald 's time in office . duggan '' from the conquest to the death of john '' english church and the papacy pp . 85–88 while still in normandy , theobald had made an intense study of ecclesiastical or canon law , which he continued after being elected archbishop . knowles monastic order p . 516 although theobald was a monk , his episcopal household was not monastic in character . as he settled into the role of archbishop , he seems to have left most of his monastic habits behind , although he continued to have a monk as a companion . his nephews and brother benefited from his nepotism , barlow thomas becket p . 32 with his nephews becoming part of his household early in his archepiscopate . the four nephews—guillaume , gilbert , roger and lechard—were witnesses to a charter of theobald 's dated to about 1150 or 1153 . after theobald 's death , guillaume was a clerk in bartholomew , the bishop of exeter 's household in around 1172 . another charter of theobald 's from about 1152 shows the usual household staff that surrounded him . it was witnessed by the archbishop 's crossbearer , three of theobald 's nephews and the clerk who presumably was in charge of them , a chancellor , two chaplains who were monks , a butler , dispenser , chamberlain , steward , cook , usher , porter and marshal . duboulay lordship of canterbury p . 252 theobald also at about the same time granted a mill to his baker named william and some lands to his cook william and the cook 's heirs . duboulay lordship of canterbury p . 258 theobald was the patron of three eminent men : becket , vacarius , and john of salisbury . barlow english church p . 38 john of salisbury was secretary to theobald for many years , and after theobald 's death became bishop of chartres . it was during john 's time as secretary that he wrote his two most famous works , the policraticus and the metalogicon . saul '' john of salisbury '' companion to medieval england pp . 150–151 others who studied for a time in theobald 's household were roger de pont l'evêque , later archbishop of york , john belemis , later archbishop of lyons , poole domesday book to magna carta p . 196 john de pageham , later bishop of worcester , bartholomew iscanus , later bishop of exeter , william of northall , later bishop of worcester , and william de vere , later bishop of hereford . barlow thomas becket pp . 30–31 in all , his household produced three archbishops and six bishops . the household itself , although not formally a school , acted as one , with many going on to careers in the church . . death and legacy . theobald died on 18 april 1161 , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 232 after a long illness , at his palace in canterbury . he was buried in canterbury cathedral , in the holy trinity chapel , near the tomb of archbishop lanfranc . his coffin was opened in 1190 during repairs to the cathedral and his body was found to be uncorrupted , but efforts to secure his canonisation as a saint on the basis of that evidence were unsuccessful . saltman theobald pp . 54–55 he was reburied in the nave near the altar to st mary , with his old marble tomb replaced above his new resting place . in 1787 his lead coffin was found in canterbury . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 595 although theobald was troubled by the opposition of his suffragan henry of blois , he regained control of the english church , secured the rights of his see , and helped maintain the unity of the realm . contemporaries were somewhat divided on his effectiveness and personality . gervase of canterbury felt that he was too impetuous , probably because of theobald 's treatment of his priors at christ church . henry of huntingdon , who knew him , felt that he was a worthy archbishop . theobald 's legacy perhaps suffered because he was overshadowed by his successor , becket . modern historians have been kinder than his contemporaries ; frank barlow says of theobald that he was '' an upright man , but quick tempered , and sometimes spoke far too rashly '' . barlow thomas becket p . 36 . notes . citations . references .