XMPP

protocol characteristics . decentralization . the xmpp network architecture is reminiscent of the simple mail transfer protocol ( smtp ) , a client–server model ; clients do not talk directly to one another as it is decentralized - anyone can run a server . by design , there is no central authoritative server as there is with messaging services such as aim , wlm , whatsapp or telegram . some confusion often arises on this point as there is a public xmpp server being run at jabber.org , to which many users subscribe . however , anyone may run their own xmpp server on their own domain . addressing . every user on the network has a unique xmpp address , called jid ( for historical reasons , xmpp addresses are often called jabber ids ) . the jid is structured like an email address with a username and a domain name ( or ip address rfc 6122 ) for the server where that user resides , separated by an at sign ( ) - for example , “ alice example.com “ : here alice is the username and example.com the server with which the user is registered . since a user may wish to log in from multiple locations , they may specify a resource . a resource identifies a particular client belonging to the user ( for example home , work , or mobile ) . this may be included in the jid by appending a slash followed by the name of the resource . for example , the full jid of a user 's mobile account could be username example.com/mobile . each resource may have specified a numerical value called priority . messages simply sent to username example.com will go to the client with highest priority , but those sent to username example.com/mobile will go only to the mobile client . the highest priority is the one with largest numerical value . jids without a username part are also valid , and may be used for system messages and control of special features on the server . a resource remains optional for these jids as well . the means to route messages based on a logical endpoint identifier - the jid , instead of by an explicit ip address present opportunities to use xmpp as an overlay network implementation on top of different underlay networks . xmpp via http . the original and '' native '' transport protocol for xmpp is transmission control protocol ( tcp ) , using open-ended xml streams over long-lived tcp connections . as an alternative to the tcp transport , the xmpp community has also developed an http transport for web clients as well as users behind restricted firewalls . in the original specification , xmpp could use http in two ways : polling and binding . the polling method , now deprecated , essentially implies messages stored on a server-side database are being fetched ( and posted ) regularly by an xmpp client by way of http 'get ' and 'post ' requests . the binding method , implemented using bidirectional-streams over synchronous http ( bosh ) , allows servers to push messages to clients as soon as they are sent . this push model of notification is more efficient than polling , where many of the polls return no new data . because the client uses http , most firewalls allow clients to fetch and post messages without any hindrances . thus , in scenarios where the tcp port used by xmpp is blocked , a server can listen on the normal http port and the traffic should pass without problems . various websites let people sign into xmpp via a browser . furthermore , there are open public servers that listen on standard http ( port 80 ) and https ( port 443 ) ports , and hence allow connections from behind most firewalls . however , the iana-registered port for bosh is actually 5280 , not 80 . extensibility . the xmpp standards foundation or xsf ( formerly the jabber software foundation ) is active in developing open xmpp extensions , so called xep . however , extensions can also be defined by any individual , software project , or organization . to maintain interoperability , common extensions are managed by the xsf . xmpp applications beyond im include : chat rooms , network management , content syndication , collaboration tools , file sharing , gaming , remote systems control and monitoring , geolocation , middleware and cloud computing , voip , and identity services . building on its capability to support discovery across local network domains , xmpp is well-suited for cloud computing where virtual machines , networks , and firewalls would otherwise present obstacles to alternative service discovery and presence-based solutions . cloud computing and storage systems rely on various forms of communication over multiple levels , including not only messaging between systems to relay state but also the migration or distribution of larger objects , such as storage or virtual machines . along with authentication and in-transit data protection , xmpp can be applied at a variety of levels and may prove ideal as an extensible middleware or message-oriented middleware ( mom ) protocol . current limitations . at the moment , xmpp does not support quality of service ( qos ) ; assured delivery of messages has to be built on-top of the xmpp layer . there are two xeps proposed to deal with this issue , xep-0184 message delivery receipts which is currently a draft standard , and xep-0333 chat markers which is considered experimental . since xml is text based , normal xmpp has a higher network overhead compared to purely binary solutions . this issue was being addressed by the experimental xep-0322 : efficient xml interchange ( exi ) format , where xml is serialized in a very efficient binary manner , especially in schema-informed mode . this xep is currently deferred . in-band binary data transfer is limited . binary data must be first base64 encoded before it can be transmitted in-band . therefore , any significant amount of binary data ( e.g . , file transfers ) is best transmitted out-of-band , using in-band messages to coordinate . the best example of this is the jingle xmpp extension protocol , xep-0166 . features . peer-to-peer sessions . using the extension called jingle , xmpp can provide an open means to support machine to machine or peer-to-peer communications across a diverse set of networks . this feature is mainly used for ip telephony ( voip ) . multi-user chat . xmpp supports conferences with multiple users , using the specification multi-user chat ( muc ) ( xep-0045 ) . from the point of view of a normal user , it is comparable to internet relay chat ( irc ) . security and encryption . xmpp servers can be isolated ( e.g . , on a company intranet ) , and secure authentication ( sasl ) and point-to-point encryption ( tls ) have been built into the core xmpp specifications , as well as off-the-record messaging ( otr ) is an extension of xmpp enabling encryption of messages and data . it has since been replaced by a better extension , multi-end-to-multi-end encryption ( omemo , xep-0384 ) end-to-end encryption between users . this gives a higher level of security , by encrypting all data from the source client and decrypting again at the target client ; the server operator can not decrypt the data they are forwarding . service discovery . while several service discovery protocols exist today ( such as zeroconf or the service location protocol ) , xmpp provides a solid base for the discovery of services residing locally or across a network , and the availability of these services ( via presence information ) , as specified by xep-0030 disco . . connecting to other protocols . one of the original design goals of the early jabber open-source community was enabling users to connect to multiple instant messaging systems ( especially non-xmpp systems ) through a single client application . this was done through entities called transports or gateways to other instant messaging protocols like icq , aim or yahoo messenger , but also to protocols such as sms , irc or email . unlike instant messaging , xmpp provides this access at the server level by communicating via special gateway services running alongside an xmpp server . any user can '' register '' with one of these gateways by providing the information needed to log on to that network , and can then communicate with users of that network as though they were xmpp users . thus , such gateways function as client proxies ( the gateway authenticates on the user 's behalf on the non-xmpp service ) . as a result , any client that fully supports xmpp can access any network with a gateway without extra code in the client , and without the need for the client to have direct access to the internet . however , the client proxy model may violate terms of service on the protocol used ( although such terms of service are not legally enforceable in several countries ) and also requires the user to send their im username and password to the third-party site that operates the transport ( which may raise privacy and security concerns ) . another type of gateway is a server-to-server gateway , which enables a non-xmpp server deployment to connect to native xmpp servers using the built in interdomain federation features of xmpp . such server-to-server gateways are offered by several enterprise im software products , including : ibm sametime '' lotus sametime 7.5 interoperates with aim , google talk '' , eweek , december 6 , 2006 eweek.com '' lotus ships gateway to integrate im with aol , yahoo , google '' , network world , december 6 , 2006 networkworld.com skype for business server ( formerly named microsoft lync server and microsoft office communications server – ocs ) '' unified communications : uniting communication across different networks '' , microsoft press release , october 1 , 2009 microsoft.com . software . xmpp is implemented by many clients , servers , and code libraries . these implementations are provided under a variety of software licenses . servers . numerous xmpp server software exist , some well known ones include ejabberd and prosody . clients . a large number of xmpp client software exist on various modern and legacy platforms , including both graphical and command line based clients . according to the xmpp website , some of the most popular software include gajim ( windows , linux ) , swift.im ( macos , windows , linux ) , conversations ( android ) , monal ( macos , ios ) and converse.js ( web browser ) . other clients include : bombus , chatsecure , coccinella , jwchat.org , mcabber , miranda , pidgin , psi , tkabber , trillian , and xabber . deployment and distribution . there are thousands of xmpp servers worldwide , many public ones as well as private individuals or organizations running their own servers without commercial intent . numerous websites show a list of public xmpp servers where users may register at ( for example on the xmpp.net website ) . several large public im services natively use or used xmpp , including livejournal 's '' lj talk '' , nimbuzz , and hipchat . various hosting services , such as dreamhost , enable hosting customers to choose xmpp services alongside more traditional web and email services . specialized xmpp hosting services also exist in form of cloud so that domain owners need not directly run their own xmpp servers , including cisco webex connect , chrome.pl , flosoft.biz , i-pobox.net , and hosted.im . xmpp is also used in deployments of non-im services , including smart grid systems such as demand response applications , message-oriented middleware , and as a replacement for sms to provide text messaging on many smartphone clients . non-native deployments . some of the largest messaging providers use , or have been using , various forms of xmpp based protocols in their backend systems without necessarily exposing this fact to their end users . one example is google , which in august 2005 introduced google talk , a combination voip and im system that uses xmpp for instant messaging and as a base for a voice and file transfer signaling protocol called jingle . the initial launch did not include inter-server communications ; google enabled that feature on january 17 , 2006 . google has since added video functionality to google talk , also using the jingle protocol for signaling . in may 2013 , google announced xmpp compatibility would be dropped from google talk for server-to-server federation , although it would retain client-to-server support . in january 2008 , aol introduced experimental xmpp support for its aim ( software ) ( aim ) service , allowing aim users to communicate using xmpp . however , in march 2008 , this service was discontinued . as of may 2011 , aol offers limited xmpp support . in february 2010 , the social-networking site facebook opened up its chat feature to third-party applications via xmpp . some functionality was unavailable through xmpp , and support was dropped in april 2014 . similarly , in december 2011 , microsoft released an xmpp interface to its microsoft messenger service . skype , its de facto successor , also provided limited xmpp support . apache wave is another example . xmpp is the de facto standard for private chat in gaming related platforms such as origin , and playstation , as well as the now discontinued xfire and raptr . two notable exceptions are steam and xbox live ; both use their own proprietary messaging protocols . history and development . jeremie miller began working on the jabber technology in 1998 and released the first version of the jabberd server on january 4 , 1999 . the early jabber community focused on open-source software , mainly the jabberd server , but its major outcome proved to be the development of the xmpp protocol . the internet engineering task force ( ietf ) formed an xmpp working group in 2002 to formalize the core protocols as an ietf instant messaging and presence technology . the early jabber protocol , as developed in 1999 and 2000 , formed the basis for xmpp as published in rfc 3920 and rfc 3921 in october 2004 ( the primary changes during formalization by the ietf 's xmpp working group were the addition of tls for channel encryption and sasl for authentication ) . the xmpp working group also produced specifications rfc 3922 and rfc 3923 . in 2011 , rfc 3920 and rfc 3921 were superseded by rfc 6120 and rfc 6121 respectively , with rfc 6122 specifying the xmpp address format . in 2015 , rfc 6122 was superseded by rfc 7622 . in addition to these core protocols standardized at the ietf , the xmpp standards foundation ( formerly the jabber software foundation ) is active in developing open xmpp extensions . the first im service based on xmpp was jabber.org , which has operated continuously and offered free accounts since 1999 . from 1999 until february 2006 , the service used jabberd as its server software , at which time it migrated to ejabberd ( both of which are free software application servers ) . in january 2010 , the service migrated to the proprietary m-link server software produced by isode ltd . in september 2008 , cisco systems acquired jabber , inc . , the creators of the commercial product jabber xcp . the xmpp standards foundation ( xsf ) develops and publishes extensions to xmpp through a standards process centered on xmpp extension protocols ( xeps , previously known as jabber enhancement proposals - jeps ) . the following extensions are in especially wide use : data forms service discovery multi-user chat publish-subscribe and personal eventing protocol xhtml-im file transfer entity capabilities http binding jingle for voice and video . internet of things . xmpp features such as federation across domains , publish/subscribe , authentication and its security even for mobile endpoints are being used to implement the internet of things . several xmpp extensions are part of the experimental implementation : efficient xml interchange ( exi ) format ; sensor data ; provisioning ; control ; concentrators ; discovery . these efforts are documented on a page in the xmpp wiki dedicated to internet of things and the xmpp iot mailing list . . specifications and standards . the ietf xmpp working group has produced a series of request for comments ( rfc ) documents : rfc 3920 ( superseded by rfc 6120 ) rfc 3921 ( superseded by rfc 6121 ) rfc 3922 rfc 3923 rfc 4622 ( superseded by rfc 5122 ) rfc 4854 rfc 4979 rfc 6122 ( superseded by rfc 7622 ) the most important and most widely implemented of these specifications are : rfc 6120 , extensible messaging and presence protocol ( xmpp ) : core , which describes client–server messaging using two open-ended xml streams . xml streams consist of , and ( info/query ) . a connection is authenticated with simple authentication and security layer ( sasl ) and encrypted with transport layer security ( tls ) . rfc 6121 , extensible messaging and presence protocol ( xmpp ) : instant messaging and presence describes instant messaging ( im ) , the most common application of xmpp . rfc 7622 , extensible messaging and presence protocol ( xmpp ) : address format describes the rules for xmpp addresses , also called jabberids or jids . currently jids use precis ( as defined in rfc 7564 ) for handling of unicode characters outside the ascii range . competing standards . xmpp has often been regarded as a competitor to simple , based on session initiation protocol ( sip ) , as the standard protocol for instant messaging and presence notification . '' xmpp rises to face simple standard '' , infoworld magazine , april 17 , 2003 xmpp rises to face simple standard '' xmpp vs simple : the race for messaging standards '' , infoworld magazine , may 23 , 2003 infoworld.com the xmpp extension for multi-user chat can be seen as a competitor to internet relay chat ( irc ) , although irc is far simpler , has far fewer features , and is far more widely used . the xmpp extensions for publish-subscribe provide many of the same features as the advanced message queuing protocol ( amqp ) .