George Lansbury

party leader . although defeated in the election , henderson remained the party leader while lansbury headed the labour group in parliament—the parliamentary labour party ( plp ) . in october 1932 henderson resigned and lansbury succeeded him . shepherd 2002 , p . 282 in most historians ' reckonings , lansbury led his small parliamentary force with skill and flair . he was also , says shepherd , an inspiration to the dispirited labour rank and file . shepherd 2002 , p . 286 as leader he began the process of reforming the party 's organisation and machinery , efforts which resulted in considerable by-election and municipal election successes—including control of the lcc under herbert morrison in 1934 . shepherd 2002 , pp . 295–96 according to blythe , lansbury '' represented political hope and decency to the three million unemployed . '' blythe , p . 283 during this period lansbury published his political credo , my england ( 1934 ) , which envisioned a future socialist state achieved by a mixture of revolutionary and evolutionary methods . postgate , pp . 294–95 the small labour group in parliament had little influence over economic policy ; lansbury 's term as leader was dominated by foreign affairs and disarmament , and by policy disagreements within the labour movement . the official party position was based on collective security through the league of nations and on multilateral disarmament . lansbury , supported by many in the plp , adopted a position of christian pacifism , unilateral disarmament and the dismantling of the british empire . vickers , pp . 107–08 under his influence the party 's 1933 conference passed resolutions calling for the '' total disarmament of all nations '' , and pledged to take no part in war . vickers , pp . 109–10 pacifism became temporarily popular in the country ; on 9 february 1933 the oxford union voted by 275 to 153 that it would '' in no circumstances fight for its king and country '' , and the fulham east by-election in october 1933 was easily won by a labour candidate committed to full disarmament . lansbury sent a message to the constituency in his position as labour leader : '' i would close every recruiting station , disband the army and disarm the air force . i would abolish the whole dreadful equipment of war and say to the world : “ do your worst ” . '' october 1934 saw the emergence of the peace pledge union . in response to the peace pledge union , the league of nations union conducted the 1934–35 peace ballot , an unofficial public referendum , which produced massive majorities in support of the league of nations , multilateral disarmament , and conflict resolution through non-military means - though crucially , a three-fold majority supported military measures as a last resort . meanwhile , adolf hitler had come to power in germany , and had withdrawn from the international conference on disarmament in geneva . blythe observes that britain 's noisy flirtations with pacifism '' drowned out the sounds from german dockyards '' , as german rearmament began . blythe , pp . 285–86 as fascism and militarism advanced in europe , lansbury 's pacifist stance drew criticism from the trades union elements of his party—who controlled the majority of party conference votes . walter citrine , the tuc general secretary , commented that lansbury '' thinks the country should be without defence of any kind & nbsp ; . it certainly is n't our policy . '' vickers , p . 112 the party 's 1935 annual conference took place in brighton during october , under the shadow of italy 's impending invasion of ethiopia . the national executive had tabled a resolution calling for sanctions against italy , which lansbury opposed as a form of economic warfare . his speech—a passionate exposition of the principles of christian pacifism—was well received by the delegates , but immediately afterwards his position was destroyed by ernest bevin , the transport and general workers ' union leader . bevin attacked lansbury for putting his private beliefs before a policy , agreed by all the party 's main institutions , to oppose fascist aggression , schneer 1990 , p . 172 and accused him of '' hawking your conscience round from body to body asking to be told what to do with it '' . shepherd 2002 , pp . 323–28 union support ensured that the sanctions resolution was carried by a huge majority ; lansbury , realising that a christian pacifist could no longer lead the party , resigned a few days later . . final years . lansbury was 76 years old when he resigned the labour leadership ; he did not , however , retire from public life . in the general election of november 1935 he kept his seat at bow and bromley ; labour , now led by attlee , improved its parliamentary representation to 154 . lansbury devoted himself entirely to the cause of world peace , a quest that took him , in 1936 , to the united states . he addressed large crowds in 27 cities before meeting president roosevelt in washington to present his proposals for a world peace conference . schneer 1990 , pp . 180–82 in 1937 he toured europe , visiting leaders in belgium , france and scandinavia , and in april secured a private meeting with hitler . no official report of the discussion was issued , but lansbury 's personal memorandum indicates that hitler expressed willingness to join in a world conference if roosevelt would convene it . shepherd 2002 , pp . 338–39 later that year lansbury met mussolini in rome ; he described the italian leader as '' a mixture of lloyd george , stanley baldwin and winston churchill '' . lansbury wrote several accounts of his peace journeys , notably my quest for peace ( 1938 ) . shepherd , p . 332 his mild and optimistic impressions of the european dictators were widely criticised as naïve and out of touch ; some british pacifists were dismayed at lansbury 's meeting with hitler , prasad , 2005 pp . 177-8 while the daily worker accused him of diverting attention from the aggressive realities of fascist policies . shepherd 2002 , p . 341 lansbury continued to meet european leaders through 1938 and 1939 , and was nominated , unsuccessfully , for the 1940 nobel peace prize . at home , lansbury served a second term as mayor of poplar , in 1936–37 . he argued against direct confrontation with mosley 's blackshirts during the october 1936 demonstrations known as the battle of cable street . shepherd 2002 , p . 342 in october 1937 he became president of the peace pledge union , and a year later he welcomed the munich agreement as a step towards peace . during this period he worked on behalf of refugees from nazi germany , and was chairman of the polish refugee fund which provided relief to displaced jewish children . on 3 september 1939 , after neville chamberlain 's announcement of war with germany , lansbury addressed the house of commons . observing that the cause to which he had dedicated his life was going down in ruins , he added : '' i hope that out of this terrible calamity will arise a spirit that will compel people to give up the reliance on force . '' early in 1940 lansbury 's health began to fail ; although unaware , he was suffering from stomach cancer . shepherd 2002 , pp . 343–45 in an article published in the socialist magazine tribune , published on 25 april 1940 , he made a final statement of his christian pacifism : '' i hold fast to the truth that this world is big enough for all , that we are all brethren , children of one father '' . article in tribune , 25 april 1940 , quoted in postgate , p . 324 lansbury died on 7 may 1940 , at the manor house hospital in golders green . his funeral in st mary 's church , bow , was followed by cremation at ilford crematorium , holman , p . 164 before a memorial service in westminster abbey . his ashes were scattered at sea , in accordance with the wish expressed in his will : '' i desire this because although i love england very dearly & nbsp ; . i am a convinced internationalist '' . . tributes and legacy . most historical assessments of lansbury have tended to stress his character and principles rather than his effectiveness as a party political leader . his biographer jonathan schneer writes : historian a . j . p . taylor labeled lansbury as '' the most lovable figure in modern politics '' and the outstanding figure of the english revolutionary left in the 20th century , taylor , p . 191 and p . 270 while kenneth o . morgan , in his biography of a later labour leader , michael foot , regards lansbury as '' an agitator of protest , not a politician of power '' . morgan , p.154 journalists commonly accused lansbury of sentimentality , and party intellectuals accused him of lacking mental capacity . shepherd 2002 , pp . 360–63 nevertheless , his speeches in the house of commons were often flavoured with historical and literary allusions , and he left behind a considerable body of writing on socialist ideas ; morgan refers to him as a '' prophet '' . morgan , p . 482 foot , who as a young man met and was influenced by lansbury , was particularly impressed by the older man 's achievements in establishing the daily herald , given his complete lack of journalistic training . morgan , p . 132 nevertheless , foot felt that lansbury 's pacifism was unrealistic , and believed that bevin 's demolition at the 1935 conference was justified . morgan , p . 77 there is much agreement among historians and analysts that lansbury was never self-serving and , guided by his christian socialism principles , was consistent in his efforts on behalf of the poorest in society . shepherd believes that '' there could have been no better leader for the labour party at the collapse of its political fortunes in 1931 than lansbury , a universally popular choice and a source of inspiration among labour ranks '' . in the house of commons on 8 may 1940 , the day following lansbury 's death , chamberlain said of him : '' there were not many hon . members who felt convinced of the practicability of the methods which he advocated for the preservation of peace , but there was no one who did not realise his intense conviction , which arose out of his deep humanitarianism '' . attlee also paid tribute to his former leader : '' he hated cruelty , injustice and wrongs , and felt deeply for all who suffered & nbsp ; . he was ever the champion of the weak , and & nbsp ; . to the end of his life he strove for that in which he believed '' . after the second world war , a stained glass window designed by the belgian artist eugeen yoors was placed in the kingsley hall community centre in bow , as a memorial to lansbury . his memory is further sustained by streets and housing developments named after him , most notably the lansbury estate in poplar , completed in 1951 . a further enduring memorial , attlee suggests , is the extent to which the then-revolutionary social policies that lansbury began advocating before the turn of the 20th century had become accepted mainstream doctrine little more than a decade after his death . attlee , p . 3 his name and picture ( and those of 58 other women 's suffrage supporters ) are on the plinth of the statue of millicent fawcett in parliament square , london , unveiled in 2018 . . personal and family life . george married elizabeth jane ( bessie ) brine on 22 may 1880 in whitechapel , london . for most of their married life , george and bessie lansbury lived in bow , originally in st stephen 's road and , from 1916 , at 39 bow road , a house which , shepherd records , became '' a political haven '' for those requiring assistance of any kind . shepherd 2002 , p . 351 bessie died in 1933 , after 53 years of a marriage that had produced 12 children between 1881 and 1905 . shepherd 2002 , pp . 347–49 of the ten who survived to adulthood , edgar followed his father into local political activism as a poplar councillor in 1912 , serving as the borough 's mayor in 1924–25 . he was for a time a member of the communist party of great britain ( cpgb ) . after the death of his first wife minnie in 1922 , edgar married moyna macgill , an actress from belfast ; shepherd 2002 , p . 307 their daughter dame angela lansbury , born in 1925 , became a stage and screen actress . george lansbury 's youngest daughter violet ( 1900–71 ) was an active cpgb member in the 1920s , who lived and worked in moscow for many years . she married clemens palme dutt , the brother of the marxist intellectual rajani palme dutt . shepherd 2002 , p . 212 another daughter , dorothy ( 1890–1973 ) , was a women 's rights activist and later a campaigner for contraceptive and abortion rights . she married ernest thurtle , the labour mp for shoreditch , and was herself a member of shoreditch council , serving as mayor in 1936 . she and her husband founded the workers ' birth control group in 1924 . her younger sister daisy ( 1892–1971 ) served as george lansbury 's secretary for 20 years . in 1913 she helped sylvia pankhurst to evade police capture by disguising herself as pankhurst . shepherd 2002 , p . 121 and p . 354 she was married to raymond postgate , the left-wing writer and historian , who was lansbury 's first biographer and founder of the good food guide . their son , oliver postgate , was a successful writer , animator and producer for children 's television . the lansbury home at 39 bow road was destroyed by bombing during the the blitz of 1940–41 . blythe , p . 293 there is a small memorial stone dedicated to lansbury in front of the current building , appropriately named george lansbury house , which itself carries a memorial plaque . there is also a memorial to lansbury in the nearby bow church , where lansbury was a long-term member of the congregation and churchwarden . books by lansbury . . see also . list of peace activists list of suffragists and suffragettes . notes . citations . sources . . external links . uk : leader of the opposition , george lansbury pleads for peace at league of nations clip from a paramount newsreel , circa 1935 catalogue of the lansbury papers at the archives division of the london school of economics . movietone footage of george lansbury speaking about conditions in slums