Conduct disorder

signs and symptoms . one of the symptoms of conduct disorder is a lower level of fear . research performed on the impact of toddlers exposed to fear and distress shows that negative emotionality ( fear ) predicts toddlers ' empathy-related response to distress . the findings support that if a caregiver is able to respond to infant cues , the toddler has a better ability to respond to fear and distress . if a child does not learn how to handle fear or distress the child will be more likely to lash out at other children . if the caregiver is able to provide therapeutic intervention teaching children at risk better empathy skills , the child will have a lower incident level of conduct disorder . spinrad , tracy , and cynthia stifter . '' toddlers ' empathy-related responding to distress : predictions from negative emotionality and maternal behavior in infancy . '' infancy 10 ( 2 ) , 97-121 , n.d . web increased instances of violent and antisocial behavior are also associated with the condition ; examples may range from pushing , hitting and biting when the child is young , progressing towards beating and inflicted cruelty as the child becomes older . conduct disorder can present with limited prosocial emotions , lack of remorse or guilt , lack of empathy , lack of concern for performance , and shallow or deficient affect . symptoms vary by individual , but the four main groups of symptoms are described below . . aggression to people and animals . often bullies , threatens , or intimidates others often initiates physical fights has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others ( e.g . , a bat , brick , broken bottle , knife , gun ) has been physically cruel to people has been physically cruel to animals has stolen while confronting a victim ( e.g . , mugging , purse snatching , extortion , armed robbery ) has forced someone into sexual activity ( rape or molestation ) . destruction of property . has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage has deliberately destroyed others ' property ( other than by fire setting ) . deceitfulness or theft . has broken into someone else 's house , building , or car often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations ( i.e . , '' cons '' others ) has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim ( e.g . , shoplifting , but without breaking and entering ; forgery ) . serious violations of rules . often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions , beginning before age 13 years has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in parental or parental surrogate home ( or once without returning for a lengthy period ) is often truant from school , beginning before age 13 years . developmental course . currently , two possible developmental courses are thought to lead to conduct disorder . the first is known as the '' childhood-onset type '' and occurs when conduct disorder symptoms are present before the age of 10 years . this course is often linked to a more persistent life course and more pervasive behaviors . specifically , children in this group have greater levels of adhd symptoms , neuropsychological deficits , more academic problems , increased family dysfunction and higher likelihood of aggression and violence . there is debate among professionals regarding the validity and appropriateness of diagnosing young children with conduct disorder . the characteristics of the diagnosis are commonly seen in young children who are referred to mental health professionals . a premature diagnosis made in young children , and thus labeling and stigmatizing an individual , may be inappropriate . it is also argued that some children may not in fact have conduct disorder , but are engaging in developmentally appropriate disruptive behavior . the second developmental course is known as the '' adolescent-onset type '' and occurs when conduct disorder symptoms are present after the age of 10 years . individuals with adolescent-onset conduct disorder exhibit less impairment than those with the childhood-onset type and are not characterized by similar psychopathology . at times , these individuals will remit in their deviant patterns before adulthood . research has shown that there is a greater number of children with adolescent-onset conduct disorder than those with childhood-onset , suggesting that adolescent-onset conduct disorder is an exaggeration of developmental behaviors that are typically seen in adolescence , such as rebellion against authority figures and rejection of conventional values . however , this argument is not established and empirical research suggests that these subgroups are not as valid as once thought . in addition to these two courses that are recognized by the dsm-iv-tr , there appears to be a relationship among oppositional defiant disorder , conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder . specifically , research has demonstrated continuity in the disorders such that conduct disorder is often diagnosed in children who have been previously diagnosed with oppositional defiant disorder , and most adults with antisocial personality disorder were previously diagnosed with conduct disorder . for example , some research has shown that 90 % of children diagnosed with conduct disorder had a previous diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder . moreover , both disorders share relevant risk factors and disruptive behaviors , suggesting that oppositional defiant disorder is a developmental precursor and milder variant of conduct disorder . however , this is not to say that this trajectory occurs in all individuals . in fact , only about 25 % of children with oppositional defiant disorder will receive a later diagnosis of conduct disorder . correspondingly , there is an established link between conduct disorder and the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder as an adult . in fact , the current diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disorder require a conduct disorder diagnosis before the age of 15 . however , again , only 25-40 % of youths with conduct disorder will develop antisocial personality disorder . nonetheless , many of the individuals who do not meet full criteria for antisocial personality disorder still exhibit a pattern of social and personal impairments or antisocial behaviors . these developmental trajectories suggest the existence of antisocial pathways in certain individuals , which have important implications for both research and treatment . associated conditions . children with conduct disorder have a high risk of developing other adjustment problems . specifically , risk factors associated with conduct disorder and the effects of conduct disorder symptomatology on a child 's psychosocial context have been linked to overlap with other psychological disorders . in this way , there seems to be reciprocal effects of comorbidity with certain disorders , leading to increased overall risk for these youth . attention deficit hyperactivity disorder . adhd is the condition most commonly associated with conduct disorders , with approximately 25-30 % of boys and 50-55 % of girls with conduct disorder having a comorbid adhd diagnosis . while it is unlikely that adhd alone is a risk factor for developing conduct disorder , children who exhibit hyperactivity and impulsivity along with aggression is associated with the early onset of conduct problems . moreover , children with comorbid conduct disorder and adhd show more severe aggression . . substance use disorders . conduct disorder is also highly associated with both substance use and abuse . children with conduct disorder have an earlier onset of substance use , as compared to their peers , and also tend to use multiple substances . however , substance use disorders themselves can directly or indirectly cause conduct disorder like traits in about half of adolescents who have a substance use disorder . as mentioned above , it seems that there is a transactional relationship between substance use and conduct problems , such that aggressive behaviors increase substance use , which leads to increased aggressive behavior . substance use in conduct disorder can lead to antisocial behavior in adulthood . . cause . while the cause of conduct disorder is complicated by an intricate interplay of biological and environmental factors , identifying underlying mechanisms is crucial for obtaining accurate assessment and implementing effective treatment . murrihy , r . , kidman , a . , & ollendick , t ( 2010 ) . clinical handbook of assessing and treating conduct problems in youth . springer : new york . these mechanisms serve as the fundamental building blocks on which evidence-based treatments are developed . despite the complexities , several domains have been implicated in the development of conduct disorder including cognitive variables , neurological factors , intraindividual factors , familial and peer influences , and wider contextual factors . these factors may also vary based on the age of onset , with different variables related to early ( e.g . , neurodevelopmental basis ) and adolescent ( e.g . , social/peer relationships ) onset . . risks . the development of conduct disorder is not immutable or predetermined . a number of interactive risk and protective factors exist that can influence and change outcomes , and in most cases conduct disorder develops due to an interaction and gradual accumulation of risk factors . in addition to the risk factors identified under cause , several other variables place youth at increased risk for developing the disorder , including child physical abuse , prenatal alcohol abuse and maternal smoking and pregnancy . protective factors have also been identified , and most notably include high iq , being female , positive social orientations , good coping skills , and supportive family and community relationships . however , a correlation between a particular risk factor and a later developmental outcome ( such as conduct disorder ) can not be taken as definitive evidence for a causal link . co-variation between two variables can arise , for instance , if they represent age-specific expressions of similar underlying genetic factors . for example , the tendency to smoke during pregnancy ( sdp ) is subject to substantial genetic influence ( d'onofrio et al . , 2007 ) , as is conduct disorder . thus , the genes that dispose the mother to sdp may also dispose the child to cd following mitotic transmission . indeed , rice et al . ( 2009 ) found that in mother-fetus pairs that were not genetically related ( by virtue of in-vitro fertilisation ) , no link between sdp and later conduct problems arose . thus , the distinction between causality and correlation is an important consideration . learning disabilities . while language impairments are most common , approximately 20-25 % of youth with conduct disorder have some type of learning disability . although the relationship between the disorders is complex , it seems as if learning disabilities result from a combination of adhd , a history of academic difficulty and failure , and long-standing socialization difficulties with family and peers . however , confounding variables , such as language deficits , ses disadvantage , or neurodevelopmental delay also need to be considered in this relationship , as they could help explain some of the association between conduct disorder and learning problems . . cognitive factors . in terms of cognitive function , intelligence and cognitive deficits are common amongst youths with conduct disorder , particularly those with early-onset and have intelligence quotients ( iq ) one standard deviation below the mean lynham , d . & henry , b . ( 2001 ) . the role of neuropsychological deficits in conduct disorders . in j . hill & b . maughan ( eds . ) , conduct disorders in childhood and adolescence ( pp.235-263 ) . new york : cambridge university press . and severe deficits in verbal reasoning and executive function . moffitt , t . & lynam , d . ( 1994 ) . the neuropsychology of conduct disorder and delinquency : implications for understanding antisocial behavior . in d.c . fowles , p . sutker , & s.h . goodman ( eds . ) , progress in experimental personality and psychopathology research ( pp . 233-262 ) . new york : springer . executive function difficulties may manifest in terms of one 's ability to shift between tasks , plan as well as organize , and also inhibit a prepotent response . these findings hold true even after taking into account other variables such as socioeconomic status ( ses ) , and education . however , iq and executive function deficits are only one piece of the puzzle , and the magnitude of their influence is increased during transactional processes with environmental factors . . brain differences . beyond difficulties in executive function , neurological research on youth with conduct disorder also demonstrate differences in brain anatomy and function that reflect the behaviors and mental anomalies associated in conduct disorder . compared to normal controls , youths with early and adolescent onset of conduct disorder displayed reduced responses in brain regions associated with social behavior ( i.e . , amygdala , ventromedial prefrontal cortex , insula , and orbitofrontal cortex ) . in addition , youths with conduct disorder also demonstrated less responsiveness in the orbitofrontal regions of the brain during a stimulus-reinforcement and reward task . this provides a neural explanation for why youths with conduct disorder may be more likely to repeat poor decision making patterns . lastly , youths with conduct disorder display a reduction in grey matter volume in the amygdala , which may account for the fear conditioning deficits . this reduction has been linked to difficulty processing social emotional stimuli , regardless of the age of onset . aside from the differences in neuroanatomy and activation patterns between youth with conduct disorder and controls , neurochemical profiles also vary between groups . individuals with conduct disorder are characterized as having reduced serotonin and cortisol levels ( e.g . , reduced hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal ( hpa ) axis ) , as well as reduced autonomic nervous system ( ans ) functioning . these reductions are associated with the inability to regulate mood and impulsive behaviors , weakened signals of anxiety and fear , and decreased self-esteem . taken together , these findings may account for some of the variance in the psychological and behavioral patterns of youth with conduct disorder . intra-individual factors . aside from findings related to neurological and neurochemical profiles of youth with conduct disorder , intraindividual factors such as genetics may also be relevant . having a sibling or parent with conduct disorder increases the likelihood of having the disorder , with a heritability rate of . 53 . there also tends to be a stronger genetic link for individuals with childhood-onset compared to adolescent onset . in addition , youth with conduct disorder also exhibit polymorphism in the monoamine oxidase a gene , low resting heart rates , and increased testosterone . coie , j . & dodge , k . ( 1998 ) . aggression and antisocial behavior . in w . damon ( series ed . ) & n . eisenberg ( vol . ed . ) , handbook of child psychology : vol.2 . social , emotional , and personality development ( 5th ed . , pp.779-862 ) . new york : wiley . . family and peer influences . elements of the family and social environment may also play a role in the development and maintenance of conduct disorder . for instance , antisocial behavior suggestive of conduct disorder is associated with single parent status , parental divorce , large family size , and young age of mothers . however , these factors are difficult to tease apart from other demographic variables that are known to be linked with conduct disorder , including poverty and low socioeconomic status . family functioning and parent-child interactions also play a substantial role in childhood aggression and conduct disorder , with low levels of parental involvement , inadequate supervision , and unpredictable discipline practices reinforcing youth 's defiant behaviors . peer influences have also been related to the development of antisocial behavior in youth , particularly peer rejection in childhood and association with deviant peers . peer rejection is not only a marker of a number of externalizing disorders , but also a contributing factor for the continuity of the disorders over time . hinshaw and lee ( 2003 ) also explain that association with deviant peers has been thought to influence the development of conduct disorder in two ways : 1 ) a “ selection ” process whereby youth with aggressive characteristics choose deviant friends , and 2 ) a “ facilitation ” process whereby deviant peer networks bolster patterns of antisocial behavior . in a separate study by bonin and colleagues , parenting programs were shown to positively affect child behavior and reduce costs to the public sector . . wider contextual factors . in addition to the individual and social factors associated with conduct disorder , research has highlighted the importance of environment and context in youth with antisocial behavior . however , it is important to note that these are not static factors , but rather transactional in nature ( e.g . , individuals are influenced by and also influence their environment ) . for instance , neighborhood safety and exposure to violence has been studied in conjunction with conduct disorder , but it is not simply the case that youth with aggressive tendencies reside in violent neighborhoods . transactional models propose that youth may resort to violence more often as a result of exposure to community violence , but their predisposition towards violence also contributes to neighborhood climate . diagnosis . conduct disorder is classified in the fourth edition of diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( dsm ) . american psychiatric association . ( 2000 ) . diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( 4th ed . , text revision ) . washington , dc : author . it is diagnosed based on a prolonged pattern of antisocial behaviour such as serious violation of laws and social norms and rules in people younger than the age of 18 . similar criteria are used in those over the age of 18 for the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder . no proposed revisions for the main criteria of conduct disorder exist in the dsm-5 ; there is a recommendation by the work group to add an additional specifier for callous and unemotional traits . according to dsm-5 criteria for conduct disorder , there are four categories that could be present in the child 's behavior : aggression to people and animals , destruction of property , deceitfulness or theft , and serious violation of rules . almost all adolescents who have a substance use disorder have conduct disorder-like traits , but after successful treatment of the substance use disorder , about half of these adolescents no longer display conduct disorder-like symptoms . therefore , it is important to exclude a substance-induced cause and instead address the substance use disorder prior to making a psychiatric diagnosis of conduct disorder . . treatment . the most effective treatment for an individual with conduct disorder is one that seeks to integrate individual , school , and family settings . additionally , treatment should also seek to address familial conflict such as marital discord and maternal or paternal depression . prognosis . about 25-40 % of youths diagnosed with conduct disorder qualify for a diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder when they reach adulthood . for those that do not develop aspd , most still exhibit social dysfunction in adult life . . epidemiology . conduct disorder is estimated to affect 51.1 million people globally as of 2013 . the percentage of children affected by conduct disorder is estimates to range from 1-10 % . however , among incarcerated youth or youth in juvenile detention facilities , rates of conduct disorder are between 23 % and 87 % . u.s . department of justice . ( 2006 ) . psychiatric disorders of youth in detention ( ncj 210331 ) washington , dc : u.s . government printing office . . sex differences . the majority of research on conduct disorder suggests that there are a significantly greater number of males than females with the diagnosis , with some reports demonstrating a threefold to fourfold difference in prevalence . lahey , b . b . , miller , t . l . , gordon , r . a . , & riley , a . w . ( 1999 ) . developmental epidemiology of the disruptive behavior disorders . in h . c . quay & a . e . hogan ( eds . ) , handbook of disruptive disorders ( pp . 23-48 ) . new york : kluwer academic/plenum publishers . however , this difference may be somewhat biased by the diagnostic criteria which focus on more overt behaviors , such as aggression and fighting , which are more often exhibited by males . females are more likely to be characterized by covert behaviors , such as stealing or running away . moreover , conduct disorder in females is linked to several negative outcomes , such as antisocial personality disorder and early pregnancy , suggesting that sex differences in disruptive behaviors need to be more fully understood . females are more responsive to peer pressure including feelings of guilt than males . racial differences . research on racial or cultural differences on the prevalence or presentation of conduct disorder is limited . however , according to studies on american youth , it appears that african-american youth are more often diagnosed with conduct disorder , while asian-american youth are about one-third as likely to develop conduct disorder when compared to white american youth . it has been widely theorized for decades that this disparity is due to unconscious bias in those who give the diagnosis . . references .