Corinth Canal

history . ancient attempts . several rulers of antiquity dreamed of digging a cutting through the isthmus . the first to propose such an undertaking was the tyrant periander in the 7th century bc . the project was abandoned and periander instead constructed a simpler and less costly overland portage road , named the diolkos or stone carriageway , along which ships could be towed from one side of the isthmus to the other . verdelis , nikolaos : '' le diolkos de l'isthme '' , bulletin de correspondance hellénique , vol . 81 ( 1957 ) , pp . 526–529 ( 526 ) cook , r . m . : '' archaic greek trade : three conjectures 1 . the diolkos '' , journal of hellenic studies , vol . 99 ( 1979 ) , pp . 152–155 ( 152 ) drijvers , j.w . : '' strabo viii 2,1 ( c335 ) : porthmeia and the diolkos '' , mnemosyne , vol . 45 ( 1992 ) , pp . 75–76 ( 75 ) raepsaet , g . & tolley , m . : '' le diolkos de l ’ isthme à corinthe : son tracé , son fonctionnement '' , bulletin de correspondance hellénique , vol . 117 ( 1993 ) , pp . 233–261 ( 256 ) lewis , m . j . t . , '' railways in the greek and roman world '' , in guy , a . / rees , j . ( eds ) , early railways . a selection of papers from the first international early railways conference ( 2001 ) , pp . 8–19 ( 11 ) periander 's change of heart is attributed variously to the great expense of the project , a lack of labour or a fear that a canal would have robbed corinth of its dominant role as an entrepôt for goods . werner , walter : '' the largest ship trackway in ancient times : the diolkos of the isthmus of corinth , greece , and early attempts to build a canal '' , the international journal of nautical archaeology , vol . 26 , no . 2 ( 1997 ) , pp . 98–119 remnants of the diolkos still exist next to the modern canal . verdelis , nikolaos : '' le diolkos de l'isthme '' , bulletin de correspondance hellénique ( 1957 , 1958 , 1960 , 1961 , 1963 ) raepsaet , g . & tolley , m . : '' le diolkos de l ’ isthme à corinthe : son tracé , son fonctionnement '' , bulletin de correspondance hellénique , vol . 117 ( 1993 ) , pp . 233–261 the diadoch demetrius poliorcetes ( 336–283 bc ) planned to construct a canal as a means to improve his communication lines , but dropped the plan after his surveyors , miscalculating the levels of the adjacent seas , feared heavy floods . gerster , béla , '' l'isthme de corinthe : tentatives de percement dans l'antiquité '' , bulletin de correspondance hellénique ( 1884 ) , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 225–232 ( in french ) the philosopher apollonius of tyana prophesied that anyone who proposed to dig a corinthian canal would be met with illness . three roman rulers considered the idea but all suffered violent deaths ; the historians plutarch and suetonius both wrote that the roman dictator julius caesar considered digging a canal through the isthmus but was assassinated before he could begin the project . suetonius , '' lives of the caesars : julius caesar '' , 44.3 caligula , the third roman emperor , commissioned a study in 40 & nbsp ; ad from egyptian experts who claimed incorrectly that the corinthian gulf was higher than the saronic gulf . as a result , they concluded , if a canal were dug the island of aegina would be inundated . caligula 's interest in the idea got no further as he too was assassinated before making any progress . image : remains of nero 's isthmus canal in 1881.jpg thumb right remains of nero 's canal project in 1881 the emperor nero was the first to attempt to construct the canal , personally breaking the ground with a pickaxe and removing the first basket-load of soil in 67 & nbsp ; ad , but the project was abandoned when he died shortly afterwards . the roman workforce , consisting of 6,000 first jewish–roman war , started digging trenches from both sides , while a third group at the ridge drilled deep shafts for probing the quality of the rock ( which were reused in 1881 for the same purpose ) . according to suetonius , the canal was dug to a distance of four stades – approximately – or about a tenth of the total distance across the isthmus . a memorial of the attempt in the form of a relief of hercules was left by nero 's workers and can still be seen in the canal cutting today . other than this , as the modern canal follows the same course as nero 's , no remains have survived . the greek philosopher and roman senator herodes atticus is known to have considered digging a canal in the 2nd century ad , but did not get a project under way . the venetians also considered it in 1687 after their morean war but likewise did not initiate a project . . construction of the modern canal . the idea of a canal was revived after greece greek war of independence from the ottoman empire in 1830 . the greek statesman ioannis kapodistrias asked a french engineer to assess the feasibility of the project but had to abandon it when its cost was assessed at 40 & nbsp ; million gold francs—far too expensive for the newly independent country . fresh impetus was given by the opening of the suez canal in 1869 and the following year , the government of prime minister thrasyvoulos zaimis passed a law authorizing the construction of a corinth canal . french entrepreneurs were put in charge but , following the bankruptcy of the french company that had attempted to dig the panama canal , french banks refused to lend money and the company went bankrupt as well . a fresh concession was granted to the société internationale du canal maritime de corinthe in 1881 , which was commissioned to construct the canal and operate it for the next 99 years . construction was formally inaugurated on 23 april 1882 in the presence of king george & nbsp ; i of greece . the company 's initial capital was 30,000,000 francs ( us 6.0 & nbsp ; million in the money of the day ) , but after eight years of work it ran out of money and a bid to issue 60,000 bonds of 500 francs each flopped when less than half of the bonds were sold . the company 's head , istván türr , went bankrupt , as did the company itself and a bank that had agreed to raise additional funds for the project . construction resumed in 1890 when the project was transferred to a greek company , and was completed on 25 july 1893 after eleven years ' work . . after completion . the canal experienced financial and operational difficulties after completion . the narrowness of the canal makes navigation difficult . its high walls channel wind along its length , and the different times of the tides in the two gulfs cause strong tidal currents in the channel . for these reasons , many ship operators were unwilling to use the canal , and traffic was far below predictions . annual traffic of just under 4 & nbsp ; million net tons had been anticipated , but by 1906 traffic had reached only half a million net tons annually . by 1913 the total had risen to 1.5 & nbsp ; million net tons , but the disruption caused by world war i resulted in a major decline in traffic . another persistent problem was the heavily faulted nature of the sedimentary rock , in an active seismic zone , through which the canal is cut . '' geology and ancient culture along the corinth canal '' the canal 's high limestone walls have been persistently unstable from the start . although it was formally opened in july 1893 it was not opened to navigation until the following november , due to landslides . it was soon found that the wake from ships passing through the canal undermined the walls , causing further landslides . this required further expense in building retaining walls along the water 's edge for more than half of the length of the canal , using 165,000 cubic metres of masonry . '' corinth canal '' . johnson 's universal cyclopedia : a new edition , vol . 7 , p . 484 . a.j . johnson & co . , 1895 between 1893 and 1940 , it was closed for a total of four years for maintenance to stabilise the walls . in 1923 alone , 41,000 cubic metres of material fell into the canal , which took two years to clear out . corinth canal history : 1923 a.c . — nowadays serious damage was caused to the canal during world war ii . on 26 april 1941 , during the battle of greece between defending british troops and the invading forces of nazi germany , german parachutists and glider troops attempted to capture the main bridge over the canal . the bridge was defended by the british and had been wired for demolition . the germans surprised the defenders with a glider-borne assault in the early morning of 26 april and captured the bridge , but the british set off the charges and destroyed the structure . other authors maintain that german pioneers cut the detonation wires , and a lucky hit by british artillery triggered the explosion . 108 blau , george e . ( 1986 ) & 91 ; 1953 & 93 ; . the german campaigns in the balkans ( spring 1941 ) ( reissue ed . ) . washington , d.c . : united states army center of military history . cmh pub 104-4 . the bridge was replaced by a combined rail/road bridge built in 25 days by the iv railway engineer battalion , of the royal italian army 's railway engineer regiment . three years later , as german forces retreated from greece , the canal was put out of action by german '' scorched earth '' operations . german forces used explosives to trigger landslides to block the canal , destroyed the bridges and dumped locomotives , bridge wreckage and other infrastructure into the canal to hinder repairs . the united states army corps of engineers began to clear the canal in november 1947 and reopened it for shallow-draft traffic by 7 july 1948 , and for all traffic by that september . . modern use . because the canal is difficult to navigate for large vessels , it is mostly used by smaller recreational boats . a notable exception occurred on 9 october 2019 , when ms braemar became the widest and longest ship to cruise through the canal . . layout . the canal consists of a single channel deep , excavated at sea level ( thus requiring no locks ) , measuring long by wide at sea level and wide at the bottom . the rock walls , which rise above sea level , are at a near-vertical 80° angle . the canal is crossed by a railway line , a road and a motorway at a height of about . in 1988 submersible bridges were installed at sea level at each end of the canal , by the eastern harbour of isthmia and the western harbour of poseidonia . although the canal saves the journey around the peloponnese , it is too narrow for modern ocean cargo ship , as it can accommodate ships only of a width up to and draft up to . in october 2019 , with over 900 passengers on board , a wide and long , fred . olsen cruise lines cruise ship successfully traversed the canal to set a new record for longest ship to pass through the canal . ships can pass through the canal only one convoy at a time on a one-way system . larger ships have to be towed by tugs . the canal is currently used mainly by tourist ships ; around 11,000 ships per year travel through the waterway . thumb