Lucius Junius Brutus

background . prior to the establishment of the roman republic , rome had been ruled by kings . brutus led the revolt that overthrew the last king , lucius tarquinius superbus , after the rape of the noblewoman ( and kinswoman of brutus ) lucretia at the hands of tarquin 's son sextus tarquinius . the account is from livy 's ab urbe condita and deals with a point in the history of rome prior to reliable historical records ( virtually all prior records were destroyed by the gauls when they sacked rome under brennus in 390 bc or 387 bc ) . overthrow of the monarchy . brutus was the son of tarquinia , daughter of rome 's fifth king lucius tarquinius priscus and sister to rome 's seventh king tarquinius superbus . according to livy , brutus had a number of grievances against his uncle the king . amongst them was the fact that tarquinius had put to death a number of the chief men of rome , including brutus ' brother . brutus avoided the distrust of tarquinius 's family by feigning that he was slow-witted livy , ab urbe condita , 1.56 ( in latin brutus translates to dullard ) . he accompanied tarquinius 's sons on a trip to the oracle of delphi . the sons asked the oracle which of them was going to be rome 's next king . the oracle of delphi responded that the first among them to kiss their mother '' shall hold supreme sway in rome . '' livy , ab urbe condita , 1.56 brutus interpreted '' mother '' to mean gaia , so he pretended to trip and kissed the ground . davies , norman ( 19961998 ) europe . new york ny , harper perennial pg . 113 brutus , along with spurius lucretius tricipitinus , publius valerius publicola , and lucius tarquinius collatinus were summoned by lucretia to collatia after she had been raped by sextus tarquinius , the son of the king tarquinius superbus . lucretia , believing that the rape dishonoured her and her family , committed suicide by stabbing herself with a dagger after telling of what had befallen her . according to legend , brutus grabbed the dagger from lucretia 's breast after her death and immediately shouted for the overthrow of the tarquins . livy , ab urbe condita , 1.58-59 the four men gathered the youth of collatia , then went to rome where brutus , being at that time tribunus celerum , summoned the people to the forum and exhorted them to rise up against the king . the people voted for the deposition of the king , and the banishment of the royal family . livy , ab urbe condita , 1.59 brutus , leaving lucretius in command of the city , proceeded with armed men to the roman army then camped at ardea . the king , who had been with the army , heard of developments at rome , and left the camp for the city before brutus ' arrival . the army received brutus as a hero , and the king 's sons were expelled from the camp . tarquinius superbus , meanwhile , was refused entry at rome , and fled with his family into exile . livy , ab urbe condita , 1.59-60 in the aftermath following the overthrow brutus is credited by later historians such as tacitus as '' establishing liberty and the consulate '' , a statement that is now believed to be false by modern historians . . the oath of brutus . according to livy , brutus ' first act after the expulsion of lucius tarquinius superbus was to bring the people to swear an oath never to allow any man again to be king in rome . livy , ab urbe condita , ed . r.s conway & c.f . walters ( oxford , 1914 ) , 2.1.9 . : : ( first of all , by swearing an oath that they would suffer no man to rule rome , it forced the people , desirous of a new liberty , not to be thereafter swayed by the entreaties or bribes of kings . ) this is , fundamentally , a restatement of the 'private oath ' sworn by the conspirators to overthrow the monarchy : livy , '' ab urbe condita '' 1.59.1 . : : ( by this guiltless blood before the kingly injustice i swear – you and the gods as my witnesses – i make myself the one who will prosecute , by what force i am able , lucius tarquinius superbus along with his wicked wife and the whole house of his freeborn children by sword , by fire , by any means hence , so that neither they nor any one else be suffered to rule rome . ) there is no scholarly agreement that the oath took place ; it is reported , although differently , by plutarch ( poplicola , 2 ) and appian ( b.c . 2.119 ) . nevertheless , the spirit of the oath inspired later romans including his descendant marcus junius brutus . consulship and death . brutus and lucretia 's bereaved husband , lucius tarquinius collatinus , were elected as the first consuls of rome ( 509 bc ) . however , tarquinius was soon replaced by publius valerius publicola . brutus ' first acts during his consulship , according to livy , included administering an oath to the people of rome to never again accept a king in rome ( see above ) and replenishing the number of senators to 300 from the principal men of the equites . the new consuls also created a new office of rex sacrorum to carry out the religious duties that had previously been performed by the kings . livy , ab urbe condita , 2.1-2 during his consulship the royal family made an attempt to regain the throne , firstly by their ambassadors seeking to subvert a number of the leading roman citizens in the tarquinian conspiracy . amongst the conspirators were two brothers of brutus ' wife vitellia , and brutus ' two sons , titus junius brutus and tiberius junius brutus . the conspiracy was discovered and the consuls determined to punish the conspirators with death . brutus gained respect for his stoicism in watching the execution of his own sons , even though he showed emotion during the punishment . his colleague collatinus was removed from office for his lack of harshness on the conspirators . dionysius of halicarnassus - roman antiquities 5.10 livy , ab urbe condita , 2.3-4 tarquinius again sought to retake the throne soon after at the battle of silva arsia , leading the forces of tarquinii and veii against the roman army . valerius led the infantry , and brutus led the cavalry . arruns tarquinius , the king 's son , led the etruscan cavalry . the cavalry first joined battle and arruns , having spied from afar the lictors , and thereby recognising the presence of a consul , soon saw that brutus was in command of the cavalry . the two men , who were cousins , charged each other , and speared each other to death . the infantry also soon joined the battle , the result being in doubt for some time . the right wing of each army was victorious , the army of tarquinii forcing back the romans , and the veientes being routed . however the etruscan forces eventually fled the field , the romans claiming the victory . livy , ab urbe condita , 2.6-7 the surviving consul , valerius , after celebrating a triumph for the victory , held a funeral for brutus with much magnificence . the roman noblewomen mourned him for one year , for his vengeance of lucretia 's violation . livy , ab urbe condita , 2.7 . brutus in literature and art . lucius junius brutus is quite prominent in english literature , and he was quite popular among british and american whigs . a reference to l . j . brutus is in the following lines from shakespeare 's play julius caesar ( play ) , ( cassius to marcus brutus , act 1 , scene 2 ) . : '' o , you and i have heard our fathers say , : there was a brutus once that would have brookt : th'eternal devil to keep his state in rome : as easily as a king . '' one of the main charges of the senatorial faction that plotted against julius caesar after he had the roman senate declare him dictator for life , was that he was attempting to make himself a king , and a co-conspirator cassius , enticed brutus ' direct descendant , marcus junius brutus , to join the conspiracy by referring to his ancestor . l . j . brutus is a leading character in shakespeare 's rape of lucrece and in nathaniel lee 's restoration tragedy ( 1680 ) , lucius junius brutus ; father of his country . in the mikado , the protagonist nanki-poo refers to his father the emperor as '' the lucius junius brutus of his race '' , for being willing to enforce his own law even if it means killing his son . the memory of l . j . brutus also had a profound impact on italian patriots , including those who established the ill-fated roman republic in february 1849 . brutus was a hero of republicanism during the enlightenment and neoclassical periods . in 1789 , at the dawn of the french revolution , master painter jacques-louis david publicly exhibited his politically charged masterwork , the lictors bring to brutus the bodies of his sons , to great controversy . the profile of lucius junius brutus is on a coin that was minted by marcus junius brutus following the assassination of julius caesar . . see also . junia gens junius . references . citations . . bibliography . michael crawford , roman republican coinage , cambridge university press , 1974 . external links . livius.org : lucius junius brutus