History of elephants in Europe

overview . europeans came in contact with live elephants in 327 bc , when alexander the great descended into india from the hindu kush , but alexander was quick to adopt them . four elephants guarded his tent , and shortly after his death his associate ptolemy issued coins showing alexander in the elephant headdress that became a royal emblem also in the hellenized east . aristotle depended on first-hand information for his account of elephants , but like most westerners he believed the animals live for two hundred years . roman scouts in the royal syrian parks shortly before the last of the seleucids fell to rome had orders to hamstring every elephant they could capture , and while elephants performed in the roman circus , shapur 's war elephants in the mid-4th century numbered in the hundreds ( fox 1973 p 338 ) . elephants largely disappeared from europe after the roman empire . as exotic and expensive animals , they were exchanged as presents between european rulers , who exhibited them as luxury pets , beginning with harun ar-rashid 's gift of an elephant to charlemagne . examples . historical accounts of elephants in europe include : the 20 elephants in the army of pyrrhus of epirus , which landed at taranto in 280 bc for the first battle of heraclea , recorded by plutarch 's ( in lives ) , polybius , dionysius of halicarnassus and livy . '' the most notable elephant in greek history , called victor , had long served in pyrrhus 's army , but on seeing its mahout dead before the city walls , it rushed to retrieve him : hoisting him defiantly on his tusks , it took wild and indiscriminate revenge for the man it loved , trampling more of its supporters than its enemies '' . coins of tarentum after this battle also featured elephants . the 37 elephants in hannibal 's army that crossed the rhône in october/november 218 bc during the second punic war , recorded by livy . the first historically recorded elephant in northern europe , the animal brought by emperor claudius during the roman invasion of britain in ad 43 to the british capital of colchester . at least one elephant skeleton with flint weapons that has been found in england was initially misidentified as this elephant , but later dating proved it to be a mammoth skeleton from the stone age . abul-abbas , the asian elephant which harun al-rashid gave to charlemagne in 797 or 802 . the animal died in 810 , of pneumonia . the annals of innisfallen record that king edgar of scotland gave a large , exotic animal to muirchertach ua briain in 1105 , possibly an elephant but more probably a camel . ( annals of innisfallen , s.a . 1105 ; a . a . m . duncan , scotland : the making of the kingdom ( 1975 ) , p . & nbsp ; 128 ) the cremona elephant presented to frederick ii , holy roman emperor by al-kamil in 1229 . the elephant given by louis ix of france to henry iii of england , for his menagerie in the tower of london in 1255 ( see : sandwich , kent ) . drawn from life by the historian matthew paris for his chronica majora , it was the first elephant to be seen in england since claudius ' war elephant . matthew paris ' original drawing appears in his bestiary , on display in the parker library of corpus christi college , cambridge . the bestiary explains that while in residence at the tower of london , the elephant enjoyed a diet of prime cuts of beef and expensive red wine , and is claimed to have died in 1257 from drinking too much wine . the accompanying text reveals that at the time , europeans believed that elephants did not have knees and so were unable to get up if they fell over ( the bestiary contains a drawing depicting an elephant on its back being dragged along the ground by another elephant , with a caption stating that elephants lacked knees – compare cow tipping ) . europeans also interpreted descriptions of howdahs to mean that indian elephants were capable of carrying actual stone castles on their backs , albeit only big enough to be garrisoned by three or four men ; note that turreted war elephants did exist , though not ones made of stone . a carving of the elephant can be found on a contemporary miserichord in exeter cathedral . this animal may be the inspiration for the heraldic device 'elephant and castle ' , the arms of the cutlers ' company of london , a guild founded in the 13th century responsible for making scissors , knives and the like . its heraldry survived in an 18th-century pub-sign that in turn gave its name to a largely modern district in south london . in the 1470s king christian i of denmark founded a chivalric order , the order of the elephant , and had it confirmed by pope sixtus iv . the order takes its name from the battle elephants which symbolized the christian crusades . , it continues to be awarded under statutes established by king christian v in 1693 , amended in 1958 to permit the admission of women to the order . the elephant given by afonso v of portugal to rené d'anjou about 1477 . the merchants of cyprus presented ercole d'este with an elephant in 1497 . suleiman ( elephant ) , a present from the portugal king john iii to maximilian ii , holy roman emperor . travelling from spain in 1551 , it arrived in vienna in 1552 , but died in 1554 . hanno , or annone , was a white elephant presented by king manuel i of portugal to pope leo x on the occasion of his coronation in 1514 . he died in 1518 , probably of an intestinal obstruction misdiagnosed as angina , with pope leo at his side . his story is told in silvio bedini 's the pope 's elephant ( nashville : sanders 1998 ) . at the villa madama , in the garden facing the loggia , the elephant fountain designed by giovanni da udine depicts '' annone '' , whose tomb was designed by raphael himself . hansken , a female elephant from ceylon that became famous in early 17th-century europe , touring through many countries demonstrating circus tricks , and sketched by rembrandt and stefano della bella . references . ; footnotes ; sources saurer , karl and elena m.hinshaw-fischli . they called him suleyman : the adventurous journey of an elephant from the forests of kerala to the capital of vienna in the middle of the sixteenth century , collected in maritime malabar and the europeans , edited by k . s . mathew , hope india publications : gurgaon , 2003 robin lane fox , 1974 . alexander the great . chapter 24 contains an excursus on alexander and the elephant in europe , the story of süleyman . celebrity elephants and other exotica in renaissance portugal , annemarie jordan gschwend , zurich , switzerland , 2010 , . external links . anecdotes of elephants as royal european status gifts . exeter-cathedral.org.uk