Philomena

discovery of the remains . on may 24 , 1802 , in the catacombs of priscilla on the via salaria nova , an inscribed loculus ( space hollowed out of the rock ) was found , and on the following day it was carefully examined and opened . the loculus was closed with three terracotta tiles , on which was the following inscription : lumena paxte cumfi . it was and is generally accepted that the tiles had not been positioned in the sequence of the words , and that the inscription originally read , with the leftmost tile placed on the right : pax tecum filumena ( '' peace with you , philomena '' ) . within the loculus was found the skeleton of a female between thirteen and fifteen years old . embedded in the cement was a small glass phial with vestiges of what was taken to be blood . in accordance with the assumptions of the time , the remains were taken to be those of a virgin martyr named philomena . butler 's lives of the saints , edition quoted in university of leicester , saints at a glance by dr g.r.jones the belief that such vials were signs of the grave of a martyr was still held in 1863 , when a december 10 decree of the sacred congregation of rites confirmed a decree of april 10 , 1868 . but this view has been rejected in practice since the investigations of giovanni battista de rossi ( 1822–1894 ) . kirsch , johann peter . '' st . philomena . '' the catholic encyclopedia . vol . 12 . new york : robert appleton company , 1911 . 29 apr . 2013 in 1805 , canon francesco de lucia of mugnano del cardinale requested relics for his oratory , and on 8 june obtained the remains discovered in may 1802 ( reduced to dust and fragments ) . '' corpus … in pulverem et in fragmina redactum '' , as described in the document with which the remains where handed over ( quoted in present ecclesial status of devotion to st . philomena the relics arrived in mugnano on august 10 , and were placed in the church of our lady of grace . enciclopedia dei santi : santa filomena di roma a new church of our lady of grace was built , containing a chapel where the sacred relics were moved on september 29 , 1805 . '' discovery and translation to the shrine '' , sanctuary of saint philomena in 1827 , pope leo xii gave to the church in mugnano del cardinale the three inscribed terracotta slabs that had been taken from the tomb . . spread of devotion . in his relazione istorica della traslazione del sagro corpo di s . filomena da roma a mugnano del cardinale , written in 1833 , francesco di lucia , relazione istorica della translazione del corpo di s . filomena vergine , e martire da roma a mugnano del cardinale , vol . 2 , pp . 80ff . canon de lucia recounted that wonders accompanied the arrival of the relics in his church , among them a statue that sweated some liquid continuously for three days . a miracle accepted as proved in the same year was the multiplication of the bone dust of the saint , which provided for hundreds of reliquaries without the original amount experiencing any decrease in quantity . devotion includes the wearing of the '' cord of philomena '' , a red and white cord , which had a number of indulgences attached to it , including a plenary indulgence on the day on which the cord was worn for the first time , indulgences that were not renewed in indulgentiarum doctrina , the 1967 general revision of the discipline concerning them . pope paul vi , apostolic constitution indulgentiarum doctrina ( 1 january 1967 ) ; cf . enchiridion indulgentiarum there is also the chaplet of saint philomena , with three white beads in honour of the blessed trinity and thirteen red beads in honour of the thirteen years of philomena 's life . saint philomena : virgin martyr and wonder worker . cecily hallack . dublin , ireland ; anthonian press , 1936 pages 120–124 a sacramental associated with the hallow is the oil of saint philomena , which is used for the healing of the body and soul . . life of the saint . on december 21 , 1833 , the holy office declared that there was nothing contrary to the catholic faith in the revelations that sister maria luisa di gesù ( 1799–1875 ) , a dominican tertiary from naples , claimed to have received from philomena herself . according to gesù , philomena told her she was the daughter of a king in greece who , with his wife , had converted to christianity . at the age of about 13 , she took a vow of consecrated virginity . when the emperor diocletian threatened to make war on her father , her father went with his family to rome to ask for peace . the emperor '' fell in love '' with the young philomena and , when she refused to be his wife , subjected her to a series of torments : scourging , from whose effects two angels cured her ; drowning with an anchor attached to her ( two angels cut the rope and raised her to the river bank ) ; being shot with arrows , ( on the first occasion her wounds were healed ; on the second , the arrows turned aside ; and on the third , they returned and killed six of the archers , after which , several of the others became christians ) . finally , the emperor had her decapitated . the story goes that the decapitation occurred on a friday at three in the afternoon , as with the death of jesus . the two anchors , three arrows , the palm , and the ivy leaf on the tiles found in the tomb were interpreted as symbols of her martyrdom . in the neapolitan nun 's account , philomena also revealed that her birthday was january 10 , that her martyrdom occurred on august 10 ( the date also of the arrival of her relics in mugnano del cardinale ) , and that her name '' filumena '' meant '' daughter of light '' . ( it is usually taken to be derived from a greek word meaning '' beloved '' . ) publication of this account gave rise to critical study both of the account itself and of the many archaeological finds , leading to uncertainty that the tomb was in fact that of a martyr . . history of veneration . on january 30 , 1837 , in the aftermath of the cure of pauline jaricot , pope gregory xvi authorized liturgical celebration of philomena on august 11 or , according to another source , originally on september 9 , first in the diocese of nola ( to which mugnano del cardinale belongs ) , and soon in several other dioceses in italy . on january 31 , 1855 , pope pius ix approved a proper mass and office dedicated to saint philomena with confirmation of the decree etsi decimo ( rescript of the sacred congregation of rites , papal confirmation of promotor of the faith brief etsi decimo as submitted by rev . andrea fratini , 31 january 1855 ) . in august 1876 , the first issue of messenger of saint philomena was published in paris , france . on october 6 , 1876 , father louis petit founded the confraternity of saint philomena in paris . in november 1886 , the confraternity was raised to the rank of archconfraternity by pope leo xiii . on may 21 , 1912 , pope pius x raised it to the rank of universal archconfraternity with the apostolic brief pias fidelium societates stating , with regard to the historical authenticity of philomena , that : '' the current statements ( regarding st . philomena ) are and remain always fixed , valid and effective ; in this way it has to be judged as normative ; and if it is proceeded in another way , it will be null and void , whatever its authority '' . pias fidelium , ( may 21 , 1912 ) , aas 4 , 1912 , p . 398 . the name saint philomena was not included in the roman martyrology , the official list of saints recognized by the catholic church and in which the saints are included immediately upon canonization . '' with the canonization of a new saint , that person is officially listed in the catalogue of saints , or martyrology '' ( canonization ) ; '' as soon as the beatification or canonization event takes place , the person 's name is technically part of the roman martyrology '' ( catholic saints database ; cf . ( new york times the roman martyrology ) . in the 1920 typical edition of the roman missal philomena is mentioned , under august 11 ( with an indication that the mass for her feastday was to be taken entirely from the common , so that there was no part , not even the collect , that was proper to her ) in the section headed '' masses for some places '' , i.e . only those places for which it had been specially authorized . on february 14 , 1961 , the holy see ordered that the name of saint philomena be removed from all liturgical calendars that mentioned her . acta apostolicae sedis , 1961 , p . 174 . the text can be consulted on the website of the holy see . it is also available at instruction de calendariis particularibus ( 1961 ) together with a french translation and a note that recounts the history of the devotion and that says a different saint named philomena ( july 5 ) and two called philomenus ( november 14 and november 29 ) were listed in the roman martyrology , in which this philomena never appeared . this order was given as part of an instruction on the application to local calendars of the principles enunciated in the 1960 code of rubrics , which had already been applied to the general roman calendar . section 33 of this document ordered the removal from local calendars of fourteen named feasts , but allowed them to be retained in places that had a special link with the feast . it then added : '' however , the feast of saint philomena virgin and martyr ( 11 august ) is to be expunged from any calendar whatever . '' '' festum autem s . philumenae v . et m . ( 11 augusti ) e quolibet calendario expungatur . '' this action did not call into question her existence or sainthood , nor prohibit popular devotion to saint philomena . no suspension or prohibition of the archconfraternity was issued . veneration by other saints . the spread of devotion to her in france as well as in italy was helped when john vianney built a shrine in her honour and referred to her often , attributing to her the miracles that others attributed to himself . another help was the cure of the near-dying pauline jaricot , founder of the society for the propagation of the faith , at philomena 's shrine on august 10 , 1835 . on july 6 , 1835 the miracle of giovanna cescutti took place in venice . damien of molokai , who had strong devotion to philomena , named his church at kalawao in honor of her . '' st . philomena catholic church in kalawao '' , kalaupapa national historical park , us national park service many other saints were devoted to saint philomena , including peter julian eymard , peter chanel , anthony mary claret , madelaine sophie barat , euphrasier pelletier , john neumann and blessed anna maria taigi . . problems . although correlation does not prove causation , the holy see 's instruction to remove the name of saint philomena even from local calendars followed the raising of questions by certain scholars , whose interest had been drawn to the phenomenon more especially in connection with the revelations of sister maria luisa di gesù . the questions were raised in particular by orazio marucchi , whose conclusions won the support of johann peter kirsch , an archaeologist and ecclesiastical historian who is the author of the article on philomena in the catholic encyclopedia . however , according to mark miravalle the conclusions have been rejected by others . in his book it is time to meet st . philomena , mark miravalle cites several who disagree with marucchi 's conclusions ( mark miravalle , it is time to meet st . philomena . queenship publishing 2007 , pp . 12–13 ) . historian michael s . carter ( who supports miravalle 's position ) has written about devotion to st . philomena within the broader context of veneration of '' catacomb martyrs '' and their relics in the history of the united states . the inscription on the three tiles that had provided the latin name '' filumena '' ( '' philomena '' in english ) belonged to the middle or second half of the second century , while the body that had been found was of the fourth century , when the persecutions of christians had ended . not only the name but also the leaf , the two anchors and the palm that decorated the three tiles , and which had been believed to indicate that filumena was a martyr ( though the necessary connection between these symbols and martyrdom has been denied ) , had no relation to the person whose remains were found . the disarrangement of the tiles was something fourth-century sextons regularly did when re-using materials already engraved , with the aim of indicating that it was not the same person who was now buried in the place . in april 2005 , at the conference of philomenian studies – 1805-2005 , findings of a study carried out on the tiles by the opificio delle pietre dure e laboratori di restauro ( factory of hard stones and restoration laboratories ) of florence were made public . the analysis confirmed that only one type of mortal lime could be found on the tiles , thus giving a strong support to the theory that the tiles had not been re-arranged . the rector of the shrine in mugnano del cardinale disputes these findings . after reporting the decision of the sacred congregation of rites in 1961 as resulting from the studies of scholars , the italian-language enciclopedia dei santi says that there still remain the miracles that occurred and the official recognition that the catholic church gave in the nineteenth century , the personal devotion to saint philomena of popes and people who were later canonized , and the widespread general devotion that still persists , particularly at mugnano del cardinale in the diocese of nola , where pilgrims from all over the world arrive continually , giving a display of intense popular devotion . the website of '' the national shrine of saint philomena , miami , florida '' sees '' the action taken in 1960 as the work of the devil in order to deprive the people of god of a most powerful intercessor , particularly in the areas of purity and faith at a time when these virtues were so much being challenged as they continue to be up until now ! '' did saint philomena really exist ? . status . in his book it is time to meet st philomena , mark miravalle says that pope gregory xvi '' liturgically canonized st . philomena , in an act of the ordinary papal magisterium '' . mark miravalle , it is time to meet st philomena ( queenship publishing company , p . o . box 220 , goleta , california 2007 , p . 41 ( of 51 ) this contrasts with the usual view that canonization is an exercise of infallible magisterium declaring a truth that must be '' definitively held '' . doctrinal commentary on the concluding formula of the professio fidei , by cardinal joseph ratzinger ( now pope benedict xvi ) , congregation for the doctrine of the faith . '' beatification and canonization '' , the catholic encyclopedia , vol . 2 . new york : robert appleton company , 1907 , p . 366 encyclopedia americana ( international edition ) 2005 , article '' canonization '' the roman martyrology contains the names of all the saints who have been formally canonized , since '' with the canonization of a new saint , that person is officially listed in the catalogue of saints , or martyrology '' , canonization and '' as soon as the beatification or canonization event takes place , the person 's name is technically part of the roman martyrology '' . catholic saints database ; cf . new york times . '' word for word : martyrology '' catholic bible student , '' the roman martyrology '' it does not now contain and in fact never included the name of this philomena , which can be seen to be absent in the 1856 edition published some twenty years after the 1837 decree . canonization is a ceremony of the highest solemnity , in which the pope himself , invoking his supreme authority in the catholic church , declares that someone is a saint and inserts that person 's name in the catalogue of saints . p.e . hallett , '' the canonization of saints '' this ceremony has never taken place with regard to saint philomena . commonweal , vol 75 , p . 431 . see also . places dedicated to st . philomena : sanctuary of st . philomena , mugnano del cardinale , avellino , italy , which houses her remains within a life-size , richly robed effigy st . philomena 's church , mysore st . philomena 's church ( cincinnati , ohio ) st . philomena 's church ( pittsburgh , pa ) st . philomena 's roman catholic church sanctuary of st . philomena ( sorocaba , sp , brazil ) . references . bibliography . sister marie helene mohr , s.c . , saint philomena , powerful with god , rockford , il : tan books and publishers , inc , 1988 . '' philomena , '' in david hugh farmer , the oxford dictionary of saints , ( oxford university press , 2004 ) dr mark miravalle , present ecclesial status of devotion to st . philomena , ( queenship publishing , 2002 ) ( also on internet : see below ) cecily hallack . saint philomena : virgin martyr and wonder worker . dublin , ireland ; anthonian press , 1936 alfonso ramos . santa filomena : princesa del cielo . chihuahua , mexico ; ultimo sello , 2013 . michael s . carter , '' glowing with the radiance of heaven : roman martyrs , american saints , and the devotional world of nineteenth-century american catholicism . u.s . catholic historian , volume 36 , number 1 ( winter 2018 ) , pp . 1-26 . external links . johann peter kirsch , '' st . philomena '' in catholic encyclopedia ( new york 1911 ) david farmer , '' philomena '' in the oxford dictionary of saints , fifth revised edition ( oxford university press 2011 dr mark miravalle , present ecclesial status of devotion to st . philomena , 2002 , retrieved march 12 , 2013 sanctuary of st . philomena in mugnano del cardinale , italy st . philomena the wonderworker by father paul o ’ sullivan , o.p . ( e.d.m ) litany to saint philomena catholic tradition saint philomena list of places devoted to saint philomena