An American Family

series . in 2011 , the new york times reflected on some of the controversy the series engendered : the show included footage of intimate family interactions , including an on-camera separation demand from wife pat to her husband , and the coming-out of one of the children , who was gay . producers conducted 300 hours of filming over seven months in 1971 on a budget of 1.2 million . in 2002 , an american family was listed at 32 on tv guide 's 50 greatest tv shows of all time list . it is the earliest example of the reality television genre . synopsis . the loud family members profiled were : bill loud ( 1921–2018 ) cf . episode '' going back home '' cf . episode '' an american family : an introduction '' narrated by producer craig gilbert , january 1 , 1973 pat loud ( 1926–2021 ) lance loud ( 1951–2001 ) kevin robert loud ( born 1953 ) grant loud ( born 1954 ) delilah ann loud ( born 1955 ) michele loud ( born 1957 ) lance loud is credited as the first continuing character on television who was openly gay pbs.org - an american family and subsequently became an icon within the lgbt community . he later became a columnist for the national lgbt news magazine the advocate . one of the more notable moments of the series was when , after 21 years of marriage , pat asked bill for a divorce and to leave the house . pat 's saying to her husband '' you know there 's a problem '' & nbsp ; & ndash ; with bill 's response , '' what 's your problem ? '' & nbsp ; & ndash ; was chosen as one of the top 100 television moments by tv guide . the series drew over 10 million viewers and considerable controversy . the family was featured in newsweek on march 12 , 1973 , in the article '' the broken family '' . . legacy and influence . in 1974 , the bbc made its own similar program , called the family . the program consisted of 12 half-hour episodes , showing the daily lives and concerns of the working-class wilkins family , of reading , berkshire , england . the series inspired a 1977 story arc in the satirical soap opera mary hartman , mary hartman in which a television crew for the david susskind show documents the daily life of the titular character as the '' typical american consumer housewife '' . in 1979 , albert brooks spoofed the series in his film real life . roberts , michael . '' the unreal world '' . westword . march 14 , 1996 in 1983 , hbo broadcast an american family revisited : the louds 10 years later . the 1985–88 mockumentary series of tv films the history of white people in america and portrait of a white marriage parody the series in following the lives of a dysfunctional white suburban family led by fred willard and mary kay place . the series inspired the mtv reality television series the real world . in 2003 , pbs broadcast the show lance loud ! : a death in an american family , shot in 2001 , visiting the family again at the invitation of lance before his death . the same family members participated in the documentary , with the exception of grant . lance was 50 years old , had gone through 20 years of addiction to crystal meth , and was hiv positive . he died of liver failure caused by a hepatitis c and hiv co-infection that year . the show was billed by pbs as the final episode of an american family . subsequent to the showing of a death in an american family , pat and bill loud moved back in together , granting one of lance 's last wishes . they lived very close to three of their four surviving children—grant , michelle and delilah—and keep in close contact with kevin and his family , who live in arizona . bill died in july 2018 . pat died in january 2021 . in april 2011 , pbs rebroadcast the entire original series in a marathon format on many of its member stations , before the release of the hbo film cinema verite , based on the series . braxton , greg , '' pbs ' koce to broadcast landmark 'an american family ' '' , los angeles times , april 13 , 2011 '' pbs looking to revisit 1973 's 'an american family ' '' , associated press , january 11 , 2011 on july 7 , 2011 , most pbs stations presented an american family : anniversary edition , a two-hour film by alan and susan raymond that featured selected moments from the documentary series , in tribute to the 40 years since the series began filming in 1971 . it was subsequently released on dvd . an american family : anniversary edition , pbs . recent events . in 2012 , pat loud released a book about her son 's life called lance out loud , which was published by glitterati incorporated . pat loud died in her sleep from natural causes on january 10 , 2021 , at age 94 . . cinema verite . hbo premiered cinema verite on april 23 , 2011 , a fictionalized examination of the process of making an american family . with a script by david seltzer and under the direction of shari springer berman and robert pulcini , the cast includes tim robbins as bill , diane lane as pat , thomas dekker as lance and james gandolfini as craig gilbert . . credits . an american family episode nine end-credits ; rerun airdate april 24 , 2011 , 7 a.m . , wnet-tv conceived and produced by craig gilbert executive producer : curtis w . davis camera : alan raymond sound : susan raymond coordinating producer : jacqueline donnet associate producer : susan lester film editor : ken werner assistant film editor : bob alvarez additional photography : joan churchill additional sound : peter pilafian assistant cameramen : tom goodwin , peter smokler , mike levine series title film created by elinor bunin title-music supervision : john adams film editors unit : pat cook , david hanser , eleanor hamerow , ken werner editing assistants : joanna alexander , ernie davidson , bob alvarez , janet lauretano , tikki goldberg , dan merrill , joe lovett , sue steinberg apprentices : jesse maple , hannah wajshonig , harvey rosenstock sound editor : thomas halpin assistant sound editor : peet begley production managers : kathleen walsh , michael podell assistant : janet freeman location unit managers : david burke , bernard katz , peter scarlet production secretary : alice carey production assistants : kristin glover , david henry research : will macdonald sound mixer : richard vorisek engineering supervisor : ed reingold senior video engineer art emerson funding provided by the ford foundation and the corporation for public broadcasting a production of wnet/13 copyright 1973 educational broadcasting corporation . references . further reading . pat loud and nora johnson . pat loud : a woman 's story . coward , mccann & geoghegan , 1974 . jeffrey ruoff . an american family : a televised life . university of minnesota press , 2002 . mark andrejevic . reality tv : the work of being watched . rowman & littlefield publishers , inc . , 2003 . ; . external links . an american family on wnet 's website subterranean cinema : an american family : the story of the louds — articles on the show reviews of the jeffery rouff book an american family : a televised life : january magazine : '' bang the drum loudly '' — richard klin 's review of rouff book documentary box 21 from the yamagata international documentary film festival — anna grimshaw 's review of rouff book nyu 's fales library guide to the '' an american family '' dvd collection