William of Wykeham

early life . william of wykeham ( born william longe ) was the son of john longe , a freeman from wickham in hampshire . he was educated at a school in winchester , and probably enjoyed early patronage from two local men , sir ralph sutton , constable of winchester castle , and sir john scures , lord of the manor of wickham , and then from thomas foxley , constable of windsor castle . in 1349 , wykeham was described as a chaplain when he was appointed rector of irstead in norfolk , a position which was in the gift of the crown . mackenzie e . c . walcott '' william of wykeham , his colleges '' p . 10 . builder . william became secretary to the constable of winchester castle and in that capacity learned about building . this led to architectural work for king edward iii , for whom he reconstructed windsor castle whilst residing at bear 's rails in old windsor . william developed a reputation for the administration and supervision of royal building works during the reign of edward iii . by may 1356 , he was clerk of the works for houses being built for the crown at henley on the heath in surrey and easthampstead in berkshire , and he was appointed surveyor of the long-running works to develop windsor castle in october 1356 . he rapidly rose in royal service , and in july 1359 he was appointed chief keeper and surveyor of windsor castle , leeds castle , dover castle , and hadleigh castle , and many royal manors , including sheen , eltham and langley , effectively in the office later called clerk of works . he also took charge of the building works at queenborough on the isle of sheppey in kent . state administrator under edward iii . william 's career took a turn by 1361 , when he became a royal secretary , part of the administration of the royal finances , and by 1363 he was a royal councillor . he was present when the treaty of brétigny was agreed in calais in 1360 . in january 1361 , edward iii and john ii of france jointly to petitioned pope innocent vi , to make william a canon at lincoln cathedral . he was appointed justice in eyre south of the trent along with peter atte wode in 1361 , a position he held until about 1367 . william was ordained in 1362 and paid for his services by being given the incomes of various churches . for instance , in april 1363 , edward iii presented him to the archdeacon of lincoln , a move that was approved by pope urban v in november 1363 only after representations from sir nicholas de loveyne , the king 's ambassador to the papal court . by 1366 , william held two benefices and eleven prebends , with an annual income exceeding £800 . william had shown considerable talent as an administrator and in june 1363 was appointed lord privy seal fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 94 and then in october 1366 he was elected bishop of winchester , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 277 pope urban v approved his appointment in july 1367 , and he was consecrated at st paul 's cathedral in london on 10 october 1367 and enthroned at winchester cathedral in july 1368 . in 1367 he was appointed chancellor of england . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 86 he struggled to find the funds necessary to pay the army fighting against france after conflict resumed in 1369 . he lost the favour of the king , who turned to william latimer , 4th baron latimer , and he resigned as chancellor in 1371 . as edward iii aged and weakened , william maintained good relationships with edmund mortimer , 3rd earl of march , john of gaunt and edward , the black prince . he remained politically important , and was one of four bishops appointed to the new royal council in may 1376 after latimer was impeached during the good parliament . his friendship with the earl of march led to a long conflict with john of gaunt , who supported latimer . latimer was pardoned by king in october 1376 , and william found himself charged with financial irregularities and mismanagement towards the end of the year . he was banished from court and the income from his church properties was seized in late 1376 , but he was pardoned by the new king richard ii in july 1377 , weeks after edward iii died . ( richard was the son of edward , the black prince , who had died in june 1376 , a year before his father . ) . richard ii . under richard ii , william resumed his position as a royal councillor . although he took the side of the lords appellant in their disputes with the king in 1388 , he also managed to maintain good relations with the king , and served as chancellor again from may 1389 to september 1391 . after years of supporting poor scholars at oxford university , he founded new college , which was granted a royal charter in 1379 . he also founded a grammar school , winchester college , in winchester , obtaining a papal bull in 1378 and a royal licence in 1382 . construction work began in oxford in 1380 , and in winchester in 1387 , under the architect william wynford . at both colleges , william stipulated daily prayers for richard ii and his queen , william and his parents , and his former patrons , sir ralph sutton , sir john scures , and thomas foxley . the funds to endow the colleges , and pay for the building works , came from william 's lucrative church positions , discounting of exchequer tallies ( that is , speculation on tax revenues due to the king ) , exporting wool , and using his influence to obtain papal approval for the acquisition of the income of the '' alien priories '' that belonged to monasteries in france , which were confiscated by the crown during the hundred years ' war . he also started the rebuilding of the nave of winchester cathedral in 1394 . william was concentrating on his foundation by the time henry iv deposed richard ii in 1399 , but he welcomed the new king in winchester in 1400 . death and legacy . william died at bishop 's waltham in hampshire on 27 september 1404 and was buried in his chantry chapel on the south side of the nave in winchester cathedral . at the time of his death , he was one of the richest men in england . much of his wealth went into the schools he patronised , but he also contrived to leave a fortune to a nephew , whose descendants include the twisleton-wykeham-fiennes family and the longe family . william 's motto was 'manners makyth man' . this , along with a coat of arms , were assumed by him and not acquired by descent . his biography was written by robert lowth . he was also written about by lord brougham in his 'old england 's worthies ' ( 1857 ) and by froissart . 'manners makyth man ' is also the motto of the establishments wykeham founded , winchester college and new college , oxford . . citations . references . partner , peter , 'wykeham , william ( c . 1324–1404 ) ' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , may 2009 accessed 28 july 2013 lowth , robert life of william of wykeham , bishop of winchester . london , 1759 moberly , g . h . life of william wykeham . wells , 1887 ; 2nd edition , london , 1893 mackenzie walcott william of wykeham and his colleges . london , 1897 . further reading . john , lord campbell , lives of the lord chancellors and keepers of the great seal of england . london , 1848 ; i , xv , xvii augusta theodosia drane , the three chancellors , or sketches of the lives of william of wykeham , william of waynflete and sir thomas more . london , 1882 ; pp . & nbsp ; 1–112 thomas kitchin , winchester . london , 1890 . virginia davis , william wykeham : a life . london ; new york : hambledon continuum , 2007