Hirta

geography . the island measures from east to west , and from north to south . it has an area of and about of coastline . the only real landing place is in the shelter of village bay on the southeast side of the island . the island slopes gently down to the sea at glen bay ( at the western end of the north coast ) , but the rocks go straight into the sea at a shallow angle and landing here is not easy if there is any swell at all . apart from these two places , the cliffs rise sheer out of deep water . however , sea kayakers can also land for a break on a small boulder beach backed by cliffs in the north of the island , just before the northeast side where the highest summit in the island , conachair , forms a precipice . st kilda is probably the core of a tertiary volcano , but , besides volcanic rocks , it contains hills of sandstone in which the stratum is distinct . is separated from hirta by a shallow strait by ( caolas an dùin ) which is about wide ; the strait is normally impassable but is reputed to dry out on rare occasions . . surrounding stacks . hirta is surrounded by a number of small stacks . , and lie under the cliffs of to the east and further south under the heights of . is west of and is further north under . there are also various large stacks in the narrow strait between hirta and soay : , and . etymology . the origin of hirta is open to interpretation . martin ( 1703 ) states that '' hirta is taken from the irish , which in that language signifies west '' . martin , martin ( 1703 ) . maclean offers several options , including an unspecified celtic word meaning '' gloom '' or '' death '' , later suggested to be – dangerous or deathlike , or the scots gaelic ( '' westland '' ) . drawing on an icelandic saga describing an early 13th-century voyage to ireland that mentions a visit to the islands of '' hirtir '' , he speculates that the shape of hirta resembles a stag , meaning '' stags '' in norse ) . maclean ( 1977 ) p . 33 steel ( 1998 ) quotes the view of reverend neil mackenzie , who lived there from 1829 to 1844 , that the name is derived from the gaelic ( '' high island '' ) , and a further possibility that it is from the norse ( '' shepherd '' ) . steel ( 1988 ) pages 26–27 . in a similar vein , murray ( 1966 ) speculates that the norse ( '' herd island '' , , , may be the origin . murray ( 1966 ) pp . 196 , 236 . another source , in scotland , expanded on the concept of '' west '' : '' its ancient appellation was hirt , hirth , hirta , or hyrtha , a contraction of h-iar-tir , the gaelic for west-land or west-country '' . st . kilda , past and present chapter iii early history and ownership . history and lifestyle . the st kilda islands were continuously populated from prehistoric times . archeologists working at the archipelago between 2017 and 2019 confirmed habitation as long as 2,000 years ago . finds included iron age pottery and some shards that might be from bronze age pottery . the director of the project told bbc news that the work '' revealed that the eastern end of village bay on st kilda was occupied fairly intensively during the iron age period , although no house structures were found '' . in more recent history , hirta was inhabited until 29 august 1930 , when the 36 inhabitants were removed to the scottish mainland at their own request . st kilda was part of the lord of the isles , then a property of the macleods of dunvegan from 1498 until 1930 . st . kilda , past and present chapter iii early history and ownership there were three chapels on st kilda , dedicated to saint brendan , saint columba , and christ church , but little remains . there are also the remains of a beehive house , known as the amazon 's house . according to unesco , '' st kilda represents subsistence economies everywhere – living off the resources of land and sea and changing them over time , until external pressures led to decline '' . indeed , the islanders had a tough life , and survived by exploiting the thousands of sea birds living on the islands . an 1885 report by a surgeon who visited hirta reported that the inhabitants had no fruit or vegetables , except for a few potatoes of poor quality . they ate '' oatmeal , salted fowl , and seabird eggs during summer and salted mutton in winter . they obtained tea , sugar , flour and tobacco from tourists and from the owner 's factor '' . water was obtained from freshwater springs . a history of village bay on hirta states that some improvements in housing were made in the 1830s by the '' landlord and the rev . neil mackenzie '' . the report adds that '' the old village further up the hill was replaced by a crescent of blackhouses . those were damaged by a hurricane , and in 1861 , 16 new dwellings replaced the blackhouses which were relegated to byres '' . missionaries provided education for many years but by 1872 , the state took over ; a true school building was eventually built . a diary ( now owned by the nts ) written by a school teacher who worked in village bay shed some light on life here in the early 1900s . one source offers this perspective about the island in that era : '' relatively speaking , a vibrant , well-connected and economically successful place thanks to a booming tourist trade and a buoyant market for the island ’ s tweed . whaling boats brought supplies of coal and the government was able to provide more services for the islanders – visiting doctors had spent the two weeks . vaccinating its residents – and the frequent presence of english fishing fleets meant they were better linked to the wider world than ever before '' . the same article about hirta states that , '' ironically , things improved with the war ww i , which brought a naval detachment and regular deliveries of mail and food from naval supply vessels . but when these services were withdrawn at end of the war , the sense of isolation increased . able bodied young islanders left for a better life , resulting in a breakdown of the island economy '' . medical care was always limited . in the late 1890s , there was a single nurse stationed on the island , with limited medical supplies . that level continued until the contingent was increased in 1915 . in 1908 , british pathé news released a documentary film , the island of st . kilda , which shed light on the lifestyle in hirta during that era . the film is available for viewing on several web sites . a documentary film which included scenes and people in hirta filmed primarily in 1923 , was rleased in 1928 . the summary for st kilda , britain 's loneliest isle , states : '' a voyage from glasgow to st kilda , containing scenes of the western isles and island life of the crofters on st kilda '' . the film is available for viewing on a national library of scotland web page which also includes a great deal of specifics in the text , in a '' shotlist '' . . declining population . in 1764 ( according to the census ) , 1764 census reveals st kilda residents feasted on 1,600 seabirds a day 29 december 2016 there were 90 st kindans , 105 in 1841 , and 112 in 1851 . the following year , 36 left for australia ; the latter was financed by the highland and island emigration society . scotland 's history : emigration from st kilda 27 february 2019 by the 1861 census , the population was only 71 ; by 1911 it was 74 , and 43 by 1927 , declining to 36 by 1930 . . first world war . early in the world war i , the royal navy erected a signal station on hirta , and the first daily communications with the mainland were established . in a belated response , the german submarine sm u-90 arrived in village bay on the morning of 15 may 1918 and , after issuing a warning , started shelling the island . one report states that '' the wireless station was destroyed . the manse , church & jetty storehouse were damaged , but no loss of life occurred '' . st kilda - western isles - outer hebrides another source offers this perspective about the significance of ww i : '' ironically , things improved with the war , which brought a naval detachment and regular deliveries of mail and food from naval supply vessels . but when these services were withdrawn at end of the war , the sense of isolation increased . able bodied young islanders left for a better life , resulting in a breakdown of the island economy '' . . evacuation and subsequent years . before the evacuation in 1930 , thirteen men , ten women , eight girls and five boys lived in st kilda , all on hirta . the 10 households rented cottages from the landowner , with the other six cottages being unoccupied . the evacuation was encouraged by williamina barclay , the resident queen ’ s nurse , who was very concerned about health issues on hirta , especially after the deaths of two young women . the islanders finally agreed and the majority signed a petition on 10 may 1930 , stating that '' it would be impossible to stay on the island another winter . '' the plan was supported by dugald munro , the missionary and schoolteacher , and by nurse barclay . petition to secretary of state for scotland signed by the islanders of st kilda requesting government assistance to leave the island , 10 may 1930 the evacuation was completed on 29 august 1930 , using the hms harebell which took them to lochaline , in the morvern peninsula . on this day 1930 : the evacuation of st kilda one report provided this summary : the morning of the evacuation promised a perfect day . the sun rose out of a calm and sparkling sea and warmed the impassive cliffs of oiseval . the sky was hopelessly blue and the sight of hirta , green and pleasant as the island of so many careless dreams , made parting all the more difficult . observing tradition the islanders left an open bible and a small pile of oats in each house , locked all the doors and at 7 & nbsp ; am boarded the harebell . although exhausted by the strain and hard work of the last few days , they were reported to have stayed cheerful throughout the operation . but as the long antler of dun fell back onto the horizon and the familiar outline of the island grew faint , the severing of an ancient tie became a reality and the st kildans gave way to tears . maclean ( 1977 ) p . 142 a film made by a private individual in summer 1930 includes some scenes of the '' preparations and evacuation of the island '' . it is owned by the national library of scotland and available for viewing on their web site . according to the national records of scotland , '' officials found forestry work for the men , and most of them were settled at lochaline near oban , while other families went to live at strome ferry , ross-shire , culcabock near inverness , and at culross , fife '' . as of 1930 , st kilda was owned by sir reginald macleod of macleod and sold to the earl of dumfries , later marquess of bute , in 1931 . he bequeathed it national trust for scotland in 1957 . st kilda was designated as scotland 's first world heritage site in 1987 . a few facilities for visitors are available on the island . the ministry of defence established a base on hirta for tracking missiles fired from the station on south uist . . military use . in 1955 , the british government decided to incorporate st kilda into a missile tracking range based in benbecula , where test firings and flights are carried out . a variety of military buildings and masts were erected , including a canteen ( which is not open to the public ) , the puff inn . some of the workers do live on the island throughout the year . '' puff inn statement '' . provided by qinetiq , approved by the mod and published by the national trust for scotland . retrieved 18 october 2012 . the ministry of defence ( mod ) leases st kilda from the national trust for scotland for a nominal fee . steel ( 1988 ) pp . 238–55 . in summer 2018 , the mod facilities were being restored as part of building a new base ; one report stated that the project included '' replacing aged generators and accommodation blocks '' . with no permanent population , the island population can vary between 20 and 70 . these inhabitants include : mod employees , national trust for scotland employees , and several scientists working on a soay sheep research project . . tourism . visits by tourists in summer became quite common starting in the 1870s when steamships and private yachts began arriving . a new pier was built in 1901 , making it easier to land passengers from the larger craft , using rowboats . by mid 2020 , visits to st kilda were not encouraged because facilities were closed due to the worldwide covid-19 pandemic ; as of early february 2021 , the toilet , camp site and shopping facilities in hirta were still closed , according to the nts web site . the nts did not prohibit visits but asked that people seriously consider postponing their plans . the nts suggests that there has been a great deal of interest in diving in the area as well as viewing of seabirds at nearby boreray with its sea stacs . the remnants of the homes built in the early 1860s in village bay ( also known as st kilda village ) and the remnants of three old chapels , are readily visible . a tour operator 's web site states that when facilities in hirta are open , '' the st . kilda museum , school and church provide a fascinating insight into the st kildans ’ way of life . the remains of the village , the graveyard and second world war gun '' can also be viewed . the historic environment scotland web site adds that '' the plain , two-bay church , with the schoolroom added to its north west in 1898 '' was '' restored as they might have appeared in the 1920s '' . the web site also explains that the '' arrangement of st kilda village along a curving street is the result of mid-19th century improvement . distinctive drystone storage structures , known as cleitan , are scattered throughout the landscape . there are over 1,400 cleitan known throughout the st kilda archipelago , but they are concentrated in the area around the village '' . ( a cleit is a small stone building with a thatched roof that was used for drying and storing food . ) the nts has improved the village over the years . '' they have reroofed some of the cottages on the main street , restored the church , and restacked stones that years of gales had toppled from the cleits , or bothies , that dot the volcanic landscape '' , according to a november 2017 report . volunteering on st kilda is all about diy and clearing ditches . yay ! 10 november 2017 one cottage , 3 on '' the street '' , was more extensively restored and turned into the museum . the collection at the edge of the world 21 august 2018 st kilda museum a reviewer who visited hirta in 2020 , however , stated that one should not expect a full restoration of most other cottages . '' although cleared of fixtures and fittings , and in some cases in quite severe disrepair , it ’ s still pretty easy to wander along , poke around inside , and get a good feel to how these people lived '' . why you should visit st kilda prior to the closure of facilities due to the pandemic , day trips for tourists were readily available from tour operators , by boat , some leaving from stein jetty , skye . the 2020 review of st kilda did warn , however , that landing at the pier can be difficult in rough seas : '' you have to step into a small boat which is jolting up and down more than the height of the boat you ’ re on '' . why you should visit st kilda 17 july 2020 . see also . list of islands of scotland list of outlying islands of scotland taraxacum pankhurstianum , the st kilda dandelion . notes . references . maclean , charles ( 1977 ) island on the edge of the world : the story of st . kilda , edinburgh . canongate . martin martin ( 1703 ) '' a voyage to st . kilda '' in a description of the western islands of scotland , appin regiment/appin historical society . retrieved 3 march 2007 w.h . murray ( 1966 ) the hebrides . london . heinemann . steel , tom ( 1988 ) the life and death of st . kilda . london . fontana . external links . michael powell ( director ) . ( 1937 ) . refers to life on hirta , although it was actually shot on foula .