List of minerals

a . : varieties that are not valid species : adamantine spar ( variety of corundum ) agate ( variety of quartz ) alabaster ( variety of gypsum ) alexandrite ( variety of chrysoberyl ) allingite ( synonym of amber ) alum amazonite ( variety of microcline ) amethyst ( purple variety of quartz ) ametrine ( variety of quartz ) ammolite ( organic ; also a gemstone ) amosite ( asbestiform grunerite ) antozonite ( variety of fluorite ) anyolite ( metamorphic rock - zoisite , ruby , and hornblende ) aquamarine ( light blue variety of beryl ) argentite ( high temperature form of acanthite ) asbestos ( fibrous serpentine- or amphibole minerals ) auerlite ( variety of thorite ) avalite ( chromian variety of illite ) aventurine ( variety of quartz ) . b . : varieties that are not valid species : barbertonite ( polytype of stichtite ) bauxite ( aluminium ore ) beckerite ( natural resin ) bentonite ( mixture of montmorillonite and other clays ) bixbite ( red gem variety of beryl ) bowenite ( variety of antigorite ) brammallite ( variety of illite ) brokenhillite ( not approved by ima ) buergerite ( renamed to fluor-buergerite ) bursaite ( not approved by ima ) bytownite ( variety of anorthite ) . c . : varieties that are not valid species : campylite ( variety of mimetite ) carnelian ( variety of quartz ) cementite ( synthetic cohenite ) ceylonite ( variety of spinel ) chalcedony ( cryptocrystalline variety of quartz ) chiastolite ( variety of andalusite ) chlorastrolite ( variety of pumpellyite- ( mg ) ) chrysocolla chrysoprase ( green nickel bearing chalcedony ) chrysotile ( group name - asbestiform serpentine ) citrine ( yellow variety of quartz ) cleveite ( variety of uraninite ) clinochrysotile ( polytype of chrysotile ) coltan ( short for minerals of the columbite group ) crocidolite ( asbestiform riebeckite ) cymophane ( variety of chrysoberyl ) . d . : varieties that are not valid species : delessite ( magnesian chamosite ) . e . : varieties that are not valid species : elsmoreite ( pure hydrokenoelsmoreite ) emerald ( green gem variety of beryl ) . f . : varieties that are not valid species : fassaite ( variety of augite ) ferrocolumbite ( synonym of columbite- ( fe ) ) ferrotantalite ( synonym of tantalite- ( fe ) ) fluorspar ( synonym of fluorite ) francolite ( variety of fluorapatite ) . g . : varieties that are not valid species : garnierite ( a nickel ore ) gedanite ( fossilized resin ) glessite ( natural resin ) goshenite ( colorless variety of beryl ) . h . : varieties that are not valid species : hatchettite ( a paraffin wax ) heliodor ( greenish-yellow variety of beryl ) heliotrope ( variety of chalcedony ) hessonite ( variety of grossular ) hiddenite ( variety of spodumene ) hyalite ( variety of opal ) hyalophane hypersthene ( synonym of enstatite or ferrosilite , or mid-way member of the enstatite–ferrosilite series ) . i . : varieties that are not valid species : idocrase ( synonym of vesuvianite ) iolite ( a gem-quality variety of cordierite ) . j . : varieties that are not valid species : jade ( tough , green mineral either jadeite or nephrite amphibole ) jasper ( variety of quartz ) jeffersonite ( variety of augite ) . k . : varieties that are not valid species : keilhauite ( variety of titanite ) kerolite ( variety of talc ) krantzite ( natural resin ) kunzite ( variety of spodumene ) . l . : varieties that are not valid species : larimar ( blue variety of pectolite ) lignite ( a type of coal ) lodestone ( a synonym of magnetite ) lublinite ( variety of calcite ) . m . : varieties that are not valid species : magnesia magnesiocummingtonite ( magnesium-rich variety of cummingtonite ) malacolite ( synonym of diopside ) manganocolumbite ( synonym of columbite- ( mn ) ) manganotantalite ( synonym of tantalite- ( mn ) ) mariposite ( variety of phengite/muscovite ) meerschaum ( variety of sepiolite ) melanite ( variety of andradite ) menilite ( variety of opal ) milky quartz ( a cloudy white quartz ) morganite ( a pink beryl ) . n . : varieties that are not valid species : nephrite ( variety of actinolite ) niobite ( synonym of columbite ) niobite-tantalite ( synonym of columbite-tantalite ) . o . : varieties that are not valid species : oligoclase ( a mixture of albite and anorthite ) onyx ( a monochromatic banded variety of chalcedony ) orthochrysotile ( a polytype of chrysotile ) . p . : varieties that are not valid species : parachrysotile ( a polytype of chrysotile ) pelagosite ( variety of aragonite ) pericline ( variety of albite ) peridot ( gem-quality olivine ) perlite ( volcanic glass ) phengite ( variety of muscovite ) phosphorite ( name given to impure , massive apatite . ) pimelite ( '' discredited mineral species '' ) pitchblende ( a massive impure form of uraninite ) plessite ( mixture of kamacite and taenite ) potassium alum or potash alum ( as a mineral , is called alum- ( k ) ) . q . qingsongite quartz quenstedtite quetzalcoatlite quintinite qusongite . r . : varieties that are not valid species : rashleighite ( variety of turquoise ) rhodolite ( variety of pyrope ) rock crystal ( quartz ) rose quartz ( pink variety of quartz ) roumanite ( amber ) ruby ( red gem corundum ) . s . : varieties that are not valid species : sapphire ( gem corundum of any color except red , especially blue varieties ) sard ( a variety of chalcedony/quartz ) satinspar ( a variety of gypsum ) selenite ( a variety of gypsum ) simetite ( a variety of amber ) smoky quartz ( a brown or black variety of quartz ) soda niter ( synonym of nitratine ) spectrolite ( a variety of labradorite ) spessartite ( synonym of spessartine ) sphene ( synonym of titanite ) stantienite ( a variety of amber ) sunstone ( a variety of either oligoclase or orthoclase ) . t . : varieties that are not valid species : tanzanite ( variety of zoisite ) thulite ( variety of zoisite ) thuringite ( variety of chamosite ) travertine ( form of calcium carbonate ) tsavorite ( gem variety of grossularite garnet ) . u . : varieties that are not valid species : ultramarine uralite ( alteration actinolite ) . v . w . x . y . ye'elimite yttrialite yttropyrochlore- ( y ) ( obruchevite ) yuksporite : varieties that are not valid species : yttrocerite ( variety of fluorite ) yttrocolumbite ( variety columbite ) . z . : varieties that are not valid species : zajacite- ( ce ) ( name changed to gagarinite- ( ce ) ) zhonghuacerite- ( ce ) ( considered to be kukharenkoite- ( ce ) or huanghoite- ( ce ) ) zinalsite ( synonym for fraipontite )