1935 in literature

events . march 20 – the london publisher boriswood pleads guilty and is fined in manchester 's assize court for publishing an '' obscene '' book , a 1934 cheap edition of james hanley 's 1931 novel boy . may 13 – t . e . lawrence , having left the british royal air force in march , has an accident with his brough superior motorcycle while returning to his cottage at clouds hill , england , after posting books to a friend , a . e . '' jock '' chambers , and sending a telegram inviting the novelist henry williamson to lunch . bodleian library ( oxford ) ms . eng . c . 2014 . he dies six days later . on july 29 his seven pillars of wisdom is first published in an edition for general circulation . june 15 w . h . auden concludes a marriage of convenience with erika mann . t . s . eliot 's verse drama murder in the cathedral is premièred , at canterbury cathedral , the setting for the action of the play . july 30 – allen lane founds penguin books , as the first mass-market paperbacks in britain . august – open-air reading room established by new york public library in bryant park . august 27 – the federal theatre project is established in the united states . september 5 – michael joseph is founded as a publisher in london . november 2 – the scottish-born thriller writer john buchan , 1st baron tweedsmuir , is sworn in as governor general of canada . november 7 – the british and foreign blind association introduces a library of talking books for the visually impaired . november 26 – scrooge , the first feature-length talking film version of dickens ' a christmas carol ( 1843 ) is released in britain . sir seymour hicks reprises the title rôle , which he has performed for decades on stage . unknown dates the library journal die bucherei in nazi germany publishes guidelines for books to be removed from library shelves and destroyed : all those by jewish authors , marxist and pacifist literature , and anything critical of the state . the first published edition of the marquis de sade 's the 120 days of sodom ( les 120 journées de sodome ) , written in 1785 , in a scholarly edition as a literary text , is completed . fredric warburg and roger senhouse retrieves the london publishers martin secker from receivership , as harvill secker . new books . fiction . nelson algren – somebody in boots mulk raj anand – untouchable enid bagnold – national velvet jorge luis borges – a universal history of infamy ( historia universal de la infamia , collected short stories ) elizabeth bowen – the house in paris pearl s . buck – a house divided edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the leopard men dino buzzati – il segreto del bosco vecchio erskine caldwell – journeyman morley callaghan – they shall inherit the earth elias canetti – die blendung john dickson carr death-watch the hollow man ( also the three coffins ) the red widow murders ( as carter dickson ) the unicorn murders ( as carter dickson ) agatha christie three act tragedy death in the clouds solomon cleaver – jean val jean robert p . tristram coffin – red sky in the morning jack conroy – a world to win a . j . cronin – the stars look down h . l . davis – honey in the horn franklin w . dixon – the hidden harbor mystery lawrence durrell – pied piper of lovers e . r . eddison – mistress of mistresses susan ertz now we set out woman alive , but now dead james t . farrell – studs lonigan – a trilogy rachel field – time out of mind charles g . finney – the circus of dr . lao graham greene – england made me george wylie henderson – ollie miss harold heslop – last cage down georgette heyer death in the stocks regency buck christopher isherwood – mr norris changes trains pamela hansford johnson – this bed thy centre anna kavan ( writing as helen ferguson ) – a stranger still sinclair lewis – it ca n't happen here august mälk – õitsev meri ( '' the flowering sea '' ) andré malraux – le temps du mépris ngaio marsh – enter a murderer john masefield – the box of delights naomi mitchison – we have been warned alberto moravia – le ambizioni sbagliate r . k . narayan – swami and friends john o'hara – butterfield 8 george orwell – a clergyman 's daughter ellery queen the spanish cape mystery the lamp of god charles ferdinand ramuz – when the mountain fell marjorie kinnan rawlings – golden apples ernest raymond – we , the accused herbert read – the green child george santayana – the last puritan dorothy l . sayers – gaudy night monica shannon – dobry howard spring – rachel rosing eleanor smith – tzigane john steinbeck – tortilla flat rex stout – the league of frightened men alan sullivan – the great divide phoebe atwood taylor deathblow hill the tinkling symbol a . a . thomson – the exquisite burden ( autobiographical novel ) b . traven – the treasure of the sierra madre s . s . van dine – the garden murder case stanley g . weinbaum – the lotus eaters p . g . wodehouse – blandings castle and elsewhere ( short stories ) xiao hong ( 蕭紅 ) – the field of life and death ( 生死场 , shēng sǐ chǎng ) eiji yoshikawa ( 吉川 英治 ) – musashi ( 宮本武蔵 , miyamoto musashi ) francis brett young – white ladies yumeno kyūsaku ( 夢野 久作 ) – dogra magra ( ドグラマグラ ) . children and young people . enid bagnold – national velvet louise andrews kent – he went with marco polo : a story of venice and cathay ( first of seven in '' he went with '' series ) john masefield – the box of delights kate seredy – the good master laura ingalls wilder – little house on the prairie . drama . j . r . ackerley – the prisoners of war maxwell anderson – winterset t . s . eliot – murder in the cathedral federico garcía lorca – doña rosita the spinster ( doña rosita la soltera ) norman ginsbury – viceroy sarah jean giraudoux – the trojan war will not take place ( la guerre de troie n'aura pas lieu ) walter c . hackett – espionage n.c . hunter – all rights reserved anthony kimmins – chase the ace archibald macleish – panic bernard merivale – the unguarded hour clifford odets – waiting for lefty clifford odets – awake and sing ! premiered february 19 , 1935 at belasco theatre , new york lawrence riley – personal appearance dodie smith – call it a day john van druten – most of the game emlyn williams – night must fall . poetry . see 1935 in poetry . non-fiction . julian bell , ed . – we did not fight : 1914–18 experiences of war resisters m . c . bradbrook – themes and conventions of elizabethan tragedy william henry chamberlin – russia 's iron age manuel chaves nogales – juan belmonte , matador de toros : su vida y sus hazañas ( translated as juan belmonte , killer of bulls ) george dangerfield – the strange death of liberal england clarence day – life with father dion fortune – the mystical qabalah ernest hemingway – green hills of africa anne morrow lindbergh – north to the orient merkantilt biografisk leksikon polish biographical dictionary ( polski słownik biograficzny ) iris origo – allegra ( biography of allegra byron ) caroline spurgeon – shakespeare 's imagery , and what it tells us nigel tranter – the fortalices and early mansions of southern scotland 1400–1650 j . dover wilson – what happens in hamlet thomas wright – the life of charles dickens . births . january 2 – david mckee , english children 's writer and illustrator january 8 – lewis h . lapham , american publisher , founded lapham 's quarterly january 14 – labhshankar thakar , indian gujarati language poet , playwright and story writer ( died 2016 ) january 18 – jon stallworthy , english poet and literary critic ( died 2014 ) january 27 – d . m . thomas , english novelist , poet and translator january 28 – david lodge , english novelist and academic january 30 – richard brautigan , american writer and poet ( died 1984 ) january 31 – kenzaburō ōe ( 大江 健三郎 ) , japanese novelist and essayist february 18 – janette oke , canadian author february 22 – danilo kiš , serbian novelist ( died 1989 ) february 23 – tom murphy , irish playwright ( died 2018 ) march 13 kofi awoonor , ghanaian poet and writer ( killed 2013 ) david nobbs , english comedy writer ( died 2015 ) march 23 – barry cryer , english comedy writer march 27 – abelardo castillo , argentinian writer ( died 2017 ) march 31 – judith rossner , american novelist ( died 2005 ) april 4 – michael horovitz , german-born english poet and translator april 6 – john pepper clark , nigerian poet and playwright april 14 – erich von däniken , swiss writer on paranormal april 15 – alan plater , english playwright and screenwriter ( died 2010 ) may 1 – julian mitchell , english playwright and screenwriter may 2 – lynda lee-potter , english columnist ( died 2004 ) may 29 – andré brink , south african novelist ( died 2015 ) june 4 – shiao yi , taiwanese-american wuxia novelist ( d . 2018 ) june 7 – harry crews , american author and playwright ( died 2012 ) june 25 larry kramer , american playwright , author , film producer and lgbt activist ( died 2020 ) fran ross , african american satirist ( died 1985 ) july 13 – earl lovelace , trinidadian novelist and playwright august 15 – régine deforges , french dramatist , novelist and publisher ( died 2014 ) august 22 – e . annie proulx , american novelist september 10 – mary oliver , american poet ( died 2018 ) september 16 – esther vilar , german-argentinian writer september 17 – ken kesey , american novelist ( died 2001 ) october 7 – thomas keneally , australian novelist and non-fiction writer november 7 elvira quintana , spanish-mexican actress , singer , and poet ( died 1968 ) willibrordus s . rendra , indonesian dramatist , poet , activist , performer , actor and director ( died 2009 ) november 18 sam abrams , american poet rodney hall , australian author and poet november 22 – hugh c . rae ( jessica stirling , etc . ) , scottish novelist ( died 2014 ) december 5 – yevgeny titarenko , soviet writer ( died 2018 ) december 10 – shūji terayama ( 寺山 修司 ) , japanese avant-garde writer , film director and photographer ( died 1983 ) december 13 – adélia prado , brazilian writer and poet unknown date – bahaa taher , egyptian writer . deaths . february 7 – lewis grassic gibbon , scottish novelist ( peritonitis , born 1901 ) february 13 – ioan bianu , romanian librarian , bibliographer and linguist ( uremia , born 1856 or 1857 ) february 28 – tsubouchi shōyō ( 坪内 逍遥 ) , japanese writer ( born 1859 ) april 6 – edwin arlington robinson , american poet ( born 1869 ) april 11 – anna katharine green , american crime writer ( born 1846 ) april 16 – panait istrati , romanian novelist , short story writer and political essayist ( tuberculosis , born 1884 ) may 19 – t . e . lawrence ( lawrence of arabia ) , english historian and memoirist ( motorcycle accident , born 1888 ) august 11 – sir william watson , english poet ( born 1858 ) august 17 – charlotte perkins gilman , american novelist ( born 1860 ) august 30 – henri barbusse , french novelist and journalist ( pneumonia , born 1873 ) september 29 – winifred holtby , english novelist ( bright 's disease , born 1898 ) october 11 – steele rudd , australian short story writer ( born 1868 ) november 30 – fernando pessoa , portuguese poet , philosopher and critic ( cirrhosis , born 1888 ) december 17 – lizette woodworth reese , american poet ( born 1856 ) december 21 – kurt tucholsky , german journalist and satirist ( drug overdose , born 1890 ) december 28 – clarence day , american writer ( born 1874 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : l . h . myers , the root and the flower james tait black memorial prize for biography : r . w . chambers , thomas more newbery medal for children 's literature : monica shannon , dobry nobel prize in literature : not awarded pulitzer prize for drama : zoë akins , the old maid pulitzer prize for poetry : audrey wurdemann , bright ambush pulitzer prize for the novel : josephine winslow johnson , now in november . in literature . march 23 – francis rattenbury is murdered in bournemouth , inspiring the stage plays cause célèbre ( 1977 ) by terence rattigan and molly ( 1978 ) by simon gray . according to anthony burgess 's novel earthly powers ( 1980 ) , this year 's nobel prize in literature is awarded to the fictional writer jakob strehler . references .