Pyrotechnics

proximate pyrotechnics . explosions , flashes , smoke , flames , fireworks or other pyrotechnic driven effects used in the entertainment industry are referred to as proximate pyrotechnics . proximate refers to the pyrotechnic device 's location relative to an audience . in the majority of jurisdictions , special training and licensing must be obtained from local authorities to legally prepare and use proximate pyrotechnics . image : rammstein-flamethrowers.jpg thumb rammstein uses pyrotechnics numerous times in their concerts ; their performance of '' feuer frei ! '' is pictured here . image : stunt pyrotechnics luc viatour.jpg thumb upright pyrotechnics stunt exhibition by '' giant auto rodéo '' , ciney , belgium many musical groups use pyrotechnics to enhance their live shows . pink floyd were innovators of pyrotechnic use in concerts . for instance , at the climax of their song '' careful with that axe , eugene '' , a blast of smoke was set off at the back of the stage . bands such as the who , kiss and queen soon followed with use of pyrotechnics in their shows . michael jackson attempted using pyrotechnics in a 1984 pepsi advertisement , bbc on this day 27 1984 : michael jackson burned in pepsi ad where a stray spark caused a small fire in his hair . german industrial metal band rammstein are renowned for their incorporation of a large variety of pyrotechnics into performances , which range from flaming costumes to face-mounted flamethrowers . nightwish , lordi , sabaton and green day are also known for their vivid pyrotechnics in concert . many professional wrestlers have also used pyrotechnics as part of their entrances to the ring . modern pyrotechnics are , in general , divided into categories based upon the type of effect produced or manufacturing method . the most common categories are : airbust - hanging charges designed to burst into spheres of sparks . binary powders - kits divided into separate oxidizer and fuel , intended to be mixed on site . comet ( meteor ) - brightly colored burning pellets resembling shooting stars . mine - tubes containing a lift charge intended to project stars , sparks , confetti or streamers . preloaded smoke pot - cartridges designed to release a mushroom cloud of smoke . concussion ( cannon simulator , concussion tube ) - device designed to create a loud report . falls - propellant with titanium burning in an open ended tube creating a falling spark effect . fireballs / mortar hits - short barreled device projecting smoky rolling ball of flame . flame projector - tube containing nitrocellulose granules that burn in pillars of colored flame . flare - short , high intensity flames or various colours . flash cotton ( sparkle string ) - nitrated cotton string ( nitrocellulose ) . flashpaper - sheets of nitrated paper ( nitrocellulose ) resembling tissue paper . flash pot - short metal pot used with binary powders creating flash , smoke or sparks . flash tray ( split mine ) - a long tube slit down one side to project a sheet of flash . gerb ( pyrotechnic ) - a fountain of sparks . lance - a small colored flare tube used in making points of light lancework or pictures in fire . line rockets - whistling or colored rocket devices that travel along guide cables . multi-tube article ( multi-shot plate , multiple shot repeater boards and bombardo boards ; designed to function in sequence ) - multiple effects chained together . pre-mixed powder - powders intended to create various effects . ( concussions , flashes , etc . ) squib - a small electrically initiated device replicating bullet hits . strobe - a brightly colored magnesium fueled flare blinking with repetitive flashes . wheel ( saxon ) - tubes that create a spinning wheel of sparks . left a basic theatrical effect , designed to create a jet or fountain of sparks , is referred to as a gerb . a gerb consists of a sufficiently strong and non-flammable container to hold the pyrotechnic compound . typical pyrotechnic formulations consist either of flammable materials such as nitrocellulose and/or black powder or a mixture of a fuel and oxidizer blended in situ . a plug placed at one end of the container with a small orifice , called a choke , constricts the expulsion of the ignited pyrotechnic compound , increasing the size and aggressiveness of the jet . image : jeff-hardy- & -triple-h on stage , -rla-melb-10.11.2007.jpg right thumb pyrotechnics are widely used in professional wrestling , including the wwe , to enhance the event . various ingredients may be added to pyrotechnic devices to provide colour , smoke , noise or sparks . special additives and construction methods are used to modify the character of the effect produced , either to enhance or subdue the effect ; for example , sandwiching layers of pyrotechnic compounds containing potassium perchlorate , sodium salicylate or sodium benzoate with layers that do not creates a fountain of sparks with an undulating whistle . in general , such pyrotechnic devices are initiated by a remotely controlled electrical signal that causes an electric match , or e-match , to produce ignition . the remote control may be manual , via a switch console , or computer controlled according to a pre-programmed sequence and/or a sequence that tracks the live performance via stage cues . display pyrotechnics . display pyrotechnics , also known as commercial fireworks , are pyrotechnic devices intended for use outdoors , where the audience can be further away , and smoke and fallout is less of a concern . generally the effects , though often similar to proximate pyrotechnics , are of a larger size and more vigorous in nature . it will typically take an entire day to set up a professional fireworks display . the size of these fireworks can range from 50 & nbsp ; mm ( 2 '' ) to over 600 & nbsp ; mm ( 24 '' ) diameter depending on the type of effect and available distance from the audience . in most jurisdictions , special fireworks training and licensing must be obtained from local authorities to legally prepare and use display pyrotechnics . consumer pyrotechnics . consumer pyrotechnics are devices readily available for purchase to the general public with little or no special licensing or training . these items are considered relatively low hazard devices but , like all pyrotechnics , can still be hazardous and should be stored , handled and used appropriately . some of the most common examples of consumer pyrotechnics encountered include recreational fireworks ( including whistling and sparking types ) , model rocket motors , highway and marine distress flares , sparklers and caps for toy guns . pyrotechnics are also indirectly involved in other consumer products such as powder actuated nail guns , ammunition for firearms , and modern fireplaces . some types , including bird scarers , shell crackers , whistle crackers and flares , may be designed to be fired from a 12-gauge pistol or rifle . safety . pyrotechnics are dangerous and must be handled and used properly . recently , several high-profile incidents involving pyrotechnics have re-enforced the need to respect these explosives at all times . proximate pyrotechnics is an area of expertise that requires additional training beyond that of other professional pyrotechnics areas and the use of devices specifically manufactured for indoor , close proximity use . homemade devices . thumb a common low-budget pyrotechnic flash pot is built using modified screw-in electric fuses in a common light fixture . the fuses are intentionally blown , acting as ignitors for a pyrotechnic material . homemade devices may fail to include safety features and can provide numerous hazards , including : a firing circuit using high-power , non-isolated ac line voltage can be a shock hazard to the operator and bystanders . the use of high-current fuses as ignitors can cause main circuit breakers and fuses to trip , due to the sudden inrush of hundreds of amperes through a dead-shorted circuit . switches used to control ignition may be damaged from the high-current surges . there may not be indicators or interlocks preventing premature ignition of the pyrotechnic material . screwing a powder-loaded fuse into an unknowingly powered socket will result in immediate ignition , injuring the operator . commercial flash pots include safety features such as warning pilot lamps , preignition grounding , and safing circuits . they also use isolated and low-voltage power sources , and have keyed power connections to help prevent accidental ignition . pyrotechnic incidents . pyrotechnics can be dangerous substances that must always be treated with the utmost respect and with the proper training . due to the hazardous nature of these materials , precautions must always be taken to ensure the safety of all individuals in the vicinity of pyrotechnics . despite all precautions , accidents and errors occur from time to time , which may result in property damage , injury and in severe cases loss of life . these incidents may be the result of poorly manufactured product , unexpected or unforeseen events , or in many cases , the result of operator error . some of the more widely publicized incidents involving pyrotechnics in recent history include : at olympic stadium in montreal during the guns n ' roses/metallica stadium tour on august 8 , 1992 , metallica frontman james hetfield was the victim of a severe pyrotechnics accident during the song '' fade to black '' , in which a pyrotechnic charge exploded . hetfield 's guitar protected him from the full force of the blast ; however , the fire engulfed his left side , burning his hand , arm , eyebrows , face and hair . he suffered second and third-degree burns , but was back on stage 17 days later . in 2003 , improper use of pyrotechnics caused a fire in a rhode island nightclub called the station . the station nightclub fire was started when fireworks used by the band great white accidentally ignited flammable soundproofing foam . the pyrotechnics in question were not appropriate . the foam caused combustion to spread rapidly and the resulting fire led to 100 deaths , apparently because their quick escape was blocked by ineffective exit doors . while the type of foam used and the lack of a sprinkler system were important factors in the fire , nist.gov the great white fire could likely have been prevented had those involved paid attention to standard safety practices around the use of pyrotechnics . nfpa.org a similar pyrotechnic-induced fire in 2004 destroyed the republica cromagnon nightclub in buenos aires , argentina , killing 194 people . in may 2000 , a small fire led to two massive explosions at the se fireworks depot in enschede , the netherlands , leaving 23 people dead , 947 people injured , and an estimated 2,000 homes damaged or destroyed . in march 2008 , a pyrotechnic lead cable snapped during the end of the show pyrotechnics , causing some minor burns and injuries to the crowd at wwe wrestlemania 24 leading to a big investigation . in february 2010 at the elimination chamber ppv , a pyrotechnic flame engulfed wwe wrestler the undertaker . he was seen with multiple burns throughout the show , but managed to go ahead with the match after pouring bottles over himself . in july 2011 , rihanna 's performance of '' california king bed '' was forced to be the finale of her show during the loud tour in dallas as a fire broke out from the pyrotechnics having caused a small fire above where rihanna had been performing . because of this , the show ended early . in july 2012 , a wwe raw pyrotechnic rehearsal caused a small fire on the led wall before doors opened . crews put it out before it could get any bigger . no one was injured but the doors were opened thirty minutes late . on january 27 , 2013 , at the '' kiss '' nightclub in santa maria , brazil , an accident due to the use of pyrotechnics by the performing live show band caused a fire which resulted in the deaths of at least 236 people , while dozens suffered serious injuries from the fire and smoke inhalation . in january 2015 a fireworks factory in granada , colombia exploded injuring one person . on june 13 , 2015 , michael clifford of 5 seconds of summer suffered face , hair , and shoulder injuries from a pyrotechnics accident on the rock out with your socks out tour at the wembley arena , london . calum hood suffered a minor burn on his arm in the incident . on october 30 , 2015 , at the colectiv nightclub in bucharest , romania , pyrotechnics used by the band goodbye to gravity accidentally ignited soundproofing foam on a pillow . the fire quickly spread onto the ceiling and the rest of the club . this led to the death of 64 people and injured approximately 200 others . four members of goodbye to gravity lost their lives , and only their soloist survived . it remains the worst night club fire in romania 's history . 2 september 2019 : joana sainz garcía , spanish singer and dancer of super hollywood orchestra , died in las berlanas , spain when a pyrotechnic was shot in the wrong direction during the on-stage explosion . on may 1 2020 , pyrotechnics caused damage to a factory in zürich , an investigation into the cause of the incident is underway . on september 5 , 2020 , a '' smoke generating pyrotechnic device '' caused a wildfire in yucaipa , california during a gender-reveal party in el dorado ranch park . the california department of forestry and fire prevention did not give out any more details regarding the party . . see also . fireworks list of nightclub fires . notes . . references . natural resources canada ( 2003 ) , '' pyrotechnics special effects manual . edition 2 '' minister of public works and government services canada nfpa ( 2006 ) , '' nfpa 160 ; standard for flame effects before an audience '' nfpa international nfpa ( 2006 ) , '' nfpa 1123 ; code for fireworks display '' nfpa international nfpa ( 2006 ) , '' nfpa 1126 ; standard for the use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience '' nfpa international . external links . explosives safety and security branch ; a division of natural resources canada . canadian fireworks association acp pgi.org – pyrotechnics guild international pyroguide – pyrotechnics wiki film pyrotechnics pyrotechnic film examples