Stephen Foster

television . two television shows about the life of foster and his childhood friend ( and later wife ) jane macdowell were produced in japan , the first in 1979 with 13 episodes , and the second from 1992 to 1993 with 52 episodes ; both were titled jeanie with the light brown hair after the song of the same name . in the honeymooners episode , '' the 99,000 answer , '' ralph kramden studies decades ' worth of popular songs for his upcoming appearance on a television game show . before each song , ed norton warms up on the piano by playing the opening to '' swanee river . '' on the program , ralph is asked his first question for just 100 dollars : '' who is the composer of 'swanee river ' ? '' ralph freezes , then nervously responds '' ed norton ? '' and loses . in a '' fractured fairy tales '' segment of the rocky and bullwinkle show , aladdin finds a lamp with a female genie with light brown hair , who immediately asks , '' are you stephen foster ? '' . film . three hollywood films have been made of foster 's life : harmony lane ( 1935 ) with douglass montgomery , swanee river ( 1939 ) with don ameche , and i dream of jeanie ( 1952 ) , with bill shirley . the 1939 production was one of twentieth century fox 's more ambitious efforts , filmed in technicolor ; the other two were low-budget affairs made by b-movie studios . in the film tombstone ( 1993 ) , billy clanton ( played by thomas haden church ) tries to bait doc holliday ( val kilmer ) , who is playing a chopin nocturne on the piano , by saying , '' is that 'old dog tray ' ? that sounds like 'old dog tray ' to me . '' when the goad fails , clanton asks whether doc knows any other songs , like '' 'camptown races ? ' , 'oh susanna ' , '' you know , stephen stinkin ' foster ? ! ? '' in the film a million ways to die in the west , seth macfarlane 's character albert ca n't get foster 's song '' if you 've only got a mustache '' , from the previous scene , out of his head . charlize theron 's character suggests singing a different song , to which he replies , '' there are only like 3 songs , '' and she adds '' and they 're all by stephen foster '' . in the 1949 film mighty joe young the character jill young ( terry moore ) is able to calm her pet 12-foot-tall gorilla by whistling or playing '' beautiful dreamer '' . other events . '' stephen foster ! super saturday '' is a day of thoroughbred racing during the spring/summer meet at churchill downs in louisville , kentucky . during the call to the post , selections of stephen foster songs are played by the track bugler , steve buttleman . the day is headlined by the stephen foster handicap , a grade i dirt race for older horses at 9 furlongs . 36 u.s.c . ยง140 designates january 13 as stephen foster memorial day , a united states national observance . in 1936 , congress authorized the minting of a silver half dollar in honor of the cincinnati musical center . foster was featured on the obverse of the coin . '' stephen foster music camp '' is a summer music camp held on eku 's campus of richmond , kentucky . the camp offers piano courses , choir , band , and orchestra ensembles . art . a public sculpture by giuseppe moretti honoring foster and commemorating his song '' uncle ned '' sat in close proximity to the stephen foster memorial until 2018 . the statue was removed following complaints about the banjo-playing slave seated next to foster . in alms park in cincinnati , overlooking the ohio river , there is a seated statue of him . the hall of fame for great americans in the bronx , overlooking the harlem river , has a bronze bust of him by artist walter hancock . added in 1940 , he is among only 98 honorees from 15 classes of distinguished men and women . in my old kentucky home state park in bardstown , kentucky , a musical , called the stephen foster story has been performed since 1958 . there is also a statue of him next to the federal hill mansion , where he visited relatives and which is the inspiration for my old kentucky home . a painting by howard chandler christy entitled , '' stephen foster and the angel of genius '' is on display in the park 's art collection . the painting inspired florence foster jenkins to author a tableau in which she personally plays the role of the angel depicted in christy 's painting . the scene was featured in the film florence foster jenkins in 2016 . accolades and honors . foster is honored on the university of pittsburgh campus with the stephen foster memorial , a landmark building that houses the stephen foster memorial museum , the center for american music , as well as two theaters : the charity randall theatre and henry heymann theatre , both performance spaces for pitt 's department of theater arts . it is the largest repository for original stephen foster compositions , recordings , and other memorabilia his songs have inspired worldwide . two state parks are named in foster 's honor : the stephen foster folk culture center state park in white springs , florida and stephen c . foster state park in georgia . both parks are on the suwannee river . stephen foster lake at mount pisgah state park in pennsylvania is also named in his honor . one state park is named in honor of foster 's songs , my old kentucky home , an historic mansion formerly named federal hill , located in bardstown , kentucky where stephen is said to have been an occasional visitor according to his brother , morrison foster . the park dedicated a bronze statue in honor of stephen 's work . the lawrenceville ( pittsburgh ) historical society , together with the allegheny cemetery historical association , hosts the annual stephen foster music and heritage festival ( doo dah days ! ) . held the first weekend of july , doo dah days ! celebrates the life and music of one of the most influential songwriters in america 's history . his home in the lawrenceville section of pittsburgh , pennsylvania , still remains on penn avenue nearby the stephen foster community center . a 1900 statue of foster by giuseppe moretti was located in schenley plaza , in pittsburgh , from 1940 until 2018 . on the unanimous recommendation of the pittsburgh art commission , the statue was removed on april 26 , 2018 . its new home has not yet been determined . it has a long reputation as the most controversial public art in pittsburgh '' for its depiction of an african-american banjo player at the feet of the seated composer . critics say the statue glorifies white appropriation of black culture , and depicts the vacantly smiling musician in a way that is at best condescending and at worst racist . '' a city-appointed task force on women in public art called for the statue to be replaced with one honoring an african american woman with ties to the pittsburgh community . the task force held a series of community forums in pittsburgh to collect public feedback on the statue replacement and circulated an online form which allowed the public to vote for one of seven previously selected candidates or write in an alternate suggestion . however , the task force on women in public art and the pittsburgh art commission have not reached an agreement as to who will be commemorated or if the statue will stay in the schenley plaza location . . see also . the stephen foster collection and archive & ndash ; most primary sources related to his life , family and music have been retained by the university of pittsburgh library system as the foster hall collection housed in the stephen foster memorial . these materials were obtained from philanthropists , or donated by collectors or his heirs . notes . . references . further reading . o'connell , joanne ( 2016 ) . the life and songs of stephen foster : a revealing portrait of the forgotten man behind swanee river , beautiful dreamer , and my old kentucky home . lanham , md : rowman and littlefield . p . & nbsp ; 321 . . external links . archives of stephen foster at the university of kentucky pittsburgh music history hymns and songs by stephen foster stephen collins foster recordings at the discography of american historical recordings . music scores sheet music for '' i see her still in my dreams '' , macon , ga : john c . schreiner & son , from the confederate imprints sheet music collection sheet music for '' parthenia to incomar '' , macon , ga : john c . schreiner & son , from the confederate imprints sheet music collection '' the melodies of stephen c . foster '' ( online version ) pittsburgh , pa : t.m . walker , full sheet music book , 307 pages