Oliver Twist

publications . the novel was originally published in monthly instalments in the magazine bentley 's miscellany , from february 1837 to april 1839 . it was originally intended to form part of dickens 's serial , the mudfog papers . dickens , charles . oliver twist , or , the parish boy 's progress edited by philip horne . penguin classics , 2003 , p . 486 . bentley 's miscellany , 1837 . george cruikshank provided one steel etching per month to illustrate each instalment . schlicke , paul ( editor ) . oxford reader 's companion to dickens . oxford : oxford university press , 1999 , p . 141 . the novel first appeared in book form six months before the initial serialisation was completed , in three volumes published by richard bentley , the owner of bentley 's miscellany , under the author 's pseudonym , '' boz '' . it included 24 steel-engraved plates by cruikshank . the first edition was titled : oliver twist , or , the parish boy 's progress . serial publication dates : masterpiece theater on pbs.org i – february 1837 ( chapters 1–2 ) ii – march 1837 ( chapters 3–4 ) iii – april 1837 ( chapters 5–6 ) iv – may 1837 ( chapters 7–8 ) v – july 1837 ( chapters 9-11 ) vi – august 1837 ( chapters 12–13 ) vii – september 1837 ( chapters 14–15 ) viii – november 1837 ( chapters 16–17 ) ix – december 1837 ( chapters 18–19 ) x – january 1838 ( chapters 20–22 ) xi – february 1838 ( chapters 23–25 ) xii – march 1838 ( chapters 26–27 ) xiii – april 1838 ( chapters 28–30 ) xiv – may 1838 ( chapters 31–32 ) xv – june 1838 ( chapters 33–34 ) xvi – july 1838 ( chapters 35–37 ) xvii – august 1838 ( chapters 38–part of 39 ) xviii – october 1838 ( conclusion of chapter 39–41 ) xix – november 1838 ( chapters 42–43 ) xx – december 1838 ( chapters 44–46 ) xxi – january 1839 ( chapters 47–49 ) xxii – february 1839 ( chapter 50 ) xxiii – march 1839 ( chapter 51 ) xxiv – april 1839 ( chapters 52–53 ) . plot summary . workhouse years . image : mr bumble 1889 dickens oliver twist character by kyd ( joseph clayton clarke ) . jpg thumb right upright mr bumble by joseph clayton clarke oliver twist is born into a life of poverty and misfortune , raised in a workhouse in the fictional town of mudfog , located north of london . he is orphaned by his father 's mysterious absence and his mother agnes ' death in childbirth , welcomed only in the workhouse and robbed of her gold name locket . oliver is meagerly provided for under the terms of the poor law and spends the first nine years of his life living at a baby farm in the 'care ' of a woman named mrs mann , who embezzles much of the money entrusted to the baby farm by the parish . oliver is brought up with little food and few comforts . around the time of oliver 's ninth birthday , mr bumble , the parish beadle , removes oliver from the baby farm and puts him to work picking and weaving oakum at the main workhouse . oliver , who toils with very little food , remains in the workhouse for six months . one day , the desperately hungry boys decide to draw lots ; the loser must ask for another portion of gruel . this task falls to oliver himself , who at the next meal comes forward trembling , bowl in hand , and begs the master for gruel with his famous request : '' please , sir , i want some more '' . a great uproar ensues . the board of well-fed gentlemen who administer the workhouse hypocritically offer £5 to any person wishing to take on the boy as an apprentice . mr gamfield , a brutal chimney sweep , almost claims oliver . however , when oliver begs despairingly not to be sent away with '' that dreadful man '' , a kindly magistrate refuses to sign the indentures . later , mr sowerberry , an undertaker employed by the parish , takes oliver into his service . he treats oliver better and , because of the boy 's sorrowful countenance , uses him as a mourner at children 's funerals . mr sowerberry is in an unhappy marriage , and his wife looks down on oliver and misses few opportunities to underfeed and mistreat him . he also suffers torment at the hands of noah claypole , an oafish and bullying fellow apprentice and '' charity boy '' who is jealous of oliver 's promotion to mute , and charlotte , the sowerberrys ' maidservant , who is in love with noah . wanting to bait oliver , noah insults oliver 's mother , calling her '' a regular right-down bad 'un '' . enraged , oliver assaults and even gets the better of the much bigger boy . however , mrs sowerberry takes noah 's side , helps him to subdue , punch , and beat oliver , and later compels her husband and mr bumble , who has been sent for in the aftermath of the fight , to beat oliver again . once oliver is sent to his room for the night he breaks down and weeps . the next day oliver escapes from the sowerberrys ' house and later decides to run away to london to seek a better life . london , the artful dodger and fagin . nearing london , oliver encounters jack dawkins , a pickpocket more commonly known by the nickname the '' artful dodger '' , and his sidekick , a boy of a humorous nature named charley bates , but oliver 's innocent and trusting nature fails to see any dishonesty in their actions . the dodger provides oliver with a free meal and tells him of a gentleman in london who will '' give him lodgings for nothing , and never ask for change '' . grateful for the unexpected assistance , oliver follows the dodger to the '' old gentleman 's '' residence . in this way oliver unwittingly falls in with an infamous jewish criminal known as fagin , the gentleman of whom the artful dodger spoke . ensnared , oliver lives with fagin and his gang of juvenile pickpockets in their lair at saffron hill for some time , unaware of their criminal occupations . he believes they make wallets and handkerchiefs . he is also clueless about fagin 's lessons with the boys , whereupon he impersonates an english gentleman browsing shops , and the boys must pick everything from his pockets while staying out of sight . oliver considers this a strange game . fagin has oliver in this training until he successfully picks everything off him . fagin rewards oliver with a shilling and orders him out on the street with charley bates and the artful dodger . oliver follows the pair to '' make handkerchiefs '' , only to learn that their real mission is to pick pockets . the dodger and charley steal the handkerchief of an old gentleman named mr . brownlow and promptly flee . when he finds his handkerchief missing , mr brownlow turns round , sees oliver running away in fright , and pursues him , thinking he was the thief . others join the chase , capture oliver , and bring him before the magistrate . curiously , mr brownlow has second thoughts about the boy & nbsp ; – he seems reluctant to believe he is a pickpocket . to the judge 's evident disappointment , a bookstall holder who saw the dodger commit the crime clears oliver , who , by now actually ill , faints in the courtroom . mr brownlow takes oliver home and , along with his housekeeper mrs bedwin , cares for him . while recovering , both mrs . bedwin and mr . brownlow notice how oliver bears a striking resemblance to a painting of a woman who was the wife of a deceased friend of mr . brownlow 's . image : bill-sikes.jpg right thumb upright bill sikes by fred barnard oliver stays with mr brownlow , recovers rapidly , and blossoms from the unaccustomed kindness . his bliss is interrupted when fagin , fearing oliver might tell the police about his criminal gang , decides that oliver must be brought back to his hideout . when mr brownlow sends oliver out to pay for some books , one of the gang , a young girl named nancy , whom oliver had previously met at fagin 's , accosts him with help from her abusive lover , the robber bill sikes , and oliver is quickly bundled back to fagin 's lair . the thieves take the five-pound note mr brownlow had entrusted to him , and strip him of his fine new clothes . oliver , shocked , flees and attempts to call for police assistance , but is dragged back by the artful dodger , charley , and fagin . nancy , alone , is sympathetic towards oliver and saves him from beatings by fagin and sikes . in a renewed attempt to draw oliver into a life of crime , fagin forces him to participate in a burglary . nancy reluctantly assists in recruiting him , all the while assuring the boy that she will help him if she can . sikes , after threatening to kill him if he does not cooperate , puts oliver through a small window and orders him to unlock the front door . the robbery goes wrong and oliver is shot by people in the house and wounded in his left arm . after being abandoned by sikes , the wounded oliver makes it back to the house and ends up under the care of the people he was supposed to rob : miss rose and her guardian mrs maylie . mystery of a man called '' monks '' . the mysterious man monks plots with fagin to destroy oliver 's reputation . monks denounces fagin 's failure to turn oliver into a criminal , and the two of them agree on a plan to make sure he does not find out about his past . monks is apparently related to oliver in some way . back in oliver 's hometown , mr bumble has married mrs corney , the matron of the workhouse where the story first began , only to find himself in an unhappy marriage , constantly arguing with his domineering wife . after one such argument , mr bumble walks to a pub where he meets monks , who questions him about oliver . bumble informs monks that he knows someone who can give monks more information for a price , and later monks meets secretly with the bumbles . after mrs bumble tells monks all she knows for a price , monks takes the locket and ring proving oliver 's parents , which had once belonged to oliver 's mother , and drops them into the river flowing under his place . monks relates these events to fagin , unaware that nancy is eavesdropping on their conversations and plans to inform oliver 's benefactors . mr brownlow returns to london , where oliver sees him , and brings him to meet the maylies . now ashamed of her role in oliver 's kidnapping and worried for the boy 's safety , nancy goes to rose maylie , staying in london . she knows that monks and fagin are plotting to get their hands on the boy again , and offers to meet again any sunday night on london bridge . rose tells mr brownlow , and the two then make plans with all their party in london . the first sunday night , nancy tries to leave for her walk , but sikes refuses permission when she declines to state exactly where she is going . fagin realizes that nancy is up to something , perhaps has a new boyfriend , and resolves to find out what her secret is . meanwhile , noah has fallen out with the undertaker mr sowerberry , stolen money from him , and fled to london with charlotte . using the name '' morris bolter '' , he joins fagin 's gang for protection and becomes a practicer of '' the kinchin lay '' ( robbing of children ) , and charlotte is put with the girls . fagin sends noah to watch the artful dodger on trial , after he is caught with a stolen silver snuff box ; the dodger is convicted while showing his style , with a punishment of transportation to australia . next , noah is sent by fagin to spy on nancy , and discovers her meeting with rose and mr brownlow on the bridge , hearing their discussion of why she did not appear the prior week and how to save oliver from fagin and monks . fagin angrily passes the information on to sikes , twisting the story to make it sound as if nancy had informed on him , when she had not . believing nancy to be a traitor , sikes beats her to death in a fit of rage that very night and flees to the countryside to escape from the police and his conscience . there , sikes is haunted by visions of nancy and alarmed by news of her murder spreading across the countryside . he returns to london to find a hiding place and intends to steal money from fagin and flee to france , only to die by accidentally hanging himself while attempting to lower himself from a rooftop to flee from a mob angry at nancy 's murder . resolution . while sikes is fleeing the mob , mr brownlow forces monks to listen to the story connecting him , once called edward leeford , and oliver as half brothers , or to face the police for his crimes . their father , edwin leeford , was once friends with brownlow . edwin had been in a miserable marriage that produced monks , only to have monk 's mother separate . edwin had associated with an older gentleman who was friends to him and mr . brownlow , who had had two daughters , one who was a girl of seventeen and the other a toddler . edwin fell in love with the elder daughter , agnes , but their relationship had been secretive . edwin had to help a dying friend in rome , and then died there himself , leaving agnes , '' his guilty love '' , in england , whereupon she died after giving birth to oliver . mr brownlow has a picture of agnes and had begun making inquiries when he noticed a marked resemblance between her and oliver . monks had hunted his brother to destroy him , to gain all in their father 's will . meeting with monks and the bumbles in oliver 's native town , brownlow asks oliver to give half his inheritance to monks to give him a second chance ; oliver is more than happy to comply . monks moves to '' the new world '' , where he squanders his money , reverts to crime , and dies in prison . fagin is arrested , tried and condemned to the gallows . on the eve of fagin 's hanging , oliver , accompanied by mr brownlow in an emotional scene , visits fagin in newgate prison , in hope of retrieving papers from monks . fagin is lost in a world of his own fear of impending death . on a happier note , monks revealed that rose was the younger sister of agnes , and thus oliver 's aunt . she marries her sweetheart harry maylie , who gives up his political ambitions to become a parson , drawing all their friends to settle near them . oliver lives happily with mr brownlow , who adopts him . due to noah 's cooperation with the law during the pursuit of fagin , he is granted immunity and becomes a paid , semi-professional police informer . the bumbles lose their positions and are reduced to poverty , ending up in the workhouse themselves . all the members of fagin 's gang suffer unhappy endings , with one exception . charley bates , horrified by sikes ' murder of nancy , becomes an honest citizen , moves to the country , and eventually becomes prosperous . the novel ends with the tombstone of oliver 's mother on which it is written only one name : agnes . characters . oliver twist – an orphan child whose mother died at his birth ; father is dead when oliver 's paternity is revealed . mr bumble – a beadle in the parish workhouse where oliver was born mrs mann – superintendent where the infant oliver is placed until age 9 who is not capable of caring for the '' culprits '' as she is self-centered and greedy . mr sowerberry – an undertaker who took oliver as apprentice mrs sowerberry – mr sowerberry 's wife noah claypole – a cowardly bully , sowerberry 's apprentice charlotte – the sowerberrys ' maid , lover of noah mr gamfield – a chimney sweep in the town where oliver was born mr brownlow – a kindly gentleman who takes oliver in , his first benefactor mr grimwig – a friend of mr brownlow mrs bedwin – mr brownlow 's housekeeper rose maylie – oliver 's second benefactor , later found to be his aunt mrs lindsay maylie – harry maylie 's mother . rose maylie 's adoptive aunt harry maylie – mrs maylie 's son mr losberne – mrs maylie 's family doctor mr giles – mrs maylie 's butler mr brittles – mrs maylie 's handyman duff and blathers – two incompetent policemen fagin – fence and boss of a criminal gang of young boys and girls bill sikes – a professional burglar bull 's eye – bill sikes 's vicious dog the artful dodger – fagin 's most adept pickpocket charley bates – a pickpocket in fagin 's gang toby crackit – an associate of fagin and sikes , a house-breaker nancy – one of fagin 's gang , now living with bill sikes bet – a girl in fagin 's gang , sometime friend to nancy barney – a jewish criminal cohort of fagin agnes fleming – oliver 's mother mr leeford – father of oliver and monks old sally – a nurse who attended oliver 's birth mrs corney – matron for the women 's workhouse monks – a sickly criminal , an associate of fagin 's , and long-lost half-brother of oliver monks ' mother – an heiress who did not love her husband mr fang – a magistrate tom chitling – one of fagin 's gang members , returned from abroad at the time of the murder . major themes and symbols . image : bill sikes 1889 dickens oliver twist character by kyd ( joseph clayton clarke ) . jpg thumb left upright bill sikes by joseph clayton clarke image : clarke-dodger.jpg thumb right upright the artful dodger by joseph clayton clarke in oliver twist , dickens mixes grim realism with merciless satire to describe the effects of industrialism on 19th-century england and to criticise the harsh new poor laws . oliver , an innocent child , is trapped in a world where his only options seem to be the workhouse , a life of crime symbolised by fagin 's gang , a prison , or an early grave . from this unpromising industrial/institutional setting , however , a fairy tale also emerges . in the midst of corruption and degradation , the essentially passive oliver remains pure-hearted ; he steers away from evil when those around him give in to it , and in proper fairy-tale fashion , he eventually receives his reward – leaving for a peaceful life in the country , surrounded by kind friends . on the way to this happy ending , dickens explores the kind of life an outcast , orphan boy could expect to lead in 1830s london . j . hillis miller . '' the dark world of oliver twist '' in charles dickens ( harold bloom , editor ) , new york : chelsea house publishers , 1987 , p . 35 . poverty and social class . poverty is a prominent concern in oliver twist . throughout the novel , dickens enlarged on this theme , describing slums so decrepit that whole rows of houses are on the point of ruin . in an early chapter , oliver attends a pauper 's funeral with mr sowerberry and sees a whole family crowded together in one miserable room . this prevalent misery makes oliver 's encounters with charity and love more poignant . oliver owes his life several times over to kindness both large and small . walder , dennis , '' oliver twist and charity '' in oliver twist : a norton critical edition ( fred kaplan , editor ) . new york : w.w . norton , 1993 , pp . 515–525 the apparent plague of poverty that dickens describes also conveyed to his middle-class readers how much of the london population was stricken with poverty and disease . nonetheless , in oliver twist , he delivers a somewhat mixed message about social caste and social injustice . oliver 's illegitimate workhouse origins place him at the nadir of society ; as an orphan without friends , he is routinely despised . his '' sturdy spirit '' keeps him alive despite the torment he must endure . most of his associates , however , deserve their place among society 's dregs and seem very much at home in the depths . noah claypole , a charity boy like oliver , is idle , stupid , and cowardly ; sikes is a thug ; fagin lives by corrupting children , and the artful dodger seems born for a life of crime . many of the middle-class people oliver encounters—mrs sowerberry , mr bumble , and the savagely hypocritical '' gentlemen '' of the workhouse board , for example—are , if anything , worse . on the other hand , oliver for a workhouse boy—proves to be of gentle birth . although he has been abused and neglected all his life , he recoils , aghast , at the idea of victimising anyone else . this apparently hereditary gentlemanliness makes oliver twist something of a changeling tale , not just an indictment of social injustice . oliver , born for better things , struggles to survive in the savage world of the underclass before finally being rescued by his family and returned to his proper place—a commodious country house . the 2005 film adaptation of oliver twist of the novel dispenses with the paradox of oliver 's genteel origins by eliminating his origin story completely , making him just another anonymous orphan like the rest of fagin 's gang . image : oliver twist - cruikshank - the burgulary.jpg right thumb upright oliver is wounded in a burglary , by george cruikshank . symbolism . dickens makes considerable use of symbolism . the '' merry old gentleman '' fagin , for example , has satanic characteristics : he is a veteran corrupter of young boys who presides over his own corner of the criminal world ; he makes his first appearance standing over a fire holding a toasting-fork , and he refuses to pray on the night before his execution . miller , ibid , p . 48 the london slums , too , have a suffocating , infernal aspect ; the dark deeds and dark passions are concretely characterised by dim rooms and pitch-black nights , while the governing mood of terror and brutality may be identified with uncommonly cold weather . in contrast , the countryside where the maylies take oliver is a bucolic heaven . the novel is also concerned with social class , and the stark injustice in oliver 's world . when the half-starved child dares to ask for more , the men who punish him are fat , and a remarkable number of the novel 's characters are overweight . toward the end of the novel , the gaze of knowing eyes becomes a potent symbol . for years , fagin avoids daylight , crowds , and open spaces , concealing himself most of the time in a dark lair . when his luck runs out at last , he squirms in the '' living light '' of too many eyes as he stands in the dock , awaiting sentence . similarly , after sikes kills nancy at dawn , he flees the bright sunlight in their room , out to the countryside , but is unable to escape the memory of her dead eyes . in addition , charley bates turns his back on crime when he sees the murderous cruelty of the man who has been held up to him as a model . characters . image : cruikshank - the last chance ( oliver twist ) . png right thumb upright the last chance , by george cruikshank . in the tradition of restoration comedy and henry fielding , dickens fits his characters with appropriate names . oliver himself , though '' badged and ticketed '' as a lowly orphan and named according to an alphabetical system , is , in fact , '' all of a twist . '' ashley , leonard . what 's in a name ? : everything you wanted to know . genealogical publishing , 1989 , p . 200 . however , oliver and his name may have been based on a young workhouse boy named peter tolliver whom dickens knew while growing up . richardson , ruth . '' dickens and the workhouse : oliver twist and the london poor . '' oxford university press , usa , 2012 , p . 56 . mr grimwig is so called because his seemingly '' grim '' , pessimistic outlook is actually a protective cover for his kind , sentimental soul . other character names mark their bearers as semi-monstrous caricatures . mrs mann , who has charge of the infant oliver , is not the most motherly of women ; mr bumble , despite his impressive sense of his own dignity , continually mangles the king 's english he tries to use ; and the sowerberries are , of course , '' sour berries '' , a reference to mrs sowerberry 's perpetual scowl , to mr sowerberry 's profession as an undertaker , and to the poor provender oliver receives from them . rose maylie 's name echoes her association with flowers and springtime , youth and beauty while toby crackit 's is a reference to his chosen profession of housebreaking . bill sikes 's dog , bull's-eye , has '' faults of temper in common with his owner '' and is an emblem of his owner 's character . the dog 's viciousness represents sikes 's animal-like brutality while sikes 's self-destructiveness is evident in the dog 's many scars . the dog , with its willingness to harm anyone on sikes 's whim , shows the mindless brutality of the master . sikes himself senses that the dog is a reflection of himself and that is why he tries to drown the dog . he is really trying to run away from who he is . this is also illustrated when sikes dies and the dog immediately dies as well . after sikes murders nancy , bull's-eye also comes to represent sikes 's guilt . the dog leaves bloody footprints on the floor of the room where the murder is committed . not long after , sikes becomes desperate to get rid of the dog , convinced that the dog 's presence will give him away . yet , just as sikes can not shake off his guilt , he can not shake off bull's-eye , who arrives at the house of sikes 's demise before sikes himself does . bull's-eye 's name also conjures up the image of nancy 's eyes , which haunt sikes until the bitter end and eventually cause him to hang himself accidentally . dickens employs polarised sets of characters to explore various dual themes throughout the novel ; mr brownlow and fagin , for example , personify '' good vs . evil '' . dickens also juxtaposes honest , law-abiding characters such as oliver himself with those who , like the artful dodger , seem more comfortable on the wrong side of the law . crime and punishment is another important pair of themes , as is sin and redemption : dickens describes criminal acts ranging from picking pockets to murder , and the characters are punished severely in the end . most obviously , he shows bill sikes hounded to death by a mob for his brutal acts and sends fagin to cower in the condemned cell , sentenced to death by due process . neither character achieves redemption ; sikes dies trying to run away from his guilt , and on his last night alive , the terrified fagin refuses to see a rabbi or to pray , instead asking oliver to help him escape . nancy , by contrast , redeems herself at the cost of her own life and dies in a prayerful pose . she is one of the few characters in oliver twist to display much ambivalence . her storyline in the novel strongly reflects themes of domestic violence and psychological abuse at the hands of bill , who ultimately murders her . although nancy is a full-fledged criminal , indoctrinated and trained by fagin since childhood , she retains enough empathy to repent her role in oliver 's kidnapping , and to take steps to try to atone . as one of fagin 's victims , corrupted but not yet morally dead , she gives eloquent voice to the horrors of the old man 's little criminal empire . she wants to save oliver from a similar fate ; at the same time , she recoils from the idea of turning traitor , especially to bill sikes , whom she loves . when he was later criticised for giving a '' thieving , whoring slut of the streets '' such an unaccountable reversal of character , dickens ascribed her change of heart to '' the last fair drop of water at the bottom of a dried-up , weed-choked well '' . donovan , frank , the children of charles dickens , p . 79 . . allegations of antisemitism . dickens has been accused of following antisemitic stereotypes because of his portrayal of the jewish character fagin in oliver twist . paul vallely writes that fagin is widely seen as one of the most grotesque jews in english literature , and the most vivid of dickens 's 989 characters . nadia valman , in antisemitism : a historical encyclopedia of prejudice and persecution , argues that fagin 's representation was drawn from the image of the jew as inherently evil , that the imagery associated him with the devil , and with beasts . the novel refers to fagin 274 times in the first 38 chapters as '' the jew '' , while the ethnicity or religion of the other characters is rarely mentioned . in 1854 , the jewish chronicle asked why '' jews alone should be excluded from the 'sympathizing heart ' of this great author and powerful friend of the oppressed . '' dickens ( who had extensive knowledge of london street life and child exploitation ) explained that he had made fagin jewish because '' it unfortunately was true , of the time to which the story refers , that that class of criminal almost invariably was a jew . '' dickens commented that by calling fagin a jew he had meant no imputation against the jewish faith , saying in a letter , '' i have no feeling towards the jews but a friendly one . i always speak well of them , whether in public or private , and bear my testimony ( as i ought to do ) to their perfect good faith in such transactions as i have ever had with them . '' eliza davis , whose husband had purchased dickens 's home in 1860 when he had put it up for sale , wrote to dickens in protest at his portrayal of fagin , arguing that he had '' encouraged a vile prejudice against the despised hebrew '' , and that he had done a great wrong to the jewish people . while dickens first reacted defensively upon receiving davis 's letter , he then halted the printing of oliver twist , and changed the text for the parts of the book that had not been set , which explains why after the first 38 chapters fagin is barely called '' the jew '' at all in the next 179 references to him . . film , television and theatrical adaptations . film . oliver twist ( 1909 ) , the first adaptation of dickens ' novel , a silent film starring edith storey and elita proctor otis . oliver twist ( 1912 ) , a british silent film adaptation , directed by thomas bentley . oliver twist ( 1912 ) , an american silent film adaptation starring nat c . goodwin . oliver twist ( 1916 ) , a silent film adaptation , starring marie doro and tully marshall . oliver twist ( 1919 ) , a silent hungarian film adaptation . oliver twist ( 1922 ) , silent film adaptation featuring lon chaney and jackie coogan . oliver twist ( 1933 ) , the first sound production of dickens ' novel . oliver twist ( 1948 ) , david lean film adaptation starring alec guinness as fagin . manik ( 1961 ) , bengali film directed by bijalibaran sen which was based on this novel . the film stars pahari sanyal , chhabi biswas , sombhu mitra and tripti mitra . oliver ! ( 1968 ) , british musical adaptation , winner in the best picture category at the 41st academy awards . oliver twist ( 1974 ) , an animated film co-written by ben starr . oliver twist ( 1982 ) , an australian animated film . oliver & company ( 1988 ) , disney full-length animated feature inspired by the story of oliver twist . the story takes place in modern-day new york city , with oliver ( voiced by joey lawrence ) portrayed as an orphaned kitten , the dodger as a street-wise mongrel ( voiced by billy joel ) , and fagin ( voiced by dom deluise ) as a homeless bum who lives on the docks with his pack of stray dogs that he trains to steal so he can survive and repay his debt to loan shark sykes ( voiced by robert loggia ) . twisted ( 1996 ) , an independent film based on charles dickens ' novel oliver twist set in the gay underground sub-culture of new york city in the 1990s and starring emmy award , tony award , grammy award winner billy porter and academy award nominee william hickey ( actor ) directed by seth michael donsky . oliver twist ( 1997 ) , directed by tony bill and starring richard dreyfuss and elijah wood . twist ( 2003 ) , an independent film loosely based on charles dickens ' novel oliver twist oliver twist ( 2005 ) , directed by roman polanski and starring barney clark and ben kingsley . twist ( 2021 ) - modern day version directed by martion owen , and starring michael caine as fagin . michael caine and lena headey ’ s modern-day ‘ oliver twist ’ sells to saban saban films acquires charles dickens retelling 'twist ' . television . oliver twist , a 1982 tv movie directed by clive donner , starring george c . scott as fagin and tim curry as bill sikes . oliver twist , a 12 episode 1985 bbc one drama directed by gareth davies , starring eric porter and michael attwell . oliver twist , 1999 itv drama adaptation starring andy serkis and keira knightley . oliver twist , a five episode 2007 bbc one drama directed by coky giedroyc , starring timothy spall and tom hardy . saban 's adventures of oliver twist , a 52 episode animated american-french co-production that aired between 1996 and 1997 , where the story is downplayed for younger viewers , where oliver loses his mother in a crowd rather than being dead and the characters are represented by anthropomorphic animals . oliver in this version is a young dog . escape of the artful dodger , an australian tv series set as a sequel , where dodger and oliver are sent to the colony of australia . theatre . in 1838 charles zachary barnett 's adaptation , the three-act burletta oliver twist ; or , the parish boy 's progress opened at the marylebone theatre in london . theatres in victorian london - victorian web oliver ! , a west end theatre stage musical adaptation by lionel bart . oliver twist is a 2017 stage adaptation of the novel written by anya reiss which premiered at the regent 's park theatre . the show was directed by caroline byrne . . see also . charles dickens bibliography child labor . references . external links . ; online versions manuscript material and articles relating to oliver twist . from the british library 's discovering literature website . oliver twist at internet archive oliver twist at standard ebooks oliver twist—easy to read html version oliver twist , or , the parish boy 's progress typeset pdf version , including the illustrations of james_mahony ( 1871 household edition by chapman & hall ) . ; critical analysis when is a book not a book ? oliver twist in context , a seminar by robert patten from the new york public library background information and plot summary for oliver twist , with links to other resources article in british medical journal on oliver twist 's diet