Rhapsody in Blue

form and analysis . right as a jazz concerto , rhapsody in blue is written for solo piano with orchestra . a rhapsody differs from a concerto in that it features one extended movement instead of separate movements . rhapsodies often incorporate passages of an improvisatory nature—although written out in a score—and are irregular in form , with heightened contrasts and emotional exuberance . the music ranges from intensely rhythmic piano solos to slow , broad , and richly orchestrated sections . consequently , the rhapsody '' may be looked upon as a fantasia , with no strict fidelity to form . '' the opening of rhapsody in blue is written as a clarinet trill followed by a legato , 17 notes in a diatonic scale . during a rehearsal , whiteman 's virtuoso clarinetist , ross gorman , rendered the upper portion of the scale as a captivating and trombone-like glissando . gershwin heard it and insisted that it be repeated in the performance . the effect is produced using the tongue and throat muscles to change the resonance of the oral cavity , thus controlling the continuously rising pitch . many clarinet players also gradually open the left-hand tone holes on their instrument during the passage from the last concert f to the top concert b as well . this effect has now become standard performance practice for the work . rhapsody in blue features both rhythmic invention and melodic inspiration , and demonstrates gershwin 's ability to write a piece with large-scale harmonic and melodic structure . the piece is characterized by strong motivic . much of the motivic material is introduced in the first 14 measures . musicologist david schiff has identified five major themes plus a sixth '' tag '' . of these , two appear in the first 14 measures , and the tag shows up in measure 19 . two of the remaining three themes are rhythmically related to the very first theme in measure 2 , which is sometimes called the glissando theme—after the opening glissando in the clarinet solo—or the ritornello theme . the remaining theme is the train theme , which is the first to appear at rehearsal 9 after the opening material . all of these themes rely on the blues scale , which includes lowered sevenths and a mixture of major and minor thirds . each theme appears both in orchestrated form and as a piano solo . there are considerable differences in the style of presentation of each theme . the harmony of the rhapsody is more difficult to analyze . the piece begins and ends in b major , but it modulates towards the sub-dominant direction very early on , returning to b major at the end , rather abruptly . the opening modulates '' downward '' , as it were , through the keys b , e , a , d , g , b , e , and finally to a major . modulation through the circle of fifths in the reverse direction inverts classical tonal relationships , but does not abandon them . the entire middle section resides primarily in c major , with forays into g major ( the dominant relation ) . such modulations occur freely , although not always with harmonic direction . gershwin frequently uses a recursive chord progression of minor thirds to give the illusion of motion when in fact a passage does not change key from beginning to end . modulation by thirds is a common feature of tin pan alley music . the influences of jazz and other contemporary styles are present in rhapsody in blue . ragtime rhythms are abundant , as is the cuban '' clave '' rhythm , which doubles as a dance rhythm in the charleston jazz dance . gershwin 's own intentions were to correct the belief that jazz had to be played strictly in time so that one could dance to it . the rhapsody 's tempos vary widely , and there is an almost extreme use of rubato in many places throughout . the clearest influence of jazz is the use of blue notes , and the exploration of their half-step relationship plays a key role in the rhapsody . the use of so-called '' vernacular '' instruments , such as accordion , banjo , and saxophones in the orchestra , contribute to its jazz or popular style , and the latter two of these instruments have remained part of grofé 's '' standard '' orchestra scoring . gershwin incorporated several different piano styles into his work . he utilized the techniques of stride piano , novelty piano , comic piano , and the song-plugger piano style . stride piano 's rhythmic and improvisational style is evident in the '' agitato e misterioso '' section , which begins four bars after rehearsal 33 , as well as in other sections , many of which include the orchestra . novelty piano can be heard at rehearsal 9 with the revelation of the train theme . the hesitations and light-hearted style of comic piano , a vaudeville approach to piano made well known by chico marx and jimmy durante , are evident at rehearsal 22 . legacy and influence . cultural zeitgeist . according to critic orrin howard of the los angeles philharmonic , gershwin 's rhapsody '' made an indelible mark on the history of american music , on the fraternity of serious composers and performers—many of whom were present at the premiere—and on gershwin himself , for its enthusiastic reception encouraged him to other and more serious projects . '' howard posits that the work 's legacy is best understood as embodying the cultural zeitgeist of the jazz age : '' beginning with that incomparable , flamboyant clarinet solo , rhapsody is irresistible still , with its syncopated rhythmic vibrancy , its abandoned , impudent flair that tells more about the roaring twenties than could a thousand words , and its genuine melodic beauty colored a deep , jazzy blue by the flatted sevenths and thirds that had their origins in the african-american slave songs . '' although gershwin 's rhapsody '' was by no means a definitive example of jazz in the jazz age , '' music historians such as james ciment and floyd levin have similarly concurred that it is the key composition that encapsulates the spirit of the era . as early as 1927 , writer f . scott fitzgerald opined that rhapsody in blue idealized the youthful zeitgeist of the jazz age . in subsequent decades , both the latter era and fitzgerald 's related literary works have been often culturally linked by critics and scholars with gershwin 's composition . accordingly , rhapsody in blue was used as a dramatic leitmotif for the character of jay gatsby in the 2013 film the great gatsby , a cinematic adaptation of fitzgerald 's 1925 novel . various writers , such as american playwright terry teachout , have also likened gershwin himself to the character of gatsby due to his attempt to transcend his lower-class background , his abrupt meteoric success , and his early death while in his thirties . musical portrait of new york city . rhapsody in blue has been also interpreted as a musical portrait of early 20th-century new york city . culture scribe darryn king wrote in the wall street journal that '' gershwin 's fusion of jazz and classical traditions captures the thriving melting pot of jazz age new york . '' likewise , music historian vince giordano has opined that '' the syncopation , the blue notes , the ragtime and jazz rhythms that gershwin wrote in 1924 was really a feeling of new york city in that amazing era . the rhythm of the city seems to be in there . '' pianist lang lang echoes this sentiment : '' when i hear rhapsody in blue , i see the empire state building somehow . i see the new york skyline in midtown manhattan , and i already see the coffee shops in times square . '' accordingly , the composition was used in this context in a new york segment for the 1999 walt disney pictures animated film fantasia 2000 , in which the piece is used as the lyrical framing for a stylized animation set drawn in the style of famed illustrator al hirschfeld . it was also used in the opening sequence of woody allen 's 1979 film manhattan . the film serves as '' a cinematic love letter to the city , which set its opening montage of quintessential new york scenes to gershwin 's famed jazz concerto . '' . influence on composers . gershwin 's rhapsody has also influenced a number of composers . in 1955 , rhapsody in blue served as the inspiration for a composition by the noted accordionist/composer john serry sr . which was subsequently published in 1957 as american rhapsody . brian wilson , leader of the beach boys , stated on several occasions that rhapsody in blue is one of his favorite pieces . he first heard it when he was two years old , and recalls that he '' loved '' it . according to biographer peter ames carlin , it was an influence on his smile album . rhapsody in blue also inspired a collaboration between blind savant british pianist derek paravicini and composer matthew king on a new concerto , called blue premiered at the south bank centre in london in 2011 . other usages . rhapsody in blue was played simultaneously by 84 pianists at the opening ceremony of the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles . pianists herbie hancock and lang lang performed rhapsody in blue at the 50th grammy awards on february 10 , 2008 . since 1980 , the piece is used by united airlines in their advertisements , in pre-flight safety videos , and in the terminal 1 underground walkway at chicago o'hare international airport . preservation status . on september 22 , 2013 , it was announced that a musicological critical edition of the full orchestral score will be eventually released . the gershwin family , working in conjunction with the library of congress and the university of michigan , are working to make these scores available to the public . though the entire gershwin project may take 40 years to complete , the rhapsody in blue edition will be an early volume . rhapsody in blue entered the 2020 in public domain , although individual recordings of it may remain under copyright .