Danish pastry

composition . danish pastry is made of yeast-leavened dough of wheat flour , milk , eggs , sugar , and large amounts of butter or margarine . a yeast dough is rolled out thinly , covered with thin slices of butter between the layers of dough , and then the dough is folded and rolled several times , creating 27 layers . if necessary , the dough is chilled between foldings to ease handling . the process of rolling , buttering , folding , and chilling is repeated multiple times to create a multilayered dough that becomes airy and crispy on the outside , but also rich and buttery . butter is the traditional fat used in danish pastry , but in industrial production , less expensive fats are often used , such as trans fat sunflower oil . terminology . in danish , norwegian , and swedish , the term for danish pastry is wienerbrød ( or wienerbröd ) , meaning '' viennese bread '' . the same etymology is also the origin of the finnish viineri and estonian viini sai ( '' viennese pastry '' ) . in vienna , the danish pastry is called kopenhagener plunder , referring to copenhagen , or dänischer plunder . utley , derek ( 1999 ) . reis på engelsk : guide , ord og uttrykk , menyordbok . oslo : nks-forlag . . history . the origin of the danish pastry is often ascribed to a strike amongst bakery workers in denmark in 1850 . the strike caused bakery owners to hire workers from abroad , among them several austrian bakers , who brought along new baking traditions and pastry recipes . the austrian pastry of plundergebäck soon became popular in denmark and after the labour disputes ended , danish bakers adopted the austrian recipes , adjusting them to their own liking and traditions by increasing the amount of egg and fat for example . this development resulted in what is now known as the danish pastry . interview with bi skaarup , a danish food-historian and former president of '' det danske gastronomiske akademi '' ( the danish gastronomical academy ) . one of the baking techniques and traditions that the austrian bakers brought with them was the viennese lamination technique . due to such novelties the danes called the pastry '' wienerbrød '' ( vienna bread ) and , as mentioned , that name is still in use in northern europe today . sverdrup , elise ( 1980 ) . norway 's delight : dishes and specialities . oslo : tanum-norli . at that time , almost all baked goods in denmark were given exotic names . . denmark . danish pastries as consumed in denmark have different shapes and names . some are topped with chocolate , pearl sugar , glacé icing , and/or slivered nuts and they may be stuffed with a variety of ingredients such as jam or preserves ( usually apple or prune ) , remonce , marzipan , and/or custard . shapes are numerous , including circles with filling in the middle ( known in denmark as spandauers ) , figure-eights , spirals ( known as snails ) , and the pretzel-like kringles . citation from the saveur article : there are hundreds of types of danish pastry , but all—from the chokoladebolle , topped with chocolate , to the spandauer , filled with vanilla custard or marmalade , or the wienerbrødhorn , infused with marzipan and sprinkled with hazelnuts—are made of crisp layers of paper-thin dough , prepared and baked according to strict rules . . varieties . in sweden , danish pastry is typically made in the spandauer-style , often with vanilla custard . in the uk , various ingredients such as jam , custard , apricots , cherry , raisins , flaked almonds , pecans , or caramelized toffee are placed on or within sections of divided dough , which is then baked . cardamom is often added to increase the aromatic sense of sweetness . in the us , danishes are typically given a topping of fruit or sweetened cream cheese prior to baking . danishes with nuts on them are also popular there and in sweden , where chocolate spritzing and powdered sugar are also often added . in argentina , they are usually filled with dulce de leche or dulce de membrillo . file : kringle ( 6868378753 ) . jpg a slice of a kringle with remonce , a type of danish pastry common in denmark file : danish pastry.jpg several types of danish pastry in a bakery in denmark . file : pecan and maple danish.jpg pecan and maple danish from france file : factura membrillo.jpg argentine facturas with dulce de membrillo file : danishjf1942.jpg danish pastries in the philippines . united states . danish pastry was brought to the united states by danish immigrants . lauritz c . klitteng of læsø popularized '' danish pastry '' in the us around 1915–1920 . according to klitteng , he made danish pastry for the wedding of president woodrow wilson in december 1915 . klitteng toured the world to promote his product and was featured in such 1920s periodicals as the national baker , the bakers ' helper , and the bakers ' weekly . klitteng briefly had his own danish culinary studio at 146 fifth avenue in new york city . herman gertner owned a chain of new york city restaurants and had brought klitteng to new york to sell danish pastry . gertner 's obituary appeared in the january 23 , 1962 the new york times : '' at one point during his career mr . gertner befriended a danish baker who convinced him that danish pastry might be well received in new york . mr . gertner began serving the pastry in his restaurant and it immediately was a success . '' . cartoon controversy . during the jyllands-posten muhammad cartoons controversy in 2006 , several religious iranian groups advocated changing the name of the highly popular danish ( shriniye danmarki ) , given its name association with the source country of the offending cartoons . the association of iranian confectionery manufacturing designated '' roses of the prophet muhammad '' as the new name for danishes made in the country as of 15 february 2006 , although compliance with the proposed name in bakeries was mixed and short-lived . related to this , many protesters in several muslim countries , angered by the pictures of muhammad , boycotted danish goods . '' roses of muhammad '' '' gole mohammadi '' , literally : muhammed flower ) is a traditional persian synonym for a variety of pink rose flowering shrub . see also . danish cookie danish cuisine doughnut list of doughnut varieties kolach kringle list of pastries pan dulce ( sweet bread ) . notes . references . cauvain , stanley & young , linda s . ( 2007 ) technology of breadmaking . springer science & business media . gisslen , wayne ( 2013 ) professional baking . ( 6th edition ) john wiley & sons , hoboken , nj . external links . danish pastry - base recipe - danish pastry bar kvalifood , a non-commercial educational cooking website from denmark . bbc danish pastries danish