Mefloquine

medical uses . mefloquine is used to both prevent and treat certain forms of malaria . . malaria prevention . mefloquine is useful for the prevention of malaria in all areas except for those where parasites may have resistance to multiple medications , and is one of several anti-malarial medications recommended by the united states centers for disease control and prevention for this purpose . it is also recommended by the infectious disease society of america for malaria prophylaxis as a first or second-line agent , depending on resistance patterns in the malaria found in the geographic region visited . it is typically taken for one to two weeks before entering an area with malaria . doxycycline and atovaquone/proguanil provide protection within one to two days and may be better tolerated . if a person becomes ill with malaria despite prophylaxis with mefloquine , the use of halofantrine and quinine for treatment may be ineffective . . malaria treatment . mefloquine is used as a treatment for chloroquine-sensitive or resistant plasmodium falciparum malaria , and is deemed a reasonable alternative for uncomplicated chloroquine-resistant plasmodium vivax malaria . it is one of several drugs recommended by the united states ' centers for disease control and prevention . it is not recommended for severe malaria infections , particularly infections from p . falciparum , which should be treated with intravenous antimalarials . mefloquine does not eliminate parasites in the liver phase of the disease , and people with p . vivax malaria should be treated with a second drug that is effective for the liver phase , such as primaquine . . resistance to mefloquine . resistance to mefloquine is common around the west border in cambodia and other parts of southeast asia . the mechanism of resistance is by increase in pfmdr1 copy number . . adverse effects . common side effects include vomiting , diarrhea , headaches , and a rash . severe side effects requiring hospitalization are rare , but include mental health problems such as depression , hallucinations , anxiety and neurological side effects such as ataxia , seizures , and tinnitus . mefloquine is therefore not recommended in people with a history of psychiatric disorders or epilepsy . . neurologic and psychiatric . in 2013 , the u.s . food and drug administration ( fda ) added a boxed warning to the prescription label of mefloquine regarding the potential for neuropsychiatric side effects that may persist even after discontinuing administration of the medication . in 2013 the fda stated '' neurologic side effects can occur at any time during drug use , and can last for months to years after the drug is stopped or can be permanent . '' neurologic effects include dizziness , loss of balance , seizures , and tinnitus . psychiatric effects include nightmares , visual hallucinations , auditory hallucinations , anxiety , depression , unusual behavior , and suicidal ideations . central nervous system events requiring hospitalization occur in about one in 10,000 people taking mefloquine for malaria prevention , with milder events ( e.g . , dizziness , headache , insomnia , and vivid dreams ) in up to 25 % . when some measure of subjective severity is applied to the rating of adverse events , about 11–17 % of travelers are incapacitated to some degree . . cardiac . mefloquine may cause abnormalities with heart rhythms that are visible on electrocardiograms . combining mefloquine with other drugs that cause similar effects , such as quinine or quinidine , can increase these effects . combining mefloquine with halofantrine can cause significant increases in qtc intervals . . contraindications . mefloquine is contraindicated in those with a previous history of seizures or a recent history of psychiatric disorders . . pregnancy and breastfeeding . available data suggests that mefloquine is safe and effective for use by pregnant women during all trimesters of pregnancy , and it is widely used for this indication . in pregnant women , mefloquine appears to pose minimal risk to the fetus , and is not associated with increased risk of birth defects or miscarriages . compared to other malaria chemoprophylaxis regimens , however , mefloqinone may produce more side effects in non-pregnant travelers . mefloquine is also safe and effective for use during breastfeeding , though it appears in breast milk in low concentrations . the world health organization ( who ) gives approval for the use of mefloquine in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy and use in the first trimester does not mandate termination of pregnancy . . pharmacology . elimination . mefloquine is metabolized primarily through the liver . its elimination in persons with impaired liver function may be prolonged , resulting in higher plasma levels and an increased risk of adverse reactions . the mean elimination plasma half-life of mefloquine is between two and four weeks . total clearance is through the liver , and the primary means of excretion is through the bile and feces , as opposed to only 4 % to 9 % excreted through the urine . during long-term use , the plasma half-life remains unchanged . liver function tests should be performed during long-term administration of mefloquine . alcohol use should be avoided during treatment with mefloquine . . chemistry . specifically it is used as mefloquine hydrochloride . mefloquine is a chiral molecule with two asymmetric carbon centres , which means it has four different stereoisomers . the drug is currently manufactured and sold as a racemate of the ( r , s ) - and ( s , r ) -enantiomers by hoffman-laroche , a swiss pharmaceutical company . essentially , it is two drugs in one . plasma concentrations of the ( – ) -enantiomer are significantly higher than those for the ( + ) -enantiomer , and the pharmacokinetics between the two enantiomers are significantly different . the ( + ) -enantiomer has a shorter half-life than the ( – ) -enantiomer . . history . mefloquine was formulated at walter reed army institute of research ( wrair ) in the 1970s shortly after the end of the vietnam war . mefloquine was number 142,490 of a total of 250,000 antimalarial compounds screened during the study . mefloquine was the first public-private venture ( ppv ) between the us department of defense and a pharmaceutical company . wrair transferred all its phase i and phase ii clinical trial data to hoffman-laroche and smith kline . fda approval as a treatment for malaria was swift . most notably , phase iii safety and tolerability trials were skipped . the drug was first approved in switzerland in 1984 by hoffmann-laroche , who brought it to market with the name lariam . however , mefloquine was not approved by the fda for prophylactic use until 1989 . this approval was based primarily on compliance , while safety and tolerability were overlooked . because of the drug 's very long half-life , the centers for disease control originally recommended a mefloquine dosage of 250 & nbsp ; mg every two weeks ; however , this caused an unacceptably high malaria rate in the peace corps volunteers who participated in the approval study , so the drug regimen was switched to once a week . by 1991 , hoffman was marketing the drug on a worldwide basis . by the 1992 unitaf , canadian soldiers were being prescribed the drug en masse . by 1994 , medical professionals were noting '' severe psychiatric side effects observed during prophylaxis and treatment with mefloquine '' , and recommending that '' the absence of contraindications and minor side effects during an initial course of mefloquine should be confirmed before another course is prescribed . '' other doctors at the university hospital of zurich noted in a case of '' a 47-year-old , previously healthy japanese tourist '' who had severe neuropsychiatric side-effects from the drug that the first randomized , controlled trial on a mixed population was performed in 2001 . prophylaxis with mefloquine was compared to prophylaxis with atovaquone/proguanil . roughly 67 % of participants in the mefloquine arm reported greater than or equal to one adverse event , vs 71 % in the atovaquone-proguanil arm . in the mefloquine arm , 5 % of the users reported severe events requiring medical attention , vs 1.2 % in the atovaquone-proguanil arm . in august 2009 , roche stopped marketing lariam in the united states . retired soldier johnny mercer , who was later appointed minister for veterans affairs by boris johnson , told in 2015 that he had received '' a letter about once or twice a week '' about ill-effects from the drug . in july 2016 , roche took this brand off the market in ireland . . military . in 2006 , the australian military deemed mefloquine '' a third-line drug '' alternative , and over the five years from 2011 only 25 soldiers had been prescribed the drug , and only in cases of their intolerance for other alternatives . between 2001 and 2012 , 16000 canadian soldiers sent to afghanistan were given the drug as a preventative measure . in 2013 , the us army banned mefloquine from use by its special forces such as the green berets . in autumn 2016 , the uk military followed suit with their australian peers after a parliamentary inquiry into the matter revealed that it can cause permanent side effects and brain damage . in early december 2016 , the german defence ministry removed mefloquine from the list of medications it would provide to its soldiers . in autumn 2016 , canadian surgeon general brigadier general hugh colin mackay told a parliamentary committee that faulty science supported the assertion that the drug has indelible noxious side effects . an expert from health canada named barbara raymond told the same committee that the evidence she had read failed to support the conclusion of indelible side effects . canadian soldiers who took mefloquine when deployed overseas have claimed they have been left with ongoing mental health problems . . research . in june 2010 , the first case report appeared of a progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy being successfully treated with mefloquine . mefloquine can also act against the jc virus . administration of mefloquine seemed to eliminate the virus from the patient 's body and prevented further neurological deterioration . wrair has published several papers outlining ongoing efforts at that institution to make mefloquine safer by producing a drug composed of only the ( + ) -enantiomer . mefloquine alters cholinergic synaptic transmission through both postsynaptic and presynaptic actions . the postsynaptic action to inhibit acetylcholinesterase changes transmission across synapses in the brain . . references . further reading . . external links .