Boot

history . early boots consisted of separate leggings , soles , and uppers worn together to provide greater ankle protection than shoes or sandals . around 1000 bc , these components were more permanently joined to form a single unit that covered the feet and lower leg , often up to the knee . a type of soft leather ankle boots were worn by nomads in eastern asia and carried to china to india and russia around ad 1200 to 1500 by mongol invaders . the inuit and aleut natives of alaska developed traditional winter boots of caribou skin or sealskin featuring decorative touches of seal intestine , dog hair and suchlike . 17th century european boots were influenced by military styles , featuring thick soles and turnover tops that were originally designed to protect horse mounted soldiers . in the 1700s , distinctive , thigh-high boots worn by hessian soldiers fighting in the american revolutionary war influenced the development of the iconic heeled cowboy boots worn by cattlemen in the american west . . types and uses . practical uses . thumb boots which are designed for walking through snow , shallow water and mud may be made of a single closely stitched design ( using leather , rubber , canvas , or similar material ) to prevent the entry of water , snow , mud or dirt through gaps between the laces and tongue found in other types of shoes . waterproof gumboots are made in different lengths of uppers . in extreme cases , thigh-boots called waders , worn by anglers , extend to the hip . such boots may also be insulated for warmth . with the exception of gum boots , boots sold in general retail stores may be considered '' water resistant , '' as they are not usually fully waterproof , compared to high-end boots for fishers or hikers . speciality boots have been made to protect steelworkers ' feet and calves if they accidentally step in puddles of molten metal , to protect workers from a variety of chemical exposure , to protect workers from construction site hazards and to protect feet from extreme cold ( e.g . , with insulated or inflatable boots for use in antarctica ) . most work boots are '' laceups '' made from leather . formerly they were usually shod with hobnails and heel- and toe-plates , but now can usually be seen with a thick rubber sole , and often with steel toecaps . boots are normally worn with socks to prevent chafes and blisters , to absorb sweat , to improve the foot 's grip inside the boot , or to insulate the foot from the cold . before socks became widely available , footwraps were worn instead . specialty boots have been designed for many different types of sports , particularly riding , skiing , snowboarding , ice skating , and sporting in wet/damp conditions . fashion and fetish use . bovver boots , doc martens boots and army boots were adopted by skinheads and punks as part of their typical dress and have migrated to more mainstream fashion , including women 's wear . as a more rugged alternative to dress shoes , dress boots may be worn ( though these can be more formal than shoes ) . fashionable boots for women may exhibit all the variations seen in other fashion footwear : tapered or spike heels , platform soles , pointed toes , zipper closures and the like . the popularity of boots as fashion footwear ebbs and flows . singer nancy sinatra popularized the fad of women wearing boots in the late 1960s with her song '' these boots are made for walkin ' '' . they were popular in the 1960s and 1970s ( particularly knee-high boots ) , but diminished in popularity towards the end of the 20th century . in the 2010s , they experienced a resurgence in popularity , especially designs with a long bootleg . boot bolos , boot bracelets , boot straps , boot chains , and boot harnesses are used to decorate boots . sandal boots also exist . thumb boots have become the object of sexual attraction for some people and they have become a standard accessory in the bdsm scene ( where leather , latex and pvc boots are favoured ) and a fashion accessory in music videos . knee- or thigh-high leather boots are worn by some strippers and pornography models and actresses . boots have even become a sexual fetish for devotees known as boot fetishism and foot fetishism . boot parts and accessories . spats boot jack for the parts of a boot , see hiking boot parts . as symbols . in heraldry . as boots have been used by riders for millennia , they were used by knights . as a consequence , albeit not common , boots came to be used as charges in heraldry . because of the origin of heraldry as insignia used by mounted warriors like the medieval knights , when boots are used in heraldry , they are often displayed as riding boots , even if the blazon might not specify it as such . they are sometimes adorned with spurs , which may or may not have another tincture ( colour ) than the boot and the background field . boots were also used in coats of arms of shoemakers ' guilds and in shop signs outside their shops . idioms and cultural references . boots that are particularly old and well worn , or a similarly tough item are referred to as being tough and strong with the phrase '' tough as old boots . '' a discarded boot may be used in the construction of a musical instrument known as the '' mendoza . '' tall ( high ) boots may have a tab , loop or handle at the top known as a bootstrap , allowing one to use fingers or a tool to provide better leverage in getting the boots on . the figurative use '' to pull one 's self up by one 's bootstraps '' in the sense of '' ability to perform a difficult task without external help '' developed in the 19th century in us english . '' it 's been widely suggested that the '' bootstrap '' metaphor originated in the legendary tales of baron von münchhausen . as chris waigl recently pointed out on the eggcorn database ( commenting on '' boots-trap '' ) , the original german version has a scene in which münchhausen gets out of a swamp by pulling on his own hair . in an american retelling ( supposedly ) , the baron uses his bootstraps to pull himself out of a similar predicament . none of the 19th-century cites i 've seen allude to the münchhausen story -- instead , they often refer to pulling oneself over a fence or up a steeple . so if münchhausen really pulls himself up by his bootstraps in an american version ( which i have yet to verify ) , then the writer probably took advantage of preexisting imagery for an absurdly impossible task . '' benjamin zimmer , american dialect society , 11 august 2005 - the term '' bootstrapping '' was subsequently used in a metaphorical sense in a number of fields , notably computing ( which uses the term '' bootup '' to describe the process of starting a computer and in entrepreneurship , which uses the term '' bootstrapping '' to describe start-up companies which are launched without major external financing . to '' die with one 's boots on '' means to die while one is still actively involved in work or to go down fighting . popularized by wild west movies . boot camp : a colloquial term for the initial recruit training of a new recruit enlisting in a military organization or armed force . in this context , a '' boot '' is just such a recruit . stormtroopers and other agents of authority or units used for political strongarm tactics such as intimidation are typically referred to by their detractors as '' jackbooted thugs , '' a reference to the hobnailed military jackboot of the world war i german stormtrooper and later nazi uniform . authoritarian rule , either by hostile military forces , or by groups of armed intimidators , is imposed by '' jackboot tactics . '' to '' give one the boot '' means to kick one out ( of a job , a club , etc . ) or expel one , either literally or figuratively . to '' put the boot in '' is an idiom for inflicting violence on someone . '' the boot is on the other foot now '' means that a situation has become reversed—a previous victor is now losing , for example . wearing '' seven-league boots '' references a classic children 's fairy tale and indicates that a person or company can cover great distances , figuratively or literally , in a single stride . to '' shake/quake in one 's boots '' means to be very frightened , and is mostly used sarcastically . '' knocking boots '' is slang for having sex , regardless of whether either person is wearing boots . the country of italy is referred to as '' lo stivale '' ( the boot ) due to its shape . see also . list of boots boot cut boot fetishism boot throwing gumboot dance wellie wanging . references .