University of Missouri System

components . universities . all four campuses are comprehensive , separately accredited , land-grant/research-intensive institutions offering undergraduate , graduate , and professional degree programs . carnegie foundation for the advancement of teaching university of missouri ( mizzou , or mu ) is the oldest campus , founded in columbia in 1839 . it is the largest university in the state with 33,266 students ( fall 2016 ) . mu is considered the flagship of the system and offers over 270 degree programs through 20 schools and colleges , and is the only public university in missouri that is a member of the association of american universities . its tigers athletic programs compete in the ncaa division i southeastern conference . university of missouri–kansas city ( umkc ) , founded in 1933 , is the largest school in the kansas city area with 16,944 students ( fall 2016 ) . it offers over 150 degree programs through 12 schools and colleges , but is best known for its programs in health sciences , entrepreneurship programs , and its conservatory of music and dance . its athletic programs , the roos , compete in the ncaa division i summit league . missouri university of science and technology ( missouri s & t or s & t ) was founded in 1870 in rolla . currently enrolling 8,838 students ( fall 2016 ) , it is the smallest campus in the system . 75 degrees and emphases are offered across a comprehensive range of programs in sciences , mathematics , liberal arts , humanities , and business , but most are focused on engineering . its miners athletic programs compete in the ncaa division ii great lakes valley conference ( glvc ) . university of missouri–st . louis ( umsl ) was founded in 1963 in suburban st . louis county . enrolling 16,989 ( fall 2016 ) over 80 degree programs are offered through nine schools and colleges , including missouri 's only college of optometry . its tritons athletic programs compete alongside the missouri s & t miners in the glvc . health care . the university of missouri health care system operates several facilities in central missouri , including university hospital ( the only level i trauma center in central missouri ) and ellis fischel cancer center ( the only hospital in missouri specializing in cancer treatment ellis fischel cancer center ) . it is also closely affiliated with mu 's school of medicine , university of missouri school of health professions , and sinclair school of nursing . it employs 4,515 employees . . extension . using science-based knowledge , university of missouri extension engages people to understand change , solve problems and make informed decisions . mu extension makes university education and information accessible for : economic viability empowered individuals strong families and communities healthy environments . university of missouri extension is a partnership of the university of missouri-columbia , lincoln university , the people of missouri through county extension councils , and the national institute for food and agriculture of the u.s . department of agriculture . mu extension offers distance learning , mizzou online , continuing education , evening classes , . mizzou online programs in agriculture , natural resources , lawn and garden , home and consumer life , nutrition and health , families and relationships , community and leadership , business and careers , and emergency management about university of missouri extension are available through offices throughout the state . . research and technology parks . as part of its economic development mission to support high-tech growth in missouri , the um system owns and operates 10 research parks throughout the state . um research and economic development missouri research park is a park in weldon spring created in 1985 . it is home to over a dozen high-tech companies and helped catalyze a high-tech corridor along i-64 . missouri research park tenants about the missouri research park technology park at fort leonard wood in st . robert is the first technology park in the nation to be located on an active army post . technology park at fort leonard wood it houses the mrp business center , which was created to be a catalyst for partnerships between the military , corporations , and academia . discovery ridge , near columbia , was established in 2005 on of mu 's south farm , a agricultural experiment station operated by mu 's college of agriculture , food and natural resources . the park is jointly operated by the um system 's office of research and economic development and mu . discovery ridge innovation park in rolla was announced in april 2007 . the former golf course will be '' a research , development and office park project '' jointly operated by the um system 's office of research and economic development and missouri s & t . curators approve umr research and technology park plans umsl research park is a park on umsl 's north campus . it is home to express scripts ' new corporate headquarters , which opened in june 2007 . scripts opens headquarters at umsl park the park is jointly operated by the um system 's office of research and economic development and umsl . innovative technology enterprises at umsl is a business incubator that supports innovation in a wide-variety of fields including it and the life sciences , providing the physical , mentoring , business development and computational resources required for startup companies to grow . center for emerging technologies ( cet ) has provided the specialized facilities , knowledgeable support services , entrepreneur training programs , and access to capital needed to establish and develop next generation bioscience , medical and other advanced technology companies . cet 's operations began in 1998 and are supported by the missouri technology corporation , city of st . louis and private donors center of research , technology and entrepreneurial exchange ( cortex ) is an office and research district in mid-town st . louis created by a nonprofit consortium formed by the university of missouri-st . louis , saint louis university , washington university , barnes-jewish hospital , and the missouri botanical garden . missouri plant science center in mexico is a partnership between the university of missouri , missouri technology corporation and the city of mexico . the nearly 25,000 sq . ft . facility houses wet and dry labs , offices and has unique pilot/scale manufacturing capabilities to process soybeans and other plant-derived materials into value-added products . mu life science business incubator at monsanto place – the facility and incubation program in columbia , mo , are operated by the missouri innovation center , a public non-profit organization specializing in assistance to entrepreneurial technology firms . press . the university of missouri press was established in 1958 and today publishes over 70 titles per year , including several series such as the missouri biography series . it also distributes books for the missouri historical society press . students organization . the associated students of the university of missouri is a student run organization that represents the students of all four um system campuses in jefferson city and washington , d.c . it was created in 1975 by the missouri students association . asum has an internship program that lobbies the missouri general assembly on a regular basis pertaining to student issues including equalizing the access missouri tuition grant , increasing funding for the bright flight scholarship , and giving the student representative to the um board of curators a vote . administration . organization . the um system is governed by a board of curators , consisting of nine members appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the missouri senate . curators serve six-year terms , staggered by three positions expiring every two years . not more than one curator can be appointed from the same congressional district , and no more than five curators can belong to the same political party . in addition , there is a non-voting student representative to the board , likewise appointed and confirmed , who serves a two-year term . the post is rotated among the four universities . um system board of curators presently , the post is held by avery welker from the s & t campus . the board of curators selects the president of the system , who reports to the board along with the general counsel . each campus is led by a chancellor who reports to the president , as does an executive vice president , four vice presidents , and a chief of staff . the president chairs the university of missouri health system advisory board . um system organization . presidents . there have been ten presidents of um system since its inception in 1963 . prior to the formation of the system , the position of president was more akin to what is now chancellor of the columbia campus . university of missouri leaders however , the um system counts presidents who served before the system was created , therefore the numbering starts at 14 . former presidents of the university of missouri see university of missouri presidents and chancellors for a list of presidents from 1841 to 1963 and chancellors from 1963–present . this list does not include all interim presidents . elmer ellis ( 1963–1966 ) elmer ellis had been president of the university of missouri since 1954 and became president of the university of missouri system upon its creation , while a new person was selected to become first chancellor of the columbia campus . john c . weaver ( 1966–1970 ) c . brice ratchford ( 1971–1976 ) james c . olson ( 1977–1984 ) : mel george ( interim ; 1984–1985 ) c . peter magrath ( 1985–1991 ) george a . russell ( 1991–1996 ) : mel george ( interim ; 1996–1997 ) manuel t . pacheco ( 1997–2002 ) elson floyd ( 2003–2007 ) gary d . forsee ( 2008–2011 ) : steve owens ( interim ; 2011–feb . 15 , 2012 ) timothy m . wolfe ( feb . 15 , 2012 – nov . 9 , 2015 ) missouri tigers president tim wolfe resigns , espn november 9 , 2015 : mike middleton ( interim ; nov . 12 , 2015–feb . 28 , 2017 ) mun choi ( 2017–present ) . history . the university of missouri was founded in 1839 in columbia . it was the first public institution of higher learning west of the mississippi river . it became a land-grant university after passage of the morrill act of 1862 . in 1870 , the university established the missouri school of mines and metallurgy in rolla . the um system was created in 1963 when the university of kansas city , which had been a private institution , was acquired and renamed university of missouri-kansas city . that same year , a new university named university of missouri-st . louis was created . in 1964 , the school of mines ‡ was renamed the university of missouri-rolla , and the original university in columbia was renamed university of missouri-columbia . effective january 1 , 2008 , um–rolla became the missouri university of science and technology . naming . since its founding in 1839 until the formation of the system in 1963 , the institution in columbia was known simply as the university of missouri . when the university of missouri system was established , the existing institutions—the university of missouri in columbia and its offshoot , the missouri school of mines and metallurgy in rolla were renamed the university of missouri–columbia and the university of missouri–rolla . the missouri school of mines and metallurgy was briefly named the university of missouri at rolla in 1963 before changing to the university of missouri–rolla in 1964 . the formerly private institution acquired by the system , the university of kansas city , was renamed the university of missouri–kansas city . the newly created institution in st . louis was suitably named the university of missouri–st . louis , thus creating a uniformly named system of institutions . the original generic name , the university of missouri , was not officially assigned to any of the schools or the system . however , it has been commonly used both formally and informally to mean the original columbia campus or the system . it has also been used to mean any of the other three campuses , though this is most often done in a casual manner at the campus in question , or by persons unfamiliar with the system . all four campuses have felt their regional designations potentially cause them to be mistaken as second-tier regional institutions . considerable controversy over use of the generic name has been caused by the columbia campus claiming de facto ownership , further marginalizing the other three campuses . the rolla campus was first to enact a break from regional designation . on 6 april 2007 , the board of curators approved a proposal to rename the school the missouri university of science and technology , effective 1 january 2008 . in addition to ridding itself of a regional designation , it also emphasizes the school 's technological research mission . the case for a name change this quickly catalyzed a long-dormant '' name restoration '' campaign at the columbia campus to drop its regional designation . mu name restoration this proposal met with considerable criticism , mainly from the kansas city and st . louis campuses , who saw this as unnecessary or unfair and an intentional detriment to their campuses . on 29 november 2007 , the board of curators voted unanimously to allow the columbia campus to use the generic university of missouri name for essentially all public purposes , but not when dealing with '' official business '' such as budget documents , legal contracts , and other internal um system documentation , or whenever clarification from the system or other campuses is needed . use of the generic name is not compulsory and the columbia designation may continue to be used in any context . the decision also stipulates that the um system utilize the '' system '' designation in most instances . proponents of the change say that it simply provides clarification and recognizes what has always been common usage , but the issue remains controversial . southwest missouri state university sought and eventually was granted permission to drop its regional designation and become missouri state university . this change was initially vehemently opposed by the um system , as it saw this as a threat to its funding and its stature as the premier public institution of higher learning in missouri . it also would create historic entanglements , as the university of missouri had interchangeably used the missouri state university name at times in its history . this resulted from mu being designated as both a land grant and a research institution , unlike states such as iowa where separate institutions ( university of iowa and iowa state university ) were created . . proposed merger . in april 2003 , northwest missouri state university in maryville approached the um system with the possibility of becoming the fifth school in the system . name proposals for the university after the merger , such as the university of missouri–northwest , were to reflect the school 's separate heritage . the maryville institution would have become a doctoral degree-granting research university of equal stature with the existing um system universities . northwest considers merging with the um system board approves memorandum of understanding for northwest merger however , the enabling legislation before the missouri general assembly never passed and the deal sunset . there have been no further attempts at a merger . 2015 racial controversies , protests , and resignations . in 2015 , wolfe was the subject of criticism from a variety of groups over his failure to address a series of racist incidents at the university of missouri , including students openly using racial slurs towards minority student leaders , and an october incident where feces was used to draw a swastika , drawing condemnation from black and jewish student organizations . in november 2015 , missouri 's legion of black collegians announced that approximately thirty athletes would not participate in any team activities unless wolfe resigned . on november 8 , 2015 , the missouri student association joined in calling for wolfe 's resignation . on november 9 , 2015 , wolfe resigned at a special board of curators meeting that morning . in a statement , he said , '' my motivation in making this decision comes from a love of columbia where i grew up and the state of missouri . i thought and prayed over this decision . it is the right thing to do . the frustration and anger i see is real and i do n't doubt it for a second . i take full responsibility for the actions that have occurred . i have asked everybody to use my resignation to heal . let 's focus in changing what we can change today and in the future , not what we ca n't change in the past . '' . references . external links .