Falerii

history . according to legend , it was of argive origin . strabo 's assertion that the population , the falisci , were of a different race from the etruscans is supported by the evidence of the epigraphy which have been found here . they were written in a latin dialect . most of the surviving inscriptions date back to the second half of the fourth century bc and the first half of the third century bc . the faliscan language survived '' the domination of the surrounding etruscan culture , as well as , for a long time , the expansion of the romans '' . due to falerii being relatively close to rome , the faliscans thought that rome was a threat to their security . for this reason , they supported the etruscan cities of veii and fidenae ( which was near veii , on the other bank of the river ) in their conflicts with rome in the fifth century . livy noted that : '' as these two states falerii and the nearby capena were nearest in point of distance , they believed that if veii fell they would be the next on whom rome would make war '' . livy , the history of rome , 5.8.5 there had been a history of on-and-off conflicts between rome and veii , which often involved fidenae . the romans had placed a colony at fidenae to garrison the city . in 437 bc fidenae revolted , attacked the roman settlers and sided with veii . romans envoys who were sent to fidenae were killed on the order of the king of veii . the romans advanced on fidenae . the faliscans sent troops in support . the veientes and fidenates ( the inhabitants of veii and fidenae ) wanted to prolong the war , but the faliscans wanted a pitched battle . the romans routed the combined enemy forces . livy , the history of rome , 4.17.11 , 19.6 in 436 bc the romans raided the territory of veii and falerii , but did not attack the two cities . livy , the history of rome , 4.21.1-2 in 435 bc the fidenates crossed into roman territory to raid it and called in the army of veii . falerii did not want to renew the war . livy , the history of rome , 4.21.8 in 434 the romans seized fidenae . this alarmed veii and falerii . they sent envoys to the etruscan league ( a council of the twelve major etruscan cities ) for assistance , however , the league refused to help veii . livy , the history of rome , 4.23.4-5 , 24.1 in 403 bc war broke out between rome and veii . the romans begun a siege which lasted until 396 bc when they seized and destroyed this city . in 402 bc falerii and capena bound themselves by an oath and sent troops to veii . they attacked the smaller the two roman camps from the rear . the veientes attacked the roman siege works form the front . the lack of unity between the roman commanders led to a rout of the romans , and the capture of the smaller camp . some romans escaped to the larger camp and some withdrew to rome . livy the history of rome , 5.8.4-13 in 400 bc the romans recaptured the lost camp , raided the territories of falerii and capena , but did not attack the two cities . in 399 bc falerii and capena sent troops to relieve veii . the romans made a sortie from their camp , put their forces to flight and pursued them killed many of their men . soon after this a contingent was sent to raid the territory of capena . it fell on the survivors of the battle and destroyed them . livy the history of rome , 5.12.4-5 , 13.8-12 in 398 bc the romans raided the territories of falerii and capena , '' carried off huge spoils and left nothing untouched that iron or fire could destroy '' . livy the history of rome , 5.14.7 livy mentioned roman campaigns against veii , of falerii , and of capena in 397 bc , but did not give any details . he wrote that the campaign at veii was indecisive . livy the history of rome , 5.16.2 , 8 in that year the etruscan league held a council '' where the capenates and faliscans proposed that all the nations of etruria should unite in a common resolution 'and design to raise the siege of veii . '' however , the request was refused because veii had not consulted the other etruscan cities '' for advice in so weighty a matter . '' moreover , '' there was now in the greatest part of etruria a strange race , new settlers , with whom they were neither securely at peace nor yet certain to have war . '' this must have been a reference to the gauls who had invaded northern italy , close to etruria . the council allowed etruscan men to volunteer to serve in the war and many men did so . livy the history of rome , 5.17.6-10 in 396 bc two roman commanders marched against falerii and capena . however , they were poor commanders and fell into an ambush . one of them fell and the other withdrew . there was a rumour that faliscans and capenates were advancing and getting close to veii '' with the whole military strength of etruria . '' this caused panic in rome . this led to a roman push at veii , which was captured and destroyed . livy the history of rome , 5.18.7-12 , 19 in 395 bc the romans conducted operations against falerii and capena . they did not attack the cities . they ravaged the countryside and '' despoiled the farmers of their possessions , leaving not one fruit-tree in the land nor any productive plant . '' capena sued for peace , but the war with falerii continued . 5.24.1-2 in 394 bc the war with falerii was entrusted to marcus furius camillus . he forced the faliscans to come out of their town by ravaging the fields and burning the farmhouses . they encamped only one mile from the town , on a spot which they thought was safe because it was difficult to access . guided by faliscan prisoners , camillus placed himself in a superior position near the camp . enemy forces which tried to hinder the work were routed and the faliscans fled back to their city . camillus proceeded to besiege it . the town had plenty of food supplies and the siege seemed a prolonged affair . the inhabitants carried on with their usual lives and their boys went to school . the faliscans had adopted the greek practice of entrusting their boys to one tutor . this tutor decided to betray the town . he led the boys out of the town daily to exercise them . at first he kept them close to the city walls . then he ventured further out . eventually he reached the roman outposts and handed the boys to the enemy . he communicated to camillus his intention to betray falerii . camillus ordered that the man be stripped , scourged , and driven back into the city by the boys . when the faliscans saw the tutor coming back in this fashion , they admired the righteousness of camillus and sent envoys to him , '' entrusting him with their lives and fortunes '' . camillus sent them to rome and they told the senate that '' the romans , by esteeming righteousness above victory , had taught them to love defeat above freedom and considered themselves '' vanquished in virtue '' . plutarch , parallel lives , the life of camillus 9-10 according to livy they also promised fidelity to roman rule . the senate entrusted the matter to camillus who demanded the town to pay the wages of the roman soldiers for that year . in livy 's account , he granted peace ; in plutarch 's account , he '' established friendship with all the faliscans '' . he then went back to rome . livy , the history of rome , 5.27 in 359 bc , war broke out between rome and the etruscan city-state of tarquinia because the latter plundered roman territory adjoining etruria . in 357 bc , faliscan men joined the tarquinenses and refused to hand back roman prisoners they had taken to falerii . livy wrote that the consul gnaeus manlius accomplished very little and mentioned that he was encamped at sutrium , in faliscan territory . in 356 bc , the romans engaged the faliscans and tarquinenses . the priests of the latter rushed towards the romans carrying snakes and torches . this dismayed the roman soldiers , who fled to their rampart . they were mocked by their officers and they rushed against the enemy , routed them and seized their camp . all etruscans then rose in arms led by tarquinii and falerii and advanced as far as the roman salt works at the mouth of the river tiber . the romans crossed the river on rafts . they caught straggling pillagers in the fields and sized the enemy camp by surprise . the enemy was driven out of roman territory . livy , the history of rome , 7.12.5 , 16.2 , 7 , 17.2-10 in 365 bc , another etruscan city , caere , joined tarquinii . it was defeated and granted a 100-year truce . the faliscans were accused of participating in the war and the brunt of the war was turned against them . the romans could not find their forces and pillaged their land . livy , the history of rome 19.6 , 20.9 in 351 bc the romans conducted a campaign against tarquinii and falerii , ravaging their fields until their resistance was broken . the two city-states requested a truce and a forty-year truce was granted . livy , the history of rome , 5.22.4-5 in 342 bc , the roman victory over the samnites in the first samnite war ( 344-342 bc ) induced falerii to ask rome to convert their forty years ' truce into a permanent treaty of peace . livy , the history of rome , 5.38.1 in the first years of the third samnite war ( 298-290 bc ) , when etruscan city-states rose against rome , the faliscans remained loyal to rome . in 298 bc , after a fight with volterra , a city-state in northern etruria , the romans went to the faliscan territory , left their baggage in falerii and proceeded to ravage enemy territory . in 297 bc , envoys for the faliscan cities of sutrium , nepete , and falerii went to rome to inform the romans that the city assemblies of etruria were discussing suing for peace . in 295 bc , before the battle of sentinum , where the romans faced a combined force of samnites , etruscans , umbrians and senone gauls , the romans stationed a reserve army in faliscan territory . livy , the history of rome , 10.12.3-7 , 14.3 , 26.15 however , in 293 bc , the faliscans made common cause with the etruscans and rome declared war on them . they seized the city of troilum and then took five strong fortresses by storm . the faliscans sued for peace and were granted a one-year truce after paying an indemnity of 100,000 asses of bronze coinage and year 's pay for the troops of the consul who campaigned in etruria . livy , the history of rome , 10.45.6-8 , 26.10-12 drawing on the work of cassius dio , zonaras wrote that in 241 bc , the romans made war of falerii . in a first battle the romans heavy infantry was defeated , but the faliscan cavalry lost . the romans won a second battle and the faiscans ' arms , cavalry , goods , slaves and half of their territory . later , the town , which was on a steep mountain , was destroyed and a new one was built on a more accessible site . zonaras : 8 , in cassius dio , roman history , fragments of book 12 the description of the two sites agrees with the usual theory that the original city occupied the site of present-day civita castellana , and that the ruins of falerii ( as the place is now called ) are those of the roman town which was transferred five kilometers to the north-west , in the fabrica di roma municipality . after this , falerii hardly appears in history . it became a colony ( junonia faliscorum ) perhaps under augustus , though according to the inscriptions , apparently not until the time of gallienus ( who may have been born there ) . there were bishops of falerii up until 1033 , see also roman catholic diocese of civita castellana and list of the roman catholic dioceses in italy . when the desertion of the place in favour of the present site began . the last mention of it dates from 1064 . location . falerii veteres . the site of the original falerii is a plateau , about 1100 m by 400 , not higher than the surrounding country ( 140 & nbsp ; m ) but separated from it by canyon over 60 & nbsp ; m in depth , and only connected with it on the western side , which was strongly fortified with a mound and ditch . the rest of the city was defended by walls constructed of rectangular blocks of tuff , of which some remains still exist . remains of a temple were found at lo scasato , at the highest point of the ancient town , in 1888 , and others have been excavated in the outskirts . the attribution of one of these to juno quiritis is uncertain . these buildings were of wood , with fine decorations of coloured terracotta . numerous tombs hewn in the rock are visible on all sides of the town , and important discoveries have been made in them ; many objects , both from the temples and from the tombs , are in the museo di villa giulia at rome . similar finds have also been made at calcata , ten kilometers to the south , and corchiano , around ten kilometers north-west . falerii novi . position : the site of the roman falerii novi is now entirely abandoned . it lay upon a road which may have been the via annia , a by-road of the via cassia ; this road approached it from the south passing through nepet , while its prolongation to the north certainly bore the name via amerina . the circuit of the city is about 2000 & nbsp ; m , its shape roughly triangular , and the walls are a remarkably fine and well-preserved specimen of roman military engineering . the roman town lay five kilometers farther north-west on the via annia . the via flaminia , which did not traverse the etruscan city , had two post-stations near it , aquaviva , some 4 & nbsp ; km southeast , and aequum faliscum , around six kilometers north-north-east ; the latter is very possibly identical with the etruscan site which george dennis identified with fescennia . george dennis , cities and cemeteries of etruria ( london , 1883 ) , i . 121 . there were about 80 towers , some 50 of which are still preserved . two of the gates also , of which there were eight , are noteworthy . of the buildings within the walls hardly anything is preserved above ground , though the forum and theatre ( as also the amphitheatre , the arena of which measured 55 by 33 meters outside the walls ) were all excavated in the 19th century . almost the only edifice now standing is the late 12th-century abbey church of s . maria , built by monks from savoy . excavations undertaken in the late 19th and into the early 20th century indicated that the plan of the whole city could easily be recovered , though the buildings have suffered considerable devastation . notizie degli scavi , 1903 , 14 . . references . . further reading . carlucci , claudia , maria anna de lucia brolli , simon keay , martin millett , kristian strutt , p . w . clogg , paola moscati , and rachel opitz . 2007 . '' an archaeological survey of the faliscan settlement at vignale , falerii veteres ( province of viterbo ) . '' papers of the british school at rome 75 : 39–121 . flower , harriet . 1998 . '' the significance of an inscribed breastplate captured at falerii in 241 b.c . ( with color after p.160 ) . '' journal of roman archaeology 11 : 224 . hay , sophie , paul johnson , simon keay , and martin millett . 2010 . '' falerii novi : further survey of the northern extramural area . '' papers of the british school at rome 78 : 1–38 . keay , simon , martin millett , sarah poppy , julia robinson , jeremy taylor , and nicola terrenato . 2000 . '' falerii novi : a new survey of the walled area '' . papers of the british school at rome 68 : 1–93 . launaro , alessandro , ninetta leone , martin millett , lieven verdonck , and frank vermeulen . 2016 . “ falerii novi ( comune di fabrica di roma , provincia di viterbo , regione lazio ) . ” papers of the british school at rome 84 : 321 . doi:10.1017/s0068246216000234 . tabolli , jacopo and jean macintosh turfa . 2014 . '' discovered anew : a faliscan tomb-group from falerii-celle in philadelphia . '' etruscan studies 17 , no . 1 : 28–62 . doi:10.1515/etst-2014-0009 .