Neal Boortz

biography . early life and education . boortz was born in bryn mawr , pennsylvania , his mother 's home . his father was a marine corps pilot , who served in world war ii , the korean war and vietnam war . describing himself as a '' military brat '' , boortz lived in many locations throughout the country ( including the small community of thrall , texas ) . he spent his first two years of high school at tustin union high school in tustin , california . the family then moved to florida . boortz graduated from pensacola high school , in 1963 . he attended texas a & m university , but did not graduate . boortz later attended john marshall law school , in atlanta , georgia , graduating in 1977 and passing the georgia bar . . career path . law school and radio . boortz began his radio career in college station , texas in the 1960s at wtaw , under the name of randy neal , while attending texas a & m university . in 1967 , after leaving texas , boortz moved to atlanta and landed a sales job . for two years he worked at rich 's department store , where he sold jewelry and carpeting . during that time , boortz was an avid listener of am 680 wrng ( now wcnn ) . the station called itself '' ring radio , '' as in the ring of a telephone . it was atlanta 's first talk radio station . boortz listened to morning talk show host , herb elfman , and soon became a devotee . '' boortz bombarded elfman with calls , reading him little scripts he 'd scribbled . '' while watching the news one evening , he heard that elfman had committed suicide . the next morning , boortz showed up at the front door of wrng and announced that he was ready to take elfman 's place . even though the management told him that '' they were going to search for a 'qualified ' host to take his place , '' boortz was offered the role of temporary two-week replacement . in the interim , the evening host was moved to mornings and boortz hosted the evening time slot . two weeks later , boortz was moved to the morning show , embarking on an atlanta talk radio career that spanned more than forty years . boortz honed his skills at the tiny 1,000-watt station , and even wrote a few speeches for then georgia governor lester maddox . he continued working at the station until 1974 , when wrng '' dumped him . '' he was offered a job at radio station wgy in schenectady , new york , but turned the offer down to return to atlanta and enroll in law school . in 1974 , boortz enrolled in then-unaccredited john marshall law school ( atlanta ) going to class in his spare time , while he and his wife donna worked full-time loading mail trucks . boortz credits his wife with providing '' the money to keep me in law school . '' after graduating from law school in 1977 , boortz practiced law in a solo law firm from 1977 through 1993 . during that period , he divided his time between his law practice and work in radio . one of boortz 's clients was boxer evander holyfield . holyfield later sued boortz and other members of his management team in the aftermath of a failed subaru car dealership investment . boortz told atlanta magazine '' it had nothing to do with representing him as a boxer . it was settled and disappeared . '' some time later , in a heated on-air exchange between atlanta mayor bill campbell and boortz , campbell remarked on the holyfield relationship : campbell ( sarcastically ) : by the way , neal , evander holyfield sends his regards . we talked a little about how good he 's doing now and the fact he 's getting ready to open up his 57,000 square-foot , 20 million home . how he 's fighting for 35 million a fight . i was sorta thinking about when you were representing him . he was living in an apartment over on lenox road . he was fighting for about 20,000 a fight . it 's sort of interesting how your great legal skills have transferred into financial well-being for evander . boortz responded by calling mayor campbell an '' unethical son of a bitch . '' boortz later remarked '' it 's the only time i 've ever been on the air that i lost control . '' in 1993 , boortz closed his law practice and devoted his full-time to his radio career . full time radio career . while in law school , boortz returned to work at wrng . in 1983 he moved to the larger news-talk radio station wgka . he later recounted how he would often go into work at his law office at 5 a.m . , work there for several hours , then go to wgst , and finally back to the law office until 11:00 & nbsp ; p.m . in 1992 , boortz asked wgst for a raise ; a salary equal to his combined income as an attorney and a radio host . when wgst refused , boortz left . he got his raise when he signed an exclusive contract with am 750 wsb to host a weekday radio show . shortly after that , he closed his law office . in 1995 , talkers magazine named boortz one of the '' 25 most important radio talk show hosts in america '' . that same year , georgia trend magazine added boortz to its list of the '' 100 most powerful & influential people in georgia '' in 1999 , his show became radio syndication through wsb 's owner cox radio . the show continued to be based in atlanta . the neal boortz show featured boortz , producers belinda skelton and royal marshall , interviews , and callers . on the air and on his website , boortz admonished his listeners to take no heed nor place any credence in anything he said , presenting himself as merely an '' entertainer . '' as an entertainer , boortz was a 2002 nab marconi radio awards finalist and radio & records newstalk personality of the year for 2002 . newsmax.com magazine 's '' top 25 talk radio host '' list selected boortz as the ninth most influential host in the nation . in 2007 , boortz and his radio show were awarded '' best radio on-air personality '' and '' best radio program , any type '' by the georgia association of broadcasters . he was also a recipient of the georgia radio hall of fame 2007 career achievement award . '' neal boortz accepts his award from pete spriggs , wsb program director '' , www.grhof.com . retrieved 2008-12-28 . the neal boortz show originated from the nation 's ninth ( 9th ) largest radio market and was ranked the sixth overall most listened to radio program in the country . in 2008 , boortz was a finalist for the nab marconi radio awards as the nation 's best syndicated radio personality . ( the award went to glenn beck ) . '' glenn beck named network/syndicated personality of the year '' , www.nab.org . retrieved 2008-12-28 . boortz was inducted in the national radio hall of fame in 2009 . '' radio hall of fame inductees : neal boortz '' , www.radiohof.org/ . author . left boortz 's first foray into authorship was in 1997 with the commencement speech you need to hear , in which he delivers his opinions on various topics in the form of a commencement speech he would give to new college graduates , if ever invited to do so . his second book , entitled the terrible truth about liberals , was published in 1998 , and contains reprinted material from his first book , along with a significant amount of new material . his third book ( co-authored by georgia congressman john linder ) entitled the fairtax book , explains the proposal to implement a national retail sales tax in lieu of the federal income taxes , payroll taxes , estate tax , etc . the hardcover version held the 1 non-fiction spot on the new york times bestseller list for the last two weeks of august 2005 and remained in the top ten for seven weeks . matt kempner , '' the fairtax book author from atlanta is pumping up volume on sales of book . '' atlanta journal-constitution , august 20 , 2005 . the paperback released in may 2006 contains additional information , an afterword and several revisions of misstatements made in the hardcover edition . it also spent several weeks on the new york times bestseller list . boortz claims to have donated 100 % of his royalties from the fairtax book to charity and has commented on his radio show that he has not made one cent from the book . as of july 2006 , boortz claims his charitable donations from book proceeds exceed one hundred thousand us dollars . the book is one of his most frequent topics of discussion . his fourth book entitled somebody 's got ta say it was released on february 20 , 2007 , and debuted at 2 spot on the new york times bestseller list , second only to barack obama 's audacity of hope . he occasionally writes columns on the internet news/commentary site townhall.com and other online magazines . his 2008 book is titled fairtax : the truth . this book attempts to answer the critics of the fair tax proposal and claims to correct some of its myths and misrepresentations . it achieved 4 on the new york times best seller list for the week of march 2 , 2008 for paperback nonfiction . after neal retired from talk radio on january 21 , 2012 , maybe i should just shut up and go away ! —the book is found after clicking the '' find this book on google books '' link ) was published in hardcover by carpenter 's son publishing in franklin tennessee . political beliefs . image : orlandotaxrallypic1.jpg thumb neal boortz speaks at a fairtax rally in orlando , florida on july 28 , 2006 boortz is a self-described libertarian . he advocates a complete overhaul of the u.s . tax system and the release of all non-violent drug offenders who are currently in prison . he has supported republican candidates and republican tax policy , though he occasionally clashes with republicans on social issues . others describe his political views as being more in line with '' republitarian '' philosophy that embraces incrementalism domestically , and a generally interventionism ( politics ) based on self-interest , national defense and the expansion of liberty . boortz disagrees with the libertarian party platform on several key issues including his firm support of the war in iraq , incremental tax reform , and his opposition to the unrestricted immigration policy advocated by the libertarian party . boortz criticizes the major parties saying '' i believe that the principal difference between the democrats and the republicans is that the democrats just want to grow our imperial federal government a bit faster than the republicans do . '' he sides with liberals on some social issues such as abortion , same-sex marriage , and civil liberties . he agrees with fiscal conservatism in advocating less government spending and decreasing corporate regulation . he is an advocate for freedom of speech . in line with the traditional views of the libertarian party , boortz supports eliminating the war on drugs , and emphasizing personal responsibility . he has repeatedly stated his belief that global climate change is not man-made . his stances on many of these issues make him popular among conservative republicans , who , due to their larger numbers in comparison to libertarians , make up the majority of his listeners and callers . boortz 's post-9/11 platforms include support for the us-led war on terror , a more aggressive foreign policy , and the usa patriot act . he is also strongly in favor of a crackdown on illegal immigration , including harsh penalties for businesses who employ persons here illegally . these views occasionally put him in conflict with the libertarian party . justin raimondo of antiwar.com has called boortz a '' statism , not a libertarian '' and a '' liberventionist '' and has urged the libertarian party to '' boot boortz '' . prior to the 2006 midterm elections , boortz opined that perhaps it would be a good thing to have the republicans lose power in congress , forcing them to wake up and stop taking their base for granted . boortz told one disgruntled caller : i am happy about it the defeat . it 's the only way to get these republicans to wake themselves up and say , 'you have abandoned what you were put in office for . ' boortz creates controversy among conservatives for his support of abortion rights ( on which boortz does not allow calls ) , for his refusal to condemn homosexuality or gay marriage , and for his negative comments regarding baptists and the young earth creationism . although he calls himself a christian , he keeps his religious views private . he has also caused a stir among some southerners , by coining the term '' flaggots '' during his frequent jabs at them and at confederate issues ( such as governmental support of the confederate flag ) . . the neal boortz show . the neal boortz show was a radio syndication talk show , which ended in january 2013 . it aired live from 8:30am to noon , weekdays . boortz marketed his talk radio show as '' insensitivity training '' , creating controversy which increased ratings . his stated '' beliefs '' included a claim that add and adhd are '' medical frauds '' and a scam that teachers , parents , and drug companies use . his attempts at controversy included referring to homeless people as '' urban outdoorsmen '' on air , and called public education '' taxpayer-funded child abuse '' . specific targets of criticism included christian conservatives , hillary clinton , ted kennedy , max cleland , and cynthia mckinney . he also expressed a negative opinion about the lack of muslim outrage for the actions of muslim terrorists and the riots that erupted in response to the jyllands-posten muhammad cartoons controversy . islamic extremism was a favorite topic . some of his remarks caused controversy . after the virginia tech shootings , boortz criticized the media , saying , '' when the history of this event is written , we will have 25 students standing meekly waiting for this guy to execute them . '' steinberg , jacques . the new york times . 2007/04/20 . talk radio tries for humor and a political advantage retrieved 2008/08/06 when public outrage resulted from his comments , members of the virginia legislature tried to have boortz 's show removed from local radio stations . gangloff , mike . the roanoke times . 2007/05/02 . radio stations report little outcry about boortz retrieved 2008/08/06 . in march 2008 , boortz attracted controversy by playing an audiotape of a nine-year-old where he repeatedly ridiculed the child 's speech , burnett , daniel.the voice , gainesville state college . boortz 's morals challenged by gsc professor . retrieved 2008/08/04 leading to an unsuccessful fcc petition to deny boortz 's employer the right to purchase five local radio stations . nelson , don . athens banner-herald . 2008/06/12 feds sign off on sale of stations retrieved 2008/08/06 federal communications commission . 2008/06/10 . daily report . retrieved 2008/08/04 federal communications commission . 2008/06/10 . complaint letter . retrieved 2008/08/04 boortz announced his retirement from radio on june 4 , 2012 . his last live show aired on january 18 , 2013 . boortz 's regular fill-in host , herman cain , replaced him on january 21 , 2013 , in what amounted to a swap of seats , as boortz became cain 's fill-in host . boortz stated he would also host commentaries for wsb and occasionally substitute for sean hannity , whose show airs in atlanta on wsb .