Coccidioidomycosis

signs and symptoms . an estimated 60 % of people infected with the fungi responsible for coccidioidomycosis have minimal to no symptoms , while 40 % will have a range of possible clinical symptoms . of those who do develop symptoms , the primary infection is most often respiratory , with symptoms resembling bronchitis or pneumonia that resolve over a matter of a few weeks . in endemic regions , coccidioidomycosis is responsible for 20 % of cases of community-acquired pneumonia . notable coccidioidomycosis signs and symptoms include a profound fatigue ( medical ) , loss of smell and taste , fever , cough , headaches , rash , myalgia , and arthralgia . fatigue can persist for many months after initial infection . the classic triad of coccidioidomycosis known as '' desert rheumatism '' includes the combination of fever , joint pains , and erythema nodosum . a minority ( 3 % -5 % ) of infected individuals do not recover from the initial acute infection and develop a chronic infection . this can take the form of chronic lung infection or widespread disseminated infection ( affecting the meninges , soft tissues , joints , and bone ) . chronic infection is responsible for most of the morbidity and mortality . chronic fibrocavitary disease is manifested by cough ( sometimes productive of mucus ) , fevers , night sweats and weight loss . osteomyelitis , including involvement of the spine , and meningitis may occur months to years after initial infection . severe lung disease may develop in hiv-infected persons . . types . after coccidioides infection , coccidioidomycosis begins with valley fever , which is its initial acute form . valley fever may progress to the chronic form and then to disseminated coccidioidomycosis . therefore , coccidioidomycosis may be divided into the following types : : acute coccidioidomycosis , sometimes described in literature as primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis : chronic coccidioidomycosis : disseminated coccidioidomycosis , which includes primary cutaneous coccidioidomycosis . complications . serious complications may occur in patients who have weakened immune systems , including severe pneumonia with respiratory failure and bronchopleural fistulas requiring resection , lung nodules , and possible disseminated form , where the infection spreads throughout the body . the disseminated form of coccidioidomycosis can devastate the body , causing skin ulcers , abscesses , bone lesions , swollen joints with severe pain , heart inflammation , urinary tract problems , and meningitis , which can lead to death . galgiani j . n . coccidioidomycosis . in : cecil , russell l . , lee goldman , and d . a . ausiello . cecil medicine . philadelphia : saunders elsevier , 2007 . . cause . it must rain first to start the cycle of initial growth of the fungus underneath the soil . in soil ( and in agar plate ) , coccidioides exist in filament form . it forms hyphae in both horizontal and vertical directions . over a prolonged dry period , cells within hyphae degenerate to form alternating barrel-shaped cells ( arthroconidia ) . arthroconidia are light-weight and carried by air currents . this happens when the soil is disturbed often by clearing trees , construction and farming . as the population grows , so have all these industries , causing a potential cascade effect . the more land that is cleared , the more arid the soil , the riper the environment for coccidioides . these spores can be easily inhaled without the person knowing . on arriving in alveoli , they enlarge in size to become spherules , and internal septations develop . this division of cells is made possible by the optimal temperature inside the body . septations develop and form endospores within the spherule . rupture of spherules release these endospores , which in turn repeat the cycle and spread the infection to adjacent tissues within the body of the infected individual . nodules can form in lungs surrounding these spherules . when they rupture , they release their contents into bronchi , forming thin-walled cavities . these cavities can result in symptoms like pleurisy , hemoptysis , and persistent cough . in individuals with a weakened immune system , the infection can spread fungemia . on rare occasion it can enter the body through a break in the skin , causing infection . . diagnosis . coccidioidomycosis diagnosis relies on a combination of an infected person 's signs and symptoms , findings on radiographic imaging , and laboratory results . the disease is commonly misdiagnosed as bacterial community-acquired pneumonia . the fungal infection can be demonstrated by microscopic detection of diagnostic cells in body fluids , exudates , sputum and biopsy tissue by methods of papanicolaou or grocott 's methenamine silver staining . these stains can demonstrate spherules and surrounding inflammation . with specific nucleotide primers , c.immitis dna can be amplified by polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) . it can also be detected in culture by morphological identification or by using molecular probes that hybridize with c.immitis rna . c . immitis and c . posadasii can not be distinguished on cytology or by symptoms , but only by dna pcr . an indirect demonstration of fungal infection can be achieved also by serologic analysis detecting fungal antigen or host igm or igg antibody produced against the fungus . the available tests include the tube-precipitin ( tp ) assays , complement fixation test , and elisa . tp antibody is not found in cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) . tp antibody is specific and is used as a confirmatory test , whereas elisa is sensitive and thus used for initial testing . if the meninges are affected , csf will show csf glucose , an increased level of protein , and lymphocytic pleocytosis . rarely , csf eosinophilia is present . imaging . chest x-rays rarely demonstrate nodules or cavities in the lungs , but these images commonly demonstrate lung opacification , pleural effusions , or lymphadenopathy associated with the lungs . computed tomography scans of the chest are more sensitive than chest x-rays to detect these changes . . prevention . preventing valley fever is challenging because it is difficult to avoid breathing in the fungus should it be present ; however , the public health effect of the disease is essential to understand in areas where the fungus is endemic . enhancing surveillance of coccidioidomycosis is key to preparedness in the medical field in addition to improving diagnostics for early infections . currently there are no completely effective preventive measures available for people who live or travel through valley fever -endemic areas . recommended preventive measures include avoiding airborne dust or dirt , but this does not guarantee protection against infection . people in certain occupations may be advised to wear face masks . the use of air filtration indoors is also helpful , in addition to keeping skin injuries clean and covered to avoid skin infection . in 1998-2011 , there were 111,117 cases of coccidioidomycosis in the u.s . that were logged into the notifiable disease united states . since many u.s . states do not require reporting of coccidioidomycosis , the actual numbers can be higher . the united states ' centers for disease control and prevention called the disease a '' silent epidemic '' and acknowledged that there is no proven anticoccidioidal vaccine available . studies done in the past show that the cost benefit of a vaccine is most notable among infants , teens , and immigrant adults , with negative cost-benefit results among older age groups . raising both surveillance and awareness of the disease while medical researchers are developing a human vaccine can positively contribute towards prevention efforts . research demonstrates that patients from endemic areas who are aware of the disease are most likely to request diagnostic testing for coccidioidomycosis . presently , meridian bioscience manufactures the so-called eia test to diagnose the valley fever , which however is known for producing a fair quantity of false positives . currently , recommended prevention measures can include type-of-exposure-based respirator protection for persons engaged in agriculture , construction and others working outdoors in endemic areas . dust control measures such as planting grass and wetting the soil , and also limiting exposure to dust storms are advisable for residential areas in endemic regions . . treatment . significant disease develops in fewer than 5 % of those infected and typically occurs in those with a weakened immune system . mild asymptomatic cases often do not require any treatment . those with severe symptoms may benefit from antifungal therapy , which requires 3–6 months or more of treatment depending on the response to the treatment . there is a lack of prospective studies that examine optimal antifungal therapy for coccidioidomycosis . on the whole , oral fluconazole and intravenous amphotericin b are used in progressive or disseminated disease , or in immunocompromised individuals . amphotericin b used to be the only available treatment , although now there are alternatives , including itraconazole or ketoconazole , that may be used for milder disease . fluconazole is the preferred medication for coccidioidal meningitis , due to its penetration into csf . intrathecal or intraventricular amphotericin b therapy is used if infection persists after fluconazole treatment . itraconazole is used for cases that involve treatment of infected person 's bones and joints . the antifungal medications posaconazole and voriconazole have also been used to treat coccidioidomycosis . because the symptoms of coccidioidomycosis are similar to the common flu , pneumonia , and other respiratory diseases , it is important for public health professionals to be aware of the rise of coccidioidomycosis and the specifics of diagnosis . greyhound dogs often get coccidioidomycosis as well , and their treatment regimen involves 6–12 months of ketoconazole , to be taken with food . . toxicity . conventional amphotericin b desoxycholate ( amb : used since the 1950s as a primary agent ) is known to be associated with increased drug-induced nephrotoxicity ( kidney toxicity ) impairing renal function . drug-induced nephrotoxicity : american family physician ( 2008 sep 15 ; 78 ( 6 ) :743-750 ) - retrieved 2017-01-16 other formulations have been developed such as lipid soluble formulations to mitigate such side-effects as direct proximal and distal tubular cytotoxicity . these include liposomal amphotericin b , amphotericin b lipid complex such as abelcet ( brand ) amphotericin b phospholipid complex amphotericin b phospholipid complex : medscape- retrieved 2017-01-16 also as ambisome intravenous , ambisome intravenous : webmd - retrieved 2017-01-16 or amphotec intravenous ( generic ; amphotericin b cholesteryl sul ) , amphotec intravenous : webmd -retrieved 2017-01-16 and amphotericin b colloidal dispersion , all shown to exhibit a decrease in nephrotoxicity . the latter was not as effective in one study as amphotericin b desoxycholate which had a 50 % murine morbidity rate versus zero for the amb colloidal dispersion . amb colloidal versus amb deoxycholate : researchgate ; antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 35 ( 9 ) :1829-33 · october 1991 ( printed from pubmed ) - retrieved 2017-01-17 the cost of amb deoxycholate , in 2015 , for a patient of at 1 & nbsp ; mg/kg/day dosage , was approximately 63.80 , compared to 5 & nbsp ; mg/kg/day of liposomal amb at 1318.80 , making the less toxic option less accessible . . epidemiology . coccidioidomycosis is endemic to the western hemisphere between 40°n and 40°s . the ecological niches are characterized by hot summers and mild winters with an annual rainfall of 10–50 & nbsp ; cm . the species are found in alkaline sandy soil , typically 10–30 & nbsp ; cm below the surface . in harmony with the mycelium life cycle , incidence increases with periods of dryness after a rainy season ; this phenomenon , termed '' grow and blow '' , refers to growth of the fungus in wet weather , producing spores which are spread by the wind during succeeding dry weather . while the majority of cases are observed in the endemic region , cases reported outside the area are generally visitors , who contact the infection and return to their native areas before becoming symptomatic . north america . in the united states , c . immitis is endemic to southern and central california with the highest presence in the san joaquin valley . c . posadassi is most prevalent in arizona , although it can be found in a wider region spanning from utah , new mexico , texas , and nevada . an estimated 150,000 infections occur annually , with 25,000 new infections occurring every year . the incidence of coccidioidomycosis in the united states in 2011 ( 42.6 per 100,000 ) was almost ten times higher than the incidence reported in 1998 ( 5.3 per 100,000 ) . in area where it is most prevalent , the infection rate is 2-4 % . incidence varies widely across the west and southwest . in arizona , for instance , in 2007 , there were 3,450 cases in maricopa county , which in 2007 had an estimated population of 3,880,181 u.s . census bureau , state & county quickfacts for an incidence of approximately 1 in 1,125 . in contrast , though southern new mexico is considered an endemic region , there were 35 cases in the entire state in 2008 and 23 in 2007 , in a region that had an estimated 2008 population of 1,984,356 , new mexico intercensal population estimates from the u.s . census bureau for an incidence of approximately 1 in 56,695 . infection rates vary greatly by county , and although population density is important , so are other factors that have not been proven yet . greater construction activity may disturb spores in the soil . in addition , the effect of altitude on fungi growth and morphology has not been studied , and altitude can range from sea level to 10,000 feet or higher across california , arizona , utah and new mexico . in california from 2000 to 2007 , there were 16,970 reported cases ( 5.9 per 100,000 people ) and 752 deaths of the 8,657 people hospitalized . the highest incidence was in the san joaquin valley with 76 % of the 16,970 cases ( 12,855 ) occurring in the area . following the 1994 northridge earthquake , there was a sudden increase of cases in the areas affected by the quake , at a pace of over 10 times baseline . there was an outbreak in the summer of 2001 in colorado , away from where the disease was considered endemic . a group of archeologists visited dinosaur national monument , and eight members of the crew , along with two national park service workers were diagnosed with valley fever . california state prisons , beginning in 1919 , have been particularly affected by coccidioidomycosis . in 2005 and 2006 , the pleasant valley state prison near coalinga and avenal state prison near avenal on the western side of the san joaquin valley had the highest incidence in 2005 , of at least 3,000 per 100,000 . the receiver appointed in plata v . schwarzenegger issued an order in may 2013 requiring relocation of vulnerable populations in those prisons . the incidence rate has been increasing , with rates as high as 7 % during 2006-2010 . the cost of care and treatment is 23 million in california prisons . a lawsuit was filed against the state in 2014 on behalf of 58 inmates stating that the avenal and pleasant valley state prisons did not take necessary steps to prevent infections . . risk factors . there are several populations that have a higher risk for contracting coccidioidomycosis and developing the advanced disseminated version of the disease . populations with exposure to the airborne arthroconidia working in agriculture and construction have a higher risk . outbreaks have also been linked to earthquakes , windstorms and military training exercises where the ground is disturbed . historically , an infection is more likely to occur in males than females , although this could be attributed to occupation rather than being sex-specific . women who are pregnant and immediately postpartum are at a high risk of infection and dissemination . there is also an association between stage of pregnancy and severity of the disease , with third trimester women being more likely to develop dissemination . presumably this is related to highly elevated hormonal levels , which stimulate growth and maturation of spherules and subsequent release of endospores . certain ethnic populations are more susceptible to disseminated coccidioidomycosis . the risk of dissemination is 175 times greater in filipinos and 10 times greater in african americans than non-hispanic whites . individuals with a weakened immune system are also more susceptible to the disease . in particular , individuals with hiv and diseases that impair t-cell function . individuals with pre-existing conditions such as diabetes are also at a higher risk . age also affects the severity of the disease , with more than one-third of deaths being in the 65-84 age group . . history . the first case of what was later named coccidioidomycosis was described in 1892 in buenos aires by alejandro posadas , a medical intern at the hospital de clínicas '' josé de san martín '' . posadas a . un nuevo caso de micosis fungoidea con posrospemias . annales cir . med . argent . ( 1892 ) , volume 15 , p . 585-597 . posadas established an infectious character of the disease after being able to transfer it in laboratory conditions to lab animals . in the u.s . , dr . e . rixford , a physician from a san francisco hospital , and t . c . gilchrist , a pathologist at johns hopkins medical school , became early pioneers of clinical studies of the infection . rixford e . , gilchrist t . c . two cases of protozoan ( coccidioidal ) infection of the skin and other organs . johns hopkins hosp rep 1896 ; 10:209-268 . they decided that the causative organism was a coccidia-type protozoan and named it coccidioides immitis ( resembling coccidia , not mild ) . dr . william ophüls , a professor at stanford university hospital ( san francisco ) , discovered that the causative agent of the disease that was at first called coccidioides infection and later coccidioidomycosis was a fungal pathogen , and coccidioidomycosis was also distinguished from histoplasmosis and blastomycosis . further , coccidioides immitis was identified as the culprit of respiratory disorders previously called san joaquin valley fever , desert fever , and valley fever , and a serum precipitin test was developed by charles e . smith that was able to detect an acute form of the infection . in retrospect , smith played a major role in both medical research and raising awareness about coccidioidomycosis , especially when he became dean of the school of public health at the university of california at berkeley in 1951 . coccidioides immitis was considered by the united states during the 1950s and 1960s as a potential biological weapon . ciottone , gregory r . disaster medicine . philadelphia , pa : mosby elsevier , 2006 , pp . 726-128 . the strain selected for investigation was designated with the military symbol oc , and initial expectations were for its deployment as a human incapacitant . medical research suggested that oc might have had some lethal effects on the populace , and coccidioides immitis started to be classified by the authorities as a threat to public health . however , coccidioides immitis was never weaponized to the public 's knowledge , and most of the military research in the mid-1960s was concentrated on developing a human vaccine . currently , it is not on the u.s . department of health and human services ' or centers for disease control and prevention list of select agents and toxins . in 2002 , coccidioides posadasii was identified as genetically distinct from coccidioides immitis despite their morphologic similarities and can also cause coccidioidomycosis . . research . as of 2013 , there is no vaccine available to prevent infection with coccidioides immitis or coccidioides posadasii , but efforts to develop such a vaccine are underway . . other animals . an animal infected with valley fever can not transmit the disease to other animals . in dogs , the most common symptom of coccidioidomycosis is a chronic cough , which can be dry or moist . other symptoms include fever ( in approximately 50 % of cases ) , weight loss , anorexia , lethargy , and depression . the disease can disseminate throughout the dog 's body , most commonly causing osteomyelitis ( infection of the bone ) , which leads to lameness . dissemination can cause other symptoms , depending on which organs are infected . if the fungus infects the heart or pericardium , it can cause heart failure and death . in cats , symptoms may include skin lesions , fever , and loss of appetite , with skin lesions being the most common . other species in which valley fever has been found include livestock such as cattle and horses ; llamas ; marine mammals , including sea otters ; zoo animals such as monkeys and apes , kangaroos , tigers , etc . ; and wildlife native to the geographic area where the fungus is found , such as cougars , skunks , and javelinas . . additional images . image : spherule and endospore forms of coccidioides immitis 01ee057 lores.jpg image : mature spherule with endospores of coccidioides immitis phil 480.tif . see also . coccidioides coccidioides immitis coccidioides posadasii zygomycosis medical geology list of cutaneous conditions thunderhead , a 1998 novel by douglas preston and lincoln child which uses the fungus and illness as a central plot point . references . further reading . ( review ) . ( review ) . external links . u.s . centers for disease control and prevention page on coccidioidomycosis medline plus entry for coccidioidomycosis