Rex E. Lee

background and education . lee was born in st . johns , arizona on february 27 , 1935 . his parents were mabel ( née whiting ) and rex e . lee . according to an obituary in american rifleman , lee 's father was shot and killed during a hunting trip in november 1934 . his mother later married wilford shumway . lee served a mission for the lds church in the mexican mission , serving as second counselor to the mission president . he first met his future wife , janet griffin ( whose father was the treasury attaché of the us embassy in mexico city ) , while he was in mexico . when lee returned from his mission and enrolled at byu , he again became acquainted with janet and they married on july 7 , 1958 in arizona . lee and griffin had seven children . during his undergraduate years at byu , lee was elected student-body president . hill , greg . funeral spealers laud life of rex lee , church news , march 23 , 1996 , retrieved 2012-05-08 after completing his undergraduate work at byu , in 1963 lee graduated from the university of chicago law school with a doctor of juridical science . binder , david . rex lee , former solicitor general , dies at 61 , the new york times , mar . 13 , 1996 retrieved 2012-05-11 after graduating as the valedictorian of his class , lee served as a seat six law clerk for byron white , an associate justice of the u.s . supreme court in washington d.c . . early legal career and academia . following his clerkship at the u.s . supreme court , lee returned to arizona and became a partner in the phoenix law firm of jennings , strouss & salmon . only four years after graduating from law school , lee argued his first case before the u.s . supreme court , despite the fact that he had not yet led any depositions in a lower civil court . in 1972 , lee left his public legal career to become the founding dean of brigham young university j . reuben clark law school and is considered personally responsible for recruiting many members of its charter class . wilkins , richard . in memoriam : rex e . lee , clark memorandum , ( spring 1996 ) p . 4 retrieved 2012-05-11 warning claxons from utah : bob bennett voted out , millard fillmore 's bathtub , may 9 , 2010 update ; retrieved 2012-09-13 . supreme court advocate and scholar . lee entered public service , first at the invitation of attorney general edward h . levi as an assistant attorney general in charge of the civil division in the united states department of justice from 1975–76 . in 1980 , lee wrote a lawyer looks at the equal rights amendment where he attempted to legally defend the lds church 's opposition of equal rights amendment as well as its anti-homosexual viewpoints . he served as solicitor general of the united states from 1981-85 under president of the united states ronald reagan . as solicitor general , lee argued cases before the supreme court . during his time as solicitor general , lee won 23 of the 30 cases he argued during ronald reagan 's first presidential term . before he died , he spent time preparing to argue his sixtieth case before the supreme court despite being confined to a hospital bed . davidson , lee . supreme court justices pay tribute to the late rex lee , byu magazine ( november 1996 ) ; retrieved april 23 , 2012 . associate justice white said that lee '' was the epitome of integrity . '' at one point , while being criticized for taking somewhat unpopular stances that might have been at odds with the administration under which he served , lee responded : '' i 'm the solicitor general , not the pamphleteer general . '' lee relished the opportunity to argue before the supreme court . his son , mike lee , noted that lee was very energetic and enthusiastic about arguing cases . in june 1985 , lee resigned as solicitor general among criticism that he was not conservative enough . in 1986 , after his resignation from the solicitor general 's office , lee was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer . lee managed to recover after about a year of cancer treatment and therapy and was named byu 's tenth president . according to some accounts , when lee was asked to assume the position as university president , he accepted on the condition that he would still be able to argue cases before the supreme court in his spare time . he argued nine before his death . . byu presidency . as president of byu , lee oversaw the creation of clear standards on employment requirements and academic freedom , especially in terms of religious education . lee believed that religious perspectives in the classroom promote academic freedom rather than hinder it . he also oversaw the streamlining of graduation requirements to aid students in graduating more quickly . specifically , he limited major requirements to 60 credit hours , encouraging graduation within four years or eight semesters . furthermore , he reinstated weekly university devotionals . his administration was responsible for growing the size of the campus and prestige of the university . in 1993 , lee decided byu would offer lower tuition for summer semester to increase enrollment . while president , lee instituted a rule that added regular church attendance as a requirement for attending byu ( though regular church attendance was not defined ) , stating that the rule would not be used to force church attendance but those that those best fitted to byu 's environment would , '' cheerfully participate in church activity . '' in 1993 to 1994 , controversy arose when two professors were terminated at byu . arguments arose on the nature of the firings with some claiming that they were fired due to their outspoken beliefs ( one of which was supportive of the pro-choice movement ) that were not in line with the beliefs of the lds church , while administrators claimed it was strictly due to academic performance . these allegations sparked accusations of an '' anti-feminist '' byu which lee denied , affirming that feminists were welcome on byu campus . lee also introduced '' question and answer '' sessions for faculty , students , and staff as well as additions to the physical plant of the university . furthermore , he emphasized university devotional attendance and encouraged school spirit . in 1994 , lee created a committee to raise 250 million for the '' lighting the way capital campaign '' for the benefit of byu and byu-hawaii to reach accreditation . the campaign was completed in december 1999 , having earned over 400 million . before lee 's tenure as university president was over , he struggled with lymphoma and peripheral neuropathy . he served as president university from july 1 , 1989 to december 31 , 1995 . he died at age 61 , less than three months after resigning as president of byu . during lee 's funeral , byu classes were canceled for two hours to allow students to attend the funeral . . legacy . during his career , lee argued 59 cases before the supreme court . associate supreme court justice samuel alito served as an assistant to solicitor general lee from 1981 to 1985 , where alito argued 12 cases before the court . gardner , peter b . brothers in law , byu magazine , spring 2011 retrieved 2012-05-08 according to scholar rebecca mae salokar , rex e . lee brought the position of solicitor general into the center of policymaking in the united states . in 1998 , the j . reuben clark law school created the rex e . lee chair , a position created to honor lee . lee won one of the first distinguished utahn of the year award . lee was an avid runner throughout his life ( he was nominated to be solicitor general two days after completing the boston marathon ) , and an annual race is held in his honor at byu to raise proceeds for cancer research . . family . like his father , thomas rex lee would later teach at the brigham young university j . reuben clark law school , before resigning to accept an appointment as an associate justice of the utah supreme court . another son , mike lee , graduated from byu as an undergrad and a law student , before clerking for judge dee benson at the united states district court , district of utah , and for justice alito , once while he was still judging on the united states court of appeals for the third circuit , and once on the u.s . supreme court . in 2011 , mike became a united states senate from utah . lee was a first cousin of politicians mo udall and stewart udall . . works . . see also . immigration and naturalization service v . chadha united states v . leon lee-hamblin family