François Darlan

early life and early career . darlan was born in nérac , lot-et-garonne , to a family with a long connection with the french navy . his great-grandfather was killed at the battle of trafalgar . his father , jean-baptiste darlan , was a lawyer and politician who served as minister of justice in the cabinet of jules méline . georges leygues , a political colleague of his father who would spend seven years as minister of the marine , was darlan 's godfather . darlan graduated from the école navale in 1902 . during world war i , he commanded an artillery battery that took part in the battle of verdun . after the war darlan commanded the training ships jeanne d'arc and edgar quinet , receiving promotions to frigate captain in 1920 and captain in 1926 . thereafter darlan rose swiftly . he was appointed chef de cabinet to leygues and promoted to rear admiral in 1929 . in 1930 , he served as the french navy 's representative at the london naval treaty , and in 1932 he was promoted to vice-amiral . subsequently , in 1934 , he took command of the atlantic squadron at brest . he was promoted to lieutenant admiral in 1936 . he was appointed chief of the naval staff from 1 january 1937 , at the same time promoted to amiral . as head of the navy he successfully used his political connections to lobby for a building programme to counter the rising threat from the kriegsmarine and regia marina . after attending the coronation of george vi , darlan complained that protocol had left him , as a mere vice admiral , '' behind a pillar and after the chinese admiral '' . auphan and mordai , p . 17 in 1939 he was promoted to amiral de la flotte , a rank created specifically to put him on equal terms with the first sea lord of the royal navy . after the declaration of war in september 1939 , darlan became commander-in-chief of the french navy . vichy government . armistice . darlan was immensely proud of the french navy which he had helped to build up , and after axis forces defeated france ( may–june 1940 ) , on 3 june he threatened that he would mutiny and lead the fleet to fight under the british flag in the event of an armistice . lacouture 1991 , p . 231 darlan promised churchill at the briare conference ( 12 june ) that no french ship would ever come into german hands . even on 15 june he was still talking of a potential armistice with indignation . lacouture 1991 , p.231 darlan appears to have retreated from his position on 15 june , when the cabinet voted 13–6 for camille chautemps ' compromise proposal to inquire about possible terms . he was willing to accept an armistice provided the french fleet was kept out of german hands . williams 2005 , pp . 325–27 on 16 june churchill 's telegram arrived agreeing to an armistice ( france and britain were bound by treaty not to seek a separate peace ) provided the french fleet was moved to british ports . this was not acceptable to darlan , who argued that it would leave france defenceless . atkin 1997 , pp . 82–86 that day , according to jules moch , he declared that britain was finished so there was no point in continuing to fight , and he was concerned that if there was no armistice hitler would invade french north africa via franco 's spain . that evening paul reynaud , feeling he lacked sufficient cabinet support for continuing the war , resigned as prime minister , and philippe pétain formed a new government with a view to seeking an armistice with germany . darlan served as the minister of marine in the pétain administration from 16 june . on 18 june darlan gave his '' word of honour '' to the british first sea lord , sir dudley pound that he would not allow the french fleet to fall into german hands . lacouture 1991 , p . 246 petain 's government signed an armistice ( 22 june 1940 ) but retained control of the territories known as '' vichy france '' after the capital moved to vichy in early july . general charles noguès , commander-in-chief of french forces in north africa , was dismayed at the armistice but accepted it partly ( he claimed ) because darlan would not let him have the french fleet to continue hostilities against the axis powers . lacouture 1991 , pp . 229–30 churchill later wrote that darlan could have been the leader of the free french , '' a de gaulle raised to the tenth power '' , had he defected at this time . de gaulle 's biographer jean lacouture described darlan as '' the archetypal man of failed destiny '' thereafter . . darlan , the french navy and the british . the terms of the armistice called for the demobilisation and disarmament of the ships of the french navy under german supervision in their home ports ( mostly in the german-occupied zone ) . as the british prime minister winston churchill pointed out , this meant that french warships would be fully armed when they came under german control . at italian suggestion , the armistice terms were amended to permit the fleet to stay temporarily in north african ports , where they might potentially be seized by italian troops from libya . darlan ordered all ships then in the atlantic ports ( which germany would soon occupy ) to steam to french overseas possessions , out of reach of the germans , although not necessarily of the italians . despite darlan 's assurance , churchill had remained concerned that darlan might be overruled by the politicians , and this concern was not allayed by darlan becoming a government minister himself . darlan repeatedly refused british requests to place the whole fleet in british custody ( or in the french west indies ) , and in attempts to get the british to release french warships , gave a version of the armistice terms inconsistent with what the british knew from other sources to be the case . they lacked confidence that darlan was being straight with them ( one government adviser minuted that he had 'turned crook like the rest ' ) and believed that , even if he was sincere , he could not deliver on his promise . this belief led to operation catapult , where , on 3 july 1940 attack on mers-el-kébir . the plans for '' catapult '' had been drawn up as early as 14 , 15 or 16 june . darlan was at his house at nérac in gascony on 3 july , and could not be contacted . lacouture 1991 , p . 247 thereafter , french forces loyal to vichy ( most of them under darlan 's command ) fiercely resisted british moves into french territory , and sometimes co-operated with german forces . however , as darlan had promised , no capital ships fell into german hands , and only three destroyers and a few dozen submarines and smaller vessels passed into german control . darlan expected germany to win the war and saw it as to france 's advantage to collaborate with germany . he distrusted the british , and after the armistice of june 1940 , he seriously considered waging a naval war against britain . . 1941–42 : collaboration with germany and after . darlan came from a republican background and never believed in the vichyite révolution nationale ; for example , he had reservations about pétain 's clericalism . however , by 1941 darlan had become pétain 's most trusted associate . in february 1941 darlan replaced pierre-étienne flandin as '' vice president of the council '' ( prime minister ) . he also became minister of foreign affairs , minister of the interior , and minister of defence ( france ) , making him the de facto head of the vichy government . on 11 february he was named pétain 's eventual successor , in accordance with act number four of the constitution . as a prominent figure in the vichy government , darlan repeatedly offered hitler active military cooperation against britain . hitler , however , distrusted france and wanted it to remain neutral during his planned attack on the soviet union . darlan negotiated the paris protocols of may 1941 with germany , in which germany made concessions on prisoners of war and occupation terms , and france agreed to german bases in french colonies . this last condition was opposed by darlan 's rival , general maxime weygand , and the protocols were never ratified , though weygand was dismissed at german insistence in november 1941 . however , the germans became suspicious of darlan 's opportunism and malleable loyalties as his obstructionism mounted . he refused to provide french conscript labour , he also insisted on protecting jewish war veterans , and only reluctantly enforced anti-semitic laws . after the british syria–lebanon campaign , and operation barbarossa stalled before moscow by december 1941 , darlan moved away from his policy of collaboration . because he reported only to pétain , darlan exercised broad powers , although pétain 's own entourage ( including weygand ) continued to wield considerable influence . in running the french colonial empire , darlan relied heavily on the personal loyalty of key army and naval officers in the colonies to head off defection to free france . in january 1942 , darlan assumed additional government offices . but in april 1942 , at german insistence , darlan resigned his ministries , and was replaced by laval , whom the germans considered more trustworthy . darlan retained several lesser posts , including that of commander-in-chief of the french armed forces . darlan 's deal in north africa . on 7 november 1942 , darlan went to algiers to visit his son , who was hospitalised . the next day , 8 november , the western allies would operation torch . during the night of 7–8 november , forces of a pro-allied group in algeria ( not connected with free france ) seized control of algiers in anticipation of the invasion . in the process , they captured darlan . the allies had anticipated little resistance from french forces in north africa , instead expecting them to accept the authority of general henri giraud , who was extracted from france to take charge . but resistance continued , and no one heeded giraud , who had no official status . to bring a quick end to the resistance and secure french co-operation , the allies came to an agreement with darlan , who as commander-in-chief could give the necessary orders . dwight d . eisenhower , the allied commander on the spot recognized darlan as commander of all french forces in the area and recognized his self-nomination as high commissioner of france in africa ( head of civil government ) for north and west africa on 14 november . in return , on 10 november , darlan ordered all french forces to join the allies . his order was obeyed ; not only in french north africa , but also by the vichy forces in french west africa with its potentially useful facilities at dakar . the '' darlan deal '' proved highly controversial , as darlan had been a notorious collaborator with germany . general de gaulle and his free france organization were outraged ; so were the pro-allied conspirators who had seized algiers . some high american and british officials objected , and there was furious criticism by newspapers and politicians . roosevelt defended it ( using wording suggested by churchill ) as ' a temporary expedient , justified only by the stress of battle' . churchill persuaded an initially sceptical secret session of the house of commons , saying that eisenhower 's recognition of darlan was right , and even if it was not quite right , it had meant french rifles being pointed not at the allies , but at the axis : '' i am sorry to have to mention a point like this , but it makes a lot of difference to a soldier whether a man fires his gun at him , or at an enemy . '' later , american historian arthur funk maintained that the '' deal with darlan '' was misunderstood by the critics at the time as an opportunistic improvisation . funk claimed darlan had been in talks with american diplomats for months about switching sides , and when the opportunity came he did so promptly . the '' deal '' thus was the result of a long and carefully considered allied plan for reaching a political and military accord with vichy . it followed a model drawn up in london and already approved at the highest levels . the '' deal '' was even more upsetting to berlin and to the vichy government . pétain stripped darlan of his offices and ordered resistance to the end in north africa , but was ignored . the germans were more direct : german troops case anton . however , the germans paused outside toulon , the base where most of the remaining french ships were moored . only on 27 november did the germans try to seize the ships , but scuttling of the french fleet in toulon , mostly fulfilling darlan 's promise in 1940 to churchill . assassination . on the afternoon of 24 december 1942 , fernand bonnier de la chapelle shot darlan in his headquarters ; darlan died a few hours later . bonnier de la chapelle was a youth of 20 , the son of a french journalist . he was a monarchist , and opposed to vichy . he was involved with a royalist group that wanted to restore the pretender to the french throne , the count of paris . bonnier de la chapelle was arrested immediately , tried and convicted the next day , and executed by firing squad on 26 december . . legacy . darlan was unpopular with the allies – he was considered pompous , having asked eisenhower to provide 200 coldstream guards and grenadier guards as an honor company for the commemoration of napoleon 's victory at austerlitz . it was said that '' no tears were shed '' by the british over his death . harold macmillan , who was churchill 's adviser to eisenhower at the time of the assassination , wryly described darlan 's service and death by saying , '' once bought , he stayed bought . '' . references . further reading . nicholas atkin , pétain , longman , 1997 , funk , arthur l . '' negotiating the 'deal with darlan ' . '' journal of contemporary history 8.2 ( 1973 ) : 81–117 . online funk , arthur l . the politics of torch , university press of kansas , 1974 . howe , george f . north west africa : seizing the initiative in the west , center of military history , us army , 1991 . hurstfield , julian g . america and the french nation , 1939–1945 ( 1986 ) online pp . & nbsp ; 162–83 kitson , simon . the hunt for nazi spies : fighting espionage in vichy france , ( university of chicago press , 2008 ) lacouture , jean . de gaulle : the rebel 1890–1944 ( 1984 ; english ed . 1991 ) , melka , robert l . '' darlan between britain and germany 1940–41 '' , journal of contemporary history ( 1973 ) 8 2 pp . & nbsp ; 57–80 at jstor verrier , anthony . assassination in algiers : churchill , roosevelt , degaulle , and the murder of admiral darlan ( 1990 ) williams , charles , pétain , little brown ( time warner book group uk ) , london , 2005 , p . & nbsp ; 206 , . in french . josé aboulker et christine levisse-touzet , '' 8 novembre 1942 : les armées américaine et anglaise prennent alger en quinze heures '' , espoir , n° 133 , paris , 2002 . yves maxime danan , la vie politique à alger de 1940 à 1944 , paris : l.g.d.j . , 1963 . professeur yves maxime danan , république française capitale alger , 1940-1944 , souvenirs , l'harmattan , paris , 2019 . jean-baptiste duroselle , politique étrangère de la france : l'abîme : 1940–1944 . imprimerie nationale , 1982 , 1986 . bernard karsenty , '' les compagnons du 8 novembre 1942 '' , les nouveaux cahiers , n°31 , nov . 1972 . simon kitson , vichy et la chasse aux espions nazis , paris : autrement , 2005 . christine levisse-touzet , l'afrique du nord dans la guerre , 1939–1945 , paris : albin michel , 1998 . henri michel , darlan , paris : hachett , 1993 . external links .