Lamma Island

name . lamma island was named lamma only because of a chart reading error by alexander dalrymple in the 1760s . he had acquired a portuguese chart to the entrances to the pearl river and , close to the west of the island , the portuguese owner had written '' lama '' . dalrymple misinterpreted that as the name of the island . however , it was a portuguese notation as to the holding ( consistency of the seabed from the point of view of anchoring there ) , which was ( and is ) mud – in portuguese '' lama '' . in all the early charts the name was spelled with only one '' m '' . so the island acquired a british name by error and one that subsequently was sinicised by its name being rendered phonetically in characters ( '' lam a '' can mean '' south fork '' in cantonese ) , with the original muddle being all but forgotten . at some point , things became further obscured by the addition of the second '' m '' in the english spelling . in ancient times , lamma used to be named as pok liu or pok liu chau . exploring lamma – history and geographical conditions hong kong and kowloon ferry . geography . lamma island is located to the southwest of hong kong island . it is the third largest island of hong kong , with an area of survey and mapping office , lands department : hong kong geographic data sheet and a length of . the northern village is called yung shue wan ( banyan tree bay ) and the eastern village is called sok kwu wan ( rainbow bay ) . few people live on the southern part of lamma . access for much of this part is by hiking or private boat . beaches along lamma 's south-facing edge include yung shue ha beach and sham wan . mount stenhouse , shan tei tong ) is the tallest mountain in lamma at above sea level , situated between sok kwu wan and sham wan . unusually shaped rocks can be found all over this mountain , but a grueling hike is necessary to access these . history . according to archaeological findings , human settlement on the northern and eastern part of lamma island can be traced back to around 4000–3000 bc , the middle neolithic and bronze ages . yung shue ha , one of lamma 's earliest villages , was settled in the early 19th century by a clan from china 's bao'an county . demographics . lamma has an estimated population of 5,900 people as of 2014 . however , with future developments such as a planned beach community in sok kwu wan the population capacity is expected to double to 11,000 residents . actor chow yun-fat grew up on the island in the village of wang long near yung shue wan . his relatives used to operate a seafood/pigeon restaurant called '' shau kee '' in the main village . lamma has a significant western and international population . the island has had a reputation for alternative lifestyles , hippies , and a relaxed attitude , but lamma is being urbanised and property prices are increasing as a result of the attraction of this lifestyle . . description . in contrast to hong kong island and kowloon , lamma is peaceful and tranquil with an abundance of natural scenery . buildings higher than three storeys are prohibited and there are no automobiles but diminutive fire trucks and ambulances , as well as village vehicles ; distinctive open-back vehicles to transport construction materials . the community 's only means of transport is either by foot or bicycle . lamma provides an alternative to the hectic life in the city . property and rents are cheap compared with those of central hong kong . these factors have attracted a significant expatriate community to lamma island . it is also popular with younger people and a haven for artists and musicians . yung shue wan . yung shue wan ( banyan bay ) is the most populated area on lamma island . several decades ago , it was the centre of the plastics industry . the factories have now been replaced by seafood restaurants , pubs , grocery stores and shops which sell oriental and indian-style handicraft . hung shing yeh beach , lamma power station , north lamma island public library and lamma winds are also located in the northern part of the island . sok kwu wan . the big street of sok kwu wan consists mainly of seafood restaurants . sok kwu wan has the largest fish farming site in hong kong . tourists can barbecue and fish at lo shing beach which is a ten-minute walk from the village . the trail between yung shue wan and sok kwu wan is surrounded by grassland and offers a picturesque walk . from there one can see a nice portion of the coastline of the island . it takes roughly an hour to walk the trail . walkers may notice a few 'caves ' on the trail near sok kwu wan , labelled on tourist signs as 'kamikaze grottos ' . these caves were dug out by the japanese during the war , to store munitions alongside the suicide boats . when the british navy reclaimed hong kong , they discovered rows of speedboats with explosives rigged to the bow in sok kwu wan . scenes in hong kong following the re-occupation of the crown colony after the japanese surrender . september 1945 imperial war museums in addition to the caves , the japanese also dug tunnels into the island 's peaks , including two known tunnels on ling kok shan japanese tunnel , ling kok shan no . 2 gwulo and one on mt . stenhouse . japanese tunnel , stenhouse lamma gwulo . sham wan . sham wan is one of the five most important archaeological sites in hong kong . the bay is the site of an important bronze age settlement which was unearthed by archaeologists in the 1970s . it yielded evidence of people living on lamma during the '' middle neolithic '' phase ( c . 3800–3000 bc ) . historically sham wan was also a place for green sea turtles to lay eggs . the endangered green turtles are a special group of marine organisms with distinctive navigation behaviour between their nesting , breeding , development and reproduction sites . as sham wan is the only existing nesting site for them in hong kong , every year there is a period of restricted access to it from 1 june to 31 october to allow the turtles to breed . conservation of sea turtles in hong kong the breeding site is about . the last known nesting at sham wan was in 2012 . . traditional festivals . tin hau temples are typical places of worship in hong kong 's coastal communities because tin hau is believed to be the goddess of the sea and of fishermen , protecting them and ensuring full nets . there are three tin hau temples on lamma , located in yung shue wan , exploring islands – tin hau temple , yung shue wan sok kwu wan , exploring islands – tin hau temple , sok kwu wan and luk chau village . exploring islands – luk chau tin hau temple the tin hau festival ( twenty-third of the third month of the lunar calendar ) is widely celebrated by the fishermen 's communities in lamma . cantonese opera and floral paper offerings known as fa pau at both sok kwu wan and yung shue wan are the highlights of the celebration . lamma island is also one of the few remaining places in hong kong where traditional chinese new year celebrations still take place : at the stroke of midnight , fireworks will be set off by the main families of the villages to frighten away the evil spirits , sending off a deafening thunder that can last up to 30 minutes . transportation . there are regular ferry services to yung shue wan and sok kwu wan from central on hong kong island , as well as to yung shue wan via pak kok , and to sok kwu wan via mo tat wan , from aberdeen . it takes about 25 minutes by ferry between yung shue wan and central . there are no cars on lamma island . two ferries collided off yung shue wan on 1 october 2012 at 8:20 & nbsp ; pm local time . with 39 killed and 92 injured , the incident was the deadliest maritime disaster in hong kong since 1971 . as the island is not connected by road to the rest of hong kong , the only vehicles on the island are those used by the emergency services , and village vehicles , which are used to transport goods . the main method of getting around the island is on foot or by bicycle . notable people . chow yun-fat , actor ; born and raised on lamma island john d . romer , a british veteran , discovered a new species of frog , liuixalus romeri ( also known as romer 's tree frog ) , which is an endangered species , in a cave in 1952 .