Council–manager government

form . the council–manager form is much like a public company . local government management , icma under the form , an elected governing body , usually called a city council , board of aldermen , or similar title , is responsible for legislative functions such as establishing policy , passing local ordinances , voting appropriations , and developing an overall vision , similar to a corporate board of directors . the legislative body appoints a city manager to oversee the administrative operations , implement its policies , and advise it . the manager position is similar to that of corporate chief executive officer ( ceo ) , providing professional management to the board of directors . the position of '' mayor '' present in this type of legislative body is a largely ceremonial title , and may be selected by the council from among its members or elected as an at-large council member with no executive functions , icma forms of government similar to a non-executive chairman in a corporation . this system of government is used in 40.1 % of american cities with populations of 2,500 or more , according to the 2011 municipal yearbook published by the international city/county management association ( icma ) , a professional organization for city managers and other top appointed local government administrators . despite success and praise from state and federal legislators , the council-manager system has not been considered at the state or national level ( e.g . state assembly hiring state manager rather than having an elected governor ) . history in the united states . the concept of the council–manager form of government was a product of a confluence of the prevailing modes of thought during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . stillman , richard j . ( 1974 ) . the rise of the city manager : a public professional in local government . albuquerque : university of new mexico press . probably the foremost influence was the progressive era ; following along the thought lines of the movement , the municipal reformers of that time wanted to rid municipalities of the pervasive '' political machine '' form of government and the abuses of the spoils system . the thought was to have a politically impartial administrator or manager to carry out the administrative function . another influence was the '' posts office '' movement , often associated with frederick winslow taylor . the focus of this movement was to run organizations in an objective , scientific fashion to maximize efficiency , among other things . a third influence behind the council–manager idea was that of the organizational structure of the for-profit corporation , with its board of directors , which hires a professional ceo to run its operations . sumter , south carolina , has the distinction of being the first city in the united states to implement council–manager government successfully , although staunton , virginia , is credited as the first american city to appoint a city manager , which it did in 1908 . this appointment attracted attention to the fledgling profession and caught the eye of richard s . childs , who would become known as the '' father '' of the council–manager form of government and the model city charter . ammons , david n . and charldean newell . ( 1989 ) . city executives : leadership roles , work characteristics , and time management . state university of ny press . the first large city to adopt the council–manager form was dayton , ohio , in 1913 . in the early 21st century , thirty-eight of virginia 's thirty-nine cities have a council–manager form of government , with the capital , richmond , being the only exception . richmond switched to a strong-mayor–council plan in 2004 , after having had a council–manager system since 1948 . the council–manager system has grown considerably in popularity since the start of the 20th century . in 1935 , icma recognized 418 u.s . cities and seven counties using the system . the council–manager form of government developed , at least in part , as a response to some perceived limitations of the city commission government form . since it relies on candidates being elected at-large , minority populations are often unable to elect candidates of their choice . in addition , it may concentrate too much power in individual commissioners , who also manage city departments . the council–manager form became the preferred alternative for progressive reform . after world war i , few cities adopted the commission form and many cities using the commission plan switched to the council–manager form . by 2001 , 3,302 cities with a population over 2,500 and 371 counties used the council–manager system . phoenix , arizona is the largest city in the united states to retain a council–manager government . . recent hybrids . since the turn of the 21st century , there have been numerous studies about the variety of hybrid forms of local governments that have evolved from the two '' pure '' forms ( council–manager and mayor–council ) . the cities that have modified their organizational structure from one of the pure forms commonly are termed '' adaptive '' community organizations . these variations necessitate a delineation of the distinguishing features of the council–manager form of government . icma has listed at least three defining characteristics that distinguish a true council–manager government : all governmental authority rests with the council , or other sovereign elected body , except for certain duties that are assigned by charter or other law to the manager , however , the manager always is employed at the pleasure of the elected body . the appointed executive , a manager , officially is allocated the executive or administrative functions in codified form , minimum functions not being at the whim of a mayor , for example . the manager must be responsible to , hired by , and can be dismissed only by the entire council , not one individual , such as a mayor or chairperson . '' model city charter '' . the model city charter ( mcc ) , published by the national civic league , formerly the national municipal league , is closely associated with the council–manager form of government . the model city charter is in its eighth edition , adopted in 2003 . since its second edition , adopted in 1915 , the model charter for municipalities has recommended this council–manager form of government . svara , james , on national civic league website public management magazine , icma , february 2003 , vol 85 , number 3 . . history in the republic of ireland . following the turmoil of world war i ( 1914–1918 ) , the 1916 rising , the irish war of independence ( 1919–1921 ) , and the irish civil war ( 1921–1923 ) , the irish government found it necessary to remove the members of several local authorities and replace them temporarily by paid commissioners . both dublin and cork city councils were so removed . in both cities , there was a body of opinion that the services provided by the councils were delivered more efficiently and fairly under the commissioners than under the previous system , where the executive function had been , in effect , vested in the councils and their committees . in 1926 , a committee of commercial and industrial interests in cork came together to consider a scheme of city government . having regard to the city 's experience of commissioners and recent experience in the united states a council–manager plan of city government was proposed . after discussion between the minister for local government and local representatives , the minister , richard mulcahy , introduced as a government measure , the cork city management bill 1929 and it became law despite opposition . the minister proposed and the oireachtas enacted similar provision for dublin city in 1930 . similar laws were passed for limerick in 1934 and waterford in 1939 under the fianna fáil government . under the county management act 1940 , which was brought into operation in august 1942 , a county manager is the manager of every borough or town in that county , but since the 1990s , has the power to delegate these functions to any other officer of that borough or town council . the system was modified also in subsequent legislation , particularly the city and county management ( amendment ) act 1955 , which made some adjustments to give greater power to the council members , and the local government act 1985 , which provided for the council–manager system in galway city once detached for local government purposes from galway county . the above acts have been replaced since that time , in substantially the same form , by the local government act 2001 . see also . mayor–council government city commission government . references . bibliography . . external links . city mayors feature on us council managers international city/county management association national civic league