1942 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1942 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . january 16 – actress carole lombard is killed in a plane crash west of las vegas while returning home to los angeles from a war bond tour . june 4 – mrs . miniver , starring greer garson and walter pidgeon , opens at radio city music hall in new york , in what will become a record-breaking 10-week run . the film is released nationally in the united states on july 22 , 1942 , and becomes mgm 's most financially successful film of the 1940s . at the 15th academy awards , mrs . miniver wins six awards , including best picture , best director ( for william wyler ) , best actress ( for greer garson ) and best supporting actress ( for teresa wright ) . august 8 – walt disney 's animated film bambi opens in united kingdom . november 11 – road to morocco , starring bob hope , bing crosby , and dorothy lamour , premieres . november 26 – the film casablanca premieres at the hollywood theatre in new york city . released nationally in the united states on january 23 , 1943 , it becomes one of the top-grossing pictures of 1943 and goes on to win the best picture and best director awards at the 16th academy awards . academy awards . best picture : mrs . miniver – metro-goldwyn-mayer best director : william wyler – mrs . miniver best actor : james cagney – yankee doodle dandy best actress : greer garson – mrs . miniver best supporting actor : van heflin – johnny eager best supporting actress : teresa wright – mrs . miniver special academy award : in which we serve . 1942 film releases . u.s.a unless stated . january–march . january 1942 1 january the man who came to dinner 6 january blue , white and perfect 8 january the black sheep of whitehall ( gb ) 10 january all through the night 18 january babes on broadway 19 january the big blockade 23 january o pátio das cantigas ( portugal ) 24 january the fleet 's in 29 january son of fury : the story of benjamin blake february 1942 2 february kings row 6 february valley of the sun 16 february the man who wanted to kill himself ( spain ) 19 february to be or not to be woman of the year 20 february ride 'em cowboy roxie hart 21 february captains of the clouds march 1942 3 march the great king ( germany ) 7 march bullet scars 10 march un garibaldino al convento ( italy ) 11 march rio rita 13 march the ghost of frankenstein song of the islands 18 march reap the wild wind 20 march rings on her fingers 21 march this was paris ( gb ) 27 march the affairs of jimmy valentine . april–june . april 1942 1 april there was a father ( japan ) 2 april alias boston blackie my favorite blonde 3 april jungle book 4 april the male animal 19 april hatter 's castle ( gb ) 22 april saboteur 24 april larceny , inc . 29 april the great man 's lady 30 april my gal sal may 1942 8 may the corpse vanishes in this our life the spoilers 12 may this above all 13 may this gun for hire 21 may pacific rendezvous tortilla flat 22 may syncopation 29 may the falcon takes over miss annie rooney 31 may in old california june 1942 6 june yankee doodle dandy 13 june the big shot flying fortress ( gb ) tombstone , the town too tough to die 15 june the next of kin ( gb ) 16 june eagle squadron 22 june the foreman went to france ( gb ) 26 june ten gentlemen from west point there 's one born every minute 27 june one of our aircraft is missing . july–september . july 1942 2 july sons of the pioneers 8 july the murderer lives at number 21 ( france ) 9 july i married an angel 10 july the magnificent ambersons 14 july pride of the yankees 16 july her cardboard lover 22 july mrs . miniver 29 july the kids grow up ( argentina ) 31 july invisible agent august 1942 4 august holiday inn 5 august tales of manhattan 7 august a-haunting we will go pardon my sarong 10 august alibi ( gb ) 11 august wake island 20 august the talk of the town 21 august bambi the pied piper 24 august uncensored ( gb ) 25 august attack on baku ( germany ) 27 august somewhere i 'll find you 28 august the loves of edgar allan poe 31 august a pistol shot september 1942 a yank at eton 4 september across the pacific the big street 14 september the first of the few ( gb ) 15 september ala-arriba ! ( portugal ) 16 september the major and the minor 17 september in which we serve ( gb ) 18 september kokoda front line ! ( australia ) sherlock holmes and the voice of terror 21 september the young mr . pitt ( gb ) 25 september desperate journey . october–december . october 1942 8 october flying tigers 16 october eyes in the night 23 october the glass key the mummy 's tomb 24 october northwest rangers 30 october i married a witch 31 october now , voyager november 1942 6 november springtime in the rockies who done it ? 9 november the great mr . handel ( gb ) 10 november road to morocco 19 november you were never lovelier 20 november the gaucho war ( argentina ) 'neath brooklyn bridge 25 november gentleman jim 26 november for me and my gal 27 november the undying monster 28 november george washington slept here december 1942 4 december the black swan thunder rock ( gb ) 5 december whom the gods love ( germany-austria ) 6 december cat people 7 december went the day well ? ( gb ) 9 december johnny eager 11 december american empire pittsburgh 17 december random harvest 18 december aniki-bóbó ( portugal ) the great impersonation 23 december four steps in the clouds ( italy ) 24 december time to kill 25 december arabian nights reunion in france 30 december commandos strike at dawn . notable films released in 1942 . u.s.a unless stated . a . across the pacific , starring humphrey bogart and mary astor the affairs of jimmy valentine , starring dennis o'keefe and ruth terry a-haunting we will go , starring laurel and hardy ala-arriba ! – ( portugal ) alias boston blackie , starring chester morris , adele mara , and richard lane alibi , starring margaret lockwood and james mason – ( gb ) all through the night , starring humphrey bogart american empire , starring richard dix andy hardy 's double life , starring lewis stone , mickey rooney , cecilia parker , fay holden aniki-bóbó – ( portugal ) arabian nights , starring sabu , jon hall , maria montez attack on baku , starring willy fritsch , rené deltgen ( germany ) . b . el baisano jalil – ( mexico ) bambi , directed by david hand , starring bobby stewart , donnie dunagan , hardie albright and john sutherland basant , directed by amiya chakravorty and starring madhubala and mumtaz shanti – ( india ) the battle of midway , documentary directed by john ford the big blockade , starring leslie banks , michael redgrave and will hay – ( uk ) the big shot , starring humphrey bogart the big street , starring henry fonda and lucille ball the black sheep of whitehall , starring will hay and john mills – ( gb ) the black swan , starring tyrone power blue , white and perfect , starring lloyd nolan bullet scars , starring regis toomey . c-d . captains of the clouds , starring james cagney casablanca , directed by michael curtiz ( oscar winner ) , starring humphrey bogart , ingrid bergman , paul henreid , peter lorre , claude rains cat people , starring simone simon and tom conway commandos strike at dawn , starring paul muni the corpse vanishes , starring bela lugosi the courtship of andy hardy , starring lewis stone , mickey rooney , cecilia parker , fay holden afsporet ( afsporet ) – ( denmark ) desperate journey , starring errol flynn and ronald reagan the devil 's envoys ( les visiteurs du soir ) , directed by marcel carné , starring arletty – ( france ) . e-f . eagle squadron , directed by arthur lubin escape from hong kong , starring marjorie lord eyes in the night , directed by fred zinneman , starring edward arnold , ann harding , donna reed the falcon takes over , starring george sanders the first of the few , directed by leslie howard , starring howard and david niven – ( gb ) the fleet 's in , starring dorothy lamour and william holden flying fortress , starring richard greene ( gb ) flying tigers , starring john wayne the foreman went to france , starring clifford evans and tommy trinder – ( gb ) for me and my gal , starring judy garland and gene kelly four steps in the clouds ( quattro passi fra le nuvole ) – ( italy ) . g-h . un garibaldino al convento , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) the gaucho war ( la guerra gaucha ) – ( argentina ) gentleman jim , a biopic of boxer james j . corbett , starring errol flynn george washington slept here , starring jack benny the ghost of frankenstein starring lon chaney jr . the glass key , starring alan ladd and veronica lake the goose steps out , starring will hay – ( gb ) the great impersonation , directed by john rawlins , starring ralph bellamy the great king ( der große könig ) – ( germany ) the great man 's lady , directed by william a . wellman , and starring barbara stanwyck the great mr . handel , directed by norman walker , starring wilfrid lawson ( gb ) hatter 's castle , starring robert newton , deborah kerr , james mason – ( gb ) her cardboard lover , starring robert taylor and norma shearer holiday inn , starring bing crosby and fred astaire historia de un gran amor ( a great love story ) – ( mexico ) . i . i married an angel , starring nelson eddy and jeanette macdonald i married a witch , starring veronica lake and fredric march in old california , starring john wayne in this our life , starring bette davis and olivia de havilland in which we serve , directed by david lean and noël coward , starring coward and john mills – ( gb ) invisible agent , starring jon hall . j-k . jackass mail , starring wallace beery and marjorie main johnny eager , starring robert taylor and lana turner jungle book , directed by zoltan korda , starring sabu kid glove killer , the directorial debut of fred zinnemann the kids grow up ( los chicos crecen ) – ( argentina ) kings row , starring ann sheridan , ronald reagan , claude rains kokoda front line ! , an academy award winning documentary film – ( australia ) . l-m . larceny , inc . , starring edward g . robinson , jane wyman , broderick crawford listen to britain , propaganda film directed by humphrey jennings – ( gb ) the loves of edgar allan poe , starring linda darnell the magnificent ambersons , directed by orson welles , starring joseph cotten and dolores costello the major and the minor , directed by billy wilder , starring ginger rogers and ray milland the male animal , starring henry fonda and olivia de havilland the man who came to dinner , starring bette davis , monty woolley , jimmy durante the man who wanted to kill himself ( el hombre que se quiso matar ) – ( spain ) miss annie rooney , starring shirley temple moontide , starring jean gabin and ida lupino mrs . miniver , directed by william wyler , starring greer garson and walter pidgeon the mummy 's tomb , starring lon chaney jr . the murderer lives at number 21 ( l'assassin habite au 21 ) , directed by henri-georges clouzot , starring pierre fresnay – ( france ) my favorite blonde , starring bob hope and madeleine carroll my gal sal , starring rita hayworth my sister eileen , starring rosalind russell . n-o . 'neath brooklyn bridge , starring east side kids the next of kin , starring mervyn johns – ( gb ) northwest rangers now , voyager , starring bette davis and paul henreid one of our aircraft is missing , directed by michael powell and emeric pressburger – ( gb ) overland mail , starring lon chaney , jr . , noah beery , jr . , noah beery , sr . p . pacific rendezvous , starring lee bowman the palm beach story , directed by preston sturges , starring claudette colbert , joel mccrea , rudy vallée panama hattie , starring ann sothern and lena horne pardon my sarong , starring bud abbott and lou costello o pátio das cantigas ( the courtyard of songs ) – ( portugal ) people of the mountains , directed by istván szőts – ( hungary ) the pied piper , starring monty woolley and roddy mcdowall a pistol shot , starring assia noris , fosco giachetti ( italy ) pittsburgh , starring john wayne , marlene dietrich , randolph scott , shemp howard the pride of the yankees , starring gary cooper , teresa wright , walter brennan , babe ruth . q-r . random harvest , starring ronald colman and greer garson reap the wild wind , starring john wayne , paulette goddard , ray milland reunion in france , starring joan crawford ride 'em cowboy , starring abbott and costello rings on her fingers , starring henry fonda and gene tierney rio rita , starring bud abbott and lou costello road to morocco , starring bing crosby , dorothy lamour , bob hope the rock of the souls ( el peñón de las ánimas ) – ( mexico ) roti ( bread ) – ( india ) roxie hart , starring ginger rogers . s . saboteur , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring priscilla lane and robert cummings saludos amigos , a walt disney animated film starring donald duck and goofy ( released in south america in 1942 and in the u.s . in 1943 ) somewhere i 'll find you , starring clark gable and lana turner son of fury : the story of benjamin blake , starring tyrone power and gene tierney song of the islands , a darryl f . zanuck production starring betty grable and victor mature sons of the pioneers , starring roy rogers and george 'gabby ' hayes the spoilers , starring marlene dietrich and john wayne springtime in the rockies , starring betty grable , john payne , carmen miranda and cesar romero star spangled rhythm , featuring an all-star cast sweater girl , starring eddie bracken , june preisser , and betty jane rhodes syncopation , starring adolphe menjou . t-v . tales of manhattan , directed by julien duvivier with an all-star cast the talk of the town , starring cary grant , jean arthur , ronald colman tarzan 's new york adventure , starring johnny weissmuller ten gentlemen from west point , starring george montgomery and maureen o'hara tennessee johnson , starring van heflin and ruth hussey there was a father ( chichi ariki ) , directed by yasujirō ozu ( japan ) there 's one born every minute , starring hugh herbert and peggy moran this above all , starring tyrone power this gun for hire , starring veronica lake and alan ladd this was paris , starring ann dvorak – ( gb ) time to kill , starring lloyd nolan thunder rock , starring michael redgrave and james mason – ( gb ) to be or not to be , directed by ernst lubitsch , starring jack benny and ( in her last film ) carole lombard tombstone , the town too tough to die , starring richard dix tortilla flat , starring spencer tracy , hedy lamarr , john garfield uncensored , directed by anthony asquith – ( gb ) the undying monster , starring james ellison valentin the good ( valentin dobrotivý ) , directed by martin frič – ( czechoslovakia ) valley of the sun , starring lucille ball and james craig the voice of terror , starring basil rathbone and nigel bruce . w-z . wake island , starring brian donlevy and robert preston went the day well ? , directed by cavalcanti , starring leslie banks and mervyn johns – ( gb ) who done it ? , starring bud abbott and lou costello whom the gods love , directed by karl hartl ( germany-austria ) woman of the year , starring spencer tracy and katharine hepburn a yank at eton , starring mickey rooney yankee doodle dandy , starring james cagney the young mr . pitt , directed by carol reed , starring robert donat – biopic of william pitt the younger – ( gb ) you were never lovelier , starring fred astaire and rita hayworth . serials . captain midnight , starring dave o'brien , directed by james w . horne don winslow of the navy gang busters junior g-men of the air , starring the dead end kids king of the mounties , starring allan lane , directed by william witney overland mail perils of nyoka , starring kay aldridge & clayton moore , directed by william witney perils of the royal mounted , directed by james w . horne the secret code , directed by spencer gordon bennet spy smasher , starring kane richmond , directed by william witney the valley of vanishing men , directed by spencer gordon bennet . short film series . laurel and hardy ( 1921–1943 ) our gang ( 1922–1944 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) . animated short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) scrappy ( 1931–1941 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) donald duck ( 1937–1956 ) pluto ( 1937–1951 ) walter lantz cartune ( also known as new universal cartoons or cartune comedies ) ( 1938-1942 ) goofy ( 1939–1955 ) andy panda ( 1939–1949 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–1949 ) swing symphonies ( 1941–1945 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) . births . january 3 – john thaw , english actor ( d . 2002 ) january 8 – yvette mimieux , american actress january 10 – walter hill , american director , producer and screenwriter january 19 – michael crawford , english actor and singer february 1 – terry jones , welsh comedic actor , director and screenwriter ( d . 2020 ) february 9 – ada lundver , estonian actress and singer ( d . 2011 ) february 21 – margarethe von trotta , german director march 25 – richard o'brien , english actor and writer march 27 – michael york , english actor march 28 – mike newell , english director and producer april 3 – marsha mason , american actress april 6 – barry levinson , american director , producer and screenwriter april 23 – sandra dee , american actress ( d . 2005 ) april 24 – barbra streisand , american actress , singer , director and producer june 18 roger ebert , american film critic of the chicago sun times ( d . 2013 ) paul mccartney , english musician and composer ( the beatles ) july 1 – geneviève bujold , canadian actress july 9 – richard roundtree , american actor july 13 – harrison ford , american actor and producer july 24 – chris sarandon , american actor august 7 – tobin bell , actor august 28 - peter bartlett , american actor and voice actor september 29 madeline kahn , american actress ( d . 1999 ) ian mcshane , english actor october 3 - steve susskind , american actor october 4 – christopher stone , american actor ( d . 1995 ) october 6 – britt ekland , swedish actress october 11 – amitabh bachchan , indian actor october 13 – suzzanna , indonesian actress ( d . 2008 ) october 22 – annette funicello , american actress and singer ( d . 2013 ) october 26 bob hoskins , english actor and director ( d . 2014 ) eili sild , estonian actress october 31 – david ogden stiers , american actor ( d . 2018 ) november 1 - marcia wallace , american actress and comedian ( d . 2013 ) november 17 – martin scorsese , american director , producer , screenwriter and actor november 24 – billy connolly , scottish comedian and actor december 4 – gemma jones , english actress . deaths . january 16 – carole lombard , 33 , american actress , to be or not to be , my man godfrey , made for each other , nothing sacred january 31 – rolf wenkhaus , 24 , german actor , emil and the detectives , s.a.-mann brand april 10 – carl schenstrøm , 60 , danish actor , cocktails , the last laugh may 29 – john barrymore , 60 , american actor , grand hotel , twentieth century , dr . jekyll and mr . hyde , dinner at eight june 4 – virginia lee corbin , 31 , american actress , hands up ! , x marks the spot july 5 – karin swanström , 69 , swedish actress , director , his english wife , black roses august 18 – rafaela ottiano , 54 , italian-born american actress , grand hotel , she done him wrong , the devil-doll , curly top october 20 – may robson , 84 , australian-born american stage & film actress , bringing up baby , a star is born , lady for a day , the adventures of tom sawyer october 22 – olga svendsen , 59 , danish actress , kidnapped november 5 – george m . cohan , 64 , american actor , songwriter , entertainer , the phantom president , broadway jones , subject of yankee doodle dandy november 9 – edna may oliver , 59 , american stage & film actress , david copperfield , drums along the mohawk , little women , a tale of two cities november 12 – laura hope crews , 62 , american stage & screen actress , gone with the wind , camille , angel , the blue bird november 15 – sidney fox , 30 , american actress , murders in the rue morgue , bad sister , six cylinder love december 12 – helen westley , 67 , american stage & screen actress , heidi , roberta , all this , and heaven too , alexander 's ragtime band . film debuts . richard attenborough – in which we serve madhubala – basant mumtaz shanti – basant betty hutton – the fleet 's in anne jeffreys – billy the kid trapped gene kelly – for me and my gal harry morgan – to the shores of tripoli eleanor parker – the big shot simone signoret – bolero elizabeth taylor – there 's one born every minute peter ustinov – one of our aircraft is missing esther williams – andy hardy 's double life tweety bird – a tale of two kitties