Ferdinand Philippe, Duke of Orléans

early life . born in palermo in september 1810 , during his parents ' exile , he was given the title duke of chartres ( and was called chartres within the family circle ) . he was baptised ferdinand philippe louis charles henri and known as ferdinand philippe in honour of his grandfathers , ferdinand i of the two sicilies and philippe égalité . despite having been born in exile , he held the rank of prince du sang and was styled serene highness . as the eldest son , he was the heir to the title of duke of orléans , head of the house of orléans ( a cadet branch of the house of bourbon descended from the only brother of louis xiv ) . the young prince first visited france in 1814 during the first restoration , settling there more permanently in 1817 . in 1819 his father put him in the care of a tutor , m . de boismilon , at the lycée henri-iv . louis philippe wished his son to receive a liberal education on a foundation of complete equality with his fellow students . ferdinand philippe was highly successful in his studies and took courses at the école polytechnique . after a trip to great britain ( visiting both england and scotland ) in 1819 , he went to lunéville to join the 1 er régiment de hussards , of which he was made colonel by charles x in 1824 . in september 1824 , king charles x granted him the style '' royal highness '' , a style maintained by ferdinand philippe at his father 's accession to the throne six years later . july revolution . in 1830 , during the july revolution , the young duke of chartres was on garrison duty at joigny . he made his regiment wear the cockade of france and quickly led them to aid the uprising in paris . he was temporarily stopped at montrouge , and entered paris on 3 august at the head of his regiment . when his father was offered the french throne by the chamber of deputies , prince ferdinand philippe received the title of duke of orléans , prince of orléans , and also became crown prince , the heir apparent to the throne . upon entering the conseil ( at his father 's bidding ) , ferdinand philippe , who had something of a temper , criticised the time lost by ministers ' prevarications and was frequently embroiled in skirmishes with the doctrinaires , to whom he wished to impart the sentiments of revolutionary youth . when casimir perier o was nominated president of the conseil in march 1831 , he accepted the post only on condition that ferdinand philippe be excluded from the conseil . in november 1831 , the young duke of orléans and maréchal d'empire nicolas soult , duc de dalmatie , were sent to repress the canut revolts . he acquitted himself of this difficult task without violence and managed to rapidly appease opponents of the july monarchy , even gaining a certain popularity . during the cholera outbreak in 1831 , he did not hesitate to take real risks in visiting the most sickly patients at the hôtel-dieu de paris , accompanied by casimir perier ( who caught the disease and died ) . in the eyes of the people and the press he was seen as a generous prince , sincerely preoccupied with the plight of the poor , and he became a sort of icon for the dynastic opposition of politician odilon barrot , who saw in him the only prince capable of reconciling modern france 's democratic aspirations with the heritage of its monarchical past . on 2 march 1832 he was granted an annual income of 1 million francs under his father 's new civil list . military career . in 1831 , under maréchal count gérard , ferdinand philippe and his young brother prince louis , duke of nemours , set out on their first campaign . when the princes entered belgium in 1831 , they eagerly visited the plain of jemmapes , where their father had fought in 1792 . the following year , ferdinand philippe returned to belgium in command of the vanguard brigade of the armée du nord . on 20 november 1832 he was before the citadel of antwerp , and commanded the trenches on the night of 29/30 november . during the attack on the saint-laurent lunette , he launched himself onto the parapet amidst a hail of projectiles to lead the action and arouse his soldiers ' courage . in 1835 , when maréchal count clauzel was sent to algeria as governor general , the young prince royal asked his father for permission to accompany him , so he could fight the emir abd el-kader . he participated with clauzel 's army in the battle of habrah , where he was wounded , and in the capture of mascara in december 1835 . he then participated in the taking of tlemcen in january 1836 . when he returned to paris , it was with an aura of military glory , and he returned to algeria in autumn 1839 to take possession of the country 's interior ( from constantine to algiers ) for france alongside maréchal count valée . he left constantine on 16 october , three days after the second anniversary of the town 's capture , and reached algiers on 2 november via sétif and the iron gates pass . abd-el-kader saw this as a violation of the treaty of tafna and unleashed jihad upon the french . this led to an escalation in tension and , ultimately , algeria 's wholesale occupation by france . ferdinand philippe set out for algeria a third time in march 1840 , taking with him his younger brother the duke of aumale , tutoring him in his first military experience . present at the battles of affroun , oued'ger and bois des oliviers , he was put in charge of directing the attackers in the capture of teniah de mouzaïa . after this campaign he was recalled to france for good . this brilliant military career increased his popularity and prestige . he also devoted himself to the improvement of the troops ' living conditions and morale . at saint-omer he organised the chasseurs de vincennes , who became the chasseurs d'orléans in 1836 , and re-formed the chasseurs de vincennes à pied . he laid the foundations for a histoire des régiments , commissioned by order of the minister of war , and began writing the regimental histories of the two regiments he had himself commanded . marriage negotiations . ferdinand philippe 's marriage had long been one of the july monarchy 's major political affairs . had it not been for the 1830 revolution , he would have married the sister of henri , count of chambord , mademoiselle ( 1819–1864 ) . her family called off the marriage plans when ferdinand philippe 's branch of the family 'usurped ' the throne . from 1835 , after an assassination attempt by giuseppe fieschi and his co-conspirators , ferdinand philippe 's father had been obsessed with the marital prospects of his son , then 25 . blanche-joséphine le bascle d'argenteuil noted , in her souvenirs , that if the prince royal died young after having fathered a male heir , the july monarchy would be faced with the prospect of a regency , in all its political uncertainty – thus , for her , the wisest course consisted of marrying off the king 's third son , then the fourth , then the fifth , guaranteeing louis philippe descendants , all the while leaving several men around the throne who could take over from him if he died suddenly . at this time the july monarchy was searching for new allies in continental europe so they would not have to depend solely on the united kingdom . talleyrand , fresh from renouncing his embassy to london and close to the british foreign secretary , lord palmerston , pointed in this direction . the king at first envisaged a rapprochement with russia via württemberg . king wilhelm i , widower of grand duchess catherine pavlovna of russia , had two daughters of marriageable age , princesses marie ( born 1816 ) and sophie ( born 1818 ) . wilhelm i 's sister catharina had already made an inauspicious french marriage alliance to jérôme bonaparte and so wilhelm declined the proposition as humiliating . he later was to accept marie 's even more humiliating marriage to count alfred von neipperg in 1840 . queen louise wrote to her parents on marie 's marriage that '' we see singular things . it was not at all probable that this daughter , who the king of württemberg did not wish to give to chartres for fear of his ending his days in exile in america , should end up marrying a miserable little austrian officer without illustriousness and of very ordinary birth . '' cited by guy antonetti , op . cit . ( p . 756 ) louis philippe next envisaged an alliance with austria via the marriage of his son to archduchess maria theresa ( born 1816 ) , daughter of archduke karl , duke of teschen ( german : herzog von teschen ) . queen marie amélie was highly favourable to such a match as she was herself a daughter of an austrian archduchess ( maria carolina of austria ) , and archduke karl was not opposed to it . however , karl faced determined opponents on two sides & nbsp ; – prince metternich , who did not want to repeat his error in marrying marie louise to napoléon i , and archduchess sophie , a bavarian princess and sister-in-law of the new kaiser ferdinand i , who dominated the vienna court with her strong personality , and was awaiting her son franz-josef 's ascent to the imperial throne . france 's ambassador to vienna , the count of sainte-aulaire , who had been put in charge of preparing the ground for an austrian match , felt the possibility was difficult if not completely impossible . the new president of the conseil , adolphe thiers , dreamed of concluding such a match and becoming a new duke of choiseul as the maker of a spectacular reversal in the alliances of europe . ferdinand philippe and his younger brother , the prince louis , duke of nemours , set out on a european tour on 2 may 1836 . ferdinand philippe and queen marie-amélie got off to a bad start when the young french prince royal refused to shave off the proud beard that had set a fashion among french youth . she wrote back to queen louise complaining that '' there was a lack of tact there and of sentiments of convenience that afflicted me . i believe that leopold i can say to him that a goatee beard on the face of a prince royal is contrary to all german manners . here , such a beard is neither handsome nor fortunate , there it can be fatal . '' cited by guy antonetti , op . cit . , p . 757 the two french princes were a great success in berlin and vienna , staying at the latter from 29 may to 11 june . however , the marquis de sémonville commented that '' everyone has shaken their hand , but no one was close to them '' . even if the young prince royal decidedly liked archduke karl and his daughter , prince metternich and the archduchess sophie put up a major barrage of problems , and news of thiers ( impatient to conclude the match ) being on his way was enough to convince louis philippe to make a marriage proposal . he was refused , though to play to french susceptibilities the official version was that the refusal was because of the '' feelings '' of archduchess marie-thérèse . queen louise wrote to her mother on 14 june 1836 : '' i am upset to see that you have thrown your all behind the cause of austria . i have always thought that chartres was of too high birth to marry she who seems to him the most minor princess in germany ; and i avow that i would better like to see him marry a princess from lippe or waldeck who was good and pretty and of robust health , rather than an archduchess of austria who would bring us all sorts of evils in her dowry . napoleon , in this situation , was able to make sacrifices to ally himself with austria ; and we all saw what profit he got from it . but we are not upstarts , and have no need of ennobling ourselves by uniting with the house of lorraine '' . the two young princes returned to france via italy . at trent they were received by her imperial majesty marie louise , the former empress consort of the french , who could not refrain from tears at the similarity between the prince royal and her son , the late napoléon ii . at milan they stayed with archduke rainer joseph of austria , viceroy of lombardy-venetia , where they heard the news of alibaud 's assassination attempt on king louis philippe on 25 june . after the austrians ' refusal of the match , only two potential catholic princesses remained ( louis-philippe confided to one of his familiars '' i would prefer her to be a catholic . you believe it is nothing , the carlists believe it is everything ; and i myself believe that it is neither here nor there '' cited by guy antonetti , op . cit . , p . 782 ) , and these were both very young for marriage ( born in 1821 ) : princess januaria of brazil , daughter of peter i of brazil , and the infanta isabella of spain , daughter of the infante francisco de paula , younger brother of king ferdinand vii . the former was excluded by her remoteness , and the latter due to her family 's unfortunate history ( her mother princess luisa carlotta of the two sicilies , niece of queen marie-amélie , was monstrously obese ) and her physical appearance ( she was red-haired and thin ; queen louise wrote to queen marie-amélie on 21 november 1836 that '' i send you her portrait , that leopold found hideous . her hair especially is frightening in terms of the children she will have . if all her family are ginger , this will afflict them too '' . cited by guy antonetti , op . cit . , p . 781 ) . marriage . some possibilities were also seen among the protestant german princesses . via his great-niece the duchess of dino , talleyrand suggested louise of hesse-kassel ( born 1817 to a cousin of the elector of hesse and his wife , a danish princess ) , whilst queen louise suggested marie of saxe-altenburg ( born 1818 to the duke of saxe-altenburg and princess amelia of wurtemberg , and who finally ended up marrying george v of hanover in 1843 ) , and princess victoria of saxe-coburg and gotha ( daughter of an elder brother of leopold i of belgium ; she was actually raised a catholic and married the prince royal 's younger brother , the duke of nemours , in 1840 ) . image : portrait of helene of mecklenburg-schwerin , ( duchess of orleans ) with her son prince louis philippe , count of paris by winterhalter.jpg thumb upright the duchess of orléans holding her son , philippe , count of paris . portrait by franz xaver winterhalter , 1839 . château de versailles . however , the negotiators ' choice finally came to rest on duchess helene of mecklenburg-schwerin ( known as hélène , 1814–1858 ) , daughter of the late prince frederick louis , hereditary grand duke of mecklenburg-schwerin , and his wife princess caroline louise of saxe-weimar-eisenach . for ferdinand philippe , it was a convenient alliance but one without much attraction ; metternich quipped that she was '' petite but of a good house '' . she was the niece of frederick william iii of prussia , whose wife was born louise of mecklenburg-strelitz ( this did not avoid difficulties for the marriage in berlin , which the french ambassador there , the count bresson , succeeded in resolving ) . nicholas i of russia , for his part , affected disdain of the marriage , proclaiming that such a minor marriage was not worth the trouble to prevent . the duke of broglie was sent to germany as ambassador extraordinary with the aim of presenting the official marriage request and bringing the princess back to france . an anonymous but virulent libel against the house of orléans was published by a prince of the house of mecklenburg . that house avoided the marriage , so that duchess hélène was only accompanied to france by her father 's third widow , augusta of hesse-homburg . the marriage was celebrated on 30 may 1837 at the château de fontainebleau , since hyacinthe-louis de quélen , the archbishop of paris , had used the pretext of religious differences to forbid it from taking place in notre dame de paris . the civil ceremony occurred in the galerie henri ii on 30 may 1837 , presided over by the baron pasquier , whom the king rewarded on 27 may by making him lord chancellor of france . the catholic ceremony was presided over by romain-frédéric gallard , bishop of meaux , in the chapel of henri iv , whilst the lutheran one was celebrated by pastor cuvier in the salon louis philippe . as his witnesses , ferdinand philippe had the four vice-presidents of the chamber of peers : baron séguier , count portalis , the duke of broglie , and the count de bastard ; the president and four vice presidents of the chamber of deputies : dupin , jean-louis calmon , delessert , jacqueminot , cunin-gridaine ; three maréchals : the nicolas soult , the georges mouton and gérard , as well as the prince de talleyrand , the duke of choiseul , and count bresson , france 's minister to berlin . the ceremony was well attended , but there was a notable lack of foreign ambassadors , except for baron de werther ( prussia ) , count le hon ( belgium ) , and the chargé d'affaires of mecklembourg . the reception was brilliant ; the duchesse de maillé observed : the marriage was very happy and produced two children : prince philippe , count of paris ( 1838–1894 ) , who was prince royal , and prince robert , duke of chartres ( 1840–1910 ) . patron of the arts . ferdinand philippe loved literature , music , and the fine arts , and had a pronounced taste for collecting , '' making his choice slowly , like a true lover of the arts '' . anonyme , l'artiste , 1836 , vol . ii , p . 164 each year he spent 100,000 to 150,000 francs from his civil list allowance on art purchases or cultural patronage . in his vast apartments in the palais des tuileries he gathered medieval and renaissance objects , ceramics by bernard palissy , hispano-moorish maiolica and ceramics , chinese and japanese porcelain , and furniture by caffieri , oeben , riesener , and jacob . image : ferdinand-philippe d'orléans - la patrie est en danger 1830.jpg thumb '' the fatherland in danger '' lithograph by ferdinand-philippe d'orléans ( 1830 ) he was passionate about modern painters , buying several canvasses from ary scheffer and newton fielding , both of whom had taught ferdinand philippe landscape painting from 1822 to 1830 . he possessed works by ferdinand-victor-eugène delacroix ( the prisoner of chillon , the assassination of the bishop of liège , hamlet and horatio in the graveyard ) , alexandre-gabriel decamps ( the defeat of the cimbri ) , eugène lami , ernest meissonnier , and paul delaroche . he loved landscapes by painters of the barbizon school , notably camille corot , paul huet , and théodore rousseau . he commissioned jean-auguste-dominique ingres to paint antiochus and stratonice ( 1833 ) , bought his œdipus and the sphinx in 1839 , and commissioned his portrait from him in 1840 . himself a talented draughtsman , ferdinand philippe made amateur engravings & nbsp ; – twelve etchings and lithographs by him are known , henri béraldi , les graveurs du xixe siècle , vol x , 1890 , p . 234-236 . including a satire showing the sleeping gulliver with lilliputians all round him on foot and on horseback and a sign referring to the alarmist proclamation of 11 july 1792 by the legislative assembly that declared the fatherland to be in danger . death . image : duke orleans pradier louvre rf1721.jpg thumb left upright bust by pradier , after his death mask , 1842 , louvre in 1842 , the duke was scheduled to leave for saint-omer to review part of the army of which he had been made the commander that was engaged at the marne . he planned to travel from the tuileries palace to neuilly-sur-seine on 13 july 1842 to say goodbye to his family , and , for the sake of expediency , opted for an open carriage . when the horses of his carriage ran out of control at sablonville in the hauts-de-seine département ; he lost his balance and fractured his skull , and , despite the best attentions of his doctors , the 31-year-old duke died some hours later , surrounded by family members who had rushed to the scene . alfred de musset evoked the accident in his poem le treize juillet ( in the collection poésies nouvelles ) . ferdinand philippe 's funeral service was held in notre dame which was covered not in black fabric ( of which there was n't enough ) but , at the suggestion of the architect visconti , black paper . he was interred in an elaborate tomb in the chapelle royale , in dreux , eure-et-loir . deprived of the popular support his eldest son had had , louis philippe and his régime fell six years later . he , his family , and ferdinand philippe 's widow princess hélène went into exile in great britain . there , hélène died nearly 16 years after her husband , on 18 may 1858 in richmond , surrey . because hélène was a protestant , she could not be buried in the catholic chapelle royale at dreux . instead , a room with a separate entrance was built attached to the chapel and a window was opened between her tomb and her husband 's . the sculpture of the protestant princess rests atop her tomb , depicting her reaching through the opening to the tomb of her beloved catholic prince . issue . prince philippe , count of paris ( 1838–1894 ) , crown prince , married princess marie isabelle of orléans , infanta of spain ( 1848–1919 ) , and had issue . prince robert , duke of chartres ( 1840–1910 ) , married princess françoise of orléans ( 1844–1925 ) and had issue . ancestry . honours . kingdom of france : order of the holy spirit , 30 may 1825 : order of leopold ( belgium ) , 10 march 1833 : knight of st . januarius order of saint ferdinand and of merit : order of the golden fleece , 1 july 1837 : order of the tower and sword retrieved 2018-09-21 . . in fiction . ferdinand-philippe was used by hanns heinz ewers as a character in his novella '' die herzen der könige '' ( the hearts of the kings ) . notes . sources . guy antonetti , louis-philippe , paris , librairie arthème fayard , 2002 ferdinand-philippe d'orléans , duc d'orléans , souvenirs 1810–1830 , texte établi , annoté et présenté par hervé robert , genève , librairie droz s.a . , 1993 ferdinand-philippe d'orléans , duc d'orléans , lettres 1825–1842 , publiées par ses fils le comte de paris et le duc de chartres , paris , calmann-lévy , 1889