Analog synthesizer

history . 1900–1920 . the earliest mention of a '' synthetic harmoniser '' using electricity appears to be in 1906 , created by the scottish physicist james robert milne frse ( d.1961 ) . proceedings of the royal society of edinburgh 1906 . 1920s–1950s . the earliest synthesizers used a variety of thermionic-valve ( vacuum tube ) and electro-mechanical technologies . while some electric instruments were produced in bulk , such as georges jenny 's ondioline , the hammond organ , and the trautonium , many of these would not be considered synthesizers by the standards of later instruments . however , some individual studios and instruments achieved a high level of sophistication , such as the trautonium of oskar sala , the electronium of raymond scott , and the ans synthesizer of evgeny murzin . another notable early instrument is the novachord , first produced in 1938 , which had many of the same features as later analog synthesizers . 1960s–1970s . early analog synthesizers used technology from electronic analog computers and laboratory test equipment . they were generally '' modular '' synthesizers , consisting of a number of independent electronic modules connected by patch cables into a patchbay that resembled the jackfields used by 1940s-era telephone operators . synthesizer modules in early analog synthesizers included voltage-controlled oscillators ( vcos ) , voltage-controlled filters ( vcfs ) , and voltage-controlled amplifiers ( vcas ) . the control voltage varied frequency in vcos and vcfs , and attenuation ( gain ) in vcas . additionally , they used envelope generators , low-frequency oscillators , and ring modulators . some synthesizers also had effects devices , such as reverb units , or tools such as sequencers or sound mixers . because many of these modules took input sound signals and processed them , an analog synthesizer could be used both as a sound-generating and sound-processing system . famous modular synthesizer manufacturers included buchla & associates , moog music , arp instruments , inc . , serge modular music systems , and electronic music studios . moog established standards recognized worldwide for control interfacing on analog synthesizers , using an exponential 1-volt-per-octave pitch control and a separate pulse triggering signal . these control signals were routed using the same types of connectors and cables that were used for routing the synthesized sound signals . a specialized form of analog synthesizer is the analog vocoder , based on equipment developed for speech synthesis . vocoders are often used to make a sound that resembles a musical instrument talking or singing . patch cords were expensive , could be damaged by use ( creating hard-to-find intermittent faults ) , and made complex patches difficult and time-consuming to recreate . thus , later analog synthesizers used the same building blocks , but integrated them into single units , eliminating patch cords in favour of integrated signal routing systems . the most popular of these was the minimoog . in 1970 , moog designed an innovative synthesizer with a built-in keyboard and without modular design—the analog circuits were retained , but made interconnectable with switches in a simplified arrangement called '' normalization '' . though less flexible than a modular design , normalization made the instrument more portable and easier to use . this first pre-patched synthesizer , the minimoog , became highly popular , with over 12,000 units sold . the minimoog also influenced the design of nearly all subsequent synthesizers , with integrated keyboard , pitch wheel and modulation wheel , and a vco- > vcf- > vca signal flow . in the 1970s , miniaturized solid-state components let manufacturers produce self-contained , portable instruments , which musicians soon began to use in live performances . electronic synthesizers quickly become a standard part of the popular-music repertoire . the first movie to use music made with a ( moog ) synthesizer was the james bond film on her majesty 's secret service in 1969 . after the release of the film , composers produced a large number of movie soundtracks that featured synthesizers . notable makers of all-in-one analog synthesizers included moog , arp , roland , korg and yamaha . because of the complexity of generating even a single note using analog synthesis , most synthesizers remained monophonic . polyphonic analog synthesizers featured limited polyphony , typically supporting four voices . oberheim was a notable manufacturer of analog polyphonic synthesizers . the polymoog was an attempt to create a truly polyphonic analog synthesizer , with sound generation circuitry for every key on the keyboard . however , its architecture resembled an electronic organ more than a traditional analog synthesizer , and the polymoog was not widely imitated . in 1978 , the first microprocessor-controlled analog synthesizers were created by sequential circuits . these used microprocessors for system control and control voltage generation , including envelope trigger generation , but the main sound generating path remained analog . the midi interface standard was developed for these systems . this generation of synthesizers often featured six or eight voice polyphony . also during this period , a number of analog/digital hybrid synthesizers were introduced , which replaced certain sound-producing functions with digital equivalents , for example the digital oscillators in synthesizers like the korg dw-8000 ( which played back pcm samples of various waveforms ) and the kawai k5 ( waveforms constructed via additive synthesis ) . with the falling cost of microprocessors , this architecture became the standard architecture for high-end analog synthesizers . 1980s–present . during the middle to late 1980s , digital synthesizers and samplers largely replaced analog synthesizers . by the early 1990s , however , musicians from the techno , rave and dj scenes who wanted to produce electronic music but lacked the budget for large digital systems created a market for the then cheap second hand analog equipment . this increased demand for analog synthesizers towards the mid-1990s , as larger numbers of musicians gradually rediscovered the analog qualities . as a result , sounds associated with analog synths became popular again . over time , this increased demand for used units ( such as the 1980 roland tr-808 drum machine and roland tb-303 bass synthesizer ) . late 1970s-era drum machines used tuned resonance voice circuits for pitched drum sounds and shaped white noise for others . the tr-808 improves on these designs , by using detuned square wave oscillators ( for the cow bell and cymbal sounds ) and analogue reverberation ( for the handclap sound ) . the demand for the analog synth sound led to development of a variety of analog modeling synthesizers—which emulate analog vcos and vcfs using samples , software , or specialized digital circuitry , and the construction of new analog keyboard synths such as the alesis andromeda , prophet '08 , and little phatty , as well as semi-modular and modular units . use in modern music . the lapse of patents in recent years , such as for the moog synthesizer transistor ladder filter , has spurred a return of diy and kit synthesizer modules , as well as an increase in the number of commercial companies selling analog modules . reverse engineering has also revealed the secrets of some synthesizer components , such as those from arp instruments , inc . in addition , despite the widespread availability during the 2000s of relatively inexpensive digital synthesizers that offered complex synthesis algorithms and envelopes , some musicians are attracted to the sounds of monophonic and polyphonic analog synths . while some musicians embrace analog synthesizers as preferable , others counter that analog and digital synthesis simply represent different sonic generation processes that both reproduce characteristics the other misses . another factor considered to have increased use of analog synths since the 1990s is weariness with the complex screen-based navigation systems of digital synths , with the '' hands-on '' , practical controls of analog synths—potentiometer knobs , faders , and other features—offering a strong appeal . references . external links . arp synthesizer patents modular analog synthesizers return ! – a discussion of modern modular equipment with links to major manufacturers . comparison table of modern analog synthesizers - a freely editable document , in construction .