Shaw Brothers Studio

history . prior to their involvement in the filmmaking business , the shaw brothers were interested in opera and happened to own a theater in shanghai ; their father also owned a cinema . one of the plays in their theater , the man from shensi , was very popular . the shaw brothers then bought their first camera , and runje shaw made this play into a silent film which turned out to be a success . runje shaw and his brothers runde and runme formed a film production company in 1925 in shanghai called the tianyi film company ( also known as unique ) . the company 's earliest films , new leaf ( 立地成佛 ) and heroine li feifei ( 女侠李飛飛 ) , were shown in shanghai in 1925 . a rival studio , mingxing film company , formed a syndicate with 5 other shanghai companies to monopolize the distribution and exhibition markets in order to exclude tianyi films from being shown in theater chains in shanghai and southeast asia . the brothers therefore became interested in forming their own network , and runme shaw , who was then the distribution manager , traveled to singapore to establish a movie distribution business for southeast asia . runme incorporated the hai seng co . ( 海星 , which later became the shaw brothers pte ltd ) to distribute films made by tianyi and other studios . in 1927 , they operated their own cinema in tanjong pagar in singapore , expanded in malaya , and opened four cinemas there . the number of cinemas owned by the shaw chain in south east asia would eventually reach 200 by the 1970s before it declined . in 1928 run run shaw moved to singapore to assist runme . in 1931 , the tianyi studio in shanghai produced what is considered by some to be the very first sound-on-film chinese talkie , spring on stage ( 歌場春色 ) . in 1932 , they teamed up with cantonese opera singer sit gok-sin ( 薛覺先 ) to make the first cantonese talkie , white golden dragon ( 白金龍 ) . this film proved to be very successful , and in 1934 , they established the tianyi studio ( hong kong ) in kowloon to make cantonese films . the move to hong kong was accelerated as the nanjing government had issued a ban on wuxia film as well as cantonese films , and two years later , they moved the entire film production operation from shanghai to hong kong . tianyi was reorganized into nanyang ( 南洋 ) productions with runde shaw as the studio head . they also announced plan for their first film production studio in singapore in 1937 to make films in malay ; a studio was built in 1940 to make malay and cantonese films , followed by another called singapore film studios in 1941 on jalan ampas . it produced malay films under the studio named malay film productions which lasted until 1967 . the most prominent malay actor , director and producer of this period was p . ramlee . the shaw brothers continued to expand but suffered a setback during the second world war when the japanese occupied malaya and singapore . after the war , they began to rebuild . in the 1950s , nanyang started to switch film production from cantonese to mandarin as communist takeover in mainland china had cut off the supply of mandarin films to overseas chinese communities . in this period , nanyang studio operated under the company name of shaw and sons ltd . the mandarin films of the 1950s were primarily wenyi films ( 文藝片 ) in a contemporary setting as well as a few period dramas . in 1957 , run run shaw moved to hong kong , set up a new company , shaw brothers ( hong kong ) ltd . , and built a new studio at clearwater bay , which officially opened in 1961 as movietown . in the mid-1960s , movietown was the largest and best-equipped studio in chinese filmmaking as well as the largest privately owned studio in the world , with 15 stages , two permanent sets , state-of-the-art film-making equipment and facilities , and 1,300 employees . period and music dramas were popular in the 1960s , and later in the decade kung fu films also became popular . some of shaw brothers ' most notable films were made in this period , including the magnificent concubine , the love eterne , as well as one-armed swordsman , which broke the box office records and some spawned multiple sequels . the studio popularized the kung fu film of films , which included king boxer and the 36th chamber of shaolin made in the 1970s . the 1960s was a period of intense rivalry between shaw brothers and cathay organisation , but eventually shaw brothers gained the upper hand and cathay ceased film production in 1970 . sir run run shaw became involved in television when tvb was launched in 1967 . in 1969 , shaw brothers ( hk ) issued shares and became a public listed company . in the 1970s , shaw brothers faced a strong challenge from a new studio , golden harvest , which had considerable success internationally with the martial arts film , enter the dragon starring bruce lee . shaw brothers then also began to co-produce films with western producers for the international market , and invest in films such as meteor and blade runner . however , shaw brothers ceased film production in 1986 because of competition from golden harvest and increasing piracy , focusing instead on tv production . in 1986 , movietown became tv city , which was leased to tvb for tv production . in 1988 , the company was reorganized under the umbrella of the shaw organization . in the 1990s , shaw again started making a few films , but no longer on the same scale as before . shaw has since relocated to a new site in tseung kwan o , hong kong . legacy . directors . shaw brothers is noted for film directors such as king hu , lau kar-leung , p . ramlee and chang cheh . king hu was an early director who is best remembered for his film , come drink with me , a martial arts film which differed from those of chang cheh in that it featured a capable female protagonist and revolved around romance in the martial arts world , rather than fast-paced action and the tales of brotherhood which chang cheh would later popularize . chang cheh , who was more fond of the latter components , would go on to be shaw studio 's best-known director , with such films as five deadly venoms , the brave archer ( based on the works of jin yong ) , one-armed swordsman , and other classics of wuxia and wushu film . almost equally as famous was fight choreographer-turned-director lau kar-leung , who would produce such highly regarded kung fu films as the 36th chamber of shaolin and the eight diagram pole fighter . while p . ramlee was known for malay style romantics and comedy such as nujum pa ' belalang , seniman bujang lapok and do re mi . actors . shaw brothers was modeled after the classic hollywood system , with hundreds of actors signed to exclusive contracts . while other studios rotated cast members , shaw brothers assigned certain groups of actors to work exclusively with certain directors . shaw brothers productions during the late 1950s to early '60s were dominated by actresses like li li-hua , ivy ling po , linda lin dai , betty loh ti , li ching in dramatic and romantic features . in particular , the huangmei opera the love eterne , starring ivy ling po and betty loh ti and based on the butterfly lovers folk legend from the jin dynasty , is one of the highest-grossing features of the shaw studio . its huge success is in part due to the ingenious casting of ivy ling po , who was a relatively unknown supporting actress , as the male lead . in the story of butterfly lovers , the female lead , played by betty loh ti , disguised herself as a male to attend college because social mingling between the sexes was forbidden . the film resonated with its audience , and reportedly some members of the audience in hong kong and taiwan repeatedly bought tickets and watched the feature in theaters over and over again in 1962 , with some having watched it over 20 times . from the late 1960s onward , production of dramatic features was reduced in favor of martial arts features . the group of actors from the 1978 release , five deadly venoms , and the subsequent series of films—known by the name the venom mob—were among the most memorable . they were lo mang , lu feng , sun chien , chiang sheng , and kuo chui , who had been stars in the shaw studio for years , but did not become memorable faces until five deadly venoms . wei pai , who played the snake ( referred to as '' number two '' throughout the film five deadly venoms ) , was also part of the venom mob , which numbered over 15 actors who appeared in almost all of the venom movies . in the first half of the 1970s , two other stars were particularly renowned and favored by the '' million-dollar director '' chang cheh in his movies : ti lung and david chiang . he is also accredited as a capable actor who reinforced his muscular glamor with strong characterization over his many films . chiang , on the other hand , was slight and wiry and often played the sarcastic antihero to lung 's standard archetype . chang cheh , with his stars ti lung and david chiang , were known as the cinematic '' iron triangle '' throughout southeast asia . in the middle of that decade , the duo was overshadowed by the rise of alexander fu sheng , who had played supporting roles opposite them on many occasions . fu was killed in 1983 in a car accident , at age 28 , ending a brief but spectacular career . members of the peking opera school , including jackie chan , yuen biao , and sammo hung , played extras and bit parts in several shaw brothers films in the 1970s , although they were unknowns at the time . better-known female martial arts actresses of shaw brothers include cheng pei-pei , lily ho , shih szu , lily li , and kara hui ying-hung . cheng pei-pei in particular is relatively well-known for her starring role in king hu 's come drink with me and more recently in ang lee 's crouching tiger , hidden dragon as jade fox . influences . the films produced by the shaw brothers studio were highly popular among chinese communities in hong kong and southeast asia and they would have a significant influence on later filmmakers , particularly in the kung fu film . these films also reached the west and were popular for a time in the 1970s , and had some influence on filmmakers such as quentin tarantino , who paid homage to the studio by displaying their logo in his kill bill : volume 1 and 2 films and adapting the styles of some of their films . . celestial pictures acquisition and distribution . many shaw brothers classic films have been bootlegged due to the popularity of particular kung fu/martial arts titles . celestial pictures acquired rights to the shaw studio 's legacy and is releasing , on dvd , 760 out of the nearly 1,000 films with restored picture and sound quality . many of these dvds have come under controversy , however , for remixing audio and not including the original mono soundtracks . karmaloop tv 's licensing deal . karmaloop tv , a multi-platform programming network designed to help operators '' reclaim '' viewership among the 18- to 34-year-old demographic , announced its first film licensing deal with celestial pictures . the hong kong-based company owns , restores and licenses the world 's largest collection of chinese-made films including the shaw brothers library of fan-favourite kung fu and action classics such as the 36th chamber of shaolin , five deadly venoms , and the one-armed swordsman . the licensing deal with karmaloop tv means that kung fu and action fans in the united states will see these films in their digitally restored versions , many of which will be premiering for the first time on u.s . television in high definition . the licensed collection includes more than 60 of the greatest martial arts masterpieces—movies which launched the careers of stars like jimmy wang yu , cheng pei-pei , ti lung , david chiang , alexander fu sheng , chen kuan-tai , and gordon liu . shaw studios . the clearwater bay site at clearwater bay road and ngan ying road is the former home of shaw studio ( built 1960–1961 ) , as well as the vacated tvb headquarters and studios ( 1986–2003 , since relocated to tvb city ) and celestial pictures . there are also apartment blocks used to house shaw actors . the newer shaw house and shaw villa are there . the site has been vacant since 2003 , and has been targeted for redevelopment several times since 2006 . in 2015 , hong kong 's antiquities advisory board declared the entire studio complex a site of cultural heritage , and subsequent redevelopment plans have included measures to restore and preserve the existing structures . a new shaw studios ( note the plural s ) has been built at tseung kwan o industrial estate , and was opened in stages between 2006 and 2008 . see also . celestial 's shaw brothers film library golden harvest hong kong action cinema list of shaw brothers films shanghainese people in hong kong . references . further reading . glaessner , verina . kung fu : cinema of vengeance . london : lorimer ; new york : bounty books , 1974 . , . wong , ain-ling . the shaw screen : a preliminary study . hong kong : hong kong film archive , 2003 . zhong , baoxian . '' hollywood of the east '' in the making : the cathay organization vs . the shaw organization in post-war hong kong . hong kong : centre for china urban and regional studies , hong kong baptist university , 2004 . zhong , baoxian . moguls of the chinese cinema : the story of the shaw brothers in shanghai , hong kong and singapore , 1924–2002 . working paper series ( david c . lam institute for east-west studies ) ; no . 44 . hong kong : david c . lam institute for east-west studies , hong kong baptist university , 2005 . external links . shaw studios shaw.intercontinental.com—official site ( big5 ) ) the shaw story—at the official company website . shaw brothers history — at hong kong cinema uk . shaw-brothers_reloaded - global international site the rise and fall of the house of shaw - scholarly essay by tom green . alexander fu sheng : biography of the chinatown kid