Mouscron

geography . mouscron is divided into 7 districts : the downtown ( le centre ) , the train station ( la gare ) , mont-à-leux , tuquet , risquons-tout , nouveau-monde and coquinie . the municipality of mouscron now also includes the old municipalities of dottignies , luingne , and herseaux since fusion of the belgian municipalities . the metropolitan area of mouscron forms a conurbation with the french metropolitan area of lille and is at the crossroad of three different administrative regions : wallonia , france and flanders . mouscron is located 9 & nbsp ; km from roubaix , 11 & nbsp ; km from kortrijk , 23 & nbsp ; km from lille and 25 & nbsp ; km from tournai . the city has been part of the french-speaking hainaut ( province ) since 1963 and , as a result , part of the administrative region of wallonia . history . middle ages . a few archaeological discoveries were made in this area proving the existence of settlements during roman times . the name dottignies & ndash ; a village that is now part of mouscron & ndash ; appeared for the first time in the 9th century , while that of mouscron only appeared in 1060 . in 1066 , baldwin v , count of flanders ceded the local buildings and territories to the estate of the church of saint-pierre in lille . in 1149 , the right to collect tithes in the mouscron area was ceded in part to the abbey of saint martin in tournai , in part to the chapter of the tournai cathedral . the rights to the neighbouring villages of herseaux and luingne & ndash ; now also part of mouscron & ndash ; were also given to the tournai cathedral in 1178 . in the 14th century , the seigneury of mouscron was eventually sold to a lord of tournai , and in 1430 , the castle of the counts ( château des comtes ) became the lord 's manor , which can still be seen today . the future charles v , holy roman emperor stopped there for dinner on may 27 , 1516 . 16th to 18th centuries . in 1575 , in the middle of the wars of religion , the castle was strengthened . it was nevertheless besieged and taken by the geuzen , locally known as the hurlus in 1579 , before being taken back three months later . in 1627 , philip iv of spain promoted the seigneury to the rank of county . the franco-dutch war under louis xiv devastated this mostly agricultural region . mouscron and the surrounding area became france after the treaty of aix-la-chapelle ( 1668 ) . part of it rejoined the southern netherlands after the treaty of nijmegen ( 1678 ) , which drew the frontier right through its territory . it was finally completely ceded to the southern netherlands under the terms of the treaty of utrecht in 1713 . the textile industry started in mouscron in the 1760s thanks to the imposition by lille of a ban on the fabrication of molletons , a mixture of flax and wool , in roubaix and tourcoing . with the battle of fleurus ( 1794 ) , mouscron went back to france . 19th and 20th centuries . at the beginning of the 19th century , the textile industry flourished and added cotton as one of its prime materials . on march 29 , 1848 , the belgian army intervened near mouscron against belgian legion french revolution of 1848 who were ready to invade belgium , in what was known as the risquons-tout incident . by the end of the century , several cotton mills and carpet plants were built , leading the village to expand into a much larger urban area , especially after the close of world war i . during world war ii , from may 22 to 27 , 1940 , artillery fire brought british and german soldiers into conflict in the risquons-tout district . 15 british soldiers , 10 german soldiers and 5 civilians were killed in the incident . in 1963 , mouscron was transferred from the province of west flanders , to the province of hainaut , to reflect the predominantly francophone population ( 94 % in 1846 and 74 % in 1947 ) . mouscron was officially recognized as a city in 1986 . sights . the town hall and the main square ( grand place ) . the town hall was opened in 1890 . it was designed by the architect rené aimé buyck from bruges and the style may be defined as neo gothic from maritime flanders . the building is outstanding because of the harmony of its proportions and the fineness of its sculptures . the saint-barthélémy church the medieval castle known as the château des comtes can still be visited . the oldest extant parts date from the 15th century . four families of lords lived in it during six centuries . from this big domain remains its courtyard marked by annexes from 16th to 17th centuries and moats . mouscron 's public park dates back to the 1930s . with its ponds and manicured green areas , it has grown into one of the most beautiful parks of the country . it is home to all the plant varieties that can be grown in the local climate and it extends over an area of 7 hectares . it was inaugurated in 1932 by fernand cocq . the house of picardy ( maison picarde ) . the building was built around 1922 . the inside is worth visiting . the painted earthenware that adorns the main hall of the second story were classified as historical artifacts . they depict bucolic scenes which praise the values of socialism , work , empowerment , knowledge and family . they were made by the studio of jules biesbroek . the urban renewal ( la rénovation urbaine ) . at the beginning of 1980 's , a big revitalization project was decided . the old green square was transformed and renamed emmanuel de neckere square . the paving is worth looking at in more detail as it depicts the city 's motto : “ geuzen ” ( french : “ fidèle au roy , jusqu ’ à porter la besace ” ) . at the center of this modern atrium , you can see the fountain made by bernard verhaeghe , a local artist , in 1987 . the olympic-size swimming pool ( les dauphins ) ; the cultural center ( marius staquet ) ; has 3 main facilities : the raymond devos theater , the andré demeyère auditorium and the jacques brel exhibition hall the exhibition hall ( centr ’ expo ) ; hosts exhibitions , fairs and events the art gallery ; set up in the old swimming pool the stadium ( cannonier ) ; can hold 10,830 spectators the public library the el bar café ; hosts concerts studio rqc ( radio qui chifel ) ; the independent radio station of the city . festivities . the hurlus festival ( fête des hurlus ) : the hurlus festival happens every first weekend of october . on friday evening , children from across the city gather on the main square for the lantern procession . children are accompanied by fanfare , musicians and other traditional groups . they walk around the city and sing the main couplet of the traditional song . on saturday , the inhabitants walk around the downtown to see traditional groups , majorettes , itinerant traders , musicians and craftsmen and a big bowls competition is organized . then , the historical procession starts in the streets of the city . it is based on two main legendary events : the kidnapping of the spanish-allied adins vicar by the hurlus and the fight in five trials between the spanish leader ( don ferrante de la plancha y otros barrios ) and the leader of the hurlus . if the hurlu leader wins the reenactment , little hurlus dolls will be tossed into the crowd . celebrations are in full swing to the beat of drums and trumpets until sunday when hurlus dolls are tossed from a raised platform on the main square . the hand festival in dottignies . every third week-end of september , a company of gilles roams the streets of the village and distributes the traditional oranges to passers-by . the festival takes its name from the copper hand , possibly a symbol of fraternity , which tops the steeple of the church of dottignies . a christmas market takes place every year on the main square . the vingt-quatre heure de mouscron takes place every september . the ultimate goal of the event is to raise money for charity . the event includes groups of sportsmen running around the city for 24 hours . the musical period . from 1960 to 1980 , the city experienced a vibrant period in the music industry . the studio of marcel de keukeleire and jean van loo produced famous european artists like chocolat 's ( brasilia carnaval ) , patrick hernandez ( born to be alive ) , amadeo ( moving like a superstar ) , j.j . lionel ( chicken dance ) and the crazy horse band , which was partly made up of people from mouscron . in 1967 , jimi hendrix gave his only belgian concert at the twenty club . in this club , many famous artists of the sixties also performed : the animals , small faces , the kinks , the yardbirds , gene vincent , the moody blues . the latter stayed in mouscron for the writing of their album “ days of future passed ” . in 1978 , their song “ top rank suite ” alludes to the city 's name with the sentence : “ they played a good game of football in mucron ” . the moody blues were certainly fans of football but they blatantly forgot how to spell the city 's name . legend says madonna would have been noticed by jean van loo and patrick hernandez during a casting in new-york . however , their offer would have been later declined by the american artist ( relevance to mouscron ? ) . eventually , the beginning of the song “ les bourgeois ” of jacques brel , anecdotally mentions the name of “ adrienne du mont-à-leux ” , who was the owner of a popular café in the city . people born in mouscron . raymond devos , humorist and stand-up comedian ( 20th century ) marcel marlier ( 1930-2011 ) : illustrator , cartoonist of martine jacques mercier ( 1943 ) : tv and radio show host , writer marcel de keukeleire : accordionist and music producer frank vandenbroucke ( 1974-2009 ) : cyclist andré waignein ( 1942-2015 ) : trumpet player and composer bourgon broucard , immigrant ancestor of american television journalist and author tom brokaw ( 17th century ) viscount leonard pierre joseph du bus de gisignies , politician ( 19th century ) alphonse joseph glorieux , missionary roman catholic bishop ( 19th century ) yvonne hubert , pianist and teacher ( 19th century ) charles schepens , ophthalmologist ( 20th century ) philippe adams , formula one driver ( 20th century ) steed malbranque , football player ( 20th century ) élise crombez , supermodel ( 20th century ) louis-philippe loncke , explorer ( 20th century , member of the explorers club ) maxime lestienne , football player with psv eindhoven ( 21st century ) . twin cities . liévin , pas-de-calais , hauts-de-france , france fécamp , seine-maritime , normandy , france rheinfelden , baden-württemberg , germany barry , vale of glamorgan , wales , united kingdom . see also . r.e . mouscron royal mouscron-péruwelz stade le canonnier . references . external links . official site of the city , in french and in dutch tourist office , in french and in dutch