Anne Fausto-Sterling

case studies . naturalism . '' of gender and genitals '' is the third chapter of sexing the body by fausto-sterling . the chapter starts with a case study description of sickle cell anemia , including hemoglobin and the risk of having hemoglobin-s crystallize , which leads to intense pain and potential paralysis in times of stress . the lecture on sickle cell anemia ends with two simple conclusions : the first is that a slight alteration to a dna sequence will leave major changes to the dna on the whole ; the second is that traits and defects can not be easily predicted . fausto-sterling 's data goes on to state that genes alone do not decide phenotypes ; phenotypes are instead decided by the environmental and developmental history of the person , in addition to their total genetic endowment . in the same regard , behavior is not solely decided by only genetics . the data further goes on to state that while the number of nerves is decided in the former half of pregnancy , cellular interconnection continues to multiply and grow throughout the first four years of life . in addition , the mind and temperament of an adult is shaped by the environment he or she is raised in . factors included , physical fitness , nutrition , and interpersonal relations with other people . through these studies and analytical work , the following four gender development theories of biological determinist , psychoanalytic , social learning , and cognitive development have been devised . . gender development theory . following a summary of the prior , fausto-sterling shows her points on the gender development theories by noting how xy and xx chromosomes stay identical up until the 6th week of development in the womb . during these six weeks , the xy/xx embryos develop an indifferent gonad , an extra layer that is n't affected by the chromosome embryo due to their indistinguishable similarity at the time . this external process develops in a similar manner to the various male and female reproductive organs that later develop within the body . by the end of the first month and a half , all embryos would 've developed , regardless of gender . in addition , the chromosomes within the cells will have developed different sets of mesonephric ducts that are indifferent to gender . a set of ducts ultimately becomes the aforementioned reproductive organs based on the sex of the fetus . once the y chromosome in the xy embryo triggers , an extensive and lengthy process is detailed on the development of male fetuses . conversely , far less is known on the development of xx fetuses . what is known about the female xx is that the fetuses produce approximately the same amount of estrogen in comparison to the testosterone production in the male xy . later down the line of fetus growth , the originally identical genitalia of the two types of fetus will differentiate on the eighth week . in some cases the xy fetus will initially begin to develop female genitals instead of the male penis and scrotum due to a deficiency in dihydrotestosterone . after detailing the opinions of john money and julianne imperato-mcguinely on gender identity , fausto-sterling concludes with the three influences that affect gender – genetic regulatory information , intrusion from outside the womb , and '' chance variation '' in development – and two points on sexual development . '' . the standard model . sex and gender are two separate characterizations of people and a standard model exists for both sex and gender . biology characterizes sex by dimorphism . in other words , people are either male or female and nothing in between . surgical procedures ensure that people are assigned to one of the two accepted sexes . gender , separate from sex , is socially constructed by culture . people determine the definition of gender by assigning roles to each gender . for example , generally , males are expected to work and women are expected to stay home and care for their family . by assigning a specific role to a gender , we have created a standard model of what it means to be male or female . in essence , the standard model characterizes by masculinity and femininity and separates nature and nurture . in chapter three of sexing the body , '' of gender and genitals '' , fausto-sterling criticizes the standard model and the way it impacts those both neither male nor female . she explains that doctors surgically assign infants male or female when they are not born with '' normal '' genitals . fausto-sterling believes that as children grow and become either more masculine or feminine '' nurture matters a great deal more than nature '' because it affects the child 's inclinations towards becoming hetero- or homo- sexual . when doctors studied the spectrum of genders , fausto-sterling criticized that '' they never questioned the fundamental assumptions that there are only two sexes , because their goal in studying intersexual was to find out more about normal development . '' the doctors ' motives for the research of intersexual show that they promote the standard model for sex and are unwilling to accept the fact that there are different variations of sex . fausto-sterling strongly believes that doctors are unethical in that they do not allow variations of sex and immediately assign a sex within a few hours of birth because there is not a way of telling whether the infant will be content with their assigned gender . furthermore , '' whatever treatment they choose . physicians . decide how to manage intersexuality act out of . deeply held beliefs about male and female sexuality and gender roles . '' fausto-sterling argues that the consequence of performing sexual reassignment surgery on intersex infants '' develops a language that reinforces the idea that lurking inside the mixed-sex child is a real male or female body . '' she claims that this is unacceptable because now that society vehemently believes that only males or females should exist , pdf . a window to a spectrum of genders closes . even more so , those who are born intersex are forced to live unhappy lives full of surgery and scrutiny because they did not fit the standard model . in order to change the standard model , sterling suggests that we should question , '' should there be only two sexes ? '' . sexing the body . in chapter three of the book sexing the body , titled '' of gender and genitals '' , fausto-sterling details the sexing of the human body . when an intersex child is first born , a '' medical emergency '' is called . gender reassignment surgery is relied upon in order to '' fix the problem '' because the body must have a specific sex . deciding whether to call a child a boy or a girl , then , employs social definitions of the essential components of gender . fausto-sterling describes the '' phall-o-metrics '' , the measurement technique used to determine medically acceptable penis or clitoris . fausto-sterling implies that the body is sexed and this sexing comes from the standards that society has placed on what a male and a female are supposed to look like and be . these definitions are primarily cultural , not biological . . publications . books book chapters fausto-sterling , anne ( 2014 ) . '' nature '' . in c . r . stimpson & g . herdt ( eds ) , critical terms for the study of gender . university of chicago press . pp . & nbsp ; 294–315 . . references . further reading . . external links . anne fausto-sterling website fausto-sterling at brown research brown university – faculty page the five sexes : why male and female are not enough sexing the body : how biologists construct human sexuality a conversation with anne fausto-sterling anne fausto-sterling papers - pembroke center archives , brown university