Academic degree

scotland . the standard first degree for students studying arts or humanities in scotland is either a bachelor of arts or a master of arts ( the latter traditionally awarded by the ancient universities of scotland for a first degree in an arts/humanities subject ) . the standard undergraduate degree for natural and social science subjects is the bachelor of science . students can work towards a first degree at either ordinary or honours level . a general or ordinary degree ( ba/ma or bsc ) takes three years to complete ; an honours degree ( ba/ma hons or bsc hons ) takes four years . the ordinary degree need not be in a specific subject , but can involve study across a range of subjects within ( and sometimes beyond ) the relevant faculty , in which case it may also be called a general degree ; if a third year or junior honours subject is included , the ordinary degree in that named discipline is awarded . the honours degree involves two years of study at a sub-honours level in which a range of subjects within the relevant faculty are studied and then two years of study at honours level which is specialised in a single field ( for example classics , history , chemistry , biology , etc . ) . not all universities in scotland adhere to this , in some you study in several subjects within a faculty for three years and can then specialise in two areas and attain a joint honours degree in fourth year . this also reflects the broader scope of the final years of education in scotland , where traditionally five highers are studied , compared to ( typically ) three english or welsh a-levels . the higher is a one-year qualification , as opposed to the two years of a-levels , which accounts for scottish honours degrees being a year longer than those in england . advanced highers add an optional final year of secondary education , bringing students up to the level of their a-level counterparts – students with strong a-levels or advanced highers may be offered entry directly into the second year at scottish universities . honours for ma or bachelor 's degrees are classified into three classes : first class honours second class honours , divided into : division one ( 2:1 ) upper second class honours division two ( 2:2 ) lower second class honours third class honours students who complete all the requirements for an honours degree , but do not receive sufficient merit to be awarded third-class honours may be awarded a special degree ( ordinary degree – bachelor 's level scqf level 9 ) . in most respects , the criteria for awarding qualifications at honours level and above are the same as in the rest of the uk ( see above under england , wales and northern ireland ) . postgraduate qualifications are not designated master of arts as in the rest of the uk , as this is an undergraduate degree . postgraduate degrees in arts and humanities subjects are usually designated master of letters ( m.litt . ) or , in natural and social sciences , master of science ( m.sc . ) . non-doctoral postgraduate research degrees are usually designated master of philosophy ( m.phil . ) or master of research ( m.res . ) . the postgraduate teaching qualification is the postgraduate diploma in education ( pgde ) . postgraduate qualifications are classified into four classes : distinction credit merit pass . north america . . canada . in canada , education is the responsibility of the provinces and territories , rather than the federal government . however , all of canada follows the three-level bachelor's-master's-doctorate system common to the anglophone world , with a few variations . a common framework for degrees was agreed between the provinces and territories in 2007 . bachelor 's degrees are normally three to four years in duration , more commonly three years in quebec ( where they follow on from college courses rather than directly from secondary education ) . outside quebec , three-year bachelor 's degrees are normally ordinary degrees , while four-year bachelor 's degrees are honours degrees ; an honours degree is normally needed for further study at the master 's level . master 's degrees take one to three years ( in quebec they normally take one and a half to two years ) . doctorates take a minimum of three years . alone among canadian provinces and territories , british columbia offers two-year associate degrees , allowing credit to be transferred into a four-year bachelor 's program . in canada , first professional degrees such as dds , md , pharmd and llb or jd are considered bachelor 's level qualifications , despite their often being named as if they were doctorates . . quebec . in the province of quebec , the majority of students must attend college prior to entering university . upon completion of a two-year pre-university program , such as in sciences or humanities , or a three-year technical program , such as nursing or computer science , college graduates obtain a college diploma , which is a prerequisite for access to university-level studies . although these college programs are typical , they are not offered in every institution in the province . moreover , while a few other pre-university programs with various concentrations exist , many other technical/career programs are available depending on the college of choice . for example , dawson college in montreal has nearly sixty different programs leading to a college diploma . special programs , such as physical rehabilitation , are offered in some colleges as well . these programs are particularly interesting because they allow students to enter professional university programs , such as physiotherapy ( which consists of an integrated bachelor of science in physiotherapy and master of physical therapy ) , without having to meet the usual grade and course prerequisites required from students holding a pre-university science diploma . a similar option is offered for college nursing graduates as they can pursue their studies in university to obtain a bachelor of nursing in two years ( rather than the usual three or four years , depending on whether the student has completed a college diploma in quebec ) . additionally , whereas aspiring medical students are usually required to complete an undergraduate degree before applying to medical schools , quebec college graduates have the option to enter : a '' medical preparatory '' year at mcgill university or université de montréal and then pursue medical studies for the four following years ; directly into the undergraduate medical education program at université laval ( 4 to 5 years in duration ) or université de sherbrooke ( 4 years in duration ) . mexico . education in mexico follows a three-degree system similar to that of canada and the us . the pre-university academic level is the bachillerato ( also called preparatoria ) , similar to high school . students typically leave preparatoria at the age of 18 for university , at which point they choose to specialize in a specific academic area ( a carrera ) . after high school , students progress to university , where they study for a técnico superior universitario ( associate degree ) or a licenciatura ( bachelor ) , then a maestría ( master ) , then a doctorado ( doctorate ) . once in university , students begin the carrera , the study of a precise academic branch like economics , business administration , sciences , law , engineering or medicine . students will be in university for 8–10 semesters of full-time study , which typically takes 4–5 years . upon graduation , students receive a licenciatura in their chosen subject area , which is equivalent to an american bachelor 's degree . they can also get the degree of '' ingenieria '' or '' medico '' that refers to an engineer or md respectively . several mexican universities offer students the possibility of obtaining an equivalent to an associate degree , called in mexico técnico superior universitario ( tsu ) , studying only half of the licenciatura , with the possibility of finishing a full bachelor 's degree later . this is done mainly in fields like engineering and computer sciences . after receiving the licenciatura , students may take extra courses called diplomados ( similar to a certification but issued by a university ) . these courses last 4–12 months and are a means to further study without continuing to the next degree level , usually studied to demonstrate that the student still updated in his field . most students stay at this level , but some choose to continue to the maestría , equivalent to the master 's degree . study at the maestría level takes 1–3 years and mandates completion of a thesis . post-graduate students in mexico typically enter a master 's program after a few years in the workforce and often continue working while studying . traditionally , students who have completed the maestria may continue on to the doctorado or the doctorate . doctoral study typically lasts 3–4 years . in last years this schemes has become flexible such that in some phd programmes , students are accepted before or not completing at all a master course . united states . in the united states , since the late 19th century , the threefold degree system of bachelor , master and doctor has been in place , but has evolved into a slightly different pattern from the european equivalent . the u.s . department of education now classifies degrees in six categories : associate degrees , bachelor 's degrees , first professional degrees , master 's degrees , intermediate graduate qualifications and doctorates . the standard academic progression remains bachelor's—master's— ( research ) doctorate . most standard academic programs are based on the four-year bachelor 's degree , most often bachelor of arts ( b.a . ) or bachelor of science ( b.s . ) , a one- or two-year master 's degree ( most often master of arts ( m.a . ) or master of science ( m.s . ) ; either of these programs might be as long as three years in length ) and a further two to five years of coursework and research , culminating in '' comprehensive '' examinations in one or more fields , plus perhaps some teaching experience and then the writing of a dissertation for the doctorate , for a total of ten or more years from starting the bachelor 's degree ( which is usually begun around age 18 ) to the awarding of the doctorate . this timetable is only approximate , however , as students in accelerated programs can sometimes earn a bachelor 's degree in three years or , on the other hand , a particular dissertation project might take four or more years to complete . in addition , a graduate may wait an indeterminate time between degrees before candidacy in the next level or even an additional degree at a level already completed . therefore , there is no time-limit on the accumulation of academic degrees . by far the most common research doctorate is the doctor of philosophy ( ph.d . ) , comprising 98.1 % of research doctorates in 2014 . the doctor of education ( ed.d . ) made up 1.1 % ( not including ed.d.s classified as professional degrees rather than research doctorates ) and all other research doctorates were less than 1 % in total . some schools , mostly junior colleges and community colleges and some four-year schools , offer an associate degree for two full years of study . these may be in professional or academic fields and the most common awards are the associate of arts ( a.a . ) and associate of science ( a.s . ) degrees . articulation agreements may allow credit earned on an associate degree to be counted toward completion of a bachelor 's degree . the '' first professional degree '' is a graduate level degree program designed to prepare graduates for professional practice in various fields other than academic scholarship and research . first professional degrees require a minimum of two years prior college-level education to enter the program and a minimum of six years total college-level education ( including that undertaken prior to entry ) to complete the program . most professional degree programs require a prior bachelor 's degree for admission and many require seven or eight years of total study . many first professional degrees , e.g . m.d . , j.d . or d.o . are named as doctorates but should not be confused with research doctorates such as the ph.d . association of american universities data exchange . glossary of terms for graduate education . accessed may 26 , 2008 ; national science foundation ( 2006 ) . '' time to degree of u.s . research doctorate recipients , '' infobrief , science resource statistics nsf 06-312 , 2006 , p . 7 . ( under '' data notes '' mentions that the j.d . is a professional doctorate ) ; san diego county bar association ( 1969 ) . ethics opinion 1969-5 . accessed may 26 , 2008 . ( under '' other references '' discusses differences between academic and professional doctorate and statement that the j.d . is a professional doctorate ) ; university of utah ( 2006 ) . university of utah – the graduate school – graduate handbook . accessed may 28 , 2008 . ( the j.d . degree is listed under doctorate degrees ) ; german federal ministry of education . u.s . higher education / evaluation of the almanac chronicle of higher education . accessed may 26 , 2008 . ( report by the german federal ministry of education analysing the chronicle of higher education from the u.s . and stating that the j.d . is a professional doctorate ) ; encyclopædia britannica . ( 2002 ) . encyclopædia britannica , 3:962:1a . ( the j.d . is listed among other doctorate degrees ) . first professional degrees should also not be confused with professional master 's degrees such as the m.arch . and m.b.a . , which are classified as master 's degrees , or with intermediate graduate qualifications that also bear the title of doctor , such as d.min . or d.psy . intermediate graduate qualifications lie between master 's level and the doctorate . they include awards such as advanced certificates , advanced graduate certificates , graduate diplomas , professional engineer status and professional diplomas , as well as specialist degrees such as education specialist , doctor of ministry , doctor of psychology and the licentiate in sacred theology . in 21 us jurisdictions , religious institutions can be authorized to grant religious-exempt ( rel . exmpt . , rel . expt . , etc . ) degrees without accreditation or government oversight . oregon student assistance commission office of degree authorization ( oda ) : religious exempt schools such degrees are used primarily to attain church-related employment . . current levels of attainment of degrees . traditionally more men than women attended and earned degrees at the world 's universities . a milestone was reached in the united states according to results of the 2010 census , as women surpassed men in attaining master 's degrees , for the first time . the u.s . census reports that 10.5 million men have master 's degrees or higher , compared with 10.6 million women . the first year that women surpassed men in earning bachelor 's degrees was in 1996 . . perceptions of the value of a degree in the us . students , the media and the general public have shown much concern over the value of getting a higher degree in the us ever since the great recession of 2007 . a 2015 survey of 2,000 adults ( 900 of which were graduates ) , implemented by an education technology company called greenwood hall , reported that more than half of the graduates surveyed believe those getting their degree now will be receiving a lower return on their investment than their counterparts 10–15 years ago . media coverage of the rising costs of higher education and increased student debt have also affected the public 's perceptions of whether higher degrees are still worthwhile . statistics citing that college graduates make around 1 million more in their lifetimes than those who did n't attend college and living longer , healthier lives work in favor of those who argue the continued value of higher degrees . studies like the 2011 learning gains study by arum and roksa , on the other hand , reported that only 55 % of students had any learning gains during their first two years of college , which favors the argument that investing in higher education may not still be worth it . as academics continue researching and dissecting these arguments , education remains a hot topic in the us as shown by president obama recently setting a national goal for the us to once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by 2020 . . oceania . . australia . the australian qualifications framework ( aqf ) covers 10 levels , of which 6 – 10 correspond to academic degrees . these are the associate degree ( level 6 ) , which normally takes 2 years , the bachelor degree ( level 7 ) , which normally takes 3 years , the honours degree ( level 8 ) , which normally takes 1 year after the bachelor 's degree and is mostly taken as an optional extension year depending of the discipline , the master degree ( level 9 ) , which normally takes 1 – 2 years for '' research '' or '' coursework '' degrees and 3 – 4 years for an '' extended '' degree and follows on from either a bachelor or honours degree and the doctorate ( level 10 ) , which normally takes 3 – 4 years following on from a master 's degree or a class i or iia honours qualification . also included within the higher education system are graduate certificates and graduate diplomas , both of which are at level 8 ( honours degree level ) , as well as advanced diplomas , at level 6 ( associate degree level ) and diplomas at level 5 ( first year of a degree course ) . in australia , most degrees are issued ungraded , with bachelor 's degrees with honours being the exception . doctorates in australia may be research doctorates ( normally titled phds ) or professional doctorates ( normally titled to refer to the field of practice , e.g . doctor of engineering . professional doctorates still require research leading to '' a significant and original contribution to knowledge in the context of professional practice '' and should not be confused with extended master 's degrees that bear similar names for historical reasons : the juris doctor and doctors of medical practice , physiotherapy , dentistry and optometry . despite their names , these extended master 's degrees may not be described as doctoral degrees nor do they confer the right to use the title of doctor on their recipients . some bachelor 's degrees ( e.g . bachelor of engineering or bachelor of medicine/bachelor of surgery ) may take longer than three years to complete and double bachelor 's degrees ( i.e . completing two bachelor 's degrees simultaneously in four to five years ) are common . new zealand . like australia , new zealand has a 10-level qualifications framework ( the new zealand qualifications framework ; nzqf ) and a referencing exercise has found a one-to-one correspondence between the levels of the two frameworks . however , the names given to qualifications at different levels are not the same and new zealand does not have associate degrees , thus only levels 7 – 10 correspond to academic degrees . these are the bachelor 's degree ( level 7 ) , honours degree ( level 8 ) , master 's degree ( level 9 ) and the doctorate ( level 10 ) . in addition to these , the nzqf has certificates across levels 1 – 6 , diplomas at levels 5 and 6 , graduate certificates and graduate diplomas at level 7 ( bachelor 's ) and postgraduate certificates and postgraduate diplomas at level 8 ( honours ) . another referencing exercise , comparing the nzqf to the 10-level irish national framework for qualifications found that degrees were comparable but that further work was needed to improve compatibility for the sub-degree levels ( 1 – 6 ) . non-degree qualifications at levels 7 – 9 were not included in the study . in new zealand , master 's degrees may be awarded with classified honours ( 1st , 2:1 , 2:2 , 3rd ) or with distinction or merit . . south america . . argentina . brazil . undergraduate students in brazilian universities graduate either with a bachelor 's degree , a licentiate degree or a technologist degree . bachelor degrees in brazil normally takes four or five years of full-time study to complete , with the exception of the human medicine course which requires six years . licentiate degree , normally takes four-years length degrees , available for students who want to qualify as school teachers . licenciatura courses exist mostly in mathematics , humanities and natural sciences . technologist degree is available in technology-related fields and can be normally obtained in three years . these degrees are turned to fast entry the industry . admission as an undergraduate student in most top public or private universities in brazil requires that the applicant pass a competitive entrance examination known as vestibular . contrary to what happens in the united states , candidates must declare their intended university major when they register for the vestibular . although it is theoretically possible to switch majors afterwards ( in a process known within the universities as transferência interna ) , that is actually quite rare in brazil . undergraduate curricula tend to be more rigid than in the united states and there is little room to take classes outside one 's major . individuals who hold either a bachelor 's degree , licentiate or technologist are eligible for admission into graduate courses leading to advanced master 's or doctor 's degrees . criteria for admission into master 's and doctor 's programs vary in brazil . some universities require that candidates take entrance exams ; others make admission decisions based solely on undergraduate transcripts , letters of recommendation and possibly oral interviews . in most cases , however , especially for the doctorate , the candidate is required to submit a research plan and one faculty member must agree to serve as his/her supervisor before the candidate can be admitted into the program ; the exception are the natural sciences post-graduate programs , that accepts students with very broad and/or vague research prospects with sometimes the prospect is given in promptu during the interview , preferring to let the students define their study program and advisor in the course of the first year of studies . there are two types of post-graduate programs , lato sensu ( specialization and mbas ) and stricto sensu ( professional master 's , master 's and doctorate ) : specializations or mbas are courses that include taking a minimum number ( minimum 360 hours ) of graduate classes but with no need to do research nor defend a thesis , only present a final work showing the knowledge . it 's a professional level where theory and practice are focused in a broad sense . professional master 's or master 's degrees usually takes one to two years of full-time study . requirements for an academic master 's degree include taking a minimum number of advanced graduate classes ( typically between five and eight ) and submitting a research thesis which is examined orally by a panel of at least two examiners ( three is the preferred number ) , sometimes including one external member who must be from another university or research institute . the emphasis of the thesis must be in adding some value to the academic knowledge , but not necessarily in being original . doctor 's degrees normally take four additional years of full-time study to complete . requirements for obtaining a doctor 's degree include taking additional advanced courses , passing an oral qualifying exam and submitting a longer doctoral dissertation which must represent a significant original contribution to knowledge in the field to which the dissertation topic is related . that contrasts with master 's thesis , which , in addition to being usually shorter than doctoral dissertations , are not required to include creation of new knowledge or revision/reinterpretation of older views/theories . the doctoral dissertation is examined in a final oral exam before a panel of at least two members ( in the state of são paulo the preferred number is five , while the other regions prefer three members ) , usually including one or two external examiners from another university or research institute . finally , a small number of brazilian universities , most notably the public universities in the state of são paulo still award the title of livre-docente ( free docent ) , which is of higher standing than a doctorate and is obtained , similar to the german habilitation , by the submission of a second ( original or cumulative ) thesis and approval in a livre-docência examination that includes giving a public lecture before a panel of full professors . see also universities and higher education in brazil . colombia . in colombia , the system of academic degrees is based in the british model been similar to the u.s . model . after completing their '' bachillerato '' ( high school ) , students can take one of three options . the first one is called a '' '' ( professional career ) , which is similar to a bachelor 's degree requiring from four to 6 years of study according to the chosen program . the other option is called a '' técnico '' ( technician ) ; this degree consists in two and a half years of study and prepares the student for technical or mechanical labors . finally , the third option is called a ¨tecnólogo¨ ( equivalent to associate degree ) and consist of 3 years of study . after this , students , now called '' '' ( professionals ) , tecnólogos ( associates ) or '' '' ( technicians ) , can opt for higher degrees . formal education after the bachelor 's degree is the master 's degree with the title of '' '' and doctorate degree known as '' '' ( doctorate ) . the master 's degree normally consists of two years . students also can take a specialization course , '' '' , equivalent to a graduate certificate degree , after their bachelor 's degree . these programs , like in the u.s . are very popular , because it requires only one to two years of study . a similar situation in colombia , when compared to the u.s . system , is that the students may not go directly to the '' '' without having the '' master '' degree first . chile . after completing '' '' ( high school ) , students receive a '' licenciatura de enseñanza media '' ( high school diploma ) , which is a requirement for higher education . in chile , there 's a distinction between academic degrees and professional titles : is the denomination given to an academic degree granted by a higher education institution recognized by the chilean mineduc ( ministry of education ) . is the denomination given to a professional title . some professional titles are required for occupations such as physicians , attorneys and as civil/commercial engineers . a professional title may or not require a '' grado académico '' , additional examination and/or work experience . for example , the '' '' professional title is granted by the chilean supreme court and requires an examination , academic degree and 6 months of pro-bono work experience . among degrees , we can find the following levels : , undergraduate degree obtained by completing a 2-year '' bachillerato '' . , undergraduate degree obtained as a 4+ year '' licenciatura '' . equivalent to a bachelor 's degree . , graduate degree , requiring a '' licenciado '' degree or equivalent . equivalent to a master 's degree . , a doctoral degree , often requiring a '' magister '' degree or equivalent . higher education programs that provide a professional title but not an academic degree are referred to as '' '' , which are similar in duration and scope to associate degree programs . these are often granted by educational institutions of the type '' instituto profesional '' ( ip ) or '' centro de formación técnica '' ( cft ) . venezuela . titles in venezuela start with the certificado de educación básica ( certificate of basic education ) , awarded upon completing 9th grade . the next title is earned upon completing 11th grade and may be bachiller en ciencias ( high school graduate of science ) , bachiller en humanidades ( high school graduate of humanities ) or técnico en ciencias ( science technician ) . the reason for this diversity is because some schools provide vocational education as part of their high school curriculum ( thereby allowing them to hand out '' technician '' titles ) while elsewhere , the student is required to decide whether to study sciences or humanities for the last two years of secondary school . titles at the higher education level usually depend on the institution handing them out . technical schools award the student with the title of técnico superior universitario ( university higher technician , to distinguish from science technician ) . universities award the student with the title of ingeniero ( engineer ) or with the title licenciado ( licentiate ) after completing a five-year program . the engineer have more physics subjects than the licentiate , but both are five-year careers . some higher education institutions may award diplomados ( diploma ) , but the time necessary to obtain one varies . medical doctors are awarded the title '' médico cirujano '' after completing a 6 year-career . postgraduate education follows conventions of the united states ( being named '' master 's '' and '' doctorate '' after the programs there ) . pontifical universities . pontifical university around the world such as the pontifical university , st patrick 's college , maynooth in ireland , the university of santo tomas in manila , the direct competence of the holy see applies only to the ecclesiastical faculties of theology , philosophy and canon . the other sciences and arts degrees are under the competence of the department of education of the philippine republic . the catholic university of america , the pontifical university of saint thomas aquinas , angelicum in rome , the university of louvain ( uclouvain ) in belgium and the pontifical catholic university of peru depend for their status as pontifical universities and for the nature of their academic degrees on the pope through the congregation for catholic education . the nature of academic degrees from ecclesiastical institutions of education is outlined in the apostolic constitution sapientia christiana . in distinction to secular or catholic universities , which are academic institutions for the study and teaching of a broad range of disciplines , ecclesiastical or pontifical university '' are usually composed of three principal ecclesiastical faculties , theology , philosophy and canon law and at least one other faculty . a pontifical university specifically addresses christian revelation and disciplines correlative to the evangelical mission of the church as set out in the apostolic constitution sapientia christiana . '' there are three cycles of degrees that constitute the core of degrees granted by pontifical universities : the first cycle leading to the baccalaureate degree ; the second cycle leading to the licentiate degree ; the third cycle leading to the doctorate . from this core pontifical universities confer degrees including : theology baccalaureate in sacred theology , sacrae theologiae baccalaureatus ( s.t.b . ) licentiate in sacred theology , sacrae theologiae licentiatus ( s.t.l . ) doctorate in sacred theology , sacrae theologiae doctoratus ( s.t.d . ) philosophy baccalaureate in philosophy , philosophiae baccalaureatus ( ph.b . ) licentiate in philosophy , philosophiae licentiatus ( ph.l . ) doctorate in philosophy , philosophiae doctoratus ( ph.d . ) canon law baccalaureate in canon law , juris canonici baccalaureatus ( j.c.b . ) licentiate in canon law , iuris canonici licentiatus ( j.c.l . ) doctorate in canon law , iuris canonici doctoratus ( j.c.d . )