Jack Valenti

early life and education . valenti was born on september 5 , 1921 in houston , texas , the son of italian immigrants . during world war ii , he was a first lieutenant in the united states army air force . valenti flew 51 combat missions as the pilot-commander of a b-25 mitchell and received four decorations , including the distinguished flying cross and air medal . valenti graduated from the university of houston in 1946 with a bba . during his time there , he worked on the staff of the university newspaper , the daily cougar , and was president of the university 's student government . valenti would later serve on the university 's board of regents . career . after earning an m.b.a . from harvard university in 1948 , valenti went to work for humble oil in its advertising department , where he helped the company 's texas gas stations jump from fifth to first in sales through a '' cleanest restrooms '' campaign . in 1952 , he and a partner named weldon weekley founded weekley & valenti , an advertising agency , with oil company , conoco , as its first client . in 1956 , valenti met then senate majority leader lyndon b . johnson . weekley & valenti branched out into political consulting and added representative albert thomas , a johnson ally , as a client . in 1960 , valenti 's firm assisted in the kennedy-johnson presidential campaign . book review by thomas mallon : this time , this place , the jack valenti memoir . the new york times june 22 , 2007 . . politics . valenti served as liaison with the news media during president john f . kennedy and vice president lyndon b . johnson 's november 22 , 1963 visit to dallas , texas , and valenti was in the presidential motorcade . following the assassination of john f . kennedy , valenti was present in the famous photograph of lyndon johnson 's swearing-in aboard air force one , and flew with the new president to washington . he then became the first '' special assistant '' to johnson 's white house and lived in the white house for the first two months of johnson 's presidency . in 1964 , johnson gave valenti the responsibility to handle relations with the republican congressional leadership , particularly gerald ford and charles halleck from the house of representatives , and the senate 's everett dirksen . valenti later called johnson '' the most single dominating human being that i 've ever been in contact with '' and '' the single most intelligent man i 've ever known '' . '' interview with jack valenti , 1981 '' . 04/23/1981 . wgbh media library & archives . retrieved 3 november 2010 . in a speech before the american advertising federation in 1965 , valenti said : '' i sleep each night a little better , a little more confidently , because lyndon johnson is my president . '' address before the advertising federation of america convention , boston , massachusetts ( 28 june 1965 ) ; published in the congressional record ( 7 july 1965 ) vol . 111 , appendix , p . a3583 valenti later attacked film director oliver stone for the 1991 movie jfk . valenti called the movie a '' monstrous charade '' and said , '' i owe where i am today to lyndon johnson . i could not live with myself if i stood by mutely and let some filmmaker soil his memory . '' bernard weinraub , '' valenti calls ' j.f.k . ' 'hoax ' and 'smear ' '' , the new york times , april 2 , 1992 . . mpaa . in 1966 , valenti , at the insistence of universal studios chief lew wasserman , and with johnson 's consent , resigned his white house commission and became the president of the motion picture association of america . with valenti 's arrival in hollywood , the pair were lifelong allies , and together orchestrated and controlled how hollywood would conduct business for the next several decades . william patry , a copyright attorney for the clinton administration , who observed valenti at first hand says : his personal passion and extreme comfort around politicians gave him credibility that others . would lack . mr valenti was a consummate salesman , who like all great salesmen . worked himself up into believing the truth of his clients ' message . those privileged to see mr valenti offstage – talking openly with his clients about what could or could not be achieved , and what artifice would or would not work – are aware that mr valenti 's clients frequently disagreed with his advice and directed him to deliver a different message through a different artifice . he was a great actor working on the stage of washington dc ( and sometimes globally ) on behalf of an industry that appreciated his craft , but that never let him forget that the message was theirs and not his . patry , w . f . : moral panics and the copyright wars , oxford university press , 2009 . . movie rating system . in 1968 , valenti developed the mpaa film rating system , which initially comprised four distinct ratings : g , m , r and x . the m rating was soon replaced by gp , and changed to pg in 1972 . the x rating immediately proved troublesome , since it was not trademarked and therefore was used freely by the pornography industry , with which it became most associated . films such as midnight cowboy and a clockwork orange were assumed to be pornographic because they carried the x rating . in 1990 the nc-17 rating was introduced as a trademarked '' adults only '' replacement for the non-trademarked x-rating . the pg-13 rating was added in 1984 to provide a greater range of distinction for audiences , and was first proposed to valenti by steven spielberg . . valenti on new technologies . during the late 1970s and early 1980s , valenti became notorious for his flamboyant attacks on the sony betamax vcr , which the mpaa feared would devastate the movie industry . he famously told a congressional panel in 1982 , '' i say to you that the vcr is to the american film producer and the american public as the boston strangler is to the woman home alone . '' jack valenti testimony at 1982 house hearing on home recording of copyrighted works despite valenti 's prediction , the home video market ultimately came to be the mainstay of movie studio revenues throughout the 1980s and 1990s . digital millennium copyright act . in 1998 , valenti lobbied for the controversial digital millennium copyright act , arguing that copyright infringement via the internet would severely damage the record and movie industries . an interview conducted by a gnu/linux user from mit . 2003 screener ban injunction . in 2003 , valenti found himself at the center of the so-called screener debate , as the mpaa barred studios and many independent producers from sending screener copies of their films to critics and voters in various awards shows . under mounting industry pressure and a court injunction antidote films . et al . v mpaa ( november 2003 ) , valenti backed down in 2004 , narrowly avoiding a massive and embarrassing antitrust lawsuit against the mpaa . the coalition of independent filmmakers ' jeff levy-hinte , ifp/los angeles executive director dawn hudson and ifp/new york executive director michelle byrd said in a joint statement , '' by obtaining a court order to force the mpaa to lift the screener ban last december , the coalition enabled individual distributors to determine when and in what manner to distribute promotional screeners . '' it was viewed as valenti 's greatest professional loss . honors . valenti received the distinguished flying cross and air medal for his service with the army air force during the second world war . in 1969 , jack valenti received the bronze medallion , new york city 's highest civilian honor . in 1985 , jack valenti received the french légion d'honneur . in 2002 , the university of houston bestowed valenti an honorary doctorate . in december 2003 , valenti received the '' legend in leadership award '' from the chief executive leadership institute of the yale school of management . in june 2005 , the washington dc headquarters of the motion picture association of america , was renamed the jack valenti building . it is located at 888 16th st . nw , washington dc , very close to the white house . jack valenti maintained an office on the 8th floor , outside the mpaa 's space , until his death . in april 2008 , the university of houston renamed its school of communication to the jack j . valenti school of communication in his honor . valenti was one of the school 's notable alumni . . retirement . valenti 's salary in 2004 was reported to be 1.35 million , which made him the seventh-highest paid washington trade group chief , according to the national journal . valenti was nominated for president of the united states by the alfalfa club in 2004 . in august 2004 , valenti , then 82 years old , retired and was replaced by former u.s . congressman and secretary of agriculture dan glickman . the previous head of the ratings system , joan graves , was appointed by valenti . after retirement from the mpaa , he became involved in technology-related venture capital activities , such as joining the advisory board of legend ventures where he advised on media investment opportunities . he also remained a supporter of causes linked to his italian american heritage and was a member of the national italian american foundation ( niaf ) for more than 20 years . after retiring from the mpaa in 2004 , valenti became the first president of friends of the global fight against aids , tuberculosis , and malaria , an organization founded by philanthropists edward w . scott and adam waldman . the founders wanted to support the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria in its work to prevent millions of people from dying of preventable and treatable diseases each year . under valenti 's leadership , friends of the global fight oversaw a steady increase in u.s . funding for the global fund , resulting in a large-scale , positive impact in the fight against aids , tuberculosis and malaria . valenti remained president of friends of the global fight until his death in 2007 . friends of the global fight . personal life . in 1962 , at the age of 41 , valenti married mary margaret valenti . they had three children : john , alexandra and warner bros . studio executive courtenay valenti . he died just before their forty-fifth wedding anniversary . in 1964 , the federal bureau of investigation conducted an investigation concerning whether valenti had a sexual relationship with a male photographer ( at a time when homosexual acts were still illegal in many states of the united states ) . the investigation concluded that there was no evidence that valenti was a homosexual . fbi probed sexuality of lbj aide jack valenti from msnbc in 1995 , he voiced a portrayal of himself on the warner bros . animated series freakazoid ! ( close friend steven spielberg was the executive producer ) ; wherein he helped recount the origin of the titular hero ; he also lectured about the movie ratings by using stickers of a family ; and also made frequent reference to his cheeks ( '' hi , i 'm jack valenti and these are my cheeks '' ) . in the 2016 film jackie , about the life of first lady jacqueline kennedy onassis after the assassination of john f . kennedy , valenti is portrayed by max casella . death . he died on april 26 , 2007 , at his home in washington from stroke complications . he is buried at arlington national cemetery under a veteran 's gravestone , which lists both his war decorations and his years as president of the mpaa . burial details : valenti , jack joseph – anc explorer his memoirs this time , this place : my life in war , the white house and hollywood were published on may 15 , 2007 , only a few weeks after his death . following his death , the national italian american foundation ( niaf ) launched the niaf jack valenti institute , which provides support to italian american film students , in his memory . director martin scorsese launched the institute at the foundation 's 32nd anniversary gala , after receiving an award from mary margaret valenti . books . ten heroes and two heroines ( 1957 ) the bitter taste of glory ( 1971 ) a very human president ( 1976 ; protect and defend ( 1992 ; speak up with confidence ( 2002 ; this time this place ( 2007 ; ) . references . external links .