1966 in literature

events . february – the nottingham-based chain of pharmacy stores boots uk closes the last of its circulating '' booklovers ' library '' branches . february 10 – author jacqueline susann has her first novel , valley of the dolls , published . from a friend she obtains a list of the bookstores on whose sales figures the new york times relies for its bestseller list . she then uses her own money to buy large quantities of her book at these stores , causing it to head the list . valley of the dolls incidentally comes to rank among list of best-selling books . february 14 – dissident writers yuli daniel and andrei sinyavsky are sentenced to hard labour for '' anti-soviet activity '' . march 9 – j . r . r . tolkien writes to roger verhulst expressing concerns about a proposed book about him by w . h . auden , saying , '' i regard such things as premature impertinences . i can not believe that they have a usefulness to justify the distaste and irritation given to the victim , '' but adding : '' i owe mr . auden a debt of gratitude for the generosity with which he has supported and encouraged me since the first appearance of the lord of the rings . '' '' letter to roger verhulst ( 9 march 1966 ) '' , tolkien gateway . march 21 – in a landmark obscenity case , memoirs v . massachusetts , the supreme court of the united states rules that the hitherto banned novel fanny hill ( john cleland 's memoirs of a woman of pleasure , 1749 ) does not meet the roth standard for obscenity . june 14 – the roman curia abolishes the index librorum prohibitorum of books banned by the catholic church , after 427 years . june 16 – blackwell 's opens the 930 m 2 norrington room in their main bookshop in broad street , oxford . june 23 – octopussy and the living daylights appears as the final collection of james bond short stories by the character 's creator , ian fleming , who died in 1964 . july 24 – american poet and critic frank o'hara is hit by a dune buggy on fire island beach . belanger , craig . '' frank o'hara . '' frank o'hara ( 2005 ) : 1 . masterfile premier . ebsco . web . may 12 , 2011 . he dies of his injuries the following day . august 24 – tom stoppard 's tragicomedy rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead is first played , at the edinburgh festival fringe . despite small audiences , stoppard 's reputation is made by a review by ronald bryden in the observer . september 8 – the first unesco international literacy day is celebrated . september 9 – new beacon books , the first caribbean publishing house in england , releases its first title , foundations by john la rose . '' foundations ( 1966 ) '' . george padmore institute . october 21 – jacques derrida delivers a lecture , la structure , le signe et le jeu dans le discours des sciences humaines , '' structure , sign , and play in the discourse of the human sciences '' to a structuralism colloquium at johns hopkins university , giving international prominence to his work on literary theory . november 3–4 – the 1966 flood of the arno in florence causes severe damage to libraries , including the national central library and gabinetto vieusseux . november 28 – truman capote 's black and white ball ( '' the party of the century '' ) is held in new york city . the guest of honor , the washington post publisher katharine graham , later says : '' truman called me up that summer and said , ' i think you need cheering up . and i 'm going to give you a ball . '.i was.sort of baffled.i felt a little bit like truman was going to give the ball anyway and that i was part of the props . '' george plimpton ( 1997 ) . truman capote : in which various friends , enemies , acquaintances and detractors recall his turbulent career . new york , doubleday . , p . 248 . december – moskva magazine begins the first publication of mikhail bulgakov 's novel the master and margarita ( ма́стер и маргари́та ) , begun in 1928 but left incomplete on the author 's death in 1940 . it appears in two parts with portions omitted or altered . unknown date – the first modern revival of a play by bhāsa , madhyamavyayoga , directed by shanta gandhi , is performed in a hindi translation . . new books . fiction . chinua achebe – a man of the people robert h . adleman ( with col . george walton ) – the devil 's brigade lloyd alexander – the castle of llyr elechi amadi – the concubine kingsley amis – the anti-death league isaac asimov – fantastic voyage margaret atwood the circle game expeditions speeches for doctor frankenstein louis auchincloss – the embezzler nigel balchin – in the absence of mrs . petersen j . g . ballard the crystal world the impossible man henry bauchau – la déchirure john bingham – the double agent paul bowles – up above the world ray bradbury – s is for space truman capote – in cold blood john dickson carr – panic in box c angela carter – shadow dance agatha christie – third girl james clavell – tai-pan robert crichton – the secret of santa vittoria august derleth and mark schorer – colonel markesan and less pleasant people philip k . dick the crack in space now wait for last year the unteleported man allen drury – capable of honor friedrich dürrenmatt – der meteor shusaku endo ( 遠藤 周作 ) – silence ( 沈黙 , chinmoku ) ian fleming – octopussy and the living daylights john fowles – the magus l.p . hartley – the betrayal robert a . heinlein – the moon is a harsh mistress aidan higgins – langrishe , go down robert e . howard and l . sprague de camp – conan the adventurer daniel keyes – flowers for algernon anatoly kuznetsov – babi yar : a document in the form of a novel ( « бабий яр . роман-документ » ) j . m . g . le clézio – le déluge violette leduc – thérèse et isabelle josé lezama lima – paradiso audrey erskine lindop – i start counting h . p . lovecraft and divers hands – the dark brotherhood and other pieces john d . macdonald – one fearful yellow eye compton mackenzie – paper lives alistair maclean – when eight bells toll larry mcmurtry – last picture show bernard malamud – the fixer marga minco – een leeg huis ( an empty house ) grace ogot – the promised land anthony powell – the soldier 's art thomas pynchon – the crying of lot 49 seabury quinn – carnacki , the ghost-finder gerard reve – nader tot u ( nearer to thee ) jean rhys – wide sargasso sea karl ristikivi – rõõmulaul giorgio scerbanenco a private venus traitors to all leonardo sciascia – a ciascuno il suo paul scott – the jewel in the crown adela rogers st . johns – tell no man krishna sobti – mitro marjani ( to hell with you mitro ! ) rex stout – death of a doxy william styron – the confessions of nat turner jacqueline susann – valley of the dolls leslie thomas – the virgin soldiers roderick thorp – the detective jack vance – the eyes of the overworld mario vargas llosa – the green house ( la casa verde ) patrick white – the solid mandala roger zelazny the dream master this immortal . children and young people . nina bawden – the witch 's daughter roald dahl – the magic finger leon garfield – devil-in-the-fog charles keeping – charley , charlotte and the golden canary clive king – the 22 letters ruth park the muddle-headed wombat at school the muddle-headed wombat in the snow bill peet capyboppy farewell to shady glade otfried preußler – the little ghost tomi ungerer – moon man eduard uspensky – crocodile gena and his friends ( « крокодил гена и его друзья » ) jill paton walsh – hengest 's tale . drama . edward albee – a delicate balance barbara garson – macbird ! günter grass – the plebeians rehearse the uprising gwenlyn parry – saer doliau ( doll doctor ) tom stoppard – rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead zdeněk svěrák , jiří šebánek and ladislav smoljak – akt ( the nude , introducing the czech fictional character jára cimrman ) luis valdez – quinta temporada . poetry . seamus heaney – death of a naturalist anne sexton – live or die . non-fiction . geoffrey blainey – the tyranny of distance : how distance shaped australia 's history dictionary of canadian biography , volume 1 . truman capote – in cold blood william crossing ( died 1928 ) – the dartmoor worker ( anthology ) l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp – spirits , stars , and spells edward jay epstein – inquest margery fish – an all the year garden michel foucault – the order of things ( les mots et les choses : une archéologie des sciences humaines ) ernst gombrich – norm and form . studies in the art of the renaissance a . e . hotchner – papa hemingway p . j . kavanagh – the perfect stranger mark lane – rush to judgment alasdair macintyre – a short history of ethics nancy mitford – the sun king maría moliner – diccionario de uso del español anaïs nin – the diary of anaïs nin , volume i : 1931–1934 arthur m . schlesinger jr . – a thousand days hunter s . thompson – hell 's angels : the strange and terrible saga of the outlaw motorcycle gangs frances yates – the art of memory . births . february 24 – alain mabanckou , francophone congolese novelist march 4 – dav pilkey , american author and illustrator april 12 – jim duffy , irish political writer april 15 – cressida cowell , english children 's writer april 20 – david chalmers , australian philosopher and cognitive scientist april 26 – natasha trethewey , american poet july 4 – brian selznick , american children 's writer and illustrator july 21 – sarah waters , welsh novelist october 19 – david vann , alaskan-born fiction writer and sailor november 17 – jane holland ( victoria lamb , etc . ) , english poet and novelist september 24 – rhys hughes , welsh short-story writer december 27 – chris abani , nigerian poet and novelist december 29 – christian kracht , swiss novelist and journalist unknown date – helen zahavi , english novelist and translator . deaths . january 18 – kathleen norris , american novelist ( born 1880 ) february 12 – elio vittorini , italian novelist ( born 1908 ) march 10 – frank o'connor , irish short-story writer ( born 1903 ) april 1 – brian o'nolan ( flann o'brien ) , irish satirist ( heart attack , born 1911 ) april 2 – c . s . forester , english historical novelist ( born 1899 ) april 10 ( easter day ) – evelyn waugh , english novelist , biographer and travel writer ( heart failure , born 1903 ) april 13 – georges duhamel , french novelist ( born 1884 ) june 7 yoshishige abe , japanese philosopher and politician ( born 1883 ) jean arp , alsatian poet , sculptor and painter ( born 1886 ) june 10 – henry treece , english children 's historical novelist and poet ( born 1911 ) june 30 – margery allingham , english crime novelist ( born 1904 ) july 20 – anne beffort , luxembourg literary writer and biographer ( born 1880 ) july 25 – frank o'hara , american poet ( ruptured liver , born 1926 ) august 2 or 3 – tristan klingsor ( léon leclère ) , french fantaisiste poet , painter and musician ( born 1874 ) august 6 – cordwainer smith ( paul myron anthony linebarger ) , american science fiction author ( heart attack , born 1913 ) august 12 – artur alliksaar , estonian poet ( cancer , born 1923 ) september 14- dorothy whipple , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1893 ) september 25 – mina loy , english-born poet and artist ( born 1882 ) september 28 – andré breton , french surrealist poet and author ( born 1896 ) october 30 – yórgos theotokás , greek novelist ( born 1906 ) november 26 – siegfried kracauer , german journalist and critic ( born 1889 ) december 23 – heimito von doderer , austrian author ( born 1896 ) . awards . alfaguara prize : manuel vicent , pascua y naranjas cholmondeley award : ted walker , stevie smith eric gregory award : robin fulton , seamus heaney , hugo williams see 1966 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . hugo award : frank herbert , dune and roger zelazny , . and call me conrad james tait black memorial prize for fiction : christine brooke-rose , such , and aidan higgins , langrishe , go down james tait black memorial prize for biography : geoffrey keynes , the life of william harvey miles franklin award : peter mathers , trap nebula award ( first ) : samuel r . delany , babel–17 and daniel keyes , flowers for algernon newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth borton de treviño , i , juan de pareja nobel prize in literature : shmuel yosef agnon , nelly sachs premio nadal : vicente soto , la zancada prix goncourt : edmonde charles-roux , oublier palerme prix médicis : marie-claire blais , a season in the life of emmanuel pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : katherine anne porter , collected stories pulitzer prize for poetry : richard eberhart , selected poems viareggio prize : alfonso gatto , la storia delle vittime . references .