1981 in literature

events . may 31 – the burning of jaffna public library in sri lanka is begun by a mob of police and government-sponsored paramilitaries . they destroy over 97,000 volumes in one of the worst examples of ethnic book burning in the modern era . august – sefer ve sefel opens as an english used bookstore in jerusalem . unknown dates john gardner successfully revives the james bond novel series originated by ian fleming with licence renewed ( not counting a faux biography of bond and a pair of film novelizations , the first original bond novel since 1968 's colonel sun ) . the revived bond book series will run uninterrupted until 2002 . colin maccabe is denied tenure at the university of cambridge , apparently because of a dispute within the english faculty about the teaching of structuralism . newsweek , 16 february 1981 , p . 95 ; see also philip lewis , '' the post-structuralist condition '' , diacritics 12:1 ( 1982 ) : 2–24 , p . 2 . the pen/faulkner award for fiction is given for the first time . . new books . fiction . kingsley amis ( ed . ) – the golden age of science fiction martin amis – other people v . c . andrews – if there be thorns louis auchincloss – the cat and the king rené barjavel – une rose au paradis samuel beckett – ill seen ill said thomas berger – reinhart 's women pierre berton – flames across the border simon bond – 101 uses for a dead cat william boyd – a good man in africa pascal bruckner – evil angels william s . burroughs – cities of the red night robert olen butler – the alleys of eden peter carey – bliss raymond carver – what we talk about when we talk about love david case – the third grave james clavell – noble house bernard cornwell sharpe 's eagle sharpe 's gold john crowley – little , big l . sprague de camp – the hand of zei l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp – footprints on sand régine deforges – la bicyclette bleue ( the blue bicycle ) samuel r . delany – distant star michel déon – where are you dying tonight ? ( un déjeuner de soleil ) cynthia freeman – no time for tears gabriel garcía márquez – chronicle of a death foretold ( crónica de una muerte anunciada ) john gardner – licence renewed charles l . grant – tales from the nightside alasdair gray – lanark jan guillou – ondskan thomas harris – red dragon frank herbert – god emperor of dune douglas hill – planet of the warlord robert e . howard and l . sprague de camp – the flame knife john irving – the hotel new hampshire rona jaffe – mazes and monsters alan judd – a breed of heroes ismail kadare – the file on h ( dosja j ) stephen king – cujo dean koontz ( as leigh nichols ) – the eyes of darkness chart korbjitti – khamphiphaksa ( the judgment ) joe r . lansdale – act of love stanisław lem – golem xiv colleen mccullough – an indecent obsession elliot s ! maggin – miracle monday naguib mahfouz – arabian nights and days ( ليالي ألف ليلة ) ian mcewan – the comfort of strangers toni morrison – tar baby robert b . parker a savage place early autumn ellis peters saint peter 's fair the leper of saint giles terry pratchett – strata bano qudsia – raja gidh ( '' king vulture '' ) jean raspail – moi , antoine de tounens , roi de patagonie alain robbe-grillet – djinn harold robbins – goodbye , janette lawrence sanders – the third deadly sin martin cruz smith – gorky park anja snellman – sonja o . kävi täällä muriel spark – loitering with intent botho strauß – couples , passersby ( paare , passanten ) paul theroux – the mosquito coast d . m . thomas – the white hotel john updike – rabbit is rich jack vance – the book of dreams mario vargas llosa – the war of the end of the world ( la guerra del fin del mundo ) gore vidal – creation joseph wambaugh – the glitter dome kit williams – masquerade gene wolfe the claw of the conciliator the sword of the lictor roger zelazny the changing land madwand . children and young people . chris van allsburg – jumanji hans christian andersen ( with jane s . woodward and michael hague ) – michael hague 's favourite hans christian andersen fairy tales judy blume – tiger eyes roald dahl – george 's marvellous medicine rumer godden – the dragon of og roger hargreaves – little miss ( first 13 books in the little miss series of 21 ) harold lamb ( with george barr and alicia austin ) – durandal michael de larrabeiti – the borribles go for broke janet lunn – the root cellar patricia lynch – the turf-cutter 's donkey michelle magorian – goodnight mister tom c . l . moore ( with alicia austin ) - scarlet dream uri orlev – the island on bird street ( האי ברחוב הציפורים ) ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat is very bad bill peet – encore for eleanor alvin schwartz – scary stories to tell in the dark maurice sendak – outside over there robert westall – the scarecrows . drama . samuel beckett – rockaby edward bond – restoration tankred dorst – merlin oder das wüste land john krizanc – tamara larry shue – the nerd barney simon – woza albert ! botho strauß – kalldewey , farce patrick süskind – der kontrabaß peter whelan – the accrington pals tennessee williams – the notebook of trigorin . poetry . l . sprague de camp – heroes and hobgoblins mehr lal soni zia fatehabadi – rang-o-noor ( the colour and the light ) norman nicholson – sea to the west sylvia plath ( posthumous ) – collected poems , edited by ted hughes kathleen raine – collected poems , 1935–1980 richard l . tierney – collected poems . non-fiction . maya angelou – the heart of a woman colin robert chase – the dating of beowulf mary chesnut – mary chesnut 's civil war hugo brandt corstius – opperlandse taal- & letterkunde daniel dennett – brainstorms : philosophical essays on mind and psychology nancy dorian – language death : the life cycle of a scottish gaelic dialect timothy findley – famous last words stephen jay gould – the mismeasure of man dumas malone – jefferson and his time v . s . naipaul – among the believers : an islamic journey giovanni pettinato – the archives of ebla : an empire inscribed in clay anne scott-james – the cottage garden ian smith – the great betrayal viktor suvorov – the liberators xu zhongyu – university chinese ( 大学语文 ) . births . july 10 – karen russell , american novelist september 30 – cecelia ahern , irish novelist october 3 – leïla slimani , franco-moroccan novelist october 12 – noviolet bulawayo ( elizabeth zandile tshele ) , zimbabwe-born novelist december 13 – mathis bailey , american-canadian novelist and fiction writer unknown dates amy sackville , english novelist sunjeev sahota , english novelist saud alsanousi , kuwaiti novelist . deaths . january 9 – a . j . cronin , scottish novelist ( born 1896 ) february 17 – david garnett , english novelist ( born 1892 ) february 23 – nan shepherd , scottish novelist and poet ( born 1893 ) march 7 – bosley crowther , american film critic ( born 1905 ) march 20 – pedro garcía cabrera , spanish poet ( born 1905 ) march 29 – clive sansom , english-born tasmanian poet and playwright ( born 1910 ) april 23 – josep pla , catalan spanish journalist and writer ( born 1897 ) april 26 – robert garioch , scottish poet ( born 1909 ) may 8 – uri zvi grinberg , israeli poet writing in hebrew and yiddish ( born 1896 ) may 9 – nelson algren , american novelist ( born 1909 ) may 18 – william saroyan , american novelist and dramatist ( born 1908 ) may 30 – gwendolyn b . bennett , african american writer and artist ( born 1902 ) june 15 – philip toynbee , english novelist and journalist ( born 1916 ) september 3 – alec waugh , english novelist ( born 1898 ) september 12 – eugenio montale , italian poet ( born 1896 ) december 26 – amber reeves , new zealand-born english scholar , feminist and novelist ( born 1887 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : elias canetti . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : chris matthews , al jazzar ; tim winton , an open swimmer kenneth slessor prize for poetry : alan gould , astral sea miles franklin award : peter carey , bliss . canada . see 1981 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : lucien bodard , anne marie prix médicis french : françois-olivier rousseau , l'enfant d'édouard prix médicis international : david shahar , le jour de la comtesse . spain . miguel de cervantes prize : octavio paz . united kingdom . booker prize : salman rushdie , midnight 's children carnegie medal for children 's literature : robert westall , the scarecrows cholmondeley award : roy fisher , robert garioch , charles boyle eric gregory award : alan jenkins , simon rae , marion lomax , philip gross , kathleen jamie , mark abley , roger crowley , ian gregson james tait black memorial prize for fiction : salman rushdie , midnight 's children , and paul theroux , the mosquito coast james tait black memorial prize for biography : victoria glendinning , edith sitwell : unicorn among lions queen 's gold medal for poetry : d . j . enright 1981 whitbread awards : william boyd , a good man in africa . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : kathy calloway , heart of the garfish american academy of arts and letters gold medal for belles lettres : malcolm cowley dos passos prize : gilbert sorrentino nebula award : gene wolfe , the claw of the conciliator newbery medal for children 's literature : katherine paterson , jacob have i loved pulitzer prize for drama : beth henley , crimes of the heart pulitzer prize for fiction : john kennedy toole – a confederacy of dunces pulitzer prize for poetry : james schuyler : the morning of the poem . elsewhere . hugo award for best novel : the snow queen by joan d . vinge premio nadal : carmen gómez ojea , cantiga de aguero . references .