Roan (color)

roan horses . a horse with intermixed white and colored hairs of any color is usually called a roan . however , such mixtures , which can appear superficially similar , are caused by a number of separate genetic factors . identifiable types of roans include true or classic roan , varnish roan , and rabicano , though other currently unknown factors may be responsible for ambiguous '' roaning . '' gray horses , which become lighter as they age until their hair coat is nearly completely white , may be confused with roans when they are young . duns , which are solid-colored horses affected by the dun dilution gene on their bodies but with darker points , are also sometimes confused with roans , but they do not have the intermixed white and colored hairs of a roan . horses with the classic or true roan pattern may be any base color which is intermingled with unpigmented white hairs on the body . except for horse markings under the control of other genes , the head , mane , tail , and lower legs are dark . roan is a simple dominant trait symbolized by the rn allele . the university of california , davis school of veterinary medicine 's genetics services have developed a dna test that uses genetic markers to indirectly determine the number of rn or rn alleles a horse has . the mutation responsible for true roan has not yet been identified exactly , but been assigned to equine chromosome 21 ( eca21 ) in the kit sequence . the overall effect is that of a silver or lightened appearance to the affected part of the coat . descriptions of roan coat colors are as follows : red roan or strawberry roan describes true or classic roan on a chestnut base coat . the mane and tail remain red or have only a few white hairs , while the body ranges from nearly chestnut to pinkish . geneticists prefer the term '' chestnut roan , '' but this term is not in common use . bay roan is true roan on a bay coat . the particular shade depends on the underlying shade of bay ; but the mane , tail , and lower legs are black , and the reddish body is intermingled with white hairs . the head is usually red . formerly , bay roans were lumped together with chestnut roans and both called '' red roans . '' blue roan is true roan on a black coat . the mane , tail , head , and legs remain black , while the body takes on a grayish or bluish appearance . blue roans are sometimes mistaken for grays or grullos . however , grays fade with age , while roans do not ; and grullos are blue duns and possess dun markings but not intermingled white hairs . any other coat color may also be affected by roaning . few combinations have the same unique terminology applied to the common roan colors , although palomino roans are sometimes called honey roans . image : varnishroan.jpg thumb left upright a varnish roan appaloosa , showing white sclera , mottled skin , and darker bony regions such as the cheekbones . roan mimics . a varnish roan is not a true roan ; it is actually one of the leopard complex coat patterns associated with appaloosa , knabstrupper , noriker horse and related breeds . rabicano is a white pattern that falls into the category of roaning or scattered white hairs , the genetics of which are not yet fully understood . sometimes called ticking , rabicano is common even in breeds that do not have true or classic roan , including arabians and thoroughbreds . this pattern usually takes the form of scattered white hairs around the junction of the stifle and flank , and peculiar rings of white hairs near the base of the tail . this trait is called a coon tail or skunk tail . some forms of sabino , which is a pinto pattern , have roaning along the edges of other white spots or markings a roan horse may not fit into any of the traditional categories as there is much still to be learned about the genetics of roan . the existence of other types of roaning conditions not covered by those mentioned here is possible and likely . . roan dogs . image : austrcattledogblue wb.jpg thumb australian cattle dog the genetics behind roan dogs are still unclear , and at present candidate genes have been ruled out . there remains a great deal of ambiguity in terminology regarding mottled dogs , which are called roan , ticked , mottled and belton depending on the context . the roan or ticked color is described in many breeds of gundogs such as english cocker spaniels , american cocker spaniels , english springer spaniels , field spaniels and brittanys , german longhaired pointers , german shorthaired pointers , bracco italiano , spinone italiano , lagotto romagnolo , english setters , small münsterländer as well as border collies and many other breeds . in dogs , roan manifests itself only in unpigmented areas , the presence and shape of which are determined by other genes . this is in stark contrast to true roan horses and roan cattle , which are roan only in pigmented regions of their coat and may have white markings . instead , dogs with roaning or ticking are born with clear , open white markings which begin to fill in with flecking in the subsequent weeks and continue to darken with age . most breed standards use the terms '' ticked '' and '' roan '' interchangeably , with the former referring to clearly defined flecks on a white background and the latter to flecks so closely spaced that the mixture appears even . image : buddy working english cocker spaniel pup.jpg thumb blue roan english cocker spaniel puppy the terminology that relates the underlying coat color with the roan modifier is often breed-specific , but most standards call a black dog with roaning blue . in breeds that are characterized by roaning and ticking such as the large munsterlander , clear white-marked individuals may be called plated . the term belton is reserved for english setters . in 1957 , little suggested that roan and ticking were controlled separately , and postulated that roan may have been homologous to '' silvered '' coat in mice . this condition in mice is actually homologous to merle , which might be described by some as '' roan . '' in 2007 , the gene responsible for roan cattle ( kitlg ) was refuted as a possible cause of roan in dogs . neither roan nor ticking , if they are independently caused , appear to be recessive . . roan cattle . image : light roan shorthorn heifer dscn1872b.jpg thumb left red roan shorthorn cow breeds of cattle known for roans are the belgian blue and shorthorn . among the former , coat color may be solid black , solid white , or blue roan ; the latter may be solid red , solid white , or red roan . belgian blues also typically exhibit spotting patterns , which are genetically separate from roan . as a result , most roan cows exhibit blotches of clearly colored and clearly white hair , with roan patches . some '' cryptic '' roan cattle appear solid , but upon close inspection reveal a small roan patch . roan cattle can not '' breed true '' but breeding white cattle to a solid mate will always yield a roan calf . the white color typical of charolais and white park breeds is not related to roan . seitz , schmutz , thue '' buchanan : '' although both charolais and white park could be classified as white phenotypically , all typed r/r homozygous colored ) at the mgf locus . alternative loci must be responsible for these forms of white , as has been suggested previously ( olson and william 1982 ) . '' roan in shorthorns and belgian blues is controlled by the mast cell growth factor ( mgf ) gene , also called the steel locus , on bovine chromosome 5 . part of the kit ligand , this region is involved in many cellular differentiation . mast cell growth factor promotes melanin production by melanocyte , and without it , skin and hair cells lack pigment . with two functional mgf genes ( homozygous dominant ) , cattle are fully pigmented ; without any functional mgf genes ( homozygous recessive ) , they are white . mgf-controlled roan occurs when cattle possess one functional and one non-functional mgf gene ( heterozygous ) , resulting in a roughly even mixture of white regions and colored regions . the reproductive condition '' white heifer disease , '' associated with the mgf gene , is characterized by homozygous mgf-white heifers with incomplete reproductive tracts . . roan guinea pigs . the roan coloration of guinea pigs is linked to microphthalmia . the allele that controls roaning in guinea pigs is incompletely dominant : an animal with one copy of the allele will have varying amounts of white hair scattered through its coat , particularly on the back and sides . about 25 % of guinea pigs born to two roans are completely white , having two copies of the '' roan '' allele , and may have a constellation of deformities associated with '' lethal white syndrome '' , although this condition has no relation to overo lethal white syndrome in horses or double merle syndrome in dogs . lethal white guinea pigs ( '' lethals '' ) often die shortly after birth or at weaning age , but with hand-feeding and regular dental care , lethals may live 2 to 3 years . some lethals have reportedly lived to 6 or 7 years . it is worth noting that , unlike anophthalmia hamsters , guinea pigs with the condition are not sterile , but females may be unable to deliver live young . lethal white syndrome symptoms include : partial or complete blindness partial or complete deafness microphthalmia or anophthalmia unpigmented eyes missing or deformed incisors deformed molars elongated tooth roots malabsorption in the small intestine , due in some cases to lack of intestinal villi increased susceptibility to illness roan coloration is not to be confused with the '' magpie '' coloration of guinea pigs , which is a brindle color lacking red pigment due to the '' chinchilla '' allele , an allele also responsible for self white and silver agouti coloration . see also . equine coat color equine coat color genetics . references . external links . photos of roan english cockers