Battle of Aegospotami

prelude . lysander 's campaigns . in 405 bc , following the severe spartan defeat at the battle of arginusae , lysander , the commander who had been responsible for the first spartan naval successes , was reinstated in command . xenophon , hellenica 2.1.6-7 since the spartan constitution prohibited any commander from holding the office of navarch more than once , he was appointed as a vice-admiral instead , with the clear understanding that this was a mere legal fiction . kagan , the peloponnesian war , 469 one of lysander 's advantages as a commander was his close relationship with the persian prince cyrus . using this connection , he quickly raised the money to begin rebuilding the spartan fleet . xenophon , hellenica 2.1.11-12 when cyrus was recalled to susa by his father darius , he gave lysander the revenues from all of his cities of asia minor . '' he then assigned to lysander all the tribute which came in from his cities and belonged to him personally , and gave him also the balance he had on hand ; and , after reminding lysander how good a friend he was both to the lacedaemonian state and to him personally , he set out on the journey to his father . '' in xenophon , hellenica 2.1.14 with the resources of this entire wealthy persian province at his disposal , lysander was able to quickly reconstitute his fleet . he then set off on a series of campaigns throughout the aegean . xenophon , hellenica 2.1.15-19 he seized several athenian-held cities , and attacked numerous islands . he was unable to move north to the hellespont , however , because of the threat from the athenian fleet at samos . to divert the athenians , lysander struck westward . approaching quite near to athens itself , he attacked aegina and salamis , and even landed in attica . the athenian fleet set out in pursuit , but lysander sailed around them , reached the hellespont , and established a base at abydos . from there , he seized the strategically important town of lampsacus . from here , the way was open to enter the bosporus and close down the trade routes from which athens received the majority of her grain . if the athenians were to avoid starvation , lysander had to be contained immediately . athenian response . the athenian fleet of 180 ships caught up with lysander shortly after he had taken lampsacus , and established a base at sestos . however , perhaps because of the need to keep a close watch on lysander , they set up camp on a beach much nearer to lampsacus . the location was less than ideal because of the lack of a harbor and the difficulty of supplying the fleet , but proximity seems to have been the primary concern in the minds of the athenian generals . kagan , the peloponnesian war , 473 every day , the fleet sailed out to lampsacus in battle formation , and waited outside the harbor ; when lysander refused to emerge , they returned home . xenophon , hellenica 2.1.23 . alcibiades 's involvement . at this time , the exiled athenian leader alcibiades was living in his ship 's castle near the athenian camp . coming down to the beach where the ships were gathered , he made several suggestions to the generals . first , he proposed relocating the fleet to the more secure base at sestos . second , he claimed that several thrace kings had offered to provide him with an army . if the generals would offer him a share of the command , he claimed , he would use this army to assist the athenians . the generals , however , declined this offer and rejected his advice . spurned , alcibiades returned to his home . xenophon , hellenica 2.1.25-26 . the battle . two accounts of the battle of aegospotami exist . diodorus siculus relates that the athenian general in command on the fifth day at sestos , philocles , sailed out with thirty ships , ordering the rest to follow him . diodorus siculus , library 13.106.1 donald kagan has argued that the athenian strategy , if this account is accurate , must have been to draw the peloponnesians into an attack on the small force so that the larger force following could surprise them . donald kagan , the peloponnesian war in the event , the small force was immediately defeated , and the remainder of the fleet was caught unprepared on the beach . xenophon , in contrast , relates that the entire athenian fleet came out as usual on the day of the battle , and lysander remained in the harbor . when the athenians returned to their camp , the sailors scattered to forage for food ; lysander 's fleet then sailed across from abydos and captured most of the ships on the beach , with no sea fighting at all . xenophon , hellenica 2.2.1 whichever account of the battle itself is accurate , the result is clear . the athenian fleet was obliterated ; only nine ships escaped , led by the general conon . lysander captured nearly all of the remainder , along with some three or four thousand athenian sailors . one of the escaped ships , the messenger ship paralus , was dispatched to inform athens of the disaster . the rest , with conon , sought refuge with evagoras , a friendly ruler in cyprus . some historians , ancient and modern , suspect that the battle was lost as the result of treachery , perhaps on the part of adeimantus , who was the only athenian commander the spartans captured during the battle who was not put to death , and perhaps with the treasonous connivance of the oligarchical faction at athens , who may have wanted their city defeated in order to overthrow the democracy . but this all remains speculative . . aftermath . lysander and his victorious fleet sailed back to lampsacus . citing a previous athenian atrocity when the captured sailors of two ships were thrown overboard , pomeroy et al , p318 lysander and his allies slaughtered philocles and 3,000 athenian prisoners , sparing other greek captives . pomeroy et al , p327 lysander 's fleet then began moving slowly towards athens , capturing cities along the way . the athenians , with no fleet , were powerless to oppose him . only at samos did lysander meet resistance ; the democratic government there , fiercely loyal to athens , refused to give in , and lysander left a besieging force behind him . xenophon reports that when the news of the defeat reached athens , fearing the retribution that the victorious spartans might take on them , the athenians resolved to hold out from the siege , but their cause was hopeless . without a fleet to import grain from the black sea , and with the spartan occupation of decelea cutting off land transportation , the athenians were beginning to starve , and with people dying of hunger in the streets , the city surrendered in march 404 bc . the walls of the city were demolished , and a pro-spartan oligarchic government was established ( the so-called thirty tyrants ' regime ) . the spartan victory at aegospotami marked the end of 27 years of war , placing sparta in a position of spartan hegemony throughout the greek world and establishing a political order that would last for more than thirty years . commemoration of the battle . the spartans commemorated their victory with a dedication at delphi of statues of the trierarchs who had fought in the battle . a verse inscription explained the circumstances : : these men , sailing with lysander in the swift ships , humbled the might of the city of cecrops : and made lacedaemon of the beautiful choruses the high city of hellas . tod , greek inscriptions , page number to follow . notes . references . diodorus siculus , library donald kagan . the peloponnesian war ( penguin books , 2003 ) . eggenberger , david . an encyclopedia of battles . new york : dover publications , 1985 . pomeroy , sarah b . , burstein , stanley m . , donlan , walter & roberts , jennifer t . ancient greece : a political , social , and cultural history . ny : oxford university press , 1999 . external links . livius.org : the battle of aigospotamoi