1946 in literature

events . january – the penguin classics imprint is launched in the u.k . under the editorship of e . v . rieu , whose translation of the odyssey is the first of the books published , and will be the country 's best-selling book over the next decade . january 5 – the estonian writer jaan kross is arrested and imprisoned by the occupying soviet authorities . february – the poet ezra pound , brought back to the united states on treason charges , is found unfit to face trial due to insanity and sent to st . elizabeths hospital , washington , d.c . , where he remains for 12 years . may 20 – the english poet w . h . auden becomes a united states citizen . may 22 – george orwell leaves london to spend much of the next 18 months on the scottish island of jura , working on his novel nineteen eighty-four ( known at an earlier stage of composition as the last man in europe ) . this year his animal farm becomes book of the year in the united states . august 18 – the assamese poet amulya barua is killed aged 24 in communal violence while studying at the university of calcutta . his only collection of poems , achina ( the stranger ) , is published posthumously . october 1 – the english première of j . b . priestley 's drama an inspector calls ( set in 1912 ) shows at the new theatre , london . it stars ralph richardson . october 9 – the broadway première of eugene o'neill 's drama the iceman cometh , set in 1912 , is held at the martin beck theatre , new york city . october 10 – die chinesische mauer by swiss writer max frisch , receives its stage première . november 7 – walker percy , a u.s . writer of philosophical novels , marries mary bernice townsend . november 8 – the english novelist and diarist christopher isherwood becomes a u.s . citizen . december 18 brendan behan is released from internment in the republic of ireland under an amnesty . damon runyon 's ashes are scattered over new york city from an airplane piloted by eddie rickenbacker . december 23 – giovannino guareschi publishes the first story about the priest don camillo in his magazine candido . december 26 – david lean 's film of great expectations is released in england . unknown dates the publisher august aimé balkema produces his first book in south africa , vyjtig gedigte by the poet c . louis leipoldt . the american writer and theologian frederick buechner resumes his b.a . degree course at princeton university after war service . new books . fiction . jorge amado – seara vermelha francis ambrière – the long holiday ( les grandes vacances ) miguel ángel asturias – el señor presidente rené barjavel – the tragic innocents simone de beauvoir – all men are mortal ( tous les hommes sont mortels ) algernon blackwood – the doll and one other jorge luis borges – deutsches requiem tadeusz borowski – this way for the gas , ladies and gentlemen ( or ladies and gentlemen , to the gas chamber , originally pożegnanie z marią ( farewell to maria ) , short stories ) ivan bunin – dark avenues ( « тёмные аллеи » , tyomnyye allei , short stories , complete edition ) john dickson carr he who whispers my late wives ( as by carter dickson ) adolfo bioy casares and silvina ocampo – los que aman , odian ( those who love , hate ) agatha christie – the hollow a . e . coppard – fearful pleasures edmund crispin – the moving toyshop kenneth fearing – the big clock adonias filho – os servos da morte errol flynn – showdown c . s . forester - lord hornblower pat frank – mr . adam carlo emilio gadda – that awful mess on via merulana ( quer pasticciaccio brutto de via merulana , serial publication ) stella gibbons – westwood william lindsay gresham – nightmare alley ruth guimarães – água funda ( deep water , in paraíba valley dialect of brazilian portuguese ) joão guimarães rosa – sagarana thomas heggen – mister roberts raymond j . healy and j . francis mccomas , editors – adventures in time and space george wylie henderson – jule william hope hodgson – the house on the borderland and other novels robert e . howard – skull-face and others christopher isherwood – the berlin stories cläre jung – aus der tiefe rufe ich nikos kazantzakis – zorba the greek ( βίος και πολιτεία του αλέξη ζορμπά , life and times of alexis zorbas ) arthur koestler – thieves in the night philip larkin – jill violette leduc – l'asphyxie ( translated as in the prison of her skin ) lois lenski – strawberry girl frank belknap long – the hounds of tindalos w . somerset maugham – then and now carson mccullers – member of the wedding oscar micheaux – the story of dorothy stanfield mervyn peake – titus groan ( first of the gormenghast series ) ann petry – the street isaac rosenfeld – passage from home anya seton – the turquoise margit söderholm – all the world 's delights rex stout – the silent speaker tugelbay sydykbekov – bizdin zamandyn kišileri ( people of our time ) phoebe atwood taylor the asey mayo trio punch with care gore vidal – williwaw a . e . van vogt – slan boris vian i spit on your graves ( j'irai cracher sur vos tombes , as vernon sullivan ) vercoquin and the plankton ( vercoquin et le plancton ) h . russell wakefield – the clock strikes twelve mervyn wall – the unfortunate fursey robert penn warren – all the king 's men eudora welty – delta wedding henry s . whitehead – west india lights kiichirō yamate – momotarō-zamurai ( 桃太郎侍 ) ivan yefremov – the land of foam ( « на краю ойкумены » , , at the edge of infinity ) seishi yokomizo – the honjin murders ( 本陣殺人事件 , honjin satsujin jiken ) . children and young people . w . v . awdry – thomas the tank engine ( first in the railway series of 26 books by him and his son ) carolyn sherwin bailey – miss hickory nancy barnes – wonderful year enid blyton – first term at malory towers ( first in the malory towers series of 6 books ) godfried bomans de avonturen van pa pinkelman ( the adventures of pa pinkelman ) sprookjes ( the wily wizard and the wicked witch and other weird stories ) jan brzechwa – academy of mr . kleks ( akademia pana kleksa , 1946 ) gertrude crampton – scuffy the tugboat ernest elmore – snuffly snorty dog william glynne-jones – brecon adventure elizabeth goudge – the little white horse graham greene – the little train racey helps – footprints in the snow tove jansson – comet in moominland ( kometjakten / mumintrollet på kometjakt / kometen kommer ) madeleine l'engle – ilsa astrid lindgren – pippi goes on board sheila stuart – alison 's highland holiday ( first in the alison series of 15 books ) charles tazewell – the littlest angel ivy wallace – pookie ( first in the pookie series of ten books ) t . h . white – mistress masham 's repose . drama . arthur adamov – l'aveu ( the confession ) clifford bax – golden eagle s . n . behrman – jane ugo betti – delitto all'isola delle capre ( crime on goat island ) jean cocteau – l'aigle à deux têtes constance cox – vanity fair eduardo de filippo filumena marturano questi fantasmi ( all these ghosts ) christopher fry – a phoenix too frequent ( verse ) kenneth horne – fools rush in frederick lonsdale – but for the grace of god ewan maccoll – uranium 235 donagh macdonagh – happy as larry robert mcleish – the gorbals story louis macneice – the dark tower ( radio play ) ronald millar – frieda henry de montherlant – malatesta eugene o'neill – the iceman cometh j.b . priestley – ever since paradise terence rattigan – the winslow boy nelson rodrigues – álbum de família carl zuckmayer – des teufels general ( the devil 's general ) . poetry . elizabeth bishop – north & south josef čapek – básně z koncentračního tabora ( poems from a concentration camp ; published posthumously ) william carlos williams – paterson , book one . non-fiction . erich auerbach – mimesis : the representation of reality in western literature ( mimesis : dargestellte wirklichkeit in der abendländischen literatur ) marc bloch ( died 1944 ) – strange defeat ( strange defeat : a statement of evidence written in 1940 ) cleanth brooks – the well wrought urn : studies in the structure of poetry r . g . collingwood ( died 1943 ) – the idea of history ( collected lectures ) john stewart collis – while following the plough viktor frankl – : de : … trotzdem ja zum leben sagen ( . nevertheless say 'yes ' to life : a psychologist experiences the concentration camp , translated as man 's search for meaning ) jean genet – miracle de la rose jens müller – tre kom tilbake ( three came back ) george orwell – critical essays jean-paul sartre – existentialism and humanism ( l'existentialisme est un humanisme ) benjamin spock – the common sense book of baby and child care władysław szpilman ( as told to jerzy waldorff ) – śmierć miasta ( '' death of a city '' , later translated as the pianist ) paramahansa yogananda – autobiography of a yogi . births . january 4 – lisa appignanesi , polish-born author and academic january 21 – gretel ehrlich , american travel writer , poet and essayist february 7 – brian patten , english poet february 25 – franz xaver kroetz , german dramatist march 1 – jim crace , english author march 5 – mem fox ( merrion frances partridge ) , australian children 's writer april 2 – sue townsend , english comic novelist and playwright ( died 2014 ) april 29 – humphrey carpenter , english biographer , children 's fiction writer and radio broadcaster ( died 2005 ) may 8 – ruth padel , english poet and author may 11 – valerie grove , english journalist and author may 12 – l . neil smith , american author and activist june 28 – john birtwhistle , english poet and librettist july 22 – ryoki inoue , born josé carlos ryoki de alpoim inoue , prolific brazilian novelist july 26 – joel mokyr , israeli economic historian july 28 – fahmida riaz , pakistani writer august 1 – paul torday , english novelist ( died 2013 ) august 2 – james howe , american journalist and author of juvenile fiction august 29 – leona gom , canadian poet and novelist september 12 – neil lyndon , english journalist and author of no more sex war : the failures of feminism september 26 – andrea dworkin , american writer and activist ( died 2005 ) october 1 – tim o'brien , american novelist october 4 - susan sarandon american actress october 19 - philip pullman , english author october 20 – elfriede jelinek , austrian novelist and nobel laureate october 28 – sharon thesen , canadian poet november 7 – diane francis , canadian journalist and author november 18 – alan dean foster , american science fiction author december 2 – ibrahim abdel meguid , egyptian novelist december 4 – maria antònia oliver cabrer , majorca-born spanish catalan fiction writer december 11 – ellen meloy , american nature writer ( died 2004 ) uncertain date sarah harrison , english novelist and children 's writer . deaths . january 6 – dion fortune , british occultist , christian qabalist , ceremonial magician and novelist ( born 1890 ) february 11 – john langalibalele dube , south african zulu writer ( born 1871 ) march 1 – adriana porter , canadian wiccan poet ( born 1857 ) march 19 – catherine carswell , scottish novelist and biographer ( born 1879 ) march 20 – henry handel richardson ( ethel florence lindesay richardson ) , australian novelist ( born 1870 ) april 1 – edward sheldon , american dramatist ( born 1886 ) april 11 – dem . theodorescu , romanian novelist and journalist ( born 1888 ) may 19 – booth tarkington , american novelist and dramatist ( born 1869 ) may 20 – jane findlater , scottish novelist ( born 1866 ) may 25 – ernest rhys , english writer and book series editor of welsh extraction ( born 1859 ) june 6 – gerhart hauptmann , german dramatist , novelist and poet , winner of the nobel prize in literature ( born 1862 ) july 8 – orrick glenday johns , american poet and playwright ( born 1887 ) july 22 – edward sperling , russian-born american humorist ( killed by bomb , born 1889 ) july 27 – gertrude stein , american novelist , poet and dramatist ( born 1874 ) july 30 – nikolai alexandrovich morozov , russian poet and revolutionary ( born 1854 ) august 13 – h . g . wells , english novelist ( born 1866 ) august 18 – marion angus , scottish poet in braid scots and english ( born 1865 ) august 31 – harley granville-barker , english actor , dramatist and critic ( born 1877 ) september 9 – violet jacob , scottish historical novelist and poet ( born 1863 ) september 26 – william strunk , jr . , american professor of english ( born 1869 ) november 14 – may sinclair , english novelist ( born 1863 ) december 10 – damon runyon , american short-story writer ( born 1880 ) december 17 – constance garnett , english translator of russian literature ( born 1861 ) december 23 – ellen marriage , english translator of balzac ( born 1865 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : elizabeth goudge , the little white horse james tait black memorial prize for fiction : oliver onions , poor man 's tapestry james tait black memorial prize for biography : richard aldington , wellington newbery medal for children 's literature : lois lenski , strawberry girl nobel prize for literature : hermann hesse premio nadal : josé maría gironella , un hombre prix goncourt : jean-jacques gautier , histoire d'un fait divers pulitzer prize for drama : russel crouse , howard lindsay , state of the union pulitzer prize for poetry : no award given pulitzer prize for the novel : no award given . references .