Life (magazine)

success . luce selected edward kramer thompson , a stringer for time , as assistant picture editor in 1937 . from 1949 to 1961 he was the managing editor , and served as editor-in-chief for nearly a decade , until his retirement in 1970 . his influence was significant during the magazine 's heyday , which was roughly from 1936 until the mid-1960s . thompson was known for the free rein he gave his editors , particularly a '' trio of formidable and colorful women : sally kirkland , fashion editor ; mary letherbee , movie editor ; and mary hamman , modern living editor . '' dora jane hamblin , that was the 'life ' , new york : w.w . norton & company , 1977 , p . 161 . when the u.s . entered the war in 1941 , so did life . by 1944 , of the 40 time and life war correspondents , seven were women : americans mary welsh hemingway , margaret bourke-white , lael tucker , peggy durdin , shelley smith mydans , annalee jacoby , and jacqueline saix , an englishwoman . ( saix 's name is often omitted from the list , but she and welsh are the only women listed as part of the magazine 's team in a timess publisher 's letter , dated may 8 , 1944 . ) life backed the war effort each week . in july 1942 , life launched its first art contest for soldiers and drew more than 1,500 entries , submitted by all ranks . judges sorted out the best and awarded 1,000 in prizes . life picked 16 for reproduction in the magazine . the national gallery in washington , d.c . agreed to put 117 entries on exhibition that summer . life , in its patriotism , also supported the military 's efforts to use artists to document the war . when congress forbade the armed forces from using government money to fund artists in the field , life privatized the programs , hiring many of the artists being let go by the department of defense ( dod ) . on december 7 , 1960 , life managers later donated many of the works by such artists to the department of defense and its art programs , such as the united states army art program . each week during world war ii , the magazine brought the war home to americans ; it had photographers in all theaters of war , from the pacific to europe . the magazine was imitated in enemy propaganda using contrasting images of life and death . in august 1942 , writing about labor and racial unrest in detroit , life warned that '' the morale situation is perhaps the worst in the u.s . it is time for the rest of the country to sit up and take notice . for detroit can either blow up hitler or it can blow up the u.s . '' mayor edward jeffries was outraged : '' i 'll match detroit 's patriotism against any other city 's in the country . the whole story in life is scurrilous . i 'd just call it a yellow magazine and let it go at that . '' mansfield ( ohio ) news journal , august 17 , 1942 . the article was considered so dangerous to the war effort that it was censored from copies of the magazine sold outside north america . the magazine hired robert capa , the distinguished war photographer . a veteran of collier 's magazine , capa accompanied the first wave of the d-day invasion in normandy , france , on june 6 , 1944 , and returned with only a handful of images , many of them out of focus . the magazine wrote in the captions that the photos were fuzzy because capa 's hands were shaking . he denied it , claiming that the darkroom had ruined his negatives . later he poked fun at life by titling his war memoir slightly out of focus ( 1947 ) . in 1954 , capa was killed after stepping on a landmine , while working for the magazine covering the first indochina war . life photographer bob landry also went in with the first wave at d-day , '' but all of landry 's film was lost , and his shoes to boot . '' the great life photographers , thames and hudson , paperback ed . 2009 , , p . 294 in a notable mistake , in its final edition just before the 1948 u.s . presidential election the magazine printed a large photo showing u.s . presidential candidate thomas e . dewey and his staff riding across san francisco , california harbor entitled '' our next president rides by ferryboat over san francisco bay '' . incumbent president harry s . truman won the election . abels , jules , out of the jaws of victory , new york : henry holt and company ( 1959 ) , p . 261 . on may 10 , 1950 , the council of ministers in cairo banned life from egypt forever . all issues on sale were confiscated . no reason was given , but egyptian officials expressed indignation over the april 10 , 1950 , story about king farouk of egypt , entitled the '' problem king of egypt '' . the government considered it insulting to the country . life in the 1950s earned a measure of respect by commissioning work from top authors . after lifes publication in 1952 of ernest hemingway 's the old man and the sea , the magazine contracted with the author for a 4,000-word piece on bullfighting . hemingway sent the editors a 10,000-word article , following his last visit to spain in 1959 to cover a series of contests between two top matadors . the article was republished in 1985 as the novella , the dangerous summer . michael palin , '' michael palin 's hemingway adventure '' , pbs , 1999 . in february 1953 , just a few weeks after leaving office , president harry s . truman announced that life magazine would handle all rights to his memoirs . truman said it was his belief that by 1954 he would be able to speak more fully on subjects pertaining to the role his administration played in world affairs . truman observed that life editors had presented other memoirs with great dignity ; he added that life also made the best offer . for his 1955 museum of modern art travelling exhibition the family of man , which was to be seen by 9 million visitors worldwide , curator edward steichen relied heavily on photographs from life ; 111 of the 503 pictures shown , constituting more than 20 % as counted by abigail solomon-godeau . his assistant wayne miller entered the magazine 's archive in late 1953 and spent an estimated nine months there . he searched through 3.5 million images , most in the form of original negatives ( only in the last years of the war did the picture department start to print contact sheets of all assignments ) and submitted to steichen for selection many that had not been published in the magazine . in november 1954 , the actress dorothy dandridge was the first african-american woman to be featured on the cover of the magazine . in 1957 , r . gordon wasson , a vice president at j . p . morgan , published an article in life extolling the virtues of magic mushrooms . this prompted albert hofmann to isolate psilocybin in 1958 for distribution by sandoz alongside lsd in the u.s . , further raising interest in lsd in the mass media . following wasson 's report , timothy leary visited mexico to try out the mushrooms , which were used in traditional religious rituals . life 's motto became '' to see life ; to see the world . '' in the post-war years , it published some of the most memorable images of events in the united states and the world . it also produced many popular science serials , such as the world we live in and the epic of man in the early 1950s . the magazine continued to showcase the work of notable illustrators , such as alton s . tobey , whose many contributions included the cover for a 1958 series of articles on the history of the russian revolution . however , as the 1950s drew to a close and tv became more popular , the magazine was losing readers . in may 1959 it announced plans to reduce its regular news-stand price from 25 cents a copy to 20 . with the increase in television sales and viewership , interest in news magazines was waning . life had to try to create a new form . 1960s and the end of an era . in the 1960s , the magazine was filled with color photos of movie stars , president john f . kennedy and his family , the war in vietnam , and the apollo program . typical of the magazine 's editorial focus was a long 1964 feature on actress elizabeth taylor and her relationship with actor richard burton . journalist richard meryman traveled with taylor to new york , california , and paris . life ran a 6,000-word first-person article on the screen star . '' i 'm not a 'sex queen ' or a 'sex symbol , ' '' taylor said . '' i do n't think i want to be one . sex symbol kind of suggests bathrooms in hotels or something . i do know i 'm a movie star and i like being a woman , and i think sex is absolutely gorgeous . but as far as a sex goddess , i do n't worry myself that way . richard is a very sexy man . he 's got that sort of jungle essence that one can sense . when we look at each other , it 's like our eyes have fingers and they grab ahold . i think i ended up being the scarlet woman because of my rather puritanical upbringing and beliefs . i could n't just have a romance . it had to be a marriage . '' '' our eyes have fingers '' , time , december 25 , 1964 . in the 1960s , the magazine featured photographs by gordon parks . '' the camera is my weapon against the things i dislike about the universe and how i show the beautiful things about the universe , '' parks recalled in 2000 . '' i did n't care about life magazine . i cared about the people , '' he said . rocky mountain news , november 29 , 2000 , page 1 . the june 1964 paul welch life article entitled '' homosexuality in america '' was the first time a national publication reported on gay issues . life 's photographer was referred to the gay leather bar in san francisco called the tool box for the article by hal call , who had long worked to dispel the myth that all homosexual men were effeminate . the article opened with a two-page spread of the mural of life size leathermen in the bar , which had been painted by chuck arnett in 1962 . the article described san francisco as '' the gay capital of america '' and inspired many gay leathermen to move there . on march 25 , 1966 , life featured the drug lsd as its cover story ; it had attracted attention among the counter culture and was not yet criminalized . in march 1967 , life won the 1967 national magazine award , chosen by the columbia university graduate school of journalism . the prestigious award was made for the magazine 's publication of stunning photos from the war in southeast asia , such as henri huet 's riveting series of a wounded medic that were published in january 1966 . increasingly , the photos that life published of the war in vietnam were searing images of death and loss . despite the industry 's accolades and its coverage of the u.s . mission to the moon in 1969 , the magazine continued to lose circulation . time inc . announced in january 1971 its decision to reduce circulation from 8.5 million to 7 million , in an effort to offset shrinking advertising revenues . the following year , life cut its circulation further , to 5.5 million beginning with the january 14 , 1972 issue . life was reportedly not losing money , but its costs were rising faster than its profits . life lost credibility with many readers when it supported author clifford irving , whose fraudulent autobiography of howard hughes was revealed as a hoax in january 1972 . the magazine had purchased serialization rights to irving 's manuscript . industry figures showed that some 96 % of life circulation went to mail subscribers , with only 4 % coming from the more profitable newsstand sales . gary valk was publisher when the magazine laid off hundreds of staff . the weekly life magazine published its last issue on december 29 , 1972 . from 1972 to 1978 , time inc . published ten life special reports on such themes as '' the spirit of israel '' , '' remarkable american women '' and '' the year in pictures '' . with a minimum of promotion , those issues sold between 500,000 and 1 million copies at cover prices of up to 2 . as a monthly ( 1978–2000 ) . beginning with an october 1978 issue , life was published as a monthly , with a new , modified logo . although it remained a familiar red rectangle with the white type , the new version was larger , the lettering was closer together and the box surrounding it was smaller . life continued for the next 22 years as a moderately successful general-interest , news features magazine . in 1986 , it decided to mark its 50th anniversary under the time inc . umbrella with a special issue showing every life cover starting from 1936 , which included the issues published during the six-year hiatus in the 1970s . the circulation in this era hovered around the 1.5 million-circulation mark . the cover price in 1986 was 2.50 . the publisher at the time was charles whittingham ; the editor was philip kunhardt . in 1991 life sent correspondents to the first gulf war and published special issues of coverage . four issues of this weekly , life in time of war , were published during the first gulf war . the magazine struggled financially and , in february 1993 , life announced the magazine would be printed on smaller pages starting with its july issue . this issue also featured the return of the original life logo . life reduced advertising prices by 34 % in a bid to make the monthly publication more appealing to advertisers . the magazine reduced its circulation guarantee for advertisers by 12 % in july 1993 to 1.5 million copies from the current 1.7 million . the publishers in this era were nora mcaniff and edward mccarrick , while daniel okrent was the editor . life for the first time was the same trim size as its longtime time inc . sister publication , fortune . the magazine returned to the national consciousness upon the death in august 1995 of alfred eisenstaedt , the life photographer whose photographs constitute some of the most enduring images of the 20th century . eisenstaedt 's photographs of the famous and infamous—adolf hitler and benito mussolini , marilyn monroe , ernest hemingway , the kennedys , sophia loren—won him worldwide renown and 86 life covers . though experiencing financial trouble , in 1999 the magazine still made news by compiling lists to round out the 20th century . life editors ranked their '' most important events of the millennium . '' this list has been criticized for being overly focused on western achievements . the chinese , for example , had invented type four centuries before johannes gutenberg , but with thousands of ideograms , found its use impractical . life also published a list of the '' 100 most important people of the millennium . '' this list , too , was criticized for focusing on the west . thomas edison 's number one ranking was challenged since critics believed other inventions , such as the internal combustion engine , the automobile , and electricity-making machines , for example , had greater effects on society than edison 's . the top 100 list was criticized for mixing world-famous names , such as isaac newton , albert einstein , louis pasteur , and leonardo da vinci , with figures largely unknown outside of the united states ( 18 americans compared to 13 italian and french , and 11 english ) . in march 2000 , time inc . announced it would cease regular publication of life with the may issue . '' it 's a sad day for us here , '' don logan , chairman and chief executive of time inc . , told cnnfn.com . '' it was still in the black , '' he said , noting that life was increasingly spending more to maintain its monthly circulation level of approximately 1.5 million . '' life was a general interest magazine and since its reincarnation , it had always struggled to find its identity , to find its position in the marketplace , '' logan said . the magazine 's last issue featured a human interest story . in 1936 , its first issue under henry luce featured a baby named george story , with the headline '' life begins '' ; over the years the magazine had published updates about the course of story 's life as he married , had children , and pursued a career as a journalist . after time announced its pending closure in march , george story happened to die of heart failure on april 4 , 2000 . the last issue of life was titled '' a life ends '' , featuring his story and how it had intertwined with the magazine over the years . for life subscribers , remaining subscriptions were honored with other time inc . magazines , such as time . in january 2001 , these subscribers received a special , life-sized format of '' the year in pictures '' edition of time magazine . it was a life issue disguised under a time logo on the front . ( newsstand copies of this edition were published under the life imprint . ) while citing poor advertising sales and a difficult climate for selling magazine subscriptions , time inc . executives said a key reason for closing the title in 2000 was to divert resources to the company 's other magazine launches that year , such as real simple . later that year , its parent company , time warner , struck a deal with the tribune company for times mirror magazines , which included golf , ski , skiing , field & stream , and yachting . aol and time warner announced a 184 billion merger , the largest corporate merger in history , which was finalized in january 2001 . in 2001 , time warner began publishing special newsstand '' megazine '' issues of life , on topics such as the september 11 attacks in 2001 and the holy land . these issues , which were printed on thicker paper , were more like softcover books than magazines . supplement ( 2004–2007 ) . beginning in october 2004 , life was revived for a second time . it resumed weekly publication as a free supplement to u.s . newspapers , competing for the first time with the two industry heavyweights , parade and usa weekend . at its launch , it was distributed with more than 60 newspapers with a combined circulation of approximately 12 million . among the newspapers to carry life were the washington post , new york daily news , los angeles times , chicago tribune , denver post , and st . louis post-dispatch . time inc . made deals with several major newspaper publishers to carry the life supplement , including knight ridder and the mcclatchy company . the launch of life as a weekly newspaper supplement was conceived by andrew blau , who served as the president of life . bill shapiro was the founding editor of the weekly supplement . this version of life retained its trademark logo but sported a new cover motto , '' america 's weekend magazine . '' it measured 9½ x 11½ inches and was printed on glossy paper in full-color . on september 15 , 2006 , life was 19 pages of editorial content . the editorial content contained one full-page photo , of actress julia louis-dreyfus , and one three-page , seven-photo essay , of kaiju big battel . on march 24 , 2007 , time inc . announced that it would fold the magazine as of april 20 , 2007 , although it would keep the web site . . special issues . special editions of life are published on notable occasions , such as a bob dylan edition on the occasion of his winning the nobel prize in literature , in 2016 , paul at 75 , in 2017 , and '' life '' explores : the roaring '20s in 2020 . '' life '' explores : the roaring '20s : the decade that changed america ( 2020 ) , new york : meredith . life is now published by the meredith corporation . partnership with google . on november 18 , 2008 , google began hosting an archive of the magazine 's photographs , as part of a joint effort with life . many images in this archive had never been published in the magazine . the archive of over 6 million photographs from life is also available through google cultural institute , allowing for users to create collections , and is accessible through google image search . the full archive of the issues of the main run ( 1936–1972 ) is available through google book search . . online presence . lifes online presence began in the 1990s as part of the pathfinder.com network . the standalone life.com site was launched march 31 , 2009 and closed january 30 , 2012 . life.com was developed by andrew blau and bill shapiro , the same team who launched the weekly newspaper supplement . while the archive of life , known as the life picture collection , was substantial , they searched for a partner who could provide significant contemporary photography . they approached getty images , the world 's largest licensor of photography . the site , a joint venture between getty images and life magazine , offered millions of photographs from their combined collections . on the 50th anniversary of the night marilyn monroe sang '' happy birthday '' to john f . kennedy , life.com presented bill ray 's iconic portrait of the actress , along with other rare photos . 2013 movie release the film , the secret life of walter mitty ( 2013 ) , starring ben stiller and kristen wiig , portrays life as it transitioned from printed material toward having only an online presence . life.com later became a redirect to a small photo channel on time.com . life.com also maintains tumblr and twitter accounts and a presence on instagram . today . life is currently owned by meredith , who acquired time inc . contributors . notable contributors since 1936 have included : john kendrick bangs ( editor , writer ) dominic behan ( writer ) photojournalists : harry benson berry berenson walter bosshard margaret bourke-white brian brake larry burrows david burnett david douglas duncan robert capa henri cartier-bresson loomis dean john dominis alfred eisenstaedt eliot elisofon bill eppridge andreas feininger ron galella alfred gescheidt bob gomel allan grant dirck halstead marie hansen bernard hoffman henri huet isaac kitrosser peter b . martin hansel mieth lee miller gjon mili ralph morse carl mydans gordon parks john phillips bill ray co rentmeester paul schutzer art shay george silk george strock w . eugene smith peter stackpole pete souza edward k . thompson ( m . editor 1949–61 ; editor 1961–70 ) john vachon jeff vespa ( and editor ) leigh wiener tony zappone ( europe edition ) john g . zimmerman lalaine madrigal film critics : brad darrach wheeler winston dixon fashion : howell conant ( fashion photographer ) sally kirkland ( editor/fashion ) clay felker ( sportswriter , founder of new york magazine ) photographers : john florea henry grossman philippe halsman dorothea lange nina leen mark shaw andré weinfeld ( portrait ) edward steichen ( portrait ) illustrators : charles dana gibson lejaren hiller , sr . mary hamman ( modern living editor ) jane howard ( journalist correspondent ) will lang jr . ( bureau chief ) henry luce ( publisher , editor-in-chief ) richard edes harrison ( cartographer ) gerald moore ( reporter ) writers : normand poirier ronald b . scott thomas thompson ( and editor ) david snell ( journalist/writer/cartoonist ) . see also . list of defunct american periodicals . references . further reading . bissonette , devan l . '' between silence and self-interest : time , life , and the unsilent generation 's coming-of-age . '' journalism history 35.2 ( 2009 ) : 62 . centanni , rebecca . '' advertising in life magazine and the encouragement of suburban ideals . '' advertising & society review 12.3 ( 2011 ) . doss , erika , ed . looking at life magazine ( 2001 ) essays by experts grady , john . '' advertising images as social indicators : depictions of blacks in life magazine , 1936–2000 . '' visual studies 22.3 ( 2007 ) : 211-239 . online keller , emily . margaret bourke-white : a photographer 's life ( twenty-first century books , 1996 ) . lester , paul , and ron smith . '' african-american photo coverage in life , newsweek and time , 1937–1988 . '' journalism & mass communication quarterly 67.1 ( 1990 ) : 128-136 . online moore , gerald . life story : the education of an american journalist ( 2016 ) . excerpt autobiography of gerald moore vials , chris . '' the popular front in the american century : life magazine , margaret bourke-white , and consumer realism , 1936–1941 . '' american periodicals : a journal of history & criticism 16.1 ( 2006 ) : 74-102 . wainwright , loudon . the great american magazine : an inside history of life ( random house inc , 1986 ) . webb , sheila m . '' creating life '' journalism & communication monographs ( 2016 ) , 18 2 pp 55–108 . evolution of photojournalism , centered on the magazine webb , sheila . '' art commentary for the middlebrow : promoting modernism & modern art through popular culture—how life magazine brought 'the new ' into middle-class homes . '' american journalism 27.3 ( 2010 ) : 115-150 . webb , sheila . '' a pictorial myth in the pages of '' life '' : small-town america as the ideal place . '' studies in popular culture 28.3 ( 2006 ) : 35-58 . external links . life.com official site life archives ( 1883–1936 ) at hathitrust digital library full life magazine issues from 1936 thru 1972 at google books le magazine life , la chronique de l'amérique life covers at coverbrowser magazine data file : life ( 1883 ) online archive , life covers , the humor magazine ( 1883–1936 )