Darter

description . anhingidae are large birds with sexual dimorphism plumage . they measure about in length , with a wingspan around , and weigh some . the males have black and dark-brown plumage , a short erectile crest on the nape and a larger bill than the female . the females have much paler plumage , especially on the neck and underparts , and are a bit larger overall . both have grey stippling on long scapulars and upper wing coverts . the sharply pointed beak has serrated edges , a desmognathous palate and no external nostrils . the darters have completely webbed feet , and their legs are short and set far back on the body . brodkorb & mourer-chauviré ( 1982 ) , myers et al . 2009 there is no eclipse plumage , but the bare parts vary in color around the year . during breeding , however , their small gular sac changes from pink or yellow to black , and the bare facial skin , otherwise yellow or yellow-green , turns turquoise . the iris changes in color between yellow , red or brown seasonally . the young hatch naked , but soon grow white or tan down . myers et al . 2009 darter vocalizations include a clicking or rattling when flying or perching . in the nesting colonies , adults communicate with croaks , grunts or rattles . during breeding , adults sometimes give a caw or sighing or hissing calls . nestlings communicate with squealing or squawking calls . . distribution and ecology . darters are mostly tropical in distribution , ranging into subtropical and barely into warm temperate regions . they typically inhabit fresh water lakes , rivers , marshes , swamps , and are less often found along the seashore in brackish estuaries , bays , lagoons and mangrove . most are sedentary and do not migrate ; the populations in the coolest parts of the range may migrate however . their preferred mode of flight is soaring and gliding ; in flapping flight they are rather cumbersome . on dry land , darters walk with a high-stepped gait , wings often spread for balance , just like pelicans do . they tend to gather in flocks – sometimes up to about 100 birds – and frequently associate with storks , herons or ibises , but are highly territorial on the nest : despite being a colonial nester , breeding pairs – especially males – will stab at any other bird that ventures within reach of their long neck and bill . the oriental darter ( a . melanogaster sensu stricto ) is a near threatened species . habitat destruction along with other human interferences ( such as egg collection and pesticide overuse ) are the main reasons for declining darter populations . . diet . darters feed mainly on mid-sized fish ; e.g . centrarchidae ( sunfishes ) , cichlidae ( cichlids ) , cyprinidae ( carps , minnows and relatives ) , cyprinodontidae ( pupfishes ) , mugilidae ( mullets ) , plotosidae ( eeltail catfishes ) and poeciliidae ( livebearers ) : myers et al . 2009 far more rarely , they eat other aquatic vertebrates e.g . anura ( frogs and toads ) , caudata ( newts and salamanders ) , snakes , turtles and even baby crocodilians : myers et al . 2009 and large invertebrates e.g . crustacea ( crabs , crayfish and shrimps ) , insects , leeches and mollusks : myers et al . 2009 of comparable size . these birds are foot-propelled divers which quietly stalk and ambush their prey ; then they use their sharply pointed beak to impale the food animal . they do not dive deep but make use of their low buoyancy made possible by wettable plumage , small air sacs and denser bones . on the underside of the cervical vertebrae 5–7 is a keel , which allows for muscles to attach to form a hinge-like mechanism that can project the neck , head and bill forward like a throwing spear . after they have stabbed the prey , they return to the surface where they toss their food into the air and catch it again , so that they can swallow it head-first . like cormorants , they have a vestigial preen gland and their plumage gets wet during diving . to dry their feathers after diving , darters move to a safe location and spread their wings . darters go through a synchronous moult of all their primaries and secondaries making them temporarily flightless , although it is possible that some individuals go through incomplete moults . . predation . predators of darters are mainly large carnivorous birds , including passerines like the australian raven ( corvus coronoides ) and house crow ( corvus splendens ) , and birds of prey such as marsh harriers ( circus aeruginosus complex ) or pallas 's fish eagle ( haliaeetus leucoryphus ) . predation by crocodylus crocodiles has also been noted . but many would-be predators know better than to try to catch a darter . the long neck and pointed bill in combination with the '' darting '' mechanism make the birds dangerous even to larger carnivorous mammals , and they will actually move toward an intruder to attack rather than defending passively or fleeing . kennedy et al . ( 1996 ) , myers et al . 2009 . breeding . they usually breed in colonies , occasionally mixed with cormorants or herons . the darters pair bond monogamously at least for a breeding season . there are many different types of displays used for mating . males display to attract females by raising ( but not stretching ) their wings to wave them in an alternating fashion , bowing and snapping the bill , or giving twigs to potential mates . to strengthen the pair bond , partners rub their bills or wave , point upwards or bow their necks in unison . when one partner comes to relieve the other at the nest , males and females use the same display the male employs during courtship ; during changeovers , the birds may also '' yawn '' at each other . breeding is seasonal ( peaking in march/april ) at the northern end of their range ; elsewhere they can be found breeding all year round . the nests are made of twigs and lined with leaves ; they are built in trees or reeds , usually near water . typically , the male gathers nesting material and brings it to the female , which does most of the actual construction work . nest construction takes only a few days ( about three at most ) , and the pairs copulate at the nest site . the clutch size is two to six eggs ( usually about four ) which have a pale green color . the eggs are laid within 24–48 hours and incubated for 25 to 30 days , starting after the first has been laid ; they hatch asynchronously . to provide warmth to the eggs , the parents will cover them with their large webbed feet , because like their relatives they lack a brood patch . the last young to hatch will usually starve in years with little food available . bi-parental care is given and the young are considered altricial . they are fed by regurgitation of partly digested food when young , switching to entire food items as they grow older . after fledging , the young are fed for about two more weeks while they learn to hunt for themselves . answers.com 2009 , myers et al . 2009 these birds reach sexual maturity by about two years , and generally live to around nine years . the maximum possible lifespan of darters seems to be about sixteen years . anage 2009 , myers et al . 2009 darter eggs are edible and considered delicious by some ; they are locally collected by humans as food . the adults are also eaten occasionally , as they are rather meaty birds ( comparable to a domestic duck ) ; like other fish-eating birds such as cormorants or seaducks they do not taste particularly good though . darter eggs and nestlings are also collected in a few places to raise the young . sometimes this is done for food , but some nomads in assam and bengal train tame darters to be employed as in cormorant fishing . with an increasing number of nomads settling down in recent decades , this cultural heritage is in danger of being lost . on the other hand , as evidenced by the etymology of '' anhinga '' detailed above , the tupi seem to have considered the anhinga a kind of bird of ill omen . . systematics and evolution . the genus anhinga was introduced by the french zoologist mathurin jacques brisson in 1760 with the anhinga or american darter ( anhinga anhinga ) as the type species . anhinga is derived from the tupi ajíŋa ( also transcribed áyinga or ayingá ) , which in local mythology refers to a malevolent demonic forest spirit ; it is often translated as '' devil bird '' . the name changed to anhingá or anhangá as it was transferred to the tupi–portuguese língua geral . however , in its first documented use as an english term in 1818 , it referred to an old world darter . ever since , it has also been used for the modern genus anhinga as a whole . jobling ( 1991 ) : p.48 , mw 2009 this family is very closely related to the other families in the suborder sulae , i.e . the phalacrocoracidae ( cormorants and shags ) and the sulidae ( gannets and boobies ) . cormorants and darters are extremely similar as regards their body and leg skeletons and may be sister taxa . in fact , several darter fossils were initially believed to be cormorants or shags ( see below ) . some earlier authors included the darters in the phalacrocoracidae as subfamily anhingina ' , but this is nowadays generally considered overlumping . however , as this agrees quite well with the fossil evidence e.g . genera like borvocarbo , limicorallus or piscator : mayr ( 2009 ) : pp.65–67 some unite the anhingidae and phalacrocoracidae in a superfamily phalacrocoracoidea . brodkorb & mourer-chauviré ( 1982 ) , olson ( 1985 ) : p.207 , becker ( 1986 ) , christidis & boles ( 2008 ) : p.100 , mayr ( 2009 ) : pp.67–70 , myers et al . 2009 the sulae are also united by their characteristic display behavior , which agrees with the phylogeny as laid out by anatomical and dna sequence data . while the darters ' lack of many display behaviors is shared with gannets ( and that of a few with cormorants ) , these are all symplesiomorphies that are absent in frigatebirds , tropicbirds and pelicans also . like cormorants but unlike other birds , darters use their hyoid bone to stretch the gular sac in display . whether the pointing display of mates is another synapomorphy of darters and cormorants that was dropped again in some of the latter , or whether it evolved independently in darters and those cormorants that do it , is not clear . the male raised-wing display seems to be a synapomorphy of the sulae ; like almost all cormorants and shags but unlike almost all gannets and boobies , darters keep their wrists bent as they lift the wings in display , but their alternating wing-waving , which they also show before take-off , is unique . that they often balance with their outstretched wings during walking is probably an autapomorphy of darters , necessitated by their being plumper than the other sulae . kennedy et al . ( 1996 ) the sulae were traditionally included in the pelecaniformes , then a paraphyletic group of '' higher waterbirds '' . the supposed traits uniting them , like all-webbed toes and a bare gular sac , are now known to be convergent , and pelicans are apparently closer relatives of storks than of the sulae . hence , the sulae and the frigatebirds – and some prehistoric relatives – are increasingly separated as the suliformes , which is sometimes dubbed '' phalacrocoraciformes '' . christidis & boles ( 2008 ) : p.100 , anwers.com 2009 , mayr ( 2009 ) : pp.67–70 , myers et al . 2009 . living species . there are four living species of darters recognized , all in the genus anhinga , although the old world ones were often lumped together as subspecies of a . melanogaster . they may form a superspecies with regard to the more distinct anhinga : olson ( 1985 ) : p.207 , becker ( 1986 ) anhinga or american darter , anhinga anhinga oriental darter or indian darter , anhinga melanogaster african darter , anhinga rufa australasian darter or australian darter , anhinga novaehollandiae extinct '' darters '' from mauritius and australia known only from bones were described as anhinga nana ( '' mauritian darter '' ) and anhinga parva . but these are actually misidentified bones of the long-tailed cormorant ( microcarbo/phalacrocorax africanus ) and the little pied cormorant ( m./p . melanoleucos ) , respectively . in the former case , however , the remains are larger than those of the geographically closest extant population of long-tailed cormorants on madagascar : they thus might belong to an extinct subspecies ( mauritian cormorant ) , which would have to be called microcarbo africanus nanus ( or phalacrocorax a . nanus ) – quite ironically , as the latin term nanus means dwarf . the late pleistocene anhinga laticeps is not specifically distinct from the australasian darter ; it might have been a large paleosubspecies of the last ice age . miller ( 1966 ) , olson ( 1975 ) , brodkorb & mourer-chauviré ( 1982 ) , olson ( 1985 ) : p.206 , mackness ( 1995 ) . fossil record . the fossil record of the anhingidae is rather dense , but very apomorphic already and appears to be lacking its base . the other families placed in the phalacrocoraciformes sequentially appear throughout the eocene , the most distinct – frigatebirds – being known since almost 50 ma ( million years ago ) and probably of paleocene origin . with fossil gannets being known since the mid-eocene ( c . 40 ma ) and fossil cormorants appearing soon thereafter , the origin of the darters as a distinct lineage was presumably around 50–40 ma , maybe a bit earlier . becker ( 1986 ) , mayr ( 2009 ) : pp.67–70 fossil anhingidae are known since the early miocene ; a number of prehistoric darters similar to those still alive have been described , as well as some more distinct genera now extinct . the diversity was highest in south america , and thus it is likely that the family originated there . some of the genera which ultimately became extinct were very large , and a tendency to become flightless has been noted in prehistoric darters . their distinctness has been doubted , but this was due to the supposed '' anhinga '' fraileyi being rather similar to macranhinga , rather than due to them resembling the living species : cione et al . ( 2000 ) , alvarenga & guilherme ( 2003 ) meganhinga alvarenga , 1995 ( early miocene of chile ) '' paranavis '' ( middle/late miocene of paraná , argentina ) – a nomen nudum named in a thesis and hence not validly according to iczn rules . an apparently flightless species the size of a . anhinga : noriega ( 1994 ) , cione et al . ( 2000 ) macranhinga noriega , 1992 ( middle/late miocene – late miocene/early pliocene of sc south america ) – may include '' anhinga '' fraileyi giganhinga rinderknecht & noriega , 2002 ( late pliocene/early pleistocene of uruguay ) ; anhinga prehistoric members of anhinga were presumably distributed in similar climates as today , ranging into europe in the hotter and wetter miocene . with their considerable stamina and continent-wide distribution abilities ( as evidenced by the anhinga and the old world superspecies ) , the smaller lineage has survived for over 20 ma . as evidenced by the fossil species ' biogeography centered around the equator , with the younger species ranging eastwards out of the americas , the hadley cell seems to have been the main driver of the genus ' success and survival : olson ( 1985 ) : p.206 anhinga walterbolesi worthy , 2012 ( late oligocene to early miocene of central australia anhinga subvolans ( brodkorb , 1956 ) ( early miocene of thomas farm , us ) – formerly in phalacrocorax uf 4500 , a proximal right humerus half . about 15 % larger than a . anhinga and more plesiomorphic : brodkorb ( 1956 ) , becker ( 1986 ) anhinga cf . grandis ( middle miocene of colombia – ? late pliocene of sc south america ) including a distal right humerus ( ufac-4721 ) from the solimões formation of cachoeira do bandeira ( acre , brazil ) . size identical to a . grandis , but distinctness in space and time makes assignment to that species questionable : mackness ( 1995 ) , alvarenga & guilherme ( 2003 ) anhinga sp . ( sajóvölgyi middle miocene of mátraszõlõs , hungary ) – a . pannonica ? an ungual phalanx : gál et al . ( 1998–99 ) , mlíkovský ( 2002 ) : p.74 '' anhinga '' fraileyi campbell , 1996 ( late miocene – ? early pliocene of sc south america ) – may belong in macranhinga holotype lacm 135356 is a slightly damaged right tarsometatarsus ; other material includes a distal left ulna end ( lacm 135361 ) , a well-preserved left tibiotarsus ( lacm 135357 ) , two cervical vertebrae ( lacm 135357-135358 ) , three humerus pieces ( lacm 135360 , 135362-135363 ) , probably also the almost complete left humerus ufac-4562 . a rather short-winged species about two-thirds larger than a . anhinga ; apparently distinct from the living genus : campbell ( 1992 ) , alvarenga & guilherme ( 2003 ) anhinga pannonica lambrecht , 1916 ( late miocene of c europe ? and tunisia , east africa , pakistan and thailand – ? sahabi early pliocene of libya ) a cervical vertebra ( the holotype ) and a carpometacarpus ; additional material includes another cervical vertebra and femur , humerus , tarsometatarsus and tibiotarsus pieces . about as large as a . rufa , apparently ancestral to the old world lineages : martin & mengel ( 1975 ) , brodkorb & mourer-chauviré ( 1982 ) , olson ( 1985 ) : p.206 , becker ( 1986 ) , mackness ( 1995 ) , mlíkovský ( 2002 ) : p.73 anhinga minuta alvarenga & guilherme , 2003 ( solimões late miocene/early pliocene of sc south america ) ufac-4720 ( holotype , an almost complete left tibiotarsus ) and ufac-4719 ( almost complete left humerus ) . the smallest known darter ( 30 % smaller than a . anhinga ) , probably not very closely related to any living species : alvarenga & guilherme ( 2003 ) anhinga grandis martin & mengel , 1975 ( late miocene – ? late pliocene of us ) assorted material , including the holotype unsm 20070 ( a distal humerus end ) and uf 25739 ( another humerus piece ) . longer-winged , about 25 % larger than and twice as heavy as a . anhinga , but apparently a close relative : martin & mengel ( 1975 ) , olson ( 1985 ) : p.206 , becker ( 1986 ) , campbell ( 1992 ) anhinga malagurala mackness , 1995 ( allingham early pliocene of charters towers , australia ) qm f25776 ( holotype , right carpometacarpus ) and qm ff2365 ( right proximal femur piece ) . slightly smaller than a . melanogaster and apparently quite distinct : becker ( 1986 ) , mackness ( 1995 ) anhinga sp . ( early pliocene of bone valley , us ) – a . beckeri ? ulna fossils larger than a . anhinga : becker ( 1986 ) anhinga hadarensis brodkorb & mourer-chauviré , 1982 ( late pliocene/early pleistocene of e africa ) the holotype is a well-preserved left femur ( al 288-52 ) . additional material consists of a proximal left femur ( al 305-2 ) , a distal left tibiotarsus ( l 193-78 ) , a proximal ( al 225-3 ) and a distal ( 11 234 ) left ulna , a proximal left carpometacarpus ( w 731 ) , and well-preserved ( 10 736 ) and fragmentary ( 2870 ) right coracoids . slightly smaller than a . rufa and probably its direct ancestor : brodkorb & mourer-chauviré ( 1982 ) , olson ( 1985 ) : p.206 anhinga beckeri emslie , 1998 ( early – late pleistocene of se us ) protoplotus , a small paleogene phalacrocoraciform from sumatra , was in old times considered a primitive darter . however , it is also placed in its own family ( protoplotidae ) and might be a basal member of the sulae and/or close to the common ancestor of cormorants and darters . olson ( 1985 ) : p.206 , mackness ( 1995 ) , mayr ( 2009 ) : pp.62–63 . references . sources . anage 2009 : anhinga longevity data . retrieved 2009-sep-09 . answers.com 2009 : darter . in : columbia electronic encyclopedia ( 6th ed . ) . columbia university press . retrieved 2009-sep-09 . christidis , les & boles , walter e . ( 2008 ) : systematics and taxonomy of australian birds . csiro publishing , collingwoodvictoria , australia . cione , alberto luis ; de las mercedes azpelicueta , maría ; bond , mariano ; carlini , alfredo a . ; casciotta , jorge r . ; cozzuol , mario alberto ; de la fuente , marcelo ; gasparini , zulma ; goin , francisco j . ; noriega , jorge ; scillatoyané , gustavo j . ; soibelzon , leopoldo ; tonni , eduardo pedro ; verzi , diego & guiomar vucetich , maría ( 2000 ) : miocene vertebrates from entre ríos province , eastern argentina . english with spanish abstract in : aceñolaza , f.g . & herbst , r . ( eds . ) : el neógeno de argentina . insugeo serie correlación geológica 14 : 191–237 . jobling , james a . ( 1991 ) : a dictionary of scientific bird names . oxford university press , oxford , uk . mayr , gerald ( 2009 ) : paleogene fossil birds . springer-verlag , heidelberg & new york . merriam-webster ( mw ) 2009 : online english dictionary – anhinga . retrieved 2009-sep-09 . mlíkovský , jirí ( 2002 ) : cenozoic birds of the world ( part 1 : europe ) . ninox press , prague . myers , p . ; espinosa , r . ; parr , c.s . ; jones , t . ; hammond , g.s . & dewey , t.a . 2009 : animal diversity web – anhingidae . retrieved 2009-sep-09 . noriega , jorge ignacio ( 1994 ) : las aves del '' mesopotamiense '' de la provincia de entre ríos , argentina '' the birds of the 'mesopotamian ' of entre ríos province , argentina '' . doctoral thesis , universidad nacional de la plata in spanish . pdf abstract . external links . darter videos on the internet bird collection