Central business district

australia . in australia , the acronym '' cbd '' is used very commonly to refer to major city '' centers , '' in particular , the skyscraper districts in several state capital cities : adelaide , brisbane , melbourne , perth , and sydney . file : sydney city business district.jpg sydney has australia 's largest cbd file : melbourne skyline - cropped and contrast.jpg melbourne cbd file : skylines of brisbane cbd in june 2019 seen from paddington , queensland ( cut ) . jpg brisbane cbd file : perth_ ( au ) , _view_from_kings_park_ -- _2019_ -- _0435-42.jpg perth cbd . colombia . the largest cbd in colombia is arguably bogotá ’ s centro internacional , where some of the tallest buildings in south america have been repurposed as national headquarters for scotiabank , davivienda and bancolombia , among others . over the years , bogotá has developed minor business districts , which include avenida chile , ciudad salitre , with companies like avianca , rappi , johnson & johnson , terpel , hilton , hyatt , marriott , sheraton , ramada , city express , aloft and novotel ; or complejo santa bárbara , the last of which features the only w hotel in the city . colombia ’ s other notable cbds include parque berrío in medellín , bocagrande in cartagena ( the largest touristic cbd in the country ) and paseo de bolívar in barranquilla . file : baluarte de santiago ctg 11 2019 2137.jpg bocagrande in cartagena , the largest cbd in colombia 's caribbean region file : iglesia de nuestra señora de la candelaria.jpg parque berrío in medellín , the second largest cbd in colombia file : torre de cali ( 1 ) . jpg cali 's downtown it is the largest cbd in colombia 's pacific region file : edificio north point bogotá , cund.jpeg north point cbd in bogotá , the third largest in the city . file : grand bay club.jpg grand bay club in barranquilla , the second largest cbd in the city . france . la défense , west of paris , is france 's largest central business district . la défense was in 2017 ranked as the leading cbd in continental europe , and the fourth in the world . the attractiveness of world-class business districts : paris la défense vs . its global competitors , ey , november 2017 la défense hosts 19 of the fortune global 500 , whilst the paris region as a whole hosts 29 of the world 's 500 largest companies , establishing itself as the first city in europe ( and 3rd worldwide ) for the number of companies classified in fortune fortune global 500 . 10 reasons to move to paris la défense , official website of paris la défense . germany . in germany , the terms innenstadt and stadtzentrum may be used to describe the central business district . both terms can be literally translated as '' inner city '' / '' city center '' . some of the larger cities have more than one central business district . for example , berlin alone has three . due to berlin 's history of division during the cold war , the city contains central business districts both in west ( kurfürstendamm ) and east berlin ( alexanderplatz ) , as well as a newly built business district near the potsdamer platz . the city 's historic center – home to the reichstag building , as well as the brandenburg gate and most federal ministries – was largely abandoned when the berlin wall cut through the area . only after the reunification with the redevelopment of potsdamer platz , and the construction of numerous shopping centers , government ministries , embassies , office buildings and entertainment venues , was the area revived . in frankfurt 's city center , there is a business district called the '' bankenviertel . '' in düsseldorf , there is a business district which is located around the famous high-street königsallee with banks , shops and offices . . india . file : mumbai skyline.jpg nariman point , mumbai file : j-k-bank-0-bandra-kurla-complex-mumbai.jpg bandra kurla complex , mumbai file : ub city at night . jpg ub city , bangalore file : gachibowli hyd.jpg gachibowli , hyderabad file : cyber city view.jpg cyber city , gurgaon file : hotel classic bokaro.jpg city centre , bokaro steel city file : parrys corner , chennai , india.jpg parrys corner , chennai file : palm beach road , belapur , navi mumbai.jpg cbd belapur , navi mumbai file : brigade gateway.gif brigade gateway , bangalore file : sakchi golchakkar.jpg sakchi , jamshedpur file : koramangala junction2.jpg koramangala , bangalore file : cyber tower , hitech city , madhapur , hyderbad.jpg hitec city , hyderabad file : infosys ( 4911287704 ) . jpg electronic city , bangalore file : kolkata chowringhee3.jpg chowringhee , kolkata file : dhanbad 0873.jpg city center , dhanbad india 's largest and famous cbd is bandra kurla complex in mumbai . and in the same city mumbai itself there is nariman point , which is another cbd including parel . in india cbds are often also referred as '' city center '' or elsewhere '' downtown '' . in delhi or new delhi connaught place is the cbd of the city . bangalore has the four famous business district which are ub city , brigade gateway , koramangala , indiranagar and electronic city . hyderabad has many central business districts . indonesia . the largest cbd in indonesia is known as the golden triangle ( segitiga emas in indonesian language ) in jakarta . the area is located along the main avenues of jakarta , jalan jenderal sudirman – jalan m.h . thamrin -jalan h.r . rasuna said – jalan prof . dr . satrio – jalan jenderal gatot subroto . scbd , a super block that is located within the golden triangle , is the first of its kind in indonesia , and one of the largest commercial center development in the city . jakarta started developing the sophistication of its business district in the early 1960s before to host the 1962 asian games . thejakartapost.com ; sukarno 's vision of a modern capital surabaya in east java , built its first central business district in the darmo region . the construction was expected to be completed by 2018 with 150 soho units and 500 residences . tempo.co ; surabaya to see first central business district . pakistan . in pakistan , a central business district or a large , concentrated urban setting within a settlement is called a shehar . karachi is pakistan 's largest city and the country 's economic hub ; the i . i . chundrigar road of the city , often called the '' wall street of pakistan , '' acts as karachi 's main financial district and is essentially a center of economic and industrial activity . shahra-e-faisal in karachi is also one of the most important business districts of pakistan . another important business district is gulberg , lahore . it has a large number of important office buildings as well as many high-rises and shopping malls . city towers , the pace tower , m.m alam road , vogue towers , park plaza hotel , tricon tower , mm tower , boulevard heights , and ali trade center , respectively , are all present in this area . ferozepur road is also central business district of lahore . it is served by lahore bus rapid transit . kayre international hotel , and arfa software technology park are also present on ferozepur road . jinnah avenue in islamabad is the main business district of the city . it is lined with numerous office buildings . blue area is the central business district of islamabad . the rawalpindi-islamabad metrobus service is under-construction bus rapid transit system in these business districts which will connect them to key areas in rawalpindi and islamabad . d ground is the central business district of faisalabad and saddar is the main central business district of rawalpindi . peru . in peru the central business district is san isidro , in lima , which hosts the majority of peru 's financial industry headquarters . general information of san isidro ( in spanish ) retrieved from san isidro 's municipality official website on 2011-09-04 although still a largely residential district , the commercial and business activity located in or in the vicinity of the area defined by avenues camino real , javier prado este , república de panamá and aramburú is highly regarded as peru 's financial and corporate heart . san isidro – peru retrieved from aboutperuhistory.com on 2011-09-04 history of san isidro , lima , peru retrieved from sanisidroperu.com on 2011-09-04 it has a permanent population of around 63,000 inhabitants san isidro – population – municipality of san isidro website ( in spanish ) retrieved from san isidro 's municipality official website on 2011-09-04 and , during weekday business hours , a floating population that exceeds 700,000 daily commuters from other districts of lima . mayor of san isidro proposes alternatives to mitigate san isidro 's challenges ( in spanish ) retrieved from larepublica.pe on 2011-09-04 san isidro is served by three stations of el metropolitano , lima 's bus rapid transit system : estación javier prado , estación canaval y moreyra ( with over 16,000 daily passengers ) metropolitano 's canaval y moreyra station will have a new access for passengers ( in spanish ) retrieved from el comercio.pe on 2011-08-22 canaval y moreyra station will have a new access for passengers ( in spanish ) retrieved from peru21.pe on 2011-08-23 and estación aramburú . since the late 2000s ( decade ) , the southeastern district of surco municipality of santiago de surco – official website ( in spanish ) retrieved on 2011-09-16 has experienced a significant increase in upscale corporate developments in the area comprised by avenues manuel holguín , el derby , el polo , and la encalada due to lower restrictions to grant construction permit and proximity to residential middle and upper class districts and is set to become , after traditional san isidro and miraflores , the new financial center of lima . russia . file : business centre of moscow 2.jpg mibc in moscow is one of the largest financial centres in europe and the world—featuring some of europe 's tallest skyscrapers . file : e-burg asv2019-05 img46 view from vysotsky.jpg yekaterinburg-city in yekaterinburg is the second-largest central business district in russia . the largest central business district in russia is the moscow international business center ( mibc ) in moscow—a commercial development located just east of the third ring road at the western edge of the presnensky district in the central administrative okrug of the city . as of 2021 , it is still under development . the construction of the mibc takes place on the presnenskaya embankment of the moskva river , approximately 4 kilometers ( 2.5 mi ) west of red square , overlooked by the third ring road . the project occupies an area of 60 hectares . the second-largest central business district is yekaterinburg-city in yekaterinburg , the fourth-largest city in the country . it is located on the iset river , and is under development as of 2021 . the area occupies five hectares . saudi arabia . saudia arabia 's capital city is riyadh . riyadh has several business districts . here business districts are : king abdullah financial district king abdullah economic city kingdom centre abraj al bait file : the king abdullah financial district.jpg file : king fahad olaya-road riyadh.jpg file : abraj-al-bait-towers.jpg abraj al bait . hong kong . central , hong kong . singapore . the area commonly called the '' cbd '' is located within the downtown core , one of the constituent planning areas of the central area , the country 's city center . its densest point is centered around raffles place , where most of singapore 's skyscrapers are located . the '' cbd '' term has also been used at times to refer to the central area as a whole . in the future , the singaporean government will redevelop jurong east into a secondary satellite cbd . the area has also been earmarked as the site of the rail terminus for the kuala lumpur–singapore high speed rail . south africa . south africa 's largest cities , namely cape town , durban , johannesburg , pretoria , and port elizabeth , have cbds which house the headquarters of many of the country 's largest companies as well as convention centers and the respective cities ' tallest buildings . cape town is renowned for having south africa 's most iconic skyline ( including the famous table mountain ) and cbd . the term cbd is used in formal contexts , such as news reports , however , the term town is used colloquially . spain . the biggest central business districts of spain are located in the country 's capital , madrid . the paseo de la castellana holds the city 's main business districts : the gate of europe , azca and ctba . azca is super block near real madrid 's stadium santiago bernabéu . it used to be the country 's main business area during the 1980s and 1990s , when most of its skyscrapers were built . the tallest building of azca is the torre picasso , a 158-tower designed by the world trade center 's architect , and contains the main offices in spain of google and deloitte . the gate of europe consists of two twin towers , which hold spanish bank bankia and real state company realia . just a few blocks north is the ctba , a complex of four skyscrapers which are the tallest in spain . architects such as norman foster , ieoh ming pei and cesar pelli have designed its towers , which were completed in 2008 . the tallest building , the torre de cristal , is the fourth tallest building is western europe , with a height of . the complex is home to offices from well known companies such as kpmg , coca-cola , volkswagen , bankia , cepsa , pwc , ohl and holds the embassies of the netherlands , united kingdom , canada and australia , as well as a 5-star hotel from eurostars . a fifth tower is currently being built and will have the campus of the instituto de empresa university . in barcelona , the 22 , gran via , and granvia l'hospitalet are the main business districts . despite the fact that the catalan capital does not have a reputation for skyscrapers and financial hubs , in recent years it has attracted several media and technology companies such as microsoft and yahoo ! . in 2005 , the torre agbar , designed by french architect jean nouvel , became the third-tallest building in the city with a height of . the building soon became a symbol of barcelona and was going to become a hyatt hotel . however , the tower is still empty due to administrative problems . . taiwan . taipei , taiwan cbd skyline.jpg taipei 's cbd – xinyi district 's skyline , with taipei 101 in the background . taichung skyline.png taichung 's 7th redevelopment zone is the main cbd of taichung . kaohsiung_tuntex_sky_tower_innen_bild_2_ ( 2 ) . jpg asia new bay area is the main cbd of kaohsiung . in taiwan , even though the term '' city center '' is often used , a different commercial district outside of the historic core can actually be typically called a '' cbd '' , '' financial district '' , or '' yolk area '' , all of which are frequently used terms . there are many central business districts located on the island of taiwan . in taipei , the capital city of taiwan , the area around its taipei station , i.e . zhongzheng district is regarded as its historic city center ; the xinyi district ( especially xinyi special district ) or eastern district of taipei located to the east of the said railway station is the current cbd of taipei , being both the modern financial , political and economic district and taipei 's foremost shopping area , including the location of the -tall taipei 101 , taiwan 's tallest building . in the southern taiwanese city of kaohsiung , the main cbd is the asia new bay area ; and in the central taiwanese metropolitan area of taichung , the cbd is situn district , especially taichung 's 7th redevelopment zone , in which most high-rise buildings containing offices are concentrated . turkey . ankara became the capital of turkey in the 1920s . istanbul has remained the main economic center of the country up to this day . ankara is called as '' officer city '' . currently , a central business district is planned in an area of 262 hectares ek metin . in varlık , altındağ . brazil . the avenida paulista in são paulo is an important business district , it is the richest avanue in the city and concentrates the business of the city of são paulo , the richer of brazil . it was founded in 1891 and based in the big european avenues and after 1950 it started to from the 1950s it started to house the headquarters of several banks and multinational companies and became the richest avenue of são paulo and its central business district . it is also one of brazil 's richest areas . this is a good area for business mainly because of its infrastructure and high concentration of people .