Aerospike engine

principles . the purpose of any engine bell is to direct the exhaust of a rocket engine in one direction , generating thrust in the opposite direction . the exhaust , a high-temperature mix of gases , has an effectively random momentum distribution ( i.e . , the exhaust pushes in any direction it can ) . if the exhaust is allowed to escape in this form , only a small part of the flow will be moving in the correct direction and thus contribute to forward thrust . the bell redirects exhaust moving in the wrong direction so that it generates thrust in the correct direction . ambient air pressure also imparts a small pressure against the exhaust , helping to keep it moving in the '' right '' direction as it exits the engine . as the vehicle travels upwards through the atmosphere , ambient air pressure is reduced . this causes the thrust-generating exhaust to begin to expand outside the edge of the bell . since this exhaust begins traveling in the '' wrong '' direction ( i.e . , outward from the main exhaust plume ) , the efficiency of the engine is reduced as the rocket travels because this escaping exhaust is no longer contributing to the thrust of the engine . an aerospike rocket engine seeks to eliminate this loss of efficiency . instead of firing the exhaust out of a small hole in the middle of a bell , an aerospike engine avoids this random distribution by firing along the outside edge of a wedge-shaped protrusion , the '' spike '' , which serves the same function as a traditional engine bell . the spike forms one side of a '' virtual '' bell , with the other side being formed by the outside air . the idea behind the aerospike design is that at low altitude the ambient pressure compresses the exhaust against the spike . exhaust recirculation in the base zone of the spike can raise the pressure in that zone to nearly ambient . since the pressure in front of the vehicle is ambient , this means that the exhaust at the base of the spike nearly balances out with the drag experienced by the vehicle . it gives no overall thrust , but this part of the nozzle also does n't lose thrust by forming a partial vacuum . the thrust at the base part of the nozzle can be ignored at low altitude . as the vehicle climbs to higher altitudes , the air pressure holding the exhaust against the spike decreases , as does the drag in front of the vehicle . the recirculation zone at the base of the spike maintains the pressure in that zone to a fraction of 1 bar , higher than the near-vacuum in front of the vehicle , thus giving extra thrust as altitude increases . this effectively behaves like an '' altitude compensator '' in that the size of the bell automatically compensates as air pressure falls . the disadvantages of aerospikes seem to be extra weight for the spike . furthermore , the larger cooled area can reduce performance below theoretical levels by reducing the pressure against the nozzle . aerospikes work relatively poorly between mach 1–3 , where the airflow around the vehicle has reduced the pressure , thus reducing the thrust . . variations . several versions of the design exist , differentiated by their shapes . in the toroidal aerospike the spike is bowl-shaped with the exhaust exiting in a ring around the outer rim . in theory this requires an infinitely long spike for best efficiency , but by blowing a small amount of gas out of the center of a shorter truncated spike ( like base bleed in an artillery shell ) , something similar can be achieved . in the linear aerospike the spike consists of a tapered wedge-shaped plate , with exhaust exiting on either side at the '' thick '' end . this design has the advantage of being stackable , allowing several smaller engines to be placed in a row to make one larger engine while augmenting steering performance with the use of individual engine throttle control . performance . rocketdyne conducted a lengthy series of tests in the 1960s on various designs . later models of these engines were based on their highly reliable j-2 engine machinery and provided the same sort of thrust levels as the conventional engines they were based on ; 200,000 lbf ( 890 kn ) in the j-2t-200k , and 250,000 & nbsp ; lbf ( 1.1 mn ) in the j-2t-250k ( the t refers to the toroidal combustion chamber ) . thirty years later their work was revived for use in nasa 's x-33 project . in this case the slightly upgraded j-2s engine machinery was used with a linear spike , creating the xrs-2200 . after more development and considerable testing , this project was cancelled when the x-33 's composite fuel tanks repeatedly failed . three xrs-2200 engines were built during the x-33 program and underwent testing at nasa 's stennis space center . the single-engine tests were a success , but the program was halted before the testing for the two-engine setup could be completed . the xrs-2200 produces thrust with an i sp of 339 seconds at sea level , and thrust with an i sp of 436.5 seconds in a vacuum . the rs-2200 linear aerospike engine was derived from the xrs-2200 . the rs-2200 was to power the venturestar single-stage-to-orbit vehicle . in the latest design , seven rs-2200s producing each would boost the venturestar into low earth orbit . the development on the rs-2200 was formally halted in early 2001 when the x-33 program did not receive space launch initiative funding . lockheed martin chose to not continue the venturestar program without any funding support from nasa . an engine of this type is on outdoor display on the grounds of the nasa marshall space flight center in huntsville alabama . the lockheed martin x-33 cancellation by the federal government in 2001 decreased funding availability , but aerospike engines remain an area of active research . for example , a milestone was achieved when a joint academic/industry team from california state university , long beach ( csulb ) and garvey spacecraft corporation successfully conducted a flight test of a liquid-propellant powered aerospike engine in the mojave desert on september 20 , 2003 . csulb students had developed their prospector 2 ( p-2 ) rocket using a 1,000 & nbsp ; lb f ( 4.4 & nbsp ; kn ) lox/ethanol aerospike engine . this work on aerospike engines continues ; prospector-10 , a ten-chamber aerospike engine , was test-fired june 25 , 2008 . further progress came in march 2004 when two successful tests sponsored by the nasa dryden flight research centre using high-power rockets manufactured by blacksky corporation , based in carlsbad , california . the aerospike nozzles and solid rocket motors were developed and built by the rocket motor division of cesaroni technology incorporated , north of toronto , ontario . the two rockets were solid-fuel powered and fitted with non-truncated toroidal aerospike nozzles . flown at the pecos county aerospace development center , fort stockton , texas , the rockets achieved apogees of and speeds of about mach 1.5 . small-scale aerospike engine development using a hybrid rocket propellant configuration has been ongoing by members of the reaction research society . implementations . firefly aerospace . in july 2014 firefly aerospace announced its planned alpha launcher that uses an aerospike engine for its first stage . intended for the small satellite launch market , it is designed to launch satellites into low-earth orbit ( leo ) at a price of us 8–9 & nbsp ; million , much lower than with conventional launchers . firefly alpha 1.0 was designed to carry payloads of up to . it uses carbon composite materials and uses the same basic design for both stages . the plug-cluster aerospike engine puts out of thrust . the engine has a bell-shaped nozzle that has been cut in half , then stretched to form a ring with the half-nozzle now forming the profile of a plug . this rocket design was never launched . the design was abandoned after firefly space systems went bankrupt . a new company , firefly aerospace , has replaced the aerospike engine with a conventional engine in the alpha 2.0 design . arca space . in march 2017 arca space corporation announced their intention to build a single-stage-to-orbit rocket ( ssto ) , named haas 2ca , using a linear aerospike engine . the rocket is designed to send up to 100 & nbsp ; kg into low-earth orbit , at a price of us 1 & nbsp ; million per launch . they later announced that their executor aerospike engine would produce of thrust at sea level and of thrust in a vacuum . in june 2017 , arca announced that they would fly their demonstrator3 rocket to space , also using a linear aerospike engine . this rocket was designed to test several components of their haas 2ca at lower cost . they announced a flight for august 2017 . in september 2017 , arca announced that , after being delayed , their linear aerospike engine was ready to perform ground tests and flight tests on a demonstrator3 rocket . on december 20 , 2019 , arca tested the las 25da aerospike steam rocket engine for the launch assist system . . ksf space and interstellar space . another spike engine concept model , by ksf space and interstellar space in los angeles , was designed for orbital vehicle named satori . due to lack of funding , the concept is still undeveloped . . rocketstar . rocketstar planned to launch its 3d-printed aerospike rocket to an altitude of 50 miles in february 2019 .