John de Stratford

early life . stratford was born into the landed stratford family of stratford-on-avon around 1275 . his father was robert de stratford ( not to be confused with john 's brother , robert stratford ) and his mother was named isabel . robert senior has been identified as ‘ master ’ robert , co-founder and first master of the hospital of st cross within the town , but in view of the title magister and the celibate status required , this appears unlikely . the family was related to the hattons , important men in the town , ralph hatton ‘ of stratford ’ , the future bishop of london , being john 's nephew . he was a relative of andrew stratford blomefield and parkin an essay towards a topographical history of the county of norfolk pp . 390 and of thomas de stratford and henry de stratford david charles douglas , alec reginald myers '' english historical documents . 4 . late medieval . 1327 – 1485 '' p . 69 ( whom he inducted as the rector of a vacant church in north berkhamstead ( lincoln ) on 16 february 1325 ) . roy martin haines '' the register of john de stratford , bishop of winchester , 1323–1333 : volume 1 '' pp . 298–299 nothing definite is known of stratford 's schooling . he studied at oxford ( not at merton college , as claimed by the 17th century antiquarian anthony wood , but probably baliol , whom he remembered in his will ) , roy martin haines '' the register of john de stratford , bishop of winchester , 1323–1333 : volume 1 '' introduction pp . xvii–xviii and by 1312 he was entitled doctor of civil law . he entered the service of worcester priory , but initially his beneficial progress was slow . however , by 1317 he was rector of holy trinity , stratford , and acting as official of bishop john dalderby of lincoln ( d . 1320 ) , whose executor he became . from lincoln he migrated to canterbury , and the service of archbishop walter reynolds ( d . 1327 ) . he was dean of the court of arches in the early 1320s , by which time he held a useful portfolio of benefices , including canonries at lichfield , lincoln , and york , as well as the archdeaconry of lincoln . roy martin haines , ‘ stratford , john ( c.1275–1348 ) ’ , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 ; online edn , oct 2006 accessed 28 may 2014 . career . thumb stratford served as archdeacon of lincoln , canon of york and dean of arches before 20 june 1323 , when he became bishop of winchester , fryde . et al . handbook of british chronology p . 277 an appointment which was made during his visit to pope john xxii at avignon and which was very much disliked by edward ii . in 1327 the bishop joined queen isabella 's partisans ; he drew up the six articles against edward ii , and was one of those who visited the captive king at kenilworth to urge him to abdicate in favour of his son . on 26 november 1326 he was appointed lord treasurer of england , a post he held until 28 january 1327 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 105 under edward iii stratford became a member of the royal council , but his high political importance dates from the autumn of 1330 , the time when roger mortimer lost his power . in november of that year stratford became chancellor , and for the next ten years he was actively engaged in public business , being the king 's most prominent adviser and being politically , says stubbs , the '' head of the lancastrian or constitutional party . '' in 1329 and 1332 he was involved in the case of christina carpenter who was an achoress in a cell in shere in kent . she escaped from her cell and asked to be readmitted so she could die as a recluse . on 3 november 1333 stratford was appointed archbishop of canterbury fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 233 and he resigned the chancellorship in the following year ; however , he held this office again from 1335 to 1337 and for about two months in 1340 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 86 in november 1340 edward iii , humiliated , impecunious and angry , returned suddenly to england from flanders and vented his wrath upon the archbishop 's brother , the chancellor , robert de stratford , as well as briefly imprisoning henry de stratford . fearing arrest the archbishop fled to canterbury , and entered upon a violent war of words with the king , and by his firm conduct led to the establishment of the principle that peers were only to be tried in full parliament before their own order ( en pleyn parlement et devant les piers ) . but good relations were soon restored between the two , and the archbishop acted as president of the council during edward 's absence from england in 1345 and 1346 , although he never regained his former position of influence . powell and wallis house of lords in the middle ages pp . 335–43 . later life and death . though stratford 's political career was by now largely over , between 1342 and his death he continued to exert influence as an elder statesman , even being dubbed dux regis by dene . in june 1348 he fell ill at maidstone . he died on 23 august at his manor of mayfield , sussex , according to ‘ birchington ’ in an aura of sanctity , and was buried in his cathedral on 9 september where his alabaster effigy , somewhat damaged , lies on a fine canopied tomb , in a prominent position on the south side of the choir next to prior eastry 's screen , as he had requested in his will . . legacy . stratford 's canterbury register has not survived , but a large number of his acta can be gleaned from other sources . he was a notable legislator , drawing up detailed ordinances for the conduct of the court of canterbury in 1342 , while three sets of provincial constitutions , issued between 1341 and 1343 , are attributed to him . the first set was clearly a draft , the second is particularly concerned with ecclesiastical administration and discipline , while the third was designed to preserve church liberties and deals with areas of friction between laymen and ecclesiastics . he was a notable benefactor to the hospital of st thomas the martyr at canterbury , known as eastbridge hospital , but his efforts were principally directed towards his native stratford , where he founded a chantry college with the same dedication . the initial foundation ( 1331 ) was for a warden , sub-warden , and three priests , but in 1336 an augmentation allowed for a further eight priests , though whether the full complement was ever achieved is uncertain . he secured the appropriation of the parish church to the foundation and a papal bull of confirmation was issued in 1345 . opinion is divided as to stratford 's character , intentions , and stature . he has been compared unfavourably with his predecessors john pecham ( d . 1292 ) and robert winchelsey ( d . 1313 ) , but it was partly due to his moderation and legal training that the change of monarch was accomplished so smoothly in 1326–7 . he certainly had a concern for what have been called ‘ lancastrian ’ principles , in particular the importance of parliament . during the regime of isabella and mortimer he hazarded his career , perhaps his life , to maintain them . without question he was a staunch defender of the liberties of the english church . the fourth of the statutes of 1340 , conceded by edward iii under constraint of circumstances , he circulated triumphantly as a ‘ charter of liberties ’ . his clerical petitions of may 1341 were incorporated in modified form into statutes of that date , which were summarily revoked by the king a few months later as contrary to english law and his own prerogative . that he was ambitious is self-evident , but it would be indefensible to argue that he had no underlying convictions . although he had laboured long in the cause of peace , by 1337 he was forced to accept the inevitability of war with france , though not at the price of oppression at home . even then he was not prepared to organize opposition to edward iii , doubtless because he had no desire to renew the civil strife of the previous reign . he may have been guilty of pride ( superbia ) , as the frustrated king alleged , but he was not a foolish man . his reasoned defence in 1340–41 taught edward a lesson he had the good sense never to forget . . citations . references . . further reading . haines , roy martin , bishop john stratford 's injunctions to his cathedral chapter and to other benedictine houses in winchester ' , revue bénédictine , t . 117 ( 2007 ) , 154–80