Village green

history . most village greens in england originated in the middle ages . individual greens may have been created for various reasons , including protecting livestock from wild animals or human raiders during the night , or providing a space for market trading . in most cases where a village green is planned , it is placed in the centre of a settlement . village greens can also be formed when a settlement expands to the edge of an existing area of common land , or when an area of waste land between two settlements becomes developed . some historical village greens have been lost as a result of the agricultural revolution and urbanization . greens are now most likely to be found in the older villages of mainland europe , the united kingdom , and older areas of the united states . some greens that used to be a common or otherwise at the centre of a village have been swallowed up by a city growing around them . sometimes they become a city park or a square , and manage to maintain a sense of place . london has several of these , such as newington green , with newington green unitarian church anchoring the northern end . town expansion in the mid-20th century led in england to the formation of local conservation societies , often centring on village green preservation , as celebrated and parodied in the kinks ' album the kinks are the village green preservation society . the open spaces society is a present-day uk national campaigning body which continues this movement . examples . united states . in the united states , the most famous example of a town green is probably the new haven green in new haven , connecticut . new haven was founded by settlers from england and was the first planned city in the united states . originally used for grazing livestock , the green dates from the 1630s and is well preserved today despite lying at the heart of the city centre . the largest green in the u.s . is a mile in length , and can be found in lebanon , connecticut . this is the only village green in the united states still used for agriculture . one of the most unusual is the dartmouth green in hanover , new hampshire , which was owned and cleared by the college in 1770 . the college , not the town , still owns it and surrounded it with buildings as a sort of collegiate quadrangle in the 1930s , although its origin as a town green remains apparent . an example of a traditional american town green exists in downtown morristown , nj . the morristown green dates from 1715 and has hosted events ranging from executions to clothing drives . there are two places in the united states called village green : village green-green ridge , pennsylvania , and village green , new york . some new england towns , along with some areas settled by new englanders such as the townships in the connecticut western reserve , refer to their town square as a village green . the village green of bedford , new york , is preserved as part of bedford village historic district . europe . a notable example of a village green is that in the village of finchingfield in essex , england , which is said to be '' the most photographed village in england '' . the green dominates the village , and slopes down to a duck pond , and is occasionally flooded after heavy rain . the small village of car colston in nottinghamshire , england , has two village greens , totaling 29 acres ( 12 ha ) , good pub guide retrieved 2 april 2016 . and the village of burton leonard in north yorkshire has three . the open spaces society states that in 2005 there were about 3,650 registered greens in england covering and about 220 in wales covering about . the northern part of the province of drenthe in the netherlands is also known for its village greens . zuidlaren is the village with the largest number of village greens in the netherlands . the błonia park , originally established in the middle ages , is an example of a large village green in kraków , poland . indonesia . in indonesia , especially in java , a similar place is called alun-alun . it is a central part of javanese village architecture and culture . legal definitions . england and wales . apart from the general use of the term , village green has a specific legal meaning in england and wales , and also includes the less common term town green . town and village greens were defined in the commons registration act 1965 , as amended by the countryside and rights of way act 2000 , as land : which has been allotted by or under any act for the exercise or recreation of the inhabitants of any locality or on which the inhabitants of any locality have a customary right to indulge in lawful sports and pastimes or if it is land on which for not fewer than twenty years a significant number of the inhabitants of any locality , or of any neighbourhood within a locality , have indulged in lawful sports and pastimes as of right . registered greens in england and wales are now governed by the commons act 2006 , but the fundamental test of whether land is a town and village green remains the same . thus land can become a village green if it has been used for twenty years without force , secrecy or request ( nec vi , nec clam , nec precario ) . for a discussion of the law on this , see austen-baker , r . and mayfield , b . , '' uncommon confusion : parallel jurisprudence in town and village green applications '' 2012 conveyancer 55 . village green legislation is often used to try to frustrate development . recent case law ( oxfordshire county council vs oxford city council and robinson ) makes it clear that registration as a green would render any development which prevented continuing use of the green as a criminal activity under the inclosure act 1857 and the commons act 1876 . this leads to some most curious areas being claimed as village greens , sometimes with success . recent examples include a bandstand , two lakes and a beach . 2013 ewca civ 276 on 11 december 2019 , a supreme court decision put the future of some village greens at risk in england and wales . the case involved five fields ( 13 hectares ) in south lancaster , the mooreside fields , owned by lancashire county council . the lands had been available for public use for over 50 years . according to the commons act 2006 , land used for informal recreation for at least 20 years can be registered as a green and is then protected from development . ( granted , the growth and infrastructure act of 2013 specified that land designated for planning applications could not be registered as a village green , but that did not apply in the moorside fields case . ) the moorside fields community group attempted to register the lands in 2016 under the commons act . the local authority challenged the registration , wanting to retain control of the lands for future expansion of the nearby moorside primary school 's playing fields . the council 's challenge failed in the high court and then in the court of appeal ; the registration of the land as a village green could proceed . lancashire county council subsequently appealed to the uk supreme court . in the appeal decision , cited as r ( on the application of lancashire county council ) ( appellant ) v secretary of state for the environment , food and rural affairs ( respondent ) the court overturned the previous judgments . at the same time , the supreme court also ruled against the registration of lands in a separate case in surrey involving the 2.9 hectare leach grove wood at leatherhead , owned by the national health service . after publication of the decision in the moorside fields case , lancashire county council told the news media that the court had '' protected this land for future generations '' . in effect , the supreme court decision left lands owned by public authorities by their statutory powers open to development for any purpose that they deem to be appropriate . this could have far-reaching ramifications in england and wales , according to the open spaces society , a national conservation group that was founded in 1865 . a representative made this comment to the guardian : '' this is a deeply worrying decision as it puts at risk countless publicly owned green spaces which local people have long enjoyed , but which , unknown to them , are held for purposes which are incompatible with recreational use '' . . gallery . file : house on village green , melmerby - geograph.org.uk - 236245.jpg village green in melmerby , cumbria in england file : stanford in the vale village green ( 2002 ) . jpg the village green in stanford in the vale , oxfordshire file : pritzhagen 07.jpg a large green in the village of pritzhagen , germany file : willerzie.jpg the village green in willerzie , belgium . see also . common land park town square . references . external links . the open spaces society—gives uk information on how to claim a village green . town greens of connecticut—historical information on the town greens that are found in almost every connecticut town