Iain Duncan Smith

return to the backbenches . the same week as michael howard succeeding him , duncan smith 's novel the devil 's tune was released to negative critical reception . in november 2003 , he was appointed by howard to the conservative party 's advisory council , along with john major , william hague and kenneth clarke . in 2004 , duncan smith established the centre for social justice , a centre-right think tank working with small charities with the aim of finding innovative policies for tackling poverty . on 7 december 2005 , he was appointed chairman of the social justice policy group , which was facilitated by the centre for social justice . his deputy chair was debbie scott , the chief executive of the charity tomorrow 's people . the group released two major reports , breakdown britain and breakthrough britain . breakdown britain was a 300,000 word document that analysed what was going wrong in the areas of economic dependence and unemployment , family breakdown , addiction , educational failure , indebtedness , and the voluntary sector . breakthrough britain recommended almost two hundred policy ideas using broadly the same themes . duncan smith was re-elected comfortably in chingford and woodford green at the 2005 general election , almost doubling his majority . in september 2006 , he was one of fourteen authors of a report concerning antisemitism in britain . he was also one of the only early supporters of the iraq surge policy . . secretary of state for work and pensions . following the 2010 general election , duncan smith was appointed by prime minister david cameron as secretary of state for work and pensions in the cameron–clegg coalition . under his leadership , the department for work and pensions ( dwp ) rolled out universal credit and a new work programme , as well as implemented a real terms cut in benefits . he also looked at '' how to make it harder for sick and disabled people to claim benefits '' by giving dwp staff more powers to conduct benefit eligibility tests and to strip benefits from claimants with serious but time-limited health conditions , but he was advised it would be illegal to introduce primary and secondary legislation . the dwp was criticised by the trussell trust , oxfam and justin welby for '' scandalous '' and '' unacceptable '' rises in food poverty and people being forced to use food banks . duncan smith himself was criticised by the uk statistics authority and national institute of economic and social research for breaking the code of practice for official statistics . . cameron–clegg coalition . shortly after being appointed , duncan smith said the government would encourage people to work for longer by making it illegal for companies to force staff to give up work at 65 and bringing forward the planned rises in the state pension age . he announced reforms to simplify benefits and tax credits into a single universal credit payment , arguing welfare reform would make low earners better off in employment . he promised targeted work activity , sanctions and possible removal of benefits for up to three years for those who refused to work . duncan smith unveils details of welfare 'contract ' , bbc benefits claimants with part-time incomes below a certain threshold would become required to search for additional work or risk losing access to their benefits . he said benefits were not a route out of child poverty but hundreds of thousands of children could be lifted out of child poverty if one of their parents were to work at least a 35-hour week at the national minimum wage . in june 2011 , duncan smith announced welfare-to-work programs would be replaced with a single work programme , which included incentives for private sector service providers to help the unemployed find long term employment . the dwp announced on the 2012 united nations ' international day of persons with disabilities forced work for disabled people who received welfare benefits , in order to '' improve disabled people 's chances of getting work by mandatory employment '' . in the 2012 cabinet reshuffle , duncan smith was offered the job at the ministry of justice replacing kenneth clarke , but declined , and remained in his post at the dwp . iain duncan smith rejected offer of justice secretary to finish welfare reform . the daily telegraph ( london ) . retrieved on 15 august 2013 . in april 2013 , duncan smith said he could live on £53 per week as work and pensions secretary , after a benefits claimant told the bbc he had £53 per week after housing costs . also in april , he called for wealthier people to voluntarily return universal winter fuel payments to help reduce the strain on public finances , prompting some wealthier pensioners to state they had already tried this but had their offers refused because there was no mechanism for returning payments . iain duncan smith calls for wealthy pensioners to hand back benefits , the guardian , 28 april 2013 , retrieved 30 april 2013 michele hanson , i tried to hand back my winter fuel payment , the guardian , 30 april 2013 , retrieved 30 april 2013 in september , the dwp cancelled a week of '' celebrations '' to mark the impact of enhanced benefit sanctions . in the same month , the dwp was subject to an '' excoriating '' national audit office report , accusing the dwp of having '' weak management , ineffective control and poor governance '' and of wasting £34 million on inadequate computer systems . '' the moral certainty of iain duncan smith '' , james landale , bbc news , 5 september 2013 duncan smith dismissed allegations in matthew d'ancona 's 2013 book in it together that the chancellor george osborne had referred to him as '' not clever enough '' . the allegations were also denied by osborne . in may 2014 , it was reported the dwp was employing debt collectors to retrieve overpaid benefits , the overpayment purely down to calculation mistakes by hm revenue and customs . after the '' workfare '' element of the work programme was successfully challenged in the courts in 2013 , duncan smith sought to re-establish the legality of the scheme through retrospective legislation but , in july 2014 , the high court ruled the retrospective nature of the legislation interfered with the '' right to a fair trial '' under article 6 of the european convention on human rights . '' ids ' emergency jobseeker law sparks civil liberties outrage '' , ian dunt , politics.co.uk , 19 march 2013 the dwp had said 1 million people would be placed on the new universal credit benefits system by april 2014 , yet by october 2014 only 15,000 were assigned to uc . duncan smith said a final delivery date would not be set for this , declaring '' arbitrary dates and deadlines are the enemy of secure delivery . '' . cameron majority government . in august 2015 , duncan smith was criticised after the dwp admitted publishing fake testimonies of claimants enjoying their benefits cuts . later the same month , publication of statistics showed 2,380 people died in a 3-year period shortly after a work capability assessment declared them fit for work leading jeremy corbyn to call for duncan smith 's resignation . at the 2015 conservative party conference , duncan smith said to the sick and disabled '' with our help , you 'll work your way out of poverty '' while criticising the current system , which he said '' makes doctors ask a simplistic question : are you too sick to work at all ? if the answer is yes , they ’ re signed off work – perhaps for ever . '' in march 2016 , duncan smith unexpectedly resigned from the cabinet . he stated that he was unable to accept the government 's planned cuts to disability benefits . he later launched an attack on the '' government 's austerity programme for balancing the books on the backs of the poor and vulnerable '' , describing this as divisive and '' deeply unfair '' , and adding : '' it is in danger of drifting in a direction that divides society rather than unites it . '' . later backbench career . campaign , stating that staying in the eu '' leaves the door open '' to the uk enduring terrorist attacks . while he had opposed david cameron over the referendum , sources close to duncan smith insisted his resignation was not about europe . in the 2019 conservative party leadership election , duncan smith served as chairman for boris johnson 's leadership campaign , resulting in an emphatic win , with over 50 % of mps and 66 % of the conservative membership voting for johnson to become the next leader of the conservative party and prime minister . he was knighted in the 2020 new year honours , for political and public service . the honour sparked criticism , with more than 237,000 people signing an online petition , set up by labour party activist dr mona kamal ahmed , an nhs psychiatrist , demanding that it be rescinded . on june 2020 , duncan smith launched the inter-parliamentary alliance on china , becoming the co-chair of the alliance in the uk with labour peer , helena kennedy . the alliance seeks to , '' promote a coordinated response between democratic states to challenges posed by the present conduct and future ambitions of the people ’ s republic of china . by developing a common set of principles and frameworks that transcend domestic party divisions and international borders , our democracies will be able to keep the rules-based and human rights systems true to their founding purposes . '' in a launch message , duncan smith explained , '' this challenge will outlast governments and administrations and it transcends party politics . '' . political views . views on gay rights and marriage . during his leadership campaign in 2001 , duncan smith changed his stance from opposing repeal of section 28 of the local government act 1988 to supporting repeal . in 2003 , his decision to compromise on the repeal of section 28 was described as '' illogical '' and '' messy '' by other conservative mps . as leader , he imposed a three-line whip on a house of lords amendment to the adoption and children act 2002 that would have restricted adoption to married couples , thus ruling out unmarried heterosexual couples and gay couples . the amendment was rejected by 344 to 145 , with eight conservative mps rebelling . duncan smith has become significantly involved in issues of family and social breakdown . he has stated his support for early interventions to reduce and prevent social breakdown . in december 2010 , he studied a state-sponsored relationship education programme in norway , under which couples were forced to '' think again '' and confront the reality of divorce before formally separating . the policy has been credited with reversing norway 's trend for rising divorce rates and halting the decline of marriage in the country over the past 15 years . duncan smith said he was keen to explore ways in which similar approaches could be encouraged in britain . officials pointed out that such a programme would be expensive but that an approach could reduce the long-term cost of family breakdown , which has been estimated at up to £100 & nbsp ; billion . duncan smith said couples in norway were able to '' work through what is going to happen with their children '' , which has '' a very big effect on their thinking '' . '' many of them think again about what they are going to embark on once they really understand the consequences of their actions subsequently , '' he said . duncan smith said in february 2011 that it was '' absurd and damaging '' for ministers not to extol the benefits of marriage for fear of stigmatising those who choose not to marry . duncan smith said : '' we do a disservice to society if we ignore the evidence which shows that stable families tend to be associated with better outcomes for children . there are few more powerful tools for promoting stability than the institution of marriage . '' he added that '' the financial costs of family breakdown are incredibly high . but what is most painful to see is the human cost – the wasted potential , the anti-social behaviour , and the low self-esteem . '' in april 2012 , he signalled his support for same-sex marriage on the basis that it would promote stability in relationships . . views on immigration . duncan smith has said that tighter immigration controls are vital if britain is to avoid '' losing another generation to dependency and hopelessness '' . in a speech delivered in spain he said that only immigrants with '' something to offer '' should be allowed into the country and that too often foreign workers purporting to be skilled take low-skilled jobs that could be occupied by british school leavers . according to the daily telegraphs analysis , the speech contained a warning to david cameron '' that a 'slack ' attitude to immigration will result in the coalition repeating the mistakes made under labour , when the vast majority of new jobs generated before the recession were taken by immigrants '' . duncan smith believes that some companies are using immigration as '' an excuse to import labour to take up posts which could be filled by people already in britain '' . he says britain needs an immigration system that gives the unemployed '' a level playing field '' . '' if we do not get this right then we risk leaving more british citizens out of work , and the most vulnerable group who will be the most affected are young people , '' he said . andrew porter , migrants 'take the jobs from young britons ' , the daily telegraph ( london ) address by iain duncan smith at the opening session of the faes campus , fundacionfaes.org ; accessed 9 may 2015 . . views on social credit . duncan smith has called for cuts to universal credit to be reversed . duncan smith said , “ rolling out a new system , and pulling the money out of it the whole time , is very difficult to do it . it counters the whole purpose of what the welfare reforms are about . ” the guardian . r ( miller ) v . secretary of state for exiting the european union . on 3 november 2016 and in response to the decision of the high court in r ( miller ) v secretary of state for exiting the european union on whether the uk government was entitled to notify an intention to leave the european union under article 50 of the treaty on european union without a vote in parliament , duncan smith stated that '' it 's not the position of the courts to tell parliament or the government how that process should work . it never has been . their job is to interpret what comes out of parliament , not to tell parliament how it goes about its functions . '' . brexit . in december 2019 , duncan smith voted in favour of the withdrawal agreement . when the house of commons debated the agreement at the time , duncan smith argued against further scrutiny by the house , stating that members of the house '' had more than 100 hours in committee over the last 3 and a half years . if there is anything about this arrangement that we have not now debated , thrashed to death , i would love to know what it is . '' in august 2020 , duncan smith subsequently said that because of clauses buried in the fine print of the withdrawal agreement , it costs too much and denies the uk true independence , urging the uk government to denounce it . . personal life . duncan smith married elizabeth '' betsy '' fremantle , daughter of the 5th baron cottesloe , in 1982 . the couple have four children , and live in a country house belonging to his father-in-law 's estate in swanbourne , buckinghamshire . he is a roman catholic . he has been reported to support both tottenham hotspur , where in 2002 he held a season ticket , and aston villa . . notes .