Mountain biking

history . thumb thumb thumb image : mountainbiking mthoodnf.jpg thumb right mountain biker gets air in mount hood national forest . image : mountain bikers at marvin braude gateway park.jpg thumb mountain bikers at marvin braude mulholland gateway park . late 1800s . one of the first examples of bicycles modified specifically for off-road use is the expedition of buffalo soldiers from missoula , montana , to yellowstone in august 1896 . . 1900s–1960s . bicycles were ridden off-road by road racing cyclists who used cyclocross as a means of keeping fit during the winter . cyclo-cross eventually became a sport in its own right in the 1940s , with the first world championship taking place in 1950 . the rough stuff fellowship was established in 1955 by off-road cyclists in the united kingdom . in oregon , one chemeketan club member , d . gwynn , built a rough terrain trail bicycle in 1966 . he named it a '' mountain bicycle '' for its intended place of use . this may be the first use of that name . in england in 1968 , geoff apps , a motorbike trials rider , began experimenting with off-road bicycle designs . by 1979 he had developed a custom-built lightweight bicycle which was uniquely suited to the wet and muddy off-road conditions found in the south-east of england . they were designed around 2 & nbsp ; inch x 650b nokian snow tires though a 700x47c ( 28 in . ) version was also produced . these were sold under the cleland cycles brand until late 1984 . bikes based on the cleland design were also sold by english cycles and highpath engineering until the early 1990s . a typical bikepacking set-up includes a frame bag , handlebar roll , seat pack , and backpack and typical gear includes lightweight and basic camping gear , and a bike repair kit . mountain bikes are generally used as many bike packing destinations are reached via forest-service roads or singletrack trails . mountain bikes specific to bike-packing use a slightly taller frame to get the maximum frame bag capacity . this is achieved by using a longer headtube , a more horizontal top tube , and a reduced stem degree . generally , bikepackers tend to cover anywhere from 25 to 75 miles ( 40 – 120 & nbsp ; km ) in a given day as the riding can be technical . . risks . injuries are a given factor when mountain biking , especially in the more extreme disciplines like downhill biking , free ride and dirt jumping . injuries range from minor wounds , such as cuts and abrasions from falls on gravel or other surfaces , to major injuries such as broken bones , head or spinal injuries resulting from impacts with rocks , trees or the terrain being ridden on . another risk factor is that mountain biking takes places in wilderness area so emergency response will be delayed in case of injury . protective equipment can protect against minor injuries and reduce the extent or seriousness of major impacts , but may not protect a rider from major impacts or accidents . to reduce the risk of injury , a rider will also take steps to minimize the risk of accidents , and thus the potential for injury ; by choosing trails which fall within the range of their experience level , ensuring that they are fit enough to deal with the trail they have chosen , and keeping their bike in top mechanical condition . lastly , maintenance of the rider 's bike is carried out more frequently for mountain biking than for utility cycling or casual commuter biking . mountain biking places higher demands on every part of the bike . jumps and impacts can crack the frame or damage components or the tire rims , and steep , fast descents can quickly wear out brake pads . since the widespread adoption of hydraulic and mechanical disk brakes on most mountain bikes from the late 1990s , the issues of brake pad wear , misalignment with , or slippage of rim brake pads on rims designed for rim brakes or '' v brakes '' , has become a non-issue . thus , whereas a casual rider may only check over and maintain their bike every few months , a mountain biker will check and properly maintain the bike before and after every ride . advocacy organizations . mountain bikers have faced land access issues from the beginnings of the sport . some areas where the first mountain bikers have ridden have faced extreme restrictions or elimination of riding . this opposition has led to the development of local , regional , and international mountain bike groups . the different groups that formed generally work to create new trails , maintain existing trails , and help existing trails that may have issues . groups work with private and public entities from the individual landowner to city parks departments , on up through the state level at the dnr , and into the federal level . different groups will work individually or together to achieve results . advocacy organizations work through numerous methods such as education , trail workdays , and trail patrols . examples of the education an advocacy group can provide include : educate local bicycle riders , property managers , and other user groups on the proper development of trails , and on the international mountain bicycling association 's ( imba ) , '' rules of the trail . '' examples of trail work days can include : flagging , cutting , and signing a new trail , or removing downed trees after a storm . a trail patrol is a bike rider who has had some training to help assist others ( including non-cyclists ) , trail users . the imba is a non-profit advocacy group whose mission is to create , enhance and preserve trail opportunities for mountain bikers worldwide . imba serves as an umbrella organization for mountain biking advocacy worldwide and represents more than 700 affiliated mountain biking groups . the group was originally formed to fight widespread trail closures . in 1988 , five california mountain bike clubs linked to form imba . the founding clubs were : concerned off-road bicyclists association , bicycle trails council east bay , bicycle trails council marin , sacramento rough riders , and responsible organized mountain . environmental impact . according to a review published by the international mountain bicycling association , the environmental impact of mountain biking , as a relatively new sport , is poorly understood . the review notes that '' as with all recreational pursuits , it is clear that mountain biking contributes some degree of environmental degradation '' . mountain biking can result in both soil and vegetation damage , which can be caused by skidding , but also by the construction of unauthorised features such as jumps and bridges , and trails themselves . several studies have reported that a mountain bike 's impact on a given length of trail surface is comparable to that of a hiker , and substantially less than that of an equestrian or motorized off-road vehicle . a critical literature review by jason lathrop on the ecological impact of mountain biking notes that while recreational trail use in general is well studied , few studies explore the specific impact of mountain biking . he quotes the bureau of land management : '' an estimated 13.5 million mountain bicyclists visit public lands each year to enjoy the variety of trails . what was once a low use activity that was easy to manage has become more complex '' . the environmental impacts of mountain biking can be greatly reduced by not riding on wet or sensitive trails , keeping speeds modest so as to minimize cornering forces and braking forces , not skidding , and by staying on the trail . mountain biking has been demonstrated to act as a human-mediated form of seed dispersal . due to advancements in technology mountain bikers have begun to move onto trail networks once only accessible by hikers . the nature of their movement patterns also plays an important role as a vector for seed dispersal . mountain bikes are not bound to any specific type of infrastructure and can therefore move freely between ecological environments acting as a connecting dispersal vector between habitats . combined with their relatively long range and speeds they also contribute to long-range dispersal . in an effort to understand and assess the socio-ecological consequences of mountain bikes as a vector for seed dispersal fabio weiss , tyler j . brummer , and gesine pufal conducted an environmental impact study on forest trails in freiburg , germany . the results of the study found that although the majority of seeds detached from tires within the first 5–20 meters ; small portions of seeds were still present after 200–500 meters contributing to moderate dispersal . the potential for long-distance dispersal was found through the transport of seeds on areas of the bike that did not come into frequent contact with the ground . the study also found that the majority of participants only cleaned their bikes on average every 70 & nbsp ; km or every two rides . rides executed in two different areas have the potential to connect previously unconnected habitats creating the potential for unwanted plant invasions . to mitigate the accidental dispersal of an unwanted invasive species , the authors of the study proposed the following measures to support conservation : a ) clean the bike between rides in different habitats , before traveling and especially before entering sensitive natural areas and regions . b ) control weeds and non-native species at trailheads and trail margins . c ) educate mountain bike riders about the potential dispersal of different species ( good stewardship begets riding privileges ) . d ) encourage cooperation between mountain bikers and managing authorities ( avoid condescending regulations , establishment of monitored designated riding areas ) . . see also . mountain bike mountain bike racing downhill mountain biking enduro ( mountain biking ) singletrack list of professional mountain bikers mountain bike hall of fame glossary of cycling . references . . external links . international mountain biking association fr : vélo tout terrain