1909 in sports

american football . college championship college football national championship – yale bulldogs . association football . international football west auckland town , an english amateur team , defeats fc winterthur of switzerland 2–0 to win the sir thomas lipton trophy , one of the earliest international club competitions brazil 4 april — sport club internacional is founded in porto alegre 12 october - coritiba foot ball club is founded in curitiba england the football league – newcastle united 53 points , everton 46 , sunderland 44 , blackburn rovers 41 , the wednesday 40 , arsenal fc 38 fa cup final – manchester united 1–0 bristol city at crystal palace , london germany national championship – phönix karlsruhe 4–2 viktoria berlin at breslau romania formation of the romanian football federation ( federaţia română de fotbal or frf ) scotland scottish football league – celtic scottish cup final – competition cancelled following a riot at a replay between rangers and celtic ; the first match was drawn 2–2 and the replay ended 1–1 spain formation of the royal spanish football federation ( real federación española de fútbol or rfef ) . it is originally known as the federación española de clubs de football . athletics . 12 february — american athlete james clark runs world record marathon ( 2:46:52.6 ) in new york city at the brooklyn marathon 23 august — fred ‘ tenby ’ davies ( wales ) defeats bert day ( ireland ) at pontypridd to become world champion over the half-mile distance run . australian rules football . vfl premiership sydney swans wins the 13th vfl premiership : south melbourne 4.14 ( 38 ) d carlton 4.12 ( 36 ) at melbourne cricket ground ( mcg ) . bandy . sweden championship final – aik 7–3 djurgårdens if . baseball . world series 8–16 october — pittsburgh pirates ( nl ) defeats detroit tigers ( al ) to win the 1909 world series by 4 games to 3 . boxing . events 19 june — monte attell wins the world bantamweight championship joining his brother abe attell , who holds the world featherweight championship , as the first pair of brothers to hold world titles simultaneously . lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – jack johnson world light heavyweight championship – vacant world middleweight championship – stanley ketchel world welterweight championship – vacant world lightweight championship – battling nelson world featherweight championship – abe attell world bantamweight championship – jimmy walsh → '' fighting '' jimmy reagan → monte attell . canadian football . grey cup 4 december — 1st grey cup – university of toronto varsity blues 26–6 toronto parkdale canoe club . cricket . events 15 june — representatives of england , australia and south africa meet at lord 's to form the imperial cricket conference ( icc ) england county championship – kent minor counties championship – wiltshire most runs – ernie hayes 2105 36.29 ( hs 276 ) most wickets – colin blythe 215 14.54 ( bb 9–42 ) wisden cricketers of the year – warren bardsley , sydney barnes , douglas carr , arthur day , vernon ransford australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – vernon ransford 825 103.12 ( hs 182 ) most wickets – jack o'connor 40 23.00 ( bb 7–36 ) india bombay triangular – europeans new zealand plunket shield – auckland south africa currie cup – western province west indies inter-colonial tournament – barbados . cycling . tour de france françois faber ( luxembourg ) wins the 7th tour de france giro d'italia luigi ganna ( italy ) wins the inaugural giro d'italia . eton wall game . events 30 november — a goal is scored in the st . andrew 's day match at eton college , the last time this has happened in the st . andrew 's day game ( the most important match of the year ) though points have been scored by other methods . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – ulrich salchow ( sweden ) world women 's champion – lily kronberger ( hungary ) world pairs champions – phyllis johnson and james h . johnson ( great britain ) . golf . major tournaments british open – john henry taylor u.s . open – george sargent other tournaments british amateur – robert maxwell us amateur – robert a . gardner . horse racing . england grand national – lutteur iii 1,000 guineas stakes – electra 2,000 guineas stakes – minoru the derby – minoru the oaks – perola st . leger stakes – bayardo australia melbourne cup – prince foote canada queen 's plate – shimonese ireland irish grand national – little hack ii irish derby stakes – bachelor 's double usa kentucky derby – wintergreen preakness stakes – effendi belmont stakes – joe madden . ice hockey . stanley cup march — ottawa hockey club wins the eastern canada hockey association ( echa ) championship and the stanley cup . march — renfrew creamery kings win the federal hockey league championship and challenge for the stanley cup , but can not play because the stanley cup trustees rule their players are ineligible . amateur hockey february — the allan cup is donated to be the amateur championship hockey trophy of canada march — ottawa cliffsides win the inter-provincial amateur hockey union ( ipahu ) and the allan cup . the cliffsides then lose a challenge to queen 's college of kingston , ontario . professional hockey 25 november — eastern canada hockey association ( echa ) disbands over the plans of the montreal wanderers to change rinks . the wanderers are shut out and the new canadian hockey association ( cha ) is formed with the remainder of the echa teams . the cha will disband in january 1910 . 2 december — the montreal wanderers form the national hockey association ( nha ) with the renfrew creamery kings , cobalt silver kings and haileybury comets of the temiscaming league . the nha owners also organize a new team les canadiens which is the basis of today 's montreal canadiens . the nha will absorb ottawa and the montreal shamrocks of the cha in january 1910 . motorsport . rowing . the boat race 3 april — oxford wins the 66th the boat race 1909 . rugby league . international 10 february — great britain defeats australia to claim the first ever ashes series in the final match of the 1908–09 kangaroo tour of great britain england championship – wigan challenge cup – wakefield trinity 17–0 hull f.c . at headingley rugby stadium , leeds rugby league county leagues – wigan rugby league county leagues – halifax lancashire county cup – wigan 10–9 oldham yorkshire county cup – halifax 9–5 hunslet australia 14 september — nsw premiership is won by minor premiers south sydney on a forfeit after balmain withdraws from the grand final . rugby union . home nations championship 27th home nations championship series is won by wales wales defeats france in a 1909 non-championship match . it is later retrospectively regarded as a grand slam winner . october 8 – the first rugby football match to be played at twickenham stadium is won by the harlequins when they defeat richmond at the brand new ground . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – oscar mathisen ( norway ) . tennis . australia australian men 's singles championship – anthony wilding ( nz ) defeats ernie parker ( australia ) 6–1 7–5 6–2 england the championships , wimbledon – arthur gore ( gb ) defeats josiah ritchie ( gb ) 6–8 1–6 6–2 6–2 6–2 the championships , wimbledon – dora boothby defeats agnes morton 6–4 4–6 8–6 france french men 's singles championship – max decugis defeats maurice germot : details unknown french women 's singles championship – jeanne matthey defeats gallay : details unknown usa us open ( tennis ) – william larned defeats william clothier 6–1 6–2 5–7 1–6 6–1 us open ( tennis ) – hazel hotchkiss wightman defeats maud barger-wallach 6–0 6–1 davis cup 1909 international lawn tennis challenge – 5–0 at double bay grounds ( grass ) sydney , australia . references .