1960 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1960 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . 1960 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1960 5 january when a woman ascends the stairs ( japan ) 12 january mrs . warren 's profession ( west germany ) 20 january the immoral mr . teas 21 january toby tyler 26 january two way stretch ( u.k . ) 27 january cash mccall 28 january the lady with the dog ( u.s.s.r . ) february 1960 1 february hell bent for leather 3 february the rise and fall of legs diamond 4 february visit to a small planet 5 february la dolce vita ( italy ) 11 february once more , with feeling ! sink the bismarck ! ( u.k . ) 16 february cimarron 19 february devi ( india ) the last voyage 24 february the bramble bush kidnapped 25 february the battle of the sexes ( u.k . ) 27 february cleopatra 's daughter the hypnotic eye march 1960 1 march comanche station heller in pink tights 2 march eyes without a face ( france ) 3 march home from the hill 4 march never take sweets from a stranger ( u.k . ) 5 march the 3rd voice 9 march can-can 10 march purple noon ( france ) 12 march seven thieves 15 march 5 branded women the angry silence ( u.k . ) 17 march breathless ( france ) 18 march the hole ( france ) 23 march the big risk ( france ) 31 march please do n't eat the daisies . april–june . april 1960 2 april twelve hours to kill 5 april the league of gentlemen ( u.k . ) 6 april tall story the unforgiven 10 april hell is a city 13 april obaltan ( south korea ) 14 april the fugitive kind 15 april who was that lady ? 21 april the ninth circle ( yugoslavia ) may 1960 16 may peeping tom ( u.k . ) 17 may the challenge ( u.k . ) 19 may crack in the mirror pollyanna 25 may faust ( west germany ) 26 may wild river june 1960 3 june cruel story of youth ( japan ) 7 june never let go ( u.k . ) 9 june macario ( mexico ) 15 june the apartment 16 june psycho 17 june the story of ruth a terrible beauty 22 june the gallant hours house of usher 23 june bells are ringing the party is over ( argentina ) portrait in black 28 june murder , inc . 29 june l'avventura ( italy ) strangers when we meet . july–september . july 1960 7 july the brides of dracula elmer gantry inherit the wind 10 july 13 ghosts the rat race 13 july the lost world 15 july from the terrace knights of the teutonic order ( poland ) 20 july the bellboy 25 july the entertainer ( u.k . ) 30 july jigoku ( japan ) august 1960 5 august last woman on earth mughal-e-azam ( india ) parakh ( india ) 7 august it started in naples 9 august make mine mink ( u.k . ) 10 august jungle cat ocean 's 11 11 august black sunday ( italy ) song without end 14 august alakazam the great ( japan ) 17 august the enchanting shadow ( hong kong ) the time machine 20 august college confidential september 1960 6 september rocco and his brothers ( italy/france ) 8 september let 's make love 9 september september storm 14 september the little shop of horrors 15 september under ten flags 16 september high time 19 september the bad sleep well ( japan ) 28 september sunrise at campobello 29 september kapo ( italy ) surprise package 30 september hell to eternity . october–december . october 1960 1 october autumn has already started never on sunday ( greece/united states ) 6 october spartacus 8 october a false student ( japan ) 9 october night and fog in japan ( japan ) 12 october the magnificent seven 13 october midnight lace 17 october the devil 's eye ( sweden ) 18 october the millionairess ( u.k . ) 24 october the alamo 27 october everybody go home ( italy ) 28 october zazie in the metro ( france ) 31 october man in the moon ( u.k . ) november 1960 1 november her brother ( japan ) ten who dared 3 november el cochecito ( spain ) five cartridges ( east germany ) the housemaid ( south korea ) 4 november butterfield 8 g.i . blues 10 november the world of suzie wong ( u.k./u.s . ) 13 november late autumn ( japan ) north to alaska 14 november the facts of life 16 november fortunat ( france/italy ) 22 november cinderfella 23 november go to hell , hoodlums ! the naked island ( japan ) december 1960 7 december village of the damned ( u.k . ) 8 december the sundowners 9 december barsaat ki raat ( india ) 11 december the human vapor 12 december the river of love ( egypt ) ta kitrina gantia ( greece ) 14 december esther and the king ( u.s./italy ) 16 december exodus the three worlds of gulliver 20 december flaming star pepe tunes of glory ( u.k . ) the wackiest ship in the army 21 december swiss family robinson 23 december the grass is greener 28 december where the boys are 30 december the last witness ( west germany ) . notable films released in 1960 . united states unless stated . . the 3rd voice , directed by hubert cornfield , starring edmond o'brien , laraine day , julie london 5 branded women , directed by martin ritt , starring vera miles , barbara bel geddes , jeanne moreau 13 ghosts , directed by william castle . a . adua and friends ( adua e le compagne ) , starring simone signoret – ( italy ) alakazam the great ( saiyu-ki ) , an anime film – ( japan ) the alamo , directed by and starring john wayne , co-starring richard widmark , laurence harvey , chill wills , frankie avalon , richard boone ali baba bujang lapok – ( malaysia/singapore ) the angry silence , starring richard attenborough – ( u.k . ) anuradha – ( india ) the apartment , directed by billy wilder , starring jack lemmon , shirley maclaine , fred macmurray , ray walston , jack kruschen , edie adams autumn has already started ( aki tachinu ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) l'avventura ( the adventure ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni – ( italy ) . b . bad luck ( zezowate szczęście ) – ( poland ) barsaat ki raat , starring madhubala and bharat bhushan – ( india ) the bad sleep well ( warui yatsu hodo yoku nemuru ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) because they 're young , starring dick clark beat girl , starring david farrar , gillian hills , adam faith , christopher lee – ( u.k . ) the bellboy , starring jerry lewis bells are ringing , starring dean martin and judy holliday beyond the time barrier the big risk ( classe tous risques ) , starring lino ventura , sandra milo , jean-paul belmondo – ( france ) black sunday ( la maschera del demonio ) – ( italy ) les bonnes femmes ( the girls ) , directed by claude chabrol – ( france ) the bramble bush , starring richard burton and angie dickinson breathless ( à bout de souffle ) , directed by jean-luc godard , starring jean-paul belmondo and jean seberg – ( france ) the brides of dracula , starring peter cushing – ( u.k . ) the broken pots ( kırık çanaklar ) – ( turkey ) butterfield 8 , directed by daniel mann , starring elizabeth taylor and laurence harvey . c . can-can , starring frank sinatra , shirley maclaine , louis jourdan , juliet prowse carry on constable , starring sid james and eric barker – ( u.k . ) cash mccall , starring james garner and natalie wood the challenge , a.k.a . it takes a thief , starring jayne mansfield – ( u.k . ) cidade ameaçada ( a.k.a . jerry the gangster ) – ( brazil ) cimarron , directed by anthony mann , starring glenn ford , maria schell , anne baxter cinderfella , starring jerry lewis and anna maria alberghetti circus of horrors , starring anton diffring and donald pleasence – ( u.k . ) cleopatra 's daughter , starring debra paget meghe dhaka tara ( meghe daka tara ) , directed by ritwik ghatak – ( india ) el cochecito ( the little coach ) , directed by marco ferreri – ( spain ) college confidential , starring mamie van doren comanche station , directed by budd boetticher , starring randolph scott come back , africa , documentary film – ( south africa ) crack in the mirror , directed by richard fleischer , starring orson welles , bradford dillman , juliette gréco the criminal , directed by joseph losey , starring stanley baker – ( u.k . ) cruel story of youth ( seishun zankoku monogatari ) , directed by nagisa oshima – ( japan ) . d . the dark at the top of the stairs , starring dorothy mcguire , shirley knight , robert preston dentist in the chair , starring bob monkhouse and kenneth connor – ( u.k . ) desire in the dust , starring joan bennett , martha hyer , raymond burr devi ( a.k.a . the goddess ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) the devil 's eye ( djävulens öga ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring bibi andersson – ( sweden ) la dolce vita ( the sweet life ) , directed by federico fellini , starring marcello mastroianni and anita ekberg – ( italy ) . e . elmer gantry , directed by richard brooks , starring burt lancaster , jean simmons , arthur kennedy , shirley jones the enchanting shadow ( ching nu yu hun ) – ( hong kong ) the entertainer , directed by tony richardson , starring laurence olivier – ( u.k . ) esther and the king , starring joan collins and richard egan – ( u.s./italy ) everybody go home ( tutti a casa ) , directed by luigi comencini – ( italy ) exodus , directed by otto preminger , starring paul newman , eva marie saint , sal mineo , peter lawford , lee j . cobb , john derek eyes without a face ( les yeux sans visage ) , starring pierre brasseur and alida valli – ( france ) . f . the facts of life , starring bob hope and lucille ball a false student ( nise daigakusei ) – ( japan ) faust – ( west germany ) five cartridges ( fünf patronenhülsen ) – ( east germany ) flaming star , starring elvis presley and barbara eden fortunat ( fortunate ) , starring bourvil and michèle morgan – ( france/italy ) from the terrace , starring paul newman , joanne woodward , ina balin , george grizzard , myrna loy . g . g.i . blues , starring elvis presley and juliet prowse the gallant hours , a biopic of william f . halsey starring james cagney girl of the night , starring anne francis and john kerr go to hell , hoodlums ! ( kutabare gurentai ) – ( japan ) goliath and the dragon goliath ii , a disney animated short the grass is greener , starring cary grant , deborah kerr , robert mitchum , jean simmons guns of the timberland , starring alan ladd . h . hell bent for leather , starring audie murphy and felicia farr hell is a city , starring stanley baker – ( u.k . ) heller in pink tights , starring sophia loren and anthony quinn hell to eternity , starring jeffrey hunter and david janssen her brother ( otôto ) , directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) high time , starring bing crosby hobbi al-wahid ( my only love ) , starring omar sharif – ( egypt ) the hole ( le trou ) ( a.k.a . the night watch ) , directed by jacques becker – ( france ) home from the hill , directed by vincente minnelli , starring robert mitchum , eleanor parker , george peppard house of usher , directed by roger corman , starring vincent price the housemaid ( hanyeo ) – ( south korea ) the human vapor ( gasu ningen dai ichigo ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the hypnotic eye , starring jacques bergerac . i . il mattatore , directed by dino risi – ( italy ) i aim at the stars , directed by j . lee thompson , starring curd jürgens , herbert lom , gia scala ice palace , starring richard burton , robert ryan and carolyn jones the iceman cometh , directed by sidney lumet , starring jason robards , jr . , myron mccormick , and robert redford – ( made for tv ) inherit the wind , directed by stanley kramer , starring spencer tracy , fredric march , gene kelly , harry morgan , dick york it started in naples , starring clark gable and sophia loren . j . jaali note ( counterfeit money ) , starring madhubala and dev anand – ( india ) jigoku ( hell ) – ( japan ) jis desh men ganga behti hai ( the land where the ganges flows ) , starring raj kapoor – ( india ) . k . kanoon ( the law ) , starring ashok kumar – ( india ) knights of the teutonic order ( krzyżacy ) , directed by aleksander ford – ( poland ) . l . the lady with the dog ( dama s sobachkoy ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) the last voyage , starring robert stack and dorothy malone the last witness ( der letzte zeuge ) – ( west germany ) last woman on earth , directed by roger corman late autumn ( akibiyori ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) the league of gentlemen , directed by basil dearden , starring jack hawkins – ( u.k . ) let 's make love , starring marilyn monroe and yves montand the little shop of horrors , directed by roger corman linda , starring carol white – ( u.k . ) the lost world , starring michael rennie and jill st . john love in simla , starring joy mukherjee and sadhana – ( india ) . m . macario , directed by roberto gavaldón – ( mexico ) macumba love – ( united states/brazil ) the magnificent seven , directed by john sturges , starring yul brynner , steve mcqueen , charles bronson , eli wallach , robert vaughn , james coburn , brad dexter , horst buchholz make mine mink , starring terry-thomas – ( u.k . ) makkers staakt uw wild geraas ( a.k.a . that joyous eve ) , directed by fons rademakers – ( netherlands ) man in the moon , starring kenneth more – ( u.k . ) manzil ( destination ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) midnight lace , starring doris day , rex harrison , john gavin , myrna loy the millionairess , directed by anthony asquith , starring sophia loren and peter sellers – ( u.k . ) the mountain road , starring james stewart mrs . warren 's profession ( frau warrens gewerbe ) , starring lilli palmer ( west germany ) mughal-e-azam ( the greatest of the mughals ) , starring madhubala and dilip kumar – ( india ) murder , inc . , starring peter falk , stuart whitman , may britt , henry morgan . n . the naked island ( hadaka no shima ) – ( japan ) never let go , directed by john guillermin , starring richard todd , peter sellers , elizabeth sellars and adam faith – ( u.k . ) never on sunday , directed by jules dassin , starring melina mercouri – ( greece/united states ) never take sweets from a stranger , starring patrick allen and gwen watford – ( u.k . ) night and fog in japan ( nihon no yoru to kiri ) , directed by nagisa oshima – ( japan ) the ninth circle ( deveti krug ) – ( yugoslavia ) north to alaska , starring john wayne , stewart granger , ernie kovacs , capucine , fabian forte . o . obaltan ( a.k.a . the stray bullet ) – ( south korea ) ocean 's 11 , starring frank sinatra , dean martin , sammy davis , jr . , peter lawford , joey bishop , angie dickinson once more , with feeling ! , directed by stanley donen , starring yul brynner our last spring ( a.k.a . eroica ) , directed by michael cacoyannis – ( greece ) . p . parakh , directed by bimal roy – ( india ) the party is over ( fin de fiesta ) – ( argentina ) le passage du rhin , starring charles aznavour – ( france/italy/west germany ) peeping tom , directed by michael powell , starring karl boehm , anna massey , moira shearer – ( u.k . ) pepe , starring cantinflas please do n't eat the daisies , starring doris day and david niven pollyanna , starring hayley mills portrait in black , starring lana turner , anthony quinn , sandra dee the private lives of adam and eve , starring mickey rooney and mamie van doren psycho , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring anthony perkins , vera miles , janet leigh , martin balsam , john gavin the pure hell of st trinian 's , starring cecil parker and joyce grenfell – ( u.k . ) purple noon ( plein soleil ) , a.k.a . blazing sun , directed by rené clément , starring alain delon – ( france ) . q . the queen of spades ( pikovaya dama ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) . r . the rat race , starring debbie reynolds , tony curtis , don rickles the rise and fall of legs diamond , directed by budd boetticher , starring ray danton and karen steele the river of love ( nahr el hub ) , starring omar sharif – ( egypt ) rocco and his brothers ( rocco e i suoi fratelli ) , directed by luchino visconti , starring alain delon – ( italy/france ) romeo , juliet and darkness ( romeo , julie a tma ) – ( czechoslovakia ) the running jumping & standing still film , directed by richard lester and peter sellers – ( u.k . ) . s . saturday night and sunday morning , directed by karel reisz , starring albert finney , shirley anne field , rachel roberts – ( u.k . ) the savage innocents , directed by nicholas ray , starring anthony quinn scent of mystery , starring denholm elliott and elizabeth taylor school for scoundrels , directed by robert hamer , starring ian carmichael and terry-thomas – ( u.k . ) september storm , starring joanne dru sergeant rutledge , starring jeffrey hunter and woody strode seven days . seven nights ( moderato cantabile ) , starring jeanne moreau – ( france ) seven thieves , starring edward g . robinson , rod steiger , eli wallach , joan collins shoot the pianist ( tirez sur le pianiste ) , directed by françois truffaut , starring charles aznavour – ( france ) sink the bismarck ! , starring kenneth more – ( u.k . ) the skeleton of mrs . morales ( el esqueleto de la señora morales ) , starring arturo de córdova – ( mexico ) song without end , starring dirk bogarde , capucine , patricia morison sons and lovers , directed by jack cardiff , starring dean stockwell and trevor howard – ( u.k . ) spartacus , directed by stanley kubrick , starring kirk douglas , laurence olivier , jean simmons , charles laughton , john gavin , peter ustinov , tony curtis the spider 's web , directed by godfrey grayson . based on an agatha christie play ( u.k . ) the story of ruth , a biblical drama starring stuart whitman and peggy wood strangers when we meet , starring kim novak , kirk douglas , ernie kovacs struggle for eagle peak ( venner ) – ( norway ) the subterraneans , starring george peppard the sundowners , directed by fred zinnemann , starring deborah kerr and robert mitchum – ( us/uk/australia ) summer of the seventeenth doll , a.k.a . season of passion , starring anne baxter , angela lansbury , ernest borgnine , john mills sunrise at campobello , starring ralph bellamy ( as franklin d . roosevelt ) and greer garson surprise package , directed by stanley donen , starring yul brynner , mitzi gaynor , noël coward swiss family robinson , starring john mills and dorothy mcguire . t . tall story , starring jane fonda , anthony perkins , ray walston tarzan the magnificent , starring gordon scott , jock mahoney , john carradine a terrible beauty , directed by tay garnett , starring robert mitchum and anne heywood testament of orpheus ( le testament d'orphée ) , directed by jean cocteau – ( france ) there was a crooked man , starring norman wisdom – ( u.k . ) the thousand eyes of dr . mabuse ( die tausend augen des dr . mabuse ) , directed by fritz lang – ( west germany ) the three worlds of gulliver , starring kerwin mathews the time machine , starring rod taylor and yvette mimieux too hot to handle , starring jayne mansfield – ( u.k . ) the trials of oscar wilde , starring peter finch – ( u.k . ) the truth ( la vérité ) , directed by henri-georges clouzot , starring brigitte bardot – ( france ) tunes of glory , directed by ronald neame , starring alec guinness – ( u.k . ) twelve hours to kill , starring nico minardos and barbara eden two-way stretch , starring peter sellers – ( u.k . ) two women , directed by vittorio de sica , starring sophia loren – ( italy ) . u . under ten flags , starring van heflin and charles laughton the unforgiven , starring burt lancaster and audrey hepburn universe – ( canada ) . v . vice raid , starring mamie van doren village of the damned , starring george sanders and barbara shelley – ( u.k . ) the virgin spring ( jungfrukällan ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring max von sydow – ( sweden ) visit to a small planet , starring jerry lewis . w . the wackiest ship in the army , starring jack lemmon and ricky nelson watch your stern , starring eric barker and leslie phillips – ( u.k . ) when a woman ascends the stairs ( onna ga kaidan wo agaru toki ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) where the boys are , starring george hamilton , paula prentiss , connie francis the white horse inn ( im weißen rößl ) – ( west germany/austria ) who was that lady ? , starring dean martin , tony curtis , janet leigh wild river , directed by elia kazan , starring montgomery clift the world of suzie wong , starring nancy kwan and william holden – ( u.k./u.s . ) . y . ta kitrina gantia ( ta kitrina gantia ) – ( greece ) the young one ( la joven ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico/united states ) . z . zazie dans le métro , directed by louis malle – ( france ) . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) . births . january 4 - april winchell , american actress , voice actress , writer , talk radio host and commentator january 9 – terje pennie , estonian actress january 12 – oliver platt , canadian actor january 13 – kevin anderson , american actor january 18 – mark rylance , english actor february 7 – james spader , american actor february 14 – meg tilly , canadian-american actress february 18 – tony anselmo , american animator and cartoon voice actor february 20 – wendee lee , american voice actress february 28 – dorothy stratten , canadian model and actress ( died 1980 ) march 17 – vicki lewis , american singer and actress march 31 – michelle nicastro , american actress and singer ( died 2010 ) april 4 – hugo weaving , australian-british actor april 14 – brad garrett , american actor , voice actor , stand-up comedian and professional poker-player april 29 - steve blum , american voice actor may 20 - tony goldwyn , american actor , singer , producer , director and political activist may 21 – mohanlal , indian actor may 24 – kristin scott thomas , english actress may 31 – chris elliott , american actor and comedian june 17 – thomas haden church , american actor july 5 – brad loree , canadian actor and stuntman july 10 - jeff bergman , american voice actor , comedian and impressionist july 11 – jafar panahi , iranian director july 14 – jane lynch , american actress august 7 david duchovny , american actor rosana pastor , spanish actress august 10 – antonio banderas , spanish actor august 16 – timothy hutton , american actor august 17 – sean penn , american actor august 29 – viire valdma , estonian actress september 1 – tahmineh milani , iranian filmmaker september 9 – hugh grant , english actor september 10 – colin firth , english actor september 13 - greg baldwin , american actor and voice actor september 17 – frédéric pierrot , french actor october 9 – maddie blaustein , american voice actress ( died 2008 ) october 18 – jean-claude van damme , belgian actor november 5 – tilda swinton , english actress november 11 – stanley tucci , american actor and film director november 18 – elizabeth perkins , american actress december 3 daryl hannah , american actress julianne moore , american actress december 9 - jeff '' swampy '' marsh , american animator , writer , director , producer and voice actor december 10 kenneth branagh , northern irish actor and film director michael schoeffling , american actor and model . deaths . january 1 – margaret sullavan , 50 , american actress , the shop around the corner , the mortal storm january 3 – victor sjöström , 80 , swedish film actor and director , the phantom carriage , wild strawberries january 4 – dudley nichols , 64 , american screenwriter , bringing up baby , stagecoach january 21 – matt moore , 72 , irish-american actor , seven brides for seven brothers , coquette january 24 – john miljan , 67 , american actor , the plainsman , mississippi february 3 fred buscaglione , 38 , italian actor and singer pierre watkin , 70 , american actor , pride of the yankees , the hunted march 19 – sonya levien , 71 , russian screenwriter , oklahoma ! , quo vadis , interrupted melody april 5 – alma kruger , 90 , american actress , his girl friday , saboteur april 25 – hope emerson , 62 , american actress , caged , adam 's rib may 27 – george zucco , 74 , british actor , the adventures of sherlock holmes , my favorite blonde june 29 – dimples cooper , 46 , filipina actress , ang tatlong hambog , miracles of love july 2 – gene fowler , 70 , american screenwriter , what price hollywood ? , the call of the wild july 15 – lawrence tibbett , 63 , american singer and actor , the rogue song , under your spell july 26 – cedric gibbons , 67 , irish production designer and art director , an american in paris , the bad and the beautiful july 29 – leonora corbett , 52 , british actress , love on wheels , living dangerously august 10 – frank lloyd , 74 , scottish director , mutiny on the bounty , cavalcade september 4 – alfred e . green , 71 , american director , baby face , top banana september 5 – aku korhonen , 57 , finnish actor september 11 – edwin justus mayer , 63 , american screenwriter , to be or not to be , a royal scandal october 11 – richard cromwell , 50 , american actor , the lives of a bengal lancer , jezebel october 15 – clara kimball young , 70 , american actress , my official wife , kept husbands november 3 – paul willis , 59 , american silent-film actor , the fall of a nation november 5 mack sennett , 80 , canadian-american producer and director , tillie 's punctured romance , tango tangles ward bond , 57 , american actor , it 's a wonderful life , the searchers , rio bravo november 16 – clark gable , 59 , american actor , it happened one night , mutiny on the bounty , gone with the wind november 19 – phyllis haver , 61 , american actress , chicago , sal of singapore november 20 – betty lawford , 48 , british actress , criminal lawyer , the devil thumbs a ride december 14 – gregory ratoff , 67 , russian actor and director , all about eve , intermezzo . film debuts . alan bates – the entertainer karen black – the prime time dyan cannon – the rise and fall of legs diamond richard chamberlain – the secret of the purple reef bruce dern – wild river albert finney – the entertainer jane fonda – tall story diane ladd – murder , inc . peter o'toole – kidnapped robert redford – tall story gian maria volonté – under ten flags susannah york – tunes of glory . notes .