La Madeleine, Paris

history . the site of this edifice , centred at the end of rue royale , a line-of-sight between gabriel 's twin hôtels in the place de la concorde , required a suitably monumental end from the time that square was established in 1755 , as place louis xv . the settlement around the site was called ville l'évêque . the site in the suburban faubourg had been annexed to the city of paris in 1722 . two false starts were made in building a church on this site . the reconstruction of the older church consecrated to mary magdalene was considered . the first design , commissioned in 1757 , with construction begun with the king 's ceremonial placing of the cornerstone , 3 april 1763 , was halted in 1764 ; that first design , by pierre contant d'ivry , was based on jules hardouin mansart ’ s late baroque church of les invalides , with a dome surmounting a latin cross . in 1777 , contant d'ivry died and was replaced by his pupil guillaume-martin couture , who decided to start anew , razing the incomplete construction , shortening the nave and basing his new , more centralised design on the pantheon , rome . at the start of the french revolution , however , only the foundations and the grand portico had been finished ; the choir of the former church was demolished in 1797 , but work was discontinued while debate simmered as to what purpose the eventual building might serve in revolutionary france : a library , a public ballroom , and a marketplace were all suggested . in the meantime , the national assembly was housed in the palais bourbon behind a pedimented colonnaded front that was inspired by the completed portico at the far end of the former rue royale . after the execution of louis xvi his body was immediately transported to the old church of the madeleine ( demolished in 1799 ) , since the legislation in force forbade burial of his remains beside those of his father , the dauphin louis de france , at sens . two curates who had sworn fealty to the revolution held a short memorial service at the church . one of them , damoureau , stated in evidence : on 21 january 1815 louis xvi and marie antoinette 's remains were re-buried in the basilica of saint-denis where in 1816 his brother , king louis xviii , had a funerary monument erected by edme gaulle . in 1806 napoleon made his decision to erect a memorial , a temple de la gloire de la grande armée ( '' temple to the glory of the great army '' ) ; following an elaborate competition with numerous entries and a jury that decided on a design by the architect claude étienne de beaumont ( 1757–1811 ) , the emperor trumped all , instead commissioning pierre-alexandre vignon ( 1763–1828 ) to build his design on an antique temple ( compare the maison carrée , in nîmes ) the then-existing foundations were razed , preserving the standing columns , and work begun anew . with completion of the arc de triomphe du carrousel in 1808 , the original commemorative role for the temple was reduced . after the fall of napoleon , with the catholic reaction during the restoration , king louis xviii determined that the structure would be used as a church , dedicated to mary magdalene . vignon died in 1828 before completing the project and was replaced by jacques-marie huvé . a new competition was set up in 1828-29 , to determine the design for sculptures for the pediment , a last judgment , in which mary magdalene knelt to intercede for the damned ; the winner was philippe joseph henri lemaire . the july monarchy rededicated the monument of repentance for revolution as a monument of national reconciliation , and the nave was vaulted in 1831 . in 1837 it was briefly suggested that the building might best be utilised as a railway station , but the building was finally consecrated as a church in 1842 . the funeral of chopin at the church of the madeleine in paris was delayed almost two weeks , until 30 october 1849 . chopin had requested that mozart 's requiem be sung . the requiem had major parts for female voices , but the church of the madeleine had never permitted female singers in its choir . the church finally relented , on condition that the female singers remain behind a black velvet curtain . during the paris commune of 1871 , the curé of the church , abbé deguerry was one of those arrested and held hostage by the commune . he was executed alongside georges darboy , the archbishop of paris and four other hostages on 24 may , as french government troops were retaking the city . architecture . the madeleine is built in the neo-classical style and was inspired by the much smaller maison carree in nîmes , one of the best-preserved of all roman temples . it is one of the earliest large neo-classical buildings to imitate the whole external form of a roman temple , rather than just the portico front . its fifty-two corinthian columns , each high , are carried around the entire building . the pediment sculpture of the last judgement is by philippe joseph henri lemaire , and the church 's bronze doors bear reliefs representing the ten commandments . it measures . inside , the church has a single nave with three domes over wide arched bays , lavishly gilded in a decor inspired as much by roman baths as by renaissance artists . at the rear of the church , above the high altar , stands a statue by carlo marochetti depicting st mary magdalene being lifted up by angels which evokes the tradition concerning ecstasy which she entered in her daily prayer while in seclusion . the half-dome above the altar is frescoed by jules-claude ziegler , entitled the history of christianity , showing the key figures in the christian religion with – a sign of its second empire date – napoleon occupying centre stage . today . the madeleine is a parish church of the archdiocese of paris ; masses and other religious services are celebrated daily , and funerals and weddings are still celebrated here . in the basement of the church ( entrance on the flower market side ) is the foyer de la madeleine . typical of various foyers run by religious and civic groups throughout france , the madeleine is the home of a restaurant in which , for a yearly subscription fee , one can dine under the vaulted ceilings on a three-course french meal served by volunteers for a nominal price . after dining one can take coffee in a lounge at the far end of the foyer for one of the cheapest espressos in paris . the walls of the foyer are often decorated by local artists . . organ and organists . the church has a celebrated pipe organ , built by aristide cavaille-coll in 1845 . it was restored by cavaillé-coll 's successor charles mutin in 1927 , who also extended the manuals to 56 notes . tonal modifications were carried out by roethinger , danion-gonzalez , and dargassies in 1957 , 1971 and 1988 respectively . the position of titular organist has been held by many major organists and composers over the years : 1842–1846 charles-alexandre fessy 1847–1858 louis james alfred lefébure-wély 1858–1877 camille saint-saëns 1877–1896 théodore dubois 1896–1905 gabriel fauré 1905–1934 henri dallier 1935–1962 edouard mignan 1962–1968 jeanne demessieux 1969–1979 odile pierre 1979– françois-henri houbart . gallery . file : the madeleine , paris , france , ca . 1890-1900.jpg la madeleine in the 1890s file : p1030420 paris viii église de la madeleine colonnes façade occidentale rwk.jpg the colonnade file : place de la concorde à paris 8e.jpg from place de la concorde file : église de la madeleine 1 , paris july 2011.jpg the nave with jules-claude ziegler 's fresco the history of christianity prominently featuring napoleon file : алтарь церкви мадлен.париж.jpg the altar with the statue of mary magdalene file : p1030409 paris viii église de la madeleine coupole rwk.jpg one of the cupolas file : baptism of christ , église de la madeleine , paris july 2011.jpg baptism of christ by françois rude file : paris église madeleine fronton détail 2014.jpg pediment showing the last judgment file : eglise de la madeleine 1215.jpg the bronze doors following the theme of the ten commandments file : nathan and david.jpg nathan confronts david , bronze bas-relief on the church door file : p1030422 paris viii église de la madeleine saint jérome rwk.jpg saint jerome . see also . list of works by james pradier sculptures in la madeleine . references . external links . church 's website 3d model of the church for use in google earth insecula : église de la madeleine history of the site and the structure