Ranulf Flambard

early life . ranulf was a norman poole domesday book to magna carta pp . 170–171 and the son of thurstin , a parish priest in the diocese of bayeux . ranulf was probably born about 1060 , as he was close to 70 when he died in 1128 . barlow william rufus pp . 193–205 originally he worked for odo of bayeux , but he soon entered the chancery of king william i , odo 's half-brother . he stood out amongst the other clerks for his intelligence and his good looks . barlow feudal kingdom of england pp . 150–151 his nickname , flambard , means torch-bearer , incendiary or devouring flame ; and may have been given to him for his high-spirited personality . mason william ii p . 75 orderic vitalis , a medieval chronicler , records that robert despenser gave the nickname to ranulf , because robert resented the fact that ranulf , though of low birth , ordered the nobility around . barlow william rufus p . 141 archbishop anselm of canterbury told the pope that the nickname came from ranulf 's cruelty , which anselm likened to a consuming flame . orderic went on to claim that ranulf was '' educated from boyhood with base parasites among the hangers-on of the court '' . quoted in turner '' changing perceptions '' journal of british studies p . 107 ranulf acquired the reputation of an able financier and administrator , and helped to increase the royal revenues . chibnall anglo-norman england p . 115 he appears to have played an important part in the compilation of the domesday survey , chibnall anglo-norman england p . 114 perhaps even the main orchestrator of the project . mason william ii pp . 85–86 domesday book gives his profession as clerk , and records him holding land in a number of counties . before the death of the old king he became chaplain to maurice , bishop of london , whom he had formerly served in the chancery . some sources call him '' almost illiterate '' , but this probably meant he was not formally educated in the liberal arts . chibnall anglo-norman england p . 127 his work in the chancery and as an administrator would have required knowledge of latin . he also served as the keeper of the king 's seal from about 1085 . once , while he was travelling in the thames estuary with the seal , he was captured by pirates . he prevented the capture of the seal by throwing it into the sea . chibnall anglo-norman england p . 133 although he served william the conqueror , he does not attest a single genuine charter or writ of william 's , which implies he was not a leading servant . mason '' flambard , ranulf '' oxford dictionary of national biography when king william died and his lands were split between his elder son robert curthose , who received normandy , and the third son , william rufus , who received england , ranulf chose to serve rufus in england . . work under rufus . before the death of william the conqueror , ranulf held a prebend in the diocese of salisbury . early in the reign of rufus he held the offices of dean of christchurch in twynham , hampshire and was a prebendary of london and lincoln . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : durham : bishops he was still keeper of the king 's seal , and also may have been in charge of the royal scriptorium . barlow william rufus p . 147 he is usually described as the chaplain of rufus , lyon constitutional and legal history p . 153 but he is also called treasurer and sometimes capitalis justicaiarius . chrimes introduction to the administrative history p . 20 other times his role is given the title procurator . william of malmesbury calls him the '' manager of the whole kingdom '' . quoted in moore '' ranulf flambard and christina of markyate '' belief and culture p . 231 at christchurch , ranulf reduced the number of canons serving the church from 25 to 13 , through not replacing clerks who died . ranulf kept the revenues that would have gone to the missing canons and used it to rebuild the church . williams english and norman conquest p . 128 some medieval sources claim that in rebuilding the church at twynham , he not only demolished the church he was replacing , but nine others that were nearby . dodwell anglo-saxon art p . 233 as chief financial administrator , ranulf bore the brunt of the chronicler 's condemnations for extortion and efforts to increase royal revenues . besides attempts to increase the efficiency of collection and the rate of taxation , ranulf created new methods of raising money . one of his new measures in revenue collection came in 1094 , when the fyrd , or english militia , was assembled to fight in normandy against the king 's brother robert curthose . when all the men had assembled , instead of sending them to normandy , ranulf dismissed them , after collecting the 10 shillings that each man had been given by their district for maintenance . ranulf then spent the money on mercenaries . huscroft ruling england p . 66 ranulf also actively pressed lawsuits , including bringing suit against anselm on the day of anselm 's consecration as archbishop of canterbury . cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 63 another innovation was the attempt to collect a relief , much like the relief due from vassals at the death of an overlord , from the under-tenants of church lands when the church office changed hands . knowles monastic order pp . 612–613 this attempt came at the death of wulfstan , bishop of worcester in 1095 , when the king sent writs to the free tenants of the bishop , setting the amount of relief owed to the king . mason william ii p . 137 this attempt was not repeated , however . mason william ii pp . 178–179 ranulf administered for the king a large proportion of the vacant ecclesiastical offices . huscroft ruling england p . 99 he personally managed sixteen abbeys or bishoprics . hollister henry i p . 381 eventually he obtained the wealthy see of durham for himself in may 1099 , being consecrated on 5 june 1099 . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 241 he had been the custodian of the see since the death of the previous bishop in early 1096 . barlow william rufus p . 359 at his consecration , he managed to avoid giving a profession of obedience to thomas the archbishop of york , just as his predecessor had done . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 329 footnote 83 william of malmesbury , a medieval chronicler , accused ranulf of paying 1,000 pounds for the bishopric . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 407 he was given ecclesiastical jurisdiction over carlisle and cumbria , because his predecessors had done so as bishops of lindisfarne , but he only exercised this for a short time , as after the accession of henry i jurisdiction over these areas was transferred to the diocese of york . rose '' cumbrian society '' studies in church history p . 124 it has been suggested that ranulf may have been the first justiciar of all england ( or chief justiciar ) , barlow william rufus p . 202 although he never held the title and it is not clear if his power was as extensive as roger of salisbury in the following reign . richardson and sayles governance of mediaeval england p . 159 he ran the government of england while rufus was fighting in normandy , not only raising money , but issuing writs and judging court cases . huscroft ruling england p . 83 william of malmesbury in describing ranulf 's financial efforts said that he '' skinned the rich , ground the down the poor , and swept other men 's inheritances into his net . '' quoted in huscroft ruling england pp . 125–123 another medieval chronicler , orderic vitalis , said that ranulf planned to revise the survey of england , almost certainly domesday book , and that he planned to use that revised survey to confiscate all excess holdings over a certain amount . if this was really planned , it was never carried out . ranulf often worked in concert with haimo the dapifer , or seneschal , and urse d'abetot in carrying out royal judgements . on one occasion , they , along with robert bloet the bishop of lincoln , reassessed the lands of thorney abbey for taxes . on another occasion , they were ordered along with ralph de luffa bishop of chichester to see that the abbey of fecamp received custody of a church at steyning . stenton english justice pp . 58–59 others who often worked with ranulf were robert fitzhamon , roger bigod , and eudo the dapifer . these men are sometimes considered by historians to be the first exchequer of pleas . mason william ii p . 23 there are also signs during ranulf 's administration of resident justices in the counties who held courts for the king . itinerant justices were probably also used to hear pleas that were reserved to the crown . lyon constitutional and legal history pp . 168–169 lyon constitutional and legal history pp . 190–191 while administering england for rufus , ranulf also supervised construction projects . under his management , the first stone bridge in london was constructed . ranulf also built a wall around the white tower in london , enclosing the inner ward . a new hall at westminster was also built , barlow feudal kingdom of england pp . 167–168 of which the outside walls of westminster hall are still surviving . crouch normans caption to plate 22 he started building the church at christchurch at twynham , which he had been granted by rufus . after rufus ' death , the church was confiscated from ranulf , and building work ceased . the crypts and transepts of the current church , however , date from ranulf 's construction work . kerr norman sites p . 28 . under henry i . at the succession of king henry i , the new king imprisoned ranulf in the tower of london huscroft ruling england p . 68 on 15 august 1100 cantor church , kingship , and lay investiture p . 134 on charges of embezzlement . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 229 his custodian , william de mandeville , allowed the bishop to escape chibnall anglo-norman england p . 75 on 3 february 1101 . poole domesday book to magna carta p . 115 flambard was not only the first inmate at the castle , but also the first person to escape from it . hollister henry i pp . 116–117 , pp . 133–134 '' ranulf flambard , bishop of durham '' tower of london a popular legend represents the bishop as descending from the window of his cell by a rope which friends had smuggled to him in a flagon of wine . ranulf gave the wine to his guards , and after they were drunk and asleep , climbed down the rope to escape . his friends had arranged a ship to transport ranulf , some of the bishop 's treasure , and the bishop 's elderly mother to normandy . crouch normans p . 170 he took refuge across the english channel with henry 's brother robert curthose , where he became one of the duke 's principal advisors . huscroft ruling england p . 69 hollister '' anglo-norman civil war '' english historical review pp . 323–324 king henry dispossessed ranulf of his lands at whitsun in 1101 , and the new archbishop of york gerard deposed him from his bishopric . hollister henry i p . 136 the archbishop of canterbury , anselm arranged for flambard 's trial in a papal court for simony , and a papal decree was issued against ranulf . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 234 as robert 's advisor , ranulf pressed the duke to dispute henry 's claim to the crown of england . the historian david crouch says that ranulf '' had to provide the strategic vision and energy that duke robert lacked '' , quoted in crouch normans p . 165 and other historians have agreed that ranulf 's arrival was the catalyst to curthose 's ability to mount an invasion . ranulf was in charge of organising transport for the duke 's invasion of england , vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 231 and also secured the defection of some of henry 's ships , thus allowing the fleet to land safely . crouch normans p . 171 robert invaded england in july 1101 along with ranulf , but robert agreed at the treaty of alton on 2 august 1101 to renounce his claim to the english throne . although no chronicler mentions ranulf being present at alton , he probably was there . hollister '' anglo-norman civil war '' english historical review p . 329 ranulf was pardoned in the treaty and restored to his bishopric , but he chose to stay with robert for five more years . some historians , including c . w . hollister , see the treaty as mainly ranulf 's work , as mainly an attempt to salvage his ecclesiastical career in england , along with a displacement of ranulf from being the chief councillor of curthose to merely being one of many . hollister '' anglo-norman civil war '' english historical review p . 327 robert rewarded ranulf for his advice during the invasion by entrusting him with the administration of the see of lisieux . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 269 after robert 's defeat by henry at tinchebray in 1106 , the bishop was among the first to make his peace with henry , and returned to durham . crouch normans p . 179 he retired from political life . henry had already replaced him with roger of salisbury an able financier who was infinitely more acceptable to the nation . although some historians have theorised that ranulf 's time in normandy was as an agent of henry , it appears that ranulf was mainly looking out for his own interests and those of his family . hollister '' anglo-norman civil war '' english historical review p . 333 in 1108 , ranulf was dragged into the middle of the ongoing dispute between archbishop anselm and the newly appointed archbishop of york , thomas over whether or not thomas should profess obedience to anselm . because anselm refused to consecrate thomas without a profession , and thomas refused to profess , thomas was unable to consecrate bishops himself . ranulf wrote to anselm , asking that he might act as thomas ' surrogate and consecrate thurgot as bishop of st andrew 's . in september 1108 , anselm wrote to ranulf forbidding anyone but thomas or anselm himself to consecrate thurgot or any other bishops . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 337 later , ranulf tried to bribe king henry to take thomas ' side . vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan pp . 347–348 thurgot had been prior of the cathedral chapter at durham , but had disagreed with ranulf , who arranged for him to be elected to st andrew 's as a solution to the quarrel . knowles monastic order p . 629 it was ranulf who ordained thurstan , the archbishop-elect of york , as a priest in 1115 , although thurstan had to wait for consecration as bishop for another four years . ranulf attended the council of reims in 1119 held by pope callixtus ii . barlow english church 1066–1154 p . 111 in 1125 john of crema , the papal legate to england , visited durham to investigate charges against the bishop . medieval chroniclers told the story that the legate was much taken with ranulf 's niece , and after sleeping with the girl , took no action on the charges against ranulf . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 555 the story is unlikely to be true . hollister henry i p . 307 . death and legacy . ranulf worked to complete the cathedral which his predecessor , william de st-calais , had begun ; adams history of western art p . 200 fortified durham with a wall around durham castle , built norham castle to help defend the river tweed ; pettifer english castles p . 193 bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 281 and endowed the collegiate church of christchurch , hampshire . he built or expanded other churches , including the one at christchurch in hampshire which he had endowed , and st . martin 's in dover . poole domesday book to magna carta p . 260 the first stone bridge at durham was completed by his instruction in 1120 , the so-called framwellgate bridge , a bridge described as '' of wonderful workmanship . '' bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 364 he cleared and levelled the palace green in durham between the castle and the cathedral . barlow feudal kingdom of england pp . 174–175 while the chroniclers mainly condemned ranulf for his morals , his own cathedral chapter held him in high esteem because of his building activities and his defence of the rights of durham . chibnall anglo-norman england p . 71 although he usurped some of the income of the cathedral chapter , the money from those rights was used to complete the cathedral rebuilding , and later restored the income to the monks as well as increasing the endowment . at his death , the cathedral walls were complete up to '' the covering '' , which probably means the vault instead of the roof . snape '' documentary evidence '' medieval art and architecture p . 22 ranulf attracted scholars to his household , and reformed the administration of the diocese , by dividing it into archdeaconries . ranulf oversaw the translation of saint cuthbert 's relics to a new tomb in a lavish ceremony . he was also a patron to the hermit saint godric , whom he befriended . barlow english church 1066–1154 pp . 73–74 one of ranulf 's brothers was fulcher , who was bishop of lisieux in 1101 . spear '' norman empire and the secular clergy '' journal of british studies p . 5 another brother was osbern , who was a royal clerk for rufus , barlow william rufus p . 150 and the last brother was geoffrey . fulcher may have been appointed bishop to enable ranulf to exploit the see while ranulf was in exile in normandy . schriber dilemma of arnulf of lisieux pp . 26–27 ranulf had a son , thomas , who also held the see of lisieux , right after his uncle . like his uncle , he may have been appointed as a placeholder to allow his father to appropriate the revenues of lisieux . ranulf 's mistress was an englishwoman named alveva or ælfgifu , who was the mother of at least two of his sons . alveva 's sons were ranulf , who was an archdeacon , and elias . keats-rohan domesday people p . 354 when ranulf became bishop , he married her to a burgess of huntingdon , but remained on good terms with both alveva and her spouse , often staying with them when he travelled away from durham . bartlett england under the norman and angevin kings p . 567 alveva was the aunt of christina of markyate , and christina is said to have rebuffed the bishop 's attempts to seduce her in 1114 . richardson and sayles governance of mediaeval england p . 159 footnote7 alveva and ranulf 's son elias held a prebend at london and was a royal clerk under henry i . ranulf 's son ralf was parson of middleham and held a prebend at london too . he was a member of archbishop theobald of canterbury 's household after 1138 . some of ranulf 's sons were educated at laon under william de corbeil , who was one of ranulf 's clerks . hollister henry i p . 23 one of ranulf 's nephews , ralf , was archdeacon of northumberland and during the reign of king stephen helped to hold the diocese of durham loyal to stephen . barlow feudal kingdom of england p . 221 other nephews were osbert , who was sheriff of durham , and robert , richard , and william who held fiefs . unrelated to ranulf , william of corbeil became one of ranulf 's household clerks , and was eventually to be elected archbishop of canterbury in 1123 . ranulf died on 5 september 1128 . he was buried in his chapter house in durham , where his tomb was opened in 1874 . his skeleton is still extant , and examination of it reveals that he would have been about tall . he was fond of clothes and was always richly dressed . while he was efficient in collecting the royal revenues , he was generous to his own men , and later in life gave liberally to the poor . his crozier and signet ring were found in his grave , and they were rather plain . an oddity of his grave was that he was buried on top of a layer of charcoal that was laid over alternating layers of lime and dirt . carver '' early medieval durham '' medieval art and architecture p . 13 ranulf 's reputation has suffered because of the hostility of the monastic chroniclers to both himself and to rufus . hollister '' anglo-norman civil war '' english historical review pp . 321–322 many chroniclers decried his financial ruthlessness and his lax morals . barlow english church 1066–1154 p . 72 orderic described ranulf 's career as '' addicted to feasts and carousals and lusts ; cruel and ambitious , prodigal to his own adherents , but rapacious in seizing the goods of other men '' . besides the chroniclers , archbishop anselm of canterbury wrote to pope paschal ii , while ranulf was in exile , describing ranulf as '' a rent collector of the worst possible reputation . '' quoted in vaughn anselm of bec and robert of meulan p . 239 william of malmesbury said that flambard was a '' plunderer of the rich , destroyer of the poor '' . quoted in dawtry '' benedictine revival in the north '' studies in church history 18 p . 91 victorian historians , including e . a . freeman , vilified ranulf , and freeman especially held that ranulf was a '' malignant genius '' . quoted in mason '' flambard , ranulf '' oxford dictionary of national biography modern historians have embraced a more moderate view , starting with richard southern in 1933 . the historian david bates felt that he , along with his successor roger of salisbury , '' were essentially the chief managers of the king 's finance and justice '' . bates '' origins of the justiciarship '' proceedings of the battle conference iv p . 11 . notes . citations . references . . further reading .