Avocado

culinary uses . the fruit of horticultural cultivars has a markedly higher fat content than most other fruit , mostly monounsaturated fat , and as such serves as an important staple in the diet of consumers who have limited access to other fatty foods ( high-fat meats and fish , dairy products ) . having a high smoke point , avocado oil is expensive compared to common salad and cooking oils , and is mostly used for salads or dips . a ripe avocado yields to gentle pressure when held in the palm of the hand and squeezed . the flesh is prone to enzymatic browning , quickly turning brown after exposure to air . to prevent this , lime or lemon juice can be added to avocados after peeling . the fruit is not sweet , but distinctly and subtly flavored , with smooth texture . it is used in both savory and sweet dishes , though in many countries not for both . the avocado is common in vegetarian cuisine as a substitute for meats in sandwiches and salads because of its high fat content . generally , avocado is served raw , though some cultivars , including the common 'hass ' , can be cooked for a short time without becoming bitter . the flesh of some avocados may be rendered inedible by heat . prolonged cooking induces this chemical reaction in all cultivars . it is used as the base for the mexican dip known as guacamole , as well as a spread on corn tortillas or toast , served with spices . in the philippines , brazil , indonesia , vietnam , and southern india ( especially the coastal kerala , tamil nadu and karnataka region ) , avocados are frequently used for milkshakes and occasionally added to ice cream and other desserts . in brazil , vietnam , the philippines and indonesia , a dessert drink is made with sugar , milk or water , and pureed avocado . chocolate syrup is sometimes added . in morocco , a similar chilled avocado and milk drink is sweetened with confectioner 's sugar and flavored with a touch of orange flower water . in ethiopia , avocados are made into juice by mixing them with sugar and milk or water , usually served with vimto and a slice of lemon . it is also common to serve layered multiple fruit juices in a glass ( locally called spris ) made of avocados , mangoes , bananas , guavas , and papayas . avocados are also used to make salads . avocados in savory dishes , often seen as exotic , are a relative novelty in portuguese-speaking countries , such as brazil , where the traditional preparation is mashed with sugar and lime , and eaten as a dessert or snack . this contrasts with spanish-speaking countries such as chile , mexico , or argentina , where the opposite is true and sweet preparations are rare . in australia and new zealand , avocados are commonly served on sandwiches , sushi , toast , or with chicken . in ghana , they are often eaten alone on sliced bread as a sandwich . in sri lanka , their well-ripened flesh , thoroughly mashed or pureed with milk and kitul treacle ( a liquid jaggery made from the sap of the inflorescence of caryota urens ) , is a common dessert . in haiti , they are often consumed with cassava or regular bread for breakfast . in mexico and central america , avocados are served mixed with white rice , in soups , salads , or on the side of chicken and meat . they are also commonly added to pozole . in peru , they are consumed with tequeños as mayonnaise , served as a side dish with asado , used in salads and sandwiches , or as a whole dish when filled with tuna , shrimp , or chicken . in chile , it is used as a puree-like sauce with chicken , hamburgers , and hot dogs ; and in slices for celery or lettuce salads . the chilean version of caesar salad contains large slices of mature avocado . in kenya and nigeria , the avocado is often eaten as a fruit alone or mixed with other fruits in a fruit salad , or as part of a vegetable salad . avocado is a primary ingredient in avocado soup . avocado slices are frequently added to hamburgers , tortas , hot dogs , and carne asada . avocado can be combined with eggs ( in scrambled eggs , tortillas , or omelettes ) , and is a key ingredient in california rolls and other makizushi ( '' maki '' , or rolled sushi ) . in the united kingdom , the avocado became available during the 1960s when introduced by sainsbury 's under the name 'avocado pear' . much of the success of avocados in the uk is attributed to a long-running promotional campaign initiated by south african growers in 1995 . . leaves . in addition to the fruit , the leaves of mexican avocados ( persea americana var . drymifolia ) are used in some cuisines as a spice , with a flavor somewhat reminiscent of anise . they are sold both dried and fresh , toasted before use , and either crumbled or used whole , commonly in bean dishes . leaves of p . americana , guatemalan variety , are toxic to goats , sheep , and horses . . nutrition and health . nutrients . raw avocado flesh is 73 % water , 15 % fat , 9 % carbohydrates , and 2 % protein ( table ) . in a 100 gram reference amount , avocado supplies 160 calories , and is a rich source ( 20 % or more of the daily value , dv ) of several b vitamins ( such as 28 % dv in pantothenic acid ) and vitamin k ( 20 % dv ) , with moderate contents ( 10-19 % dv ) of vitamin c , vitamin e , and potassium . avocados also contain phytosterols and carotenoids , such as lutein and zeaxanthin . . fat composition . avocados have diverse fats . for a typical one : about 75 % of an avocado 's energy comes from fat , most of which ( 67 % of total fat ) is monounsaturated fat as oleic acid ( table ) . other predominant fats include palmitic acid and linoleic acid . the saturated fat content amounts to 14 % of the total fat . typical total fat composition is roughly : 1 % & nbsp ; ω-3 , 14 % & nbsp ; ω-6 , 71 % & nbsp ; ω-9 ( 65 % oleic and 6 % palmitoleic ) , and 14 % saturated fat ( palmitic acid ) . although costly to produce , nutrient-rich avocado oil has a multitude of uses for salads or cooking and in cosmetics and soap products . . allergies . some people have allergic reactions to avocado . there are two main forms of allergy : those with a tree-pollen allergy develop local symptoms in the mouth and throat shortly after eating avocado ; the second , known as latex-fruit syndrome , is related to latex allergy and symptoms include generalised urticaria , abdominal pain , and vomiting and can sometimes be life-threatening . . toxicity to animals . avocado leaves , bark , skin , or pit are documented to be harmful to animals ; cats , dogs , cattle , goats , rabbits , rats , guinea pigs , birds , fish , and horses can be severely harmed or even killed when they consume them . the avocado fruit is poisonous to some birds , and the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals ( aspca ) lists it as toxic to horses . avocado leaves contain a toxic fatty acid derivative , persin , which in sufficient quantity can cause colic in horses and without veterinary treatment , death . the symptoms include gastrointestinal irritation , vomiting , diarrhea , respiratory distress , congestion , fluid accumulation around the tissues of the heart , and even death . birds also seem to be particularly sensitive to this toxic compound . a line of premium dog and cat food , avoderm , uses oils and meal made from avocado meat as main ingredients . the manufacturer says the avocado 's leaves and pit are the source of toxicity , and only in the guatemalan variety of avocados , and the fruit is often eaten by orchard dogs as well as wildlife such as bears and coyotes . . see also . avocado cake california avocado society california avocado commission florida lime & avocado growers , inc . v . paul guacamole list of avocado dishes plant propagation recalcitrant seed . notes . references . further reading . . external links . definitive illustrated list of avocado varieties avocados beyond persea americana , california rare fruit growers