Capital asset pricing model

inventors . the capm was introduced by jack treynor ( 1961 , 1962 ) , william f . sharpe ( 1964 ) , john lintner ( 1965a , b ) and jan mossin ( 1966 ) independently , building on the earlier work of harry markowitz on diversification and modern portfolio theory . sharpe , markowitz and merton miller jointly received the 1990 nobel memorial prize in economics for this contribution to the field of financial economics . fischer black ( 1972 ) developed another version of capm , called black capm or zero-beta capm , that does not assume the existence of a riskless asset . this version was more robust against empirical testing and was influential in the widespread adoption of the capm . formula . \right where p_t is the payoff of the asset or portfolio . . asset-specific required return . the capm returns the asset-appropriate required return or discount rate—i.e . the rate at which future cash flows produced by the asset should be discounted given that asset 's relative riskiness . betas exceeding one signify more than average '' riskiness '' ; betas below one indicate lower than average . thus , a more risky stock will have a higher beta and will be discounted at a higher rate ; less sensitive stocks will have lower betas and be discounted at a lower rate . given the accepted concave utility function , the capm is consistent with intuition—investors ( should ) require a higher return for holding a more risky asset . since beta reflects asset-specific sensitivity to non-diversifiable , i.e . market risk , the market as a whole , by definition , has a beta of one . stock market indices are frequently used as local proxies for the market—and in that case ( by definition ) have a beta of one . an investor in a large , diversified portfolio ( such as a mutual fund ) , therefore , expects performance in line with the market . risk and diversification . the risk of a portfolio comprises systematic risk , also known as undiversifiable risk , and specific risk which is also known as idiosyncratic risk or diversifiable risk . systematic risk refers to the risk common to all securities—i.e . market risk . unsystematic risk is the risk associated with individual assets . unsystematic risk can be diversified away to smaller levels by including a greater number of assets in the portfolio ( specific risks '' average out '' ) . the same is not possible for systematic risk within one market . depending on the market , a portfolio of approximately 30–40 securities in developed markets such as the uk or us will render the portfolio sufficiently diversified such that risk exposure is limited to systematic risk only . in developing markets a larger number is required , due to the higher asset volatilities . a rational investor should not take on any diversifiable risk , as only non-diversifiable risks are rewarded within the scope of this model . therefore , the required return on an asset , that is , the return that compensates for risk taken , must be linked to its riskiness in a portfolio context—i.e . its contribution to overall portfolio riskiness—as opposed to its '' stand alone risk '' . in the capm context , portfolio risk is represented by higher variance i.e . less predictability . in other words , the beta of the portfolio is the defining factor in rewarding the systematic exposure taken by an investor . efficient frontier . image : markowitz frontier.jpg thumb 269px the ( markowitz ) efficient frontier . cal stands for the capital allocation line . the capm assumes that the risk-return profile of a portfolio can be optimized—an optimal portfolio displays the lowest possible level of risk for its level of return . additionally , since each additional asset introduced into a portfolio further diversifies the portfolio , the optimal portfolio must comprise every asset , ( assuming no trading costs ) with each asset value-weighted to achieve the above ( assuming that any asset is infinitely divisible ) . all such optimal portfolios , i.e . , one for each level of return , comprise the efficient frontier . because the unsystematic risk is diversifiable , the total risk of a portfolio can be viewed as beta . assumptions . all investors : aim to maximize economic utilities ( asset quantities are given and fixed ) . are rational and risk-averse . are broadly diversified across a range of investments . are price takers , i.e . , they can not influence prices . can lend and borrow unlimited amounts under the risk free rate of interest . trade without transaction or taxation costs . deal with securities that are all highly divisible into small parcels ( all assets are perfectly divisible and liquid ) . have homogeneous expectations . assume all information is available at the same time to all investors . problems . in their 2004 review , economists eugene fama and kenneth french argue that '' the failure of the capm in empirical tests implies that most applications of the model are invalid '' . the traditional capm using historical data as the inputs to solve for a future return of asset i . however , the history may not be sufficient to use for predicting the future and modern capm approaches have used betas that rely on future risk estimates . most practitioners and academics agree that risk is of a varying nature ( non-constant ) . a critique of the traditional capm is that the risk measure used remains constant ( non-varying beta ) . recent research has empirically tested time-varying betas to improve the forecast accuracy of the capm . the model assumes that the variance of returns is an adequate measurement of risk . this would be implied by the assumption that returns are normally distributed , or indeed are distributed in any two-parameter way , but for general return distributions other risk measures ( like coherent risk measures ) will reflect the active and potential shareholders ' preferences more adequately . indeed , risk in financial investments is not variance in itself , rather it is the probability of losing : it is asymmetric in nature . barclays wealth have published some research on asset allocation with non-normal returns which shows that investors with very low risk tolerances should hold more cash than capm suggests . the model assumes that all active and potential shareholders have access to the same information and agree about the risk and expected return of all assets ( homogeneous expectations assumption ) . the model assumes that the probability beliefs of active and potential shareholders match the true distribution of returns . a different possibility is that active and potential shareholders ' expectations are biased , causing market prices to be informationally inefficient . this possibility is studied in the field of behavioral finance , which uses psychological assumptions to provide alternatives to the capm such as the overconfidence-based asset pricing model of kent daniel , david hirshleifer , and avanidhar subrahmanyam ( 2001 ) . the model does not appear to adequately explain the variation in stock returns . empirical studies show that low beta stocks may offer higher returns than the model would predict . some data to this effect was presented as early as a 1969 conference in buffalo , new york in a paper by fischer black , michael jensen , and myron scholes . either that fact is itself rational ( which saves the efficient-market hypothesis but makes capm wrong ) , or it is irrational ( which saves capm , but makes the emh wrong – indeed , this possibility makes volatility arbitrage a strategy for reliably beating the market ) . the model assumes that given a certain expected return , active and potential shareholders will prefer lower risk ( lower variance ) to higher risk and conversely given a certain level of risk will prefer higher returns to lower ones . it does not allow for active and potential shareholders who will accept lower returns for higher risk . casino gamblers pay to take on more risk , and it is possible that some stock traders will pay for risk as well . the model assumes that there are no taxes or transaction costs , although this assumption may be relaxed with more complicated versions of the model . the market portfolio consists of all assets in all markets , where each asset is weighted by its market capitalization . this assumes no preference between markets and assets for individual active and potential shareholders , and that active and potential shareholders choose assets solely as a function of their risk-return profile . it also assumes that all assets are infinitely divisible as to the amount which may be held or transacted . the market portfolio should in theory include all types of assets that are held by anyone as an investment ( including works of art , real estate , human capital . ) in practice , such a market portfolio is unobservable and people usually substitute a stock index as a proxy for the true market portfolio . unfortunately , it has been shown that this substitution is not innocuous and can lead to false inferences as to the validity of the capm , and it has been said that due to the inobservability of the true market portfolio , the capm might not be empirically testable . this was presented in greater depth in a paper by richard roll in 1977 , and is generally referred to as roll 's critique . however , others find that the choice of market portfolio may not be that important for empirical tests . other authors have attempted to document what the world wealth or world market portfolio consists of and what its returns have been . the model assumes economic agents optimise over a short-term horizon , and in fact investors with longer-term outlooks would optimally choose long-term inflation-linked bonds instead of short-term rates as this would be more risk-free asset to such an agent . campbell , j & vicera , m '' strategic asset allocation : portfolio choice for long term investors '' . clarendon lectures in economics , 2002 . the model assumes just two dates , so that there is no opportunity to consume and rebalance portfolios repeatedly over time . the basic insights of the model are extended and generalized in the intertemporal capm ( icapm ) of robert merton , and the consumption capm ( ccapm ) of douglas breeden and mark rubinstein . capm assumes that all active and potential shareholders will consider all of their assets and optimize one portfolio . this is in sharp contradiction with portfolios that are held by individual shareholders : humans tend to have fragmented portfolios or , rather , multiple portfolios : for each goal one portfolio — see behavioral portfolio theory and maslowian portfolio theory . empirical tests show market anomalies like the size and value effect that can not be explained by the capm . for details see the fama–french three-factor model . roger dayala goes a step further and claims the capm is fundamentally flawed even within its own narrow assumption set , illustrating the capm is either circular or irrational . the circularity refers to the price of total risk being a function of the price of covariance risk only ( and vice versa ) . the irrationality refers to the capm proclaimed ‘ revision of prices ’ resulting in identical discount rates for the ( lower ) amount of covariance risk only as for the ( higher ) amount of total risk ( i.e . identical discount rates for different amounts of risk . roger ’ s findings have later been supported by lai & stohs . . see also . arbitrage pricing theory carhart four-factor model consumption beta ( ccapm ) fama–french three-factor model intertemporal capm ( icapm ) build-up method chance-constrained portfolio selection . references . bibliography . black , fischer . , michael c . jensen , and myron scholes ( 1972 ) . the capital asset pricing model : some empirical tests , pp . & nbsp ; 79–121 in m . jensen ed . , studies in the theory of capital markets . new york : praeger publishers . french , craig w . ( 2003 ) . the treynor capital asset pricing model , journal of investment management , vol . 1 , no . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 60–72 . available at french , craig w . ( 2002 ) . jack treynor 's 'toward a theory of market value of risky assets ( december ) . available at ross , stephen a . ( 1977 ) . the capital asset pricing model ( capm ) , short-sale restrictions and related issues , journal of finance , 32 ( 177 ) stone , bernell k . ( 1970 ) risk , return , and equilibrium : a general single-period theory of asset selection and capital-market equilibrium . cambridge : mit press . treynor , jack l . ( 1962 ) . toward a theory of market value of risky assets . unpublished manuscript . a final version was published in 1999 , in asset pricing and portfolio performance : models , strategy and performance metrics . robert a . korajczyk ( editor ) london : risk books , pp . & nbsp ; 15–22 .