Lionel Bart

early life . he was born lionel begleiter , the youngest of seven surviving children of galician jews , yetta ( née darumstundler ) and morris begleiter , a master tailor . he grew up in stepney ; his father worked in the area as a tailor in a garden shed . the family had escaped the pogroms against jews by ukrainian cossacks in galicia . as a young man he was an accomplished painter . when bart was aged six , a teacher told his parents that he was a musical genius . his parents gave him an old violin , but he did not apply himself and the lessons stopped . songwriting . he started his songwriting career in amateur theatre , first at the international youth centre in 1952 where he and a friend wrote a revue together called iyc revue 52 . the following year the pair auditioned for a production of the leonard irwin play the wages of eve at london 's unity theatre . shortly afterward bart began composing songs for unity theatre productions , contributing material ( including the title song ) to its 1953 revue turn it up , and songs for its 1953 pantomime , an agitprop version of cinderella . while at the unity he was talent-spotted by joan littlewood , and so joined theatre workshop . this is detailed mainly in david roper 's book , and some of it in colin chambers ' he also wrote comedy songs for the sunday lunchtime bbc radio programme billy cotton . he first gained widespread recognition through his pop songwriting , penning numerous hits for the stable of young male singers promoted by artist manager and music publisher larry parnes . bart 's pop output in this period includes the hits '' living doll '' ( written for cliff richard ) and '' rock with the cavemen '' , '' handful of songs '' , '' butterfingers '' and '' little white bull '' ( all for tommy steele ) . during this period , steele and mike pratt were his songwriting partners . he won three ivor novello awards in 1957 , a further four in 1958 , and two in 1960 . he wrote the theme song for the 1963 james bond film from russia with love . his other hits include '' do you mind ? '' ( recorded by both anthony newley and andy williams ) , '' big time '' ( a 1961 cover by jack jones of his fings ai n't wot they used t'be show tune ) , '' easy going me '' ( adam faith ) , and '' always you and me '' ( with russ conway ) . bart was also responsible for the discovery of two of parnes ' biggest stars . it was on his recommendation that parnes went to see singer tommy hicks , whom he signed and renamed tommy steele , and bart also suggested that parnes see singer reg smith , who was then performing at the condor club . although parnes missed his performance , he went round to smith 's house and signed him up on the basis of bart 's recommendation . smith went on to score a number of uk hits under his new stage name marty wilde . twenty-seven years after it became a number one hit for cliff richard , '' living doll '' was re-recorded by the young ones and richard for comic relief , and spent another three weeks at number one . fings ai n't wot they used t'be , the lionel bart story , by david and caroline stafford , omnibus press , 2011 . . musical theatre . bart 's first professional musical was 1959 's lock up your daughters , based on the 18th-century play rape upon rape by henry fielding . following that , fings ai n't wot they used t'be produced by joan littlewood 's theatre workshop , was noted for encouraging the use of authentic cockney accents on the london stage and bringing an end to censorship of british theatre . oliver ! ( 1960 ) , based on dickens 's oliver twist , was a major success . the music for oliver ! was transcribed by eric rogers , who wrote and composed 21 scores for the carry on films . bart hummed the melodies and rogers wrote the notes on his behalf as bart could not read or write music . in 1968 oliver ! was made into a movie starring ron moody , oliver reed and shani wallis that won several oscars , including best film . it is estimated that around this time bart was earning 16 pounds a minute from oliver ! bart 's next two musicals , blitz ! ( 1962 ) ( from which came the song '' far away '' , a hit for shirley bassey ) and maggie may ( 1964 ) had successful and respectable west end runs ( blitz ! , at the time london 's most expensive musical ever , had a run of 568 performances ) , but twang ! ! ( 1965 ) , a musical based on the robin hood legend , was a flop and la strada ( 1969 ) , which opened on broadway after the removal of most of bart 's songs , closed after only one performance . by this time bart was taking lsd and other drugs and was drinking heavily . bart used his personal finances to try to rescue his last two productions , selling his past and future rights to his work , including oliver ! which he sold to the entertainer max bygraves for £350 ( bygraves later sold them on for £250,000 ) to realise capital to finance the shows ; bart later estimated that this action lost him over £1 million . by 1972 , bart was bankrupt with debts of £73,000 . a twenty-year period of depression and alcoholism ensued . he eventually stopped drinking , although the years of substance abuse seriously damaged his health , leaving him with diabetes and impaired liver function . he wrote next year in jerusalem in 1975–1976 , but it was not staged until 2021 in a virtual performance of the jewish music institute featuring maureen lipman . in may 1977 , an autobiographical musical called lionel ! opened in the west end at the new london theatre . it was loosely based on bart 's early life as a child prodigy . bart added some new songs for the show . the cast included clarke peters , marion montgomery and adrienne posta . the role of lionel was shared by a young todd carty and chris nieto . the show closed after six weeks . later life . bart continued writing songs and themes for films , but his only real success in his later years was '' happy endings '' , a song he wrote for a 1989 abbey ( bank ) advertising campaign , which featured bart playing the piano and singing to children . he received a special ivor novello award for life achievement in 1986 . in 1987 , encouraged by long-time friend barry humphries , he travelled to australia to attend the opening of a new production of blitz ! , which was then revived in london 's west end in 1990 by the national youth theatre of great britain to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the london blitz . cameron mackintosh , who owned half the rights to oliver ! , revived the musical at the london palladium in 1994 in a version featuring rewrites by bart . mackintosh gave bart a share of the production royalties . at the peak of his career , bart was romantically linked in the media with singers judy garland and alma cogan , though he was in fact gay . his sexuality was known to friends and colleagues but he did not '' come out '' until a few years before his death . bart died at the hammersmith hospital in west london on 3 april 1999 , of liver cancer . his funeral was held at golders green crematorium . a memorial bench is dedicated to him in kew gardens . a workshop of a musical based on bart 's life and using his songs , it 's a fine life , was staged in 2006 at the queen 's theatre , hornchurch . a later version titled more ! was presented in concert at theatre royal stratford east in 2015 featuring neil mcdermott as bart , jessica hynes as joan littlewood and sonny jay as charlene , with an appearance by 1960s pop-star grazina frame , who was an original cast member in bart 's blitz ! . west end theatrical credits . lock up your daughters ( 1959 ) – lyrics fings ai n't wot they used t'be ( 1959 ) – music , lyrics oliver ! ( 1960 ) – music , lyrics , book . oliver ! was also produced on broadway in 1963 , winning a tony award for best original score and receiving nominations for best musical and best author of a musical . a return broadway engagement of the original production played in 1965 , and a broadway revival was mounted in 1984 . blitz ! ( 1962 ) – music , lyrics , book maggie may ( 1964 ) – music , lyrics twang ! ! ( 1965 ) – music , lyrics la strada ( 1969 ) – co-composer , co-lyricist . a broadway production opened the same year . lionel ! ( 1977 ) – music , lyrics . see also . : category : songs written by lionel bart . references . sources . chambers , colin . the story of unity theatre roper , david . bart ! the unauthorized life & times , ins and outs , ups and downs of lionel bart stafford , david and caroline . fings ai n't wot they used t'be – the lionel bart story , omnibus press , 2011 . external links . samantha ellis , '' lionel bart 's oliver ! '' , june 1960 the guardian , 18 june 2003 . michael coveney , lionel bart : appetite for destruction , the independent , 31 august 2006 . lionel begleiter ( bart ) , icons gallery , circa-club.com . lionel bart , a composer of songs and musicals , the queens theatre ( hornchurch ) . gerald mahlowe , songwriter profile lionel bart , songwriter magazine interview