Choking

cause . choking is often caused by an object from outside the body , also called a foreign body , blocking the airway . the object can block the upper or lower airway passages . the airway obstruction is usually partial , but can also be complete . among children , the most common causes of choking are food , coins , toys , and balloons . in one study , peanuts were the most common object found in the airway of children evaluated for suspected foreign body aspiration . foods that pose a high risk of choking include hot dogs , hard candy , nuts , seeds , whole grapes , raw carrots , apples , popcorn , peanut butter , marshmallows , chewing gum , and sausages . the most common cause of choking death in children is latex balloons . small , round non-food objects such as balls , marbles , toys , and toy parts are also associated with a high risk of choking death because of their potential to completely block a child 's airway . children younger than age three are especially at risk of choking because they explore their environment by putting objects in their mouth . also , young children are still developing the ability to chew food completely . molar teeth , which come in around 1.5 years of age , are necessary for grinding food . even after molar teeth are present , children continue developing the ability to chew food completely and swallow throughout early childhood . in addition , a child 's airway is smaller in diameter than an adult 's airway , which means that smaller objects can cause an airway obstruction in children . infants and young children generate a less forceful cough than adults , so coughing may not be as effective in relieving an airway obstruction . finally , children with neuromuscular disorders , developmental delay , traumatic brain injury , and other conditions that affect swallowing are at an increased risk of choking . in adults , choking often involves food blocking the airway . risk factors include using alcohol or sedatives , undergoing a procedure involving the mouth or pharynx , wearing oral appliances , or having a medical condition that causes difficulty swallowing or impairs the cough reflex . conditions that can cause difficulty swallowing and/or impaired coughing include neurological conditions such as strokes , alzheimer 's disease , or parkinson 's disease . in older adults , risk factors also include living alone , wearing dentures , and having difficulty swallowing . children and adults with neurological , cognitive , or psychiatric disorders may experience a delay in diagnosis because there may not be a known history of a foreign body entering the airway . . prevention . in choking , the time to react is quite short , and the worst cases are deadly . for these reasons , it is convenient to prevent it , so it does not even happen . basic prevention choking typically happens when swallowing too large or too abundant mouthfuls that are badly chewed . this risk disappears when one obtains the discipline to split the food in pieces of moderated size , and to chew them completely , not swallowing them before . if a food can be chewed , it must be chewed , whatever it is , even if it is very soft or gelatinous , such as spreads and soft desserts . eating in handfuls ( it can happen with foods as popcorn , different peeled nuts , etc . ) , requires to chew with more control than normal , and not exceeding in the amounts that enter into the mouth . having at hand some liquid to drink is useful to help to finish swallowing ( before the choking has happened ) . to swallow well , it is recommended that the neck is in a normal position , straight for the eater 's body , with the head looking forward , being seated or standing up ( not lying or too reclined ) . dangerous foods the foods that produce the most complicated choking are those whose shape adapts to the shape of the pharynx or trachea : hot dogs and sausages , bananas , food in blocks , etc . it is easier to choke on foods that dry the mouth ( overcooked meat , sponge cake , cold pizza , etc . ) , which require the help of drinking liquid , or to be accompanied of purees or sauces . it is also easier to choke on foods that are tough ( meat of octopus or cuttlefish , major size animals , some reptiles , etc . ) , they may need to be eaten together with something that helps the teeth to grind them ( as loaf bread ) , or any concrete way to be prepared or cooked . groups of risk some population groups have a higher choking risk , as : the elderly , the children , the disabled ( physically or mentally ) , people under the effects of alcohol or drugs , people who have taken medications that seriously reduce the ability to salivate or react , patients with difficulties to swallow ( dysphagia ) , suicidal people , epileptics , people on the autism spectrum , individuals with disorders such as pica that lead them to consume inedible objects , etc . they may require more assistance to feed themselves and it may be necessary to supervise them while they eat . if they are unable to chew properly , their food can not be hard nor tough . if they have difficulty eating normally , it is not recommended to give them food that may cause issues , or to separate it into very small pieces . in cases where a person is unable to safely eat , food can be supplied by feeding syringes that pour a liquid content into the patient 's mouth . if the problem is that they have taken any medication or substance that reduces saliva , they can not eat solid food until their salivation is restored . prevention in babies and children all little children require care in eating . they must learn to chew their food completely to avoid choking . feeding them while they do another activity ( when they run , play , laugh , etc . ) increases the risk of choking . caregivers can supervise children while eating or playing . providers such as pediatricians and dentists can provide information to parents and caregivers about what food and toys are appropriate by age to prevent choking . the american academy of pediatricians recommends waiting until 6 months of age before introducing solid foods to infants . caregivers can avoid giving children , when they are younger than 5 years-old , foods that pose a high risk of choking such as hot dog pieces , bananas , cheese sticks , cheese chunks , hard candy , nuts , grapes , marshmallows or popcorn . later , when they are accustomed to these foods , it is normal to give them split into small pieces . for example : if they are going to eat hot dogs , it is possible to split the sausage lengthwise , sliced , or both . and the same in the case of bananas , grapes , grains , etc . parents , teachers , child care providers and other caregivers for children are advised to be trained in choking first-aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( cpr ) . children can put small objects into their mouths ( deflated balloons , marbles , small pieces , buttons , coins , button batteries , etc . ) , which could lead to the child swallowing or choking on them . when babies choke on deflated balloons or plastic bags ( as the sacks for wrapping the dirty diapers , the nappy sacks , which are a sort of bag sometimes dangerously placed near the babies ) , it produces a complicated obstruction that would require it to be directly removed with the fingers , if it is visible . to prevent children from swallowing things , it is needed to take precautions on their environment by placing dangerous objects out of their reach . besides , they must be supervised , paying enough attention to what they do . it is necessary to teach the children to avoid putting things into their mouths . they may try to eat small pieces of toys . toys and games may indicate on their packages the ages for which they are safe . in the us , manufacturers of children 's toys and products are required by law to apply appropriate warning labels to their packaging . however , toys that are resold may not be marked with warning labels . caregivers can try to prevent choking by considering the features of a toy ( such as size , shape , consistency , small parts ) before giving it to a child . children 's products that are found to pose a choking risk can be taken off the market . ( how to recognize airway obstruction ) . symptoms , signs and times . symptoms and signs : difficulty or inability to speak or cry out . inability or difficulty in breathing . labored breathing , including gasping or wheeze , may be present . violent and largely involuntary coughing , gurgling , or vomiting noises may be present . more serious choking victims will have a limited ( if any ) ability to produce these symptoms since they require at least some air movement . the person may begin clutching of the throat or mouth , or attempting to induce vomiting by putting fingers down the throat . the person 's face turns blue ( cyanosis ) from lack of oxygen , if breathing is not restored . the person may become unconscious , if breathing is not restored . times : brain damage typically occurs if the body is deprived of air for three minutes . death will usually occur if breathing is not restored in six to eight minutes . life can be extended some more by the use of cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( cpr ) on unconscious victims of choking ( see more details further below ) . treatment . choking is treated with a number of different procedures , which form the airway management . this consist in basic techniques available for first aiders and more advanced techniques available for health professionals . basic treatment ( first-aid ) . basic treatment of choking includes a number of non-invasive techniques to help remove foreign bodies from the airways . most modern protocols , including those of the american heart association and the american red cross , recommend several stages , designed to apply increasingly more pressure . for the conscious choking victim , most protocols recommend encouraging the victim to cough , followed by hard back slaps and , if none of these things work , abdominal thrusts ( heimlich maneuver ) or chest thrusts . once the choking victims loses consciousness , initiating cpr is recommended . . cough . if the choking individual is conscious and coughing , the american red cross recommends encouraging the individual to stay calm and continue coughing freely , and it may be easier to take air through the nose to refill the lungs . if the person choking is unable to cough or if coughing is not effective , the american red cross recommends to move onto other methods , detailed below .