U.S. National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence

background . the national violence commission established task forces on assassination , group violence , individual acts of violence , law enforcement , media and violence , firearms , and violence in american history . as reported by john herbers in the new york times , the chairman of the commission , milton eisenhower , stated that the task force report on individual acts of violence was '' by all odds the most important '' of the reports written for the commission . the national violence commission was formed only a few months after release of the final report of the kerner commission , which assessed the big city protests of the 1960s . in its final report in december 1969 , the violence commission , as the kerner commission , concluded that the most important policy issue was lack of employment and educational opportunity in inner city neighborhoods . the commission framed lack of inner city opportunity within a larger american economy that prized material success and within a tradition of violence that the media transmitted particularly well : in one of its most important final report passages , the national violence commission observed : to be a young , poor male ; to be undereducated and without means of escape from an oppressive urban environment ; to want what the society claims is available ( but mostly to others ) ; to see around oneself illegitimate and often violent methods being used to achieve material success ; and to observe others using these means with impunity – all this is to be burdened with an enormous set of influences that pull many toward crime and delinquency . to be also a negro , mexican or puerto rican american and subject to discrimination and segregation adds considerably to the pull of these other criminogenic forces . the violence commission recommended new investments in jobs , training and education – totaling 20b per year in 1968 dollars . a long run '' reordering of national priorities '' was in order , said the violence commission , which shared the kerner commission ’ s moral vision that there could be no higher claim on the nation ’ s conscience . a majority of the members of the national violence commission , including both republicans and democrats , recommended confiscation of most handguns , restrictions on new handgun ownership to those who could demonstrate reasonable need , and identification of rifle and shotgun owners . '' when in man 's long history other great civilizations fell '' , concluded the violence commission , '' it was less often from external assault than from internal decay…the greatness and durability of most civilizations has been finally determined by how they have responded to these challenges from within . ours will be no exception . '' . continuation . in 1981 , the milton s . eisenhower foundation was formed as the private sector continuation of both the national violence commission and kerner commission . founding and other early eisenhower foundation trustees included : a . leon higginbotham , former vice chair of the national violence commission and federal third circuit court of appeals judge ; fred harris , former member of the kerner riot commission and former united states senator ; nicholas katzenbach , former chairman of the 1966 president 's commission on law enforcement and administration of justice and former attorney general of the united states ; david ginsburg , former executive director of the kerner riot commission and counselor to the president during the johnson administration ; milton eisenhower , former chair of the national violence commission and president emeritus of johns hopkins university ; patricia roberts harris , former member of the national violence commission and former secretary of housing and urban development ; edward brooke , former member of the kerner riot commission and former united states senator ; marvin wolfgang , former co-director of research on the national violence commission and professor of criminology at the university of pennsylvania ; henry cisneros , former secretary of housing and urban development and former mayor of san antonio ; lloyd cutler , former executive director of the national violence commission and former counselor to presidents carter and clinton ; elmer staats , former comptroller general of the united states ; james rouse , president of the rouse corporation and founder of the enterprise foundation ; frank stanton , former president of cbs , inc . , and chairman of the american red cross ; and alan curtis , president of the eisenhower foundation . mindful of the findings of the two commissions , the trustees of the foundation focused on the inner city . as it evolved , the foundation ’ s mission was to identify , finance , replicate , evaluate , communicate , advocate for and scale up politically feasible multiple solution inner city ventures . the priority was on wraparound and evidence based strategies that worked for the inner city and high risk racial minority youth . over the decades , examples of evidence-based inner city eisenhower foundation successes have included the quantum opportunities program , the youth safe haven-police ministation program , the argus learning for living program and full service community schools . . updates . the eisenhower foundation has released two updates of the national violence commission , as well as updates of the kerner riot commission . eisenhower foundation president alan curtis edited the foundation ’ s 15 year update of the violence commission , published by yale university press in 1985 . curtis and eisenhower foundation trustee elliott currie , professor of criminology , law and society at the university of california , irvine , co-authored the foundation ’ s 30 year update in 1999 . the 1985 national violence commission update was featured on the cbs evening news with dan rather and presented in a forum at the kennedy school of government at harvard , a forum at the john f . kennedy library in boston , and a forum at the united states senate at which senator edward kennedy was keynote speaker . the senate forum was published in a special issue of the annals of the american academy of political and social science edited by curtis and covered in a story in foundation news . the foundation news story concluded : the policy message that emerged from the senate forum participants was clear . using a public-private approach , efforts should be made to combine employment , community involvement and family to prevent crime ; move away from a federal policy of increased incarceration ; reverse the '' trickle down '' policy of federal anti-crime programs affecting neighborhoods to a '' bubble-up '' process emanating from the local level ; and formulate a new cooperative role for police as supporters , not strictly enforcers . titled to establish justice , to insure domestic tranquility , the 1999 update of the national violence commission was featured in a debate on the pbs pbs newshour . curtis observed to reporter ray suarez : the original violence commission predicted that we would have a city of the future in which the middle class would escape to the suburbs , drive to work in sanitized quarters , and work in buildings protected by high tech . that city of the future has come true . an editorial in the detroit free press said that city was detroit . domestic tranquility is roughly the same in 1999 as in 1969 in spite of the increase in prison building . on the other hand , we haven ’ t had an increase in justice . we have 25 percent of all our young children living in poverty . we have the greatest inequality in terms of wealth and income and wages in the world . one of every three african-americans is in prison , on probation or on parole at any one time – and one out of every two in cities . that is a direct result of the racial bias in our sentencing system and our mandatory minimum sentences . for example , crack-cocaine sentences are longer , and crack cocaine is used more by minorities . powder cocaine sentences are shorter , and powder cocaine is used more by whites . the result is that our prison populations are disproportionately filled with racial minorities . yet , at the same time , prison building has become a kind of economic development policy for white communities which send lobbyists to washington . in addition , the national violence commission updates were covered by news stories in the washington post , los angeles times , newsweek and usa today , interviews on npr , and editorials in the detroit free press , philadelphia daily news and chicago tribune , among other media . for example , the 1999 detroit free press editorial focused on the violence commission ’ s 1969 '' city of the future '' prediction of '' suburban neighborhoods , increasingly far-removed from the central city , with homes fortified by an array of security devices ; high-speed police-patrolled expressways becoming sterilized corridors connecting safe areas and urban streets that will be unsafe in differing degrees…that was in 1969 . sounds like any metropolitan area you know ? '' . firearms policy . in 2012 , after the sandy hook elementary school shooting in newtown , connecticut , the washington post published commentary by curtis that reminded the nation of how , in 1969 , a majority of national violence commission members , including both republicans and democrats , recommended confiscation of most handguns , restrictions on new handgun ownership to those who could demonstrate reasonable need , and identification of rifle and shotgun owners . given that america is the only advanced industrialized nation in the world without effective firearms regulations and given that america , not surprisingly , therefore leads the industrialized world in firearms killings , the foundation believes a new grassroots coalition against firearms in america should build on the recommendations of the national violence commission and better integrate the advocacy of , among others , the brady campaign , mayors against illegal guns , the children 's defense fund , racial minorities , women , outraged parents , teachers , youthful voters , grandparents and voters who view firearms control as a key policy against terrorist acts and mass killings . . membership . members of the commission were : milton eisenhower , chair – and president emeritus of johns hopkins university a . leon higginbotham , vice chair and u.s . third court of appeals judge hale boggs , congressman ( d-la ) terence cooke , archbishop of new york philip hart , senator ( d-mi ) eric hoffer , longshoreman , migratory worker and philosopher roman hruska , senator ( r-ne ) patricia roberts harris , attorney and former ambassador to luxembourg leon jaworski , attorney albert jenner , attorney william mcculloch , congressman ( r-oh ) ernest mcfarland , arizona supreme court justice walter menninger , psychiatrist , menninger foundation joseph r . sahid , attorney , university of virginia school of law , cravath , swaine & moore , llp . references .