USS New Mexico (BB-40)

world war ii . . 1940–43 . as the prospect of war grew , new mexico was based at pearl harbor , hawaii , from 6 december 1940 to 20 may 1941 . she then left pearl harbor to join the atlantic fleet at norfolk on 16 june for neutrality patrol duty along the atlantic coast . in the atlantic , she served on three 7- to 14-day '' shifts '' following destroyers to escort convoys across the atlantic . on 10 december , while headed to hampton roads ( en route to the west coast after the japanese attacked pearl harbor ) , she accidentally rammed and sank the u.s . freighter oregon south of the nantucket lightship off boston harbor . she managed to reach the panama canal by 17 january 1942 . during an overhaul in may 1942 , at the puget sound navy yard , she had her remaining secondary battery of twelve 5–inch/51 guns removed to make space for more anti-aircraft guns . after the overhaul , which was completed on 1 august , she departed san francisco to hawaii to prepare for action . from 6 december to 22 march 1943 , she escorted convoys and transports to the fijis . after that , she patrolled the southwestern pacific , before returning to pearl harbor to get ready for the aleutian islands campaign . after her training , on 17 may , she steamed to adak , which would be her base for the attack on attu . she later participated in the shelling of kiska on 21 july , which preceded the japanese evacuation of the island a week later . after the aleutian islands campaign , a refit was undertaken at the puget sound navy yard . on 25 october , new mexico returned to pearl harbor to practice for the invasion of the gilbert islands . on 20 november , while the invasion was under way , she shelled makin atoll . during the fighting on the islands the ship was tasked with guarding transports at night when they retreated from the islands , providing anti-aircraft fire for the unloading of supplies and troops , and providing screening fire for the aircraft carriers . after u.s . troops captured the gilbert islands on 5 december , new mexico returned to pearl harbor . 1944 . new mexico was part of the marshall islands invasion force on 12 january 1944 . she shelled kwajalein and ebeye from 31 january to 1 february . replenishing at majuro , on 20 february the ship shelled wotje , and then the following month also shelled new ireland and kavieng . after that , she sailed to the solomon islands to practice the attack on the mariana islands , stopping at sydney , in australia , on the way . in mid-june , new mexico joined the shelling of tinian , and also bombarded saipan and guam . on 18 june , she helped drive away two air attacks . later , on 20 june , she escorted transports off the mariana islands . meanwhile , the carrier task force destroyed the japanese carrier force at the battle of the philippine sea . later , she escorted troop transports to the naval base of eniwetok . on 9 july , she sailed to guard escort carriers until 12 july . her guns later hit guam on 21 july and kept on shelling the island until 30 july . after the invasion of the mariana islands , she received an overhaul at bremerton , washington , from october to november . after the overhaul , she arrived in leyte gulf to escort reinforcement and supply transports and convoys . she dealt with daily air attacks , as the japanese put up heavy resistance to the liberation of the philippines . she departed leyte gulf on 2 december to the palaus , where she later joined a mindoro-bound convoy . she provided anti-aircraft fire for the convoy and provided cover fire for invading forces . she provided cover for two more days before retiring to the palaus . 1945 . thumb new mexicos next task in the philippines was the liberation of luzon . she took part in the pre-invasion shelling of lingayen gulf on 6 january . during the bombardment she came under heavy attack by kamikazes , one of which hit her bridge , killing her commanding officer , captain robert walton fleming , and 29 others . the dead included lieutenant general herbert lumsden , the british representative to general of the army douglas macarthur . a further 87 of her crew were wounded . bruce fraser , the commander of the british pacific fleet , narrowly escaped death while on her bridge , although his secretary was killed . the guns remained in action as the ship 's crew repaired the damage while the invasion troops were landing on the beaches . more extensive repairs were completed at pearl harbor , after which new mexico sailed to the island of ulithi , where she was assigned to task force 54 ( tf 54 ) , the fire-support group for the battle of okinawa . her heavy guns opened up on okinawa on 26 march , and for the next month she continued to support the us troops ashore . on 11 may , she destroyed eight shinyo suicide boats . while she was approaching her berth in the hagushi anchorage , just after sunset on 12 may , she was attacked by two kamikazes . one of them plunged into her , the other managed to hit her with its bomb . she was set on fire and 54 members of new mexicos crew were killed , while a further 119 were wounded . swift action led to the fires being extinguished within 30 minutes . on 28 may , she departed for repairs at leyte , followed by rehearsals for the planned operation downfall . word of the war 's end reached her when she was at saipan on 15 august . the next day she sailed for okinawa to join the occupation force . she entered sagami wan on 27 august to support the airborne occupation of atsugi airfield . the next day new mexico passed into tokyo bay to witness the japanese surrender , which took place on 2 september . she departed tokyo bay on 6 september , passing okinawa , hawaii , and the panama canal , before arriving at boston on 17 october . postwar . new mexico was decommissioned in boston on 19 july 1946 , and was struck from the naval vessel register on 25 february 1947 . on 9 november 1947 , she was sold for scrapping to the lipsett division of luria bros , for 381,600 . lipsett decided to tow new mexico for scrapping at newark , new jersey . the proximity of newark to rail lines made it an ideal location for dismantling the ship and hauling away the steel . in early november 1947 new mexico departed boston , towed by two tugs . on 12 november , while off the coast of new york , the tugs pulling the battleship encountered heavy weather and were forced to cut the tow lines . running lights were kept on aboard new mexico along with three crewmembers , but the tugs eventually lost sight of the battleship . new mexico then drifted as a derelict until spotted by a coast guard plane the next day , 35 miles off the coast . the two tugs then secured tow lines and continued the journey to the scrapyard . newark city officials decided they did not want any more ships scrapped along the city 's waterfront . newark was implementing a beautification plan for the waterfront , and had allocated 70 million for improvements . as such , the city declared that any attempt to bring new mexico to newark would be blocked . two city fireboats , michael p . duffy and william t . brennan , were dispatched and were prepared to use their fire hoses and chemical sprayers to halt lipsett and new mexico . in response , lipsett organized its own force of four tugs , and the united states coast guard declared it would guarantee safe passage of new mexico , provided legal entry was permitted . this showdown was dubbed by the press as the '' battle of newark bay '' , while the santa fe chamber of commerce announced it would protest newark 's '' slur '' of new mexico 's namesake , through its refusal to admit the battleship . as new mexico awaited suitable tidal conditions to make the final tow into newark , the navy department sent under secretary w . john kenney to negotiate . after several sessions , he arranged a tenuous agreement between the city of newark and lipsett . newark would allow new mexico and two other battleships , and , to be scrapped at newark , but there would be no permanent ship dismantling facility . lipsett had nine months to dispose of the three ships , or would be subjected to a fine of 1,000 per day after the deadline . new mexico finally entered newark channel on 19 november , and was greeted by the same newark fireboats that had earlier been sent to oppose the ship . newark also arranged to have school children honor the old battleship dockside , with a marching band . new mexico was subsequently joined by idaho and wyoming , where all three were finally dismantled . scrapping of new mexico began on 24 november and was completed by july 1948 . two ship 's bells from the battleship were donated to the state of new mexico . the larger bell was on display at the santa fe plaza from 1948 until the early 1970s and is now part of the new mexico history museum collection . the smaller bell was sent to the university of new mexico , where it hung in scholes hall from 1948 to 1964 and subsequently in its own freestanding tower near smith plaza . . footnotes . notes .