Chalcedon

prehistory . the mound of fikirtepe has yielded remains dating to the copper age ( 5500-3500 bc ) and attest to a continuous settlement since prehistoric times . phoenicians were active traders in this area . pliny states that chalcedon was first named procerastis , a name which may be derived from a point of land near it : then it was named colpusa , from the harbour probably ; and finally caecorum oppidum , or the town of the blind . pliny . nat . 5.43 . megarian colony . image : symposium stele chalcedon istarchmu.jpg left thumb 180px funerary stele from the 1st century bc . chalcedon originated as a megara colony in 685 bc . the colonists from megara settled on a site that was viewed in antiquity as so obviously inferior to that visible on the opposite shore of the bosphorus ( with its small settlements of lygos and semistra on seraglio point ) , that the 6th-century bc persian general megabazus allegedly remarked that chalcedon 's founders must have been blind . herodotus . histories . 4.144 . indeed , strabo and pliny relate that the oracle of apollo told the athenians and megarians who founded byzantium in 657 bc to build their city '' opposite to the blind '' , and that they interpreted '' the blind '' to mean chalcedon , the '' city of the blind '' . strabo ( p . 320 ) . pliny . nat . 9.15 nevertheless , trade thrived in chalcedon ; the town flourished and built many temples , including one to apollo , which had an oracle . chalcedonia , the territory dependent upon chalcedon , herodotus . histories . 4.85 . ) stretched up the anatolian shore of the bosphorus at least as far as the temple of zeus , now the site of yoros castle , and may have included the north shore of the bay of astacus which extends towards i̇zmit . important villages in chalcedonia included chrysopolis xenophon , xen . anab . 6.6 , 38-z1 . ( the modern üsküdar ) and panteicheion ( pendik ) . strabo notes that '' a little above the sea '' in chalcedonia lies '' the fountain azaritia , which contains small crocodiles '' . strabo 1.597 . in its early history chalcedon shared the fortunes of byzantium . later , the 6th-century bc persian satrap otanes captured it . the city vacillated for a long while between the sparta and the athens interests . darius the great 's bridge of boats , built in 512 bc for his scythian campaign , extended from chalcedonia to thrace . chalcedon formed a part of the kingdom of bithynia , whose king nicomedes willed bithynia to the romans upon his death in 74 bc . roman city . the city was partly destroyed by mithridates . the governor of bithynia , cotta , had fled to chalcedon for safety along with thousands of other romans . three thousand of them were killed , sixty ships captured , and four ships destroyed in mithridates ' assault on the city . appian . mithrid . 71 ; plut . luc . 8 . during the empire , chalcedon recovered , and was given the status of a free city . it fell under the repeated attacks of the barbarian hordes who crossed over after having ravaged byzantium , including some referred to as scythians who attacked during the reign of valerian and gallienus in the mid 3rd century . zosimus 1.34 . . byzantine and ottoman suburbs . image : silver jug chalcedon istarchmu.jpg thumb 180px small silver jug from chalcedon . chalcedon suffered somewhat from its proximity to the new imperial capital at constantinople . first the byzantines and later the ottoman turks used it as a quarry for building materials for constantinople 's monumental structures . ammian . 31.1 , and the notes of valesius . chalcedon also fell repeatedly to armies attacking constantinople from the east . in 361 ad it was the location of the chalcedon tribunal , where julian the apostate brought his enemies to trial . in 451 ad an ecumenical council of christian leaders convened here . see below for this council of chalcedon . the general belisarius probably spent his years of retirement on his estate of rufinianae in chalcedonia . beginning in 616 and for at least a decade thereafter , chalcedon furnished an encampment to the persians under chosroes ii gibbon . decline , & c . 100.46 . ( cf . siege of constantinople ( 626 ) ) . it later fell for a time to the arabs under yazid ( cf . siege of constantinople ( 674 ) ) . chalcedon was badly damaged during the fourth crusade ( 1204 ) . it came definitively under ottoman rule under orhan i a century before the fall of constantinople . ecclesiastical history . chalcedon was an episcopal see at an early date and several christian martyrs are associated with chalcedon : the virgin euphemia and her companions in the early 4th century ; the cathedral of chalcedon was consecrated to her . st . sabel the persian and his companions . it was the site of various ecclesiastical councils . the fourth ecumenical council , known as 'the ' council of chalcedon , was convened in 451 and defined the human and divine natures of jesus , which provoked the schism with the churches composing oriental orthodoxy . after the council , chalcedon became a metropolitan see , but without suffragans . there is a list of its bishops in le quien , michel le quien , oriens christianus , i , 599 . completed by anthimus alexoudes , in anatolikos aster xxx , 108 . revised for the early period by pargoire . in échos d'orient iii , 85 , 204 ; iv , 21 , 104 . among others are : sophrone pétridès , '' chalcedon '' in catholic encyclopedia ( new york 1908 ) st . adrian , a martyr ; st . john , sts . cosmas and nicetas , during the iconoclastic period ; maris , the arian ; heraclianus , who wrote against the manichaeans and the monophysites ; leo , persecuted by alexius i comnenus . greek and catholic successions . the greek orthodox metropolitan of chalcedon holds senior rank ( currently third position ) within the greek orthodox patriarchal synod of constantinople . the incumbent is metropolitan athanasios papas . the cathedral is that of euphemia . after the great schism , the latin church retained chalcedon as a titular see with archiepiscopal rank , annuario pontificio 2013 ( libreria editrice vaticana , 2013 , , p . 855 with known incumbents since 1356 . among the titular bishops named to this see were william bishop ( 1623–1624 ) and richard smith ( 1624–1632 ) , who were appointed vicar apostolic for the pastoral care of catholics in england at a time when that country had no catholic diocesan bishops . such appointments ceased after the second vatican council and the titular see has not been assigned since 1967 . chalcedon ( titular see ) chalcedon has also been a titular archbishopric for two eastern catholic church dioceses : syrian ( antiochian rite , established in 1922 ; vacant since 1958 ) armenian catholic ( armenian rite , established 1951 , after two incumbents , suppressed in 1956 ) . notable people . euphemia ( 3rd century ad ) , christian saint and martyr , patron saint of kalkhedon boethus ( 2nd century bc ) , greek sculptor herophilos ( 2nd century bc ) , greek physician phaleas of chalcedon ( 4th century bc ) , greek statesman thrasymachus ( 5th century bc ) , greek sophist xenocrates ( 4th century bc ) , greek philosopher