Dawn

etymology . '' dawn '' derives from the old english verb dagian , '' to become day '' . types of dawn . dawn begins with the first sight of lightness in the morning , and continues until the sun breaks the horizon . this morning twilight before sunrise is divided into three categories depending on the amount of sunlight that is present in the sky , which is determined by the angular distance of the centre of the sun ( degrees below the horizon ) in the morning . these categories are astronomical , nautical , and civil dawn . astronomical dawn . astronomical dawn begins when the sun is 18 degrees below the horizon in the morning . astronomical twilight follows instantly until the sun is 12 degrees below the horizon . at this point a very small portion of the sun 's rays illuminate the sky and the fainter stars begin to disappear . astronomical dawn is often indistinguishable from night , especially in areas with light pollution . astronomical dawn marks the beginning of astronomical twilight , which lasts until nautical dawn . . nautical dawn . nautical twilight begins when there is enough illumination for sailors to distinguish the horizon at sea but the sky is too dark to perform outdoor activities . formally , it begins when the sun is 12 degrees below the horizon in the morning . the sky becomes light enough to clearly distinguish it from land and water . nautical dawn marks the start of nautical twilight , which lasts until civil dawn . . civil dawn . civil twilight begins when there is enough light for most objects to be distinguishable , so that some outdoor activities can commence . formally , it occurs when the sun is 6 degrees below the horizon in the morning . if the sky is clear , it is blue colored , and if there is some cloud or haze , there can be bronze , orange and yellow colours . some bright stars and planets such as venus and jupiter are visible to the naked eye at civil dawn . this moment marks the start of civil twilight , which lasts until sunrise . . effects of latitude . the duration of the twilight period ( e.g . between astronomical dawn and sunrise ) varies greatly depending on the observer 's latitude : from a little over 70 minutes at the equator , to many hours in the polar regions . equator . the period of twilight is shortest at the equator , where the equinox sun rises due east and sets due west , at a right angle to the horizon . each stage of twilight ( civil , nautical , and astronomical ) lasts only 24 minutes . from anywhere on earth , the twilight period is shortest around the equinoxes and longest on the solstices . polar regions . daytime becomes longer as the summer solstice approaches , while nighttime gets longer as the winter solstice approaches . this can have a potential impact on the times and durations of dawn and dusk . this effect is more pronounced closer to the poles , where the sun rises at the vernal equinox and sets at the autumn equinox , with a long period of twilight , lasting for a few weeks . the polar circle ( at 66°34 & prime ; north or south ) is defined as the lowest latitude at which the sun does not set at the summer solstice . therefore , the angular radius of the polar circle is equal to the angle between earth 's equatorial plane and the ecliptic plane . this period of time with no sunset lengthens closer to the pole . near the summer solstice , latitudes higher than 54°34 & prime ; get no darker than nautical twilight ; the '' darkness of the night '' varies greatly at these latitudes . at latitudes higher than about 60°34 , summer nights get no darker than civil twilight . this period of '' bright nights '' is longer at higher latitudes . example . around the summer solstice , glasgow , scotland at 55°51′ n , and copenhagen , denmark at 55°40′ n , get a few hours of '' night feeling '' . oslo , norway at 59°56′ n , and stockholm , sweden at 59°19′ n , seem very bright when the sun is below the horizon . when the sun gets 9.0 to 9.5 degrees below the horizon ( at summer solstice this is at latitudes 57°30′–57°00′ ) , the zenith gets dark even on cloud-free nights ( if there is no full moon ) , and the brightest stars are clearly visible in a large majority of the sky . mythology and religion . in islam , astronomical dawn is called false morning ( subhe-kadhib , arabic صبح کاذب ) while nautical dawn is called sehr ( سحر ) or true morning ( subhe-sadiq , arabic صبح صادق ) and it is the time of first prayer of the day , and the beginning of the daily fast during ramadan . many indo-european mythologies have a dawn goddess , separate from the male solar deity , her name deriving from pie hausos , derivations of which include greek eos , roman aurora and indian ushas . also related is lithuanian aušrinė , and possibly a germanic eostre ( whence the term easter ) . in sioux mythology , anpao is an entity with two faces . the hindu dawn deity ushas is female , whereas surya , the sun , and aruṇa , the sun 's charioteer , are male . ushas is one of the most prominent rigvedic deities . the time of dawn is also referred to as the brahmamuhurtham ( brahma is god of creation and muhurtham is a hindu unit of time ) , and is considered an ideal time to perform spiritual activities , including meditation and yoga . in some parts of india , both usha and pratyusha ( dusk ) are worshiped along with the sun during the festival of chhath . prime is the fixed time of prayer of the traditional divine office ( canonical hours ) in christian liturgy , said at the first hour of daylight . in judaism , the question of how to calculate dawn ( hebrew alos/ hashachar , or alos/ is posed by the talmud , pesachim 94a as it has many ramifications for jewish law ( such as the possible start time for certain daytime commandments , like prayer ) . the simple reading of the talmud is that dawn takes place 72 minutes before sunrise . others , including the vilna gaon , have the understanding that the talmud 's timeframe for dawn was referring specifically to an equinox day in mesopotamia , and is therefore teaching that dawn should be calculated daily as commencing when the sun is 16.1 degrees below the horizon . the longstanding practice among most sephardic jews is to follow the first opinion , while many ashkenazi jews follow the latter view . dawn in art . file : l'aurore by william-adolphe bouguereau - bma.jpg l'aurore by william-adolphe bouguereau file : guillaume vogels - l'aurore , mer du nord.jpg mer du nord by guillaume vogels . literature . homer uses the stock epithet '' rosy-fingered dawn '' frequently in the iliad and the odyssey an aubade ( occitan alba , german tagelied ) is a song about lovers having to separate at daybreak aurora musis amica ( dawn is a friend to the muse ) , in epigrammata disticha poetarum latinorum , veterum et recentum , nobiliora ( 1642 ) by barthold nihus the dawn , volume 1 on jean-christophe written by romain rolland dawn , a novel written by henry rider haggard , published in 1884 '' dawn '' , a poem written by rupert brooke published in the collected poems of rupert brooke '' dawn '' , a poem written by richard aldington '' dawn '' , a poem written by emily dickinson '' dawn '' , a poem written by francis ledwidge '' dawn '' , a poem written by john masefield '' down '' , a poem written by william carlos williams i greet the dawn : poems , a book of poetry written by paul laurence dunbar , published january 1 , 1978 by atheneum books '' dawn '' , a four-line poem from lyrics of lowly life , a book of poetry written by paul laurence dunbar , originally published in 1896 . this poem was published again in the complete poems of paul laurence dunbar , the 1913 collection of his work -- : :an angel , robed in spotless white , : :bent down and kissed the sleeping night . : :night woke to blush ; the sprite was gone . : :men saw the blush and called it dawn . : : : : : -dawn by paul laurence dunbar . see also . dusk sky sunrise sunset twilight dawn chorus ( electromagnetic ) . references . external links . worldwide timetable for dawn time calculation