Hail Mary

holy biblical source . the prayer incorporates two greetings to mary in gospel of luke : '' hail , full of grace , the lord is with thee . '' luke 1:28 : χαῖρε , κεχαριτωμένη , ὁ κύριος μετὰ σοῦ / chaire , kecharitōmenē , o kyrios meta sou ) . and '' blessed art thou amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb . '' luke 1:42 : εὐλογημένη σὺ ἐν γυναιξὶν καὶ εὐλογημένος ὁ καρπὸς τῆς κοιλίας σου / eulogēmenē su en gynaixin kai eulogēmenos o karpos tēs koilias sou ) . in mid-13th-century western europe the prayer consisted only of these words with the single addition of the name '' mary '' after the word '' hail '' , as is evident from the commentary of saint thomas aquinas on the prayer . '' saint thomas aquinas on the hail mary '' , catholic dossier , may-june 1996 , ignatius press , snohomish , washington . the first of the two passages from saint luke 's gospel is the greeting of the angel gabriel to mary , originally written in koine greek . the opening word of greeting , , chaíre , here translated '' hail '' , literally has the meaning '' rejoice '' or '' be glad '' . this was the normal greeting in the language in which saint luke 's gospel is written and continues to be used in the same sense in modern greek . accordingly , both '' hail '' and '' rejoice '' are valid english translations of the word ( '' hail '' reflecting the latin translation , and '' rejoice '' reflecting the original greek ) . the word , ( kecharitōménē ) , here translated as '' full of grace '' , admits of various translations . grammatically , the word is the feminine perfect passive participle of the verb , charitóō , which means '' to show , or bestow with , grace '' and here , in the passive voice , '' to have grace shown , or bestowed upon , one '' . liddell and scott , a greek–english lexicon , '' χαρι^τ-όω '' . the text also appears in the account of the annunciation contained in the apocryphal gospel of pseudo-matthew , in chapter 9 . the second passage is taken from elizabeth 's greeting to mary in luke 1:42 , '' blessed art thou among women , and blessed is the fruit of thy womb . '' taken together , these two passages are the two times mary is greeted in luke 1 . in western ( latin ) tradition . after considering the use of similar words in syriac , greek and latin in the 6th century , herbert thurston , writing in the catholic encyclopedia concludes that '' there is little or no trace of the hail mary as an accepted devotional formula before about 1050 '' – though a later pious tale attributed to ildephonsus of toledo ( fl . 7th century ) the use of the first part , namely the angel 's greeting to mary , without that of elizabeth , as a prayer . all the evidence suggests that it took its rise from certain versicles and responsories occurring in the little office of the blessed virgin mary , which just at that time was coming into favour among the monastic orders . saint thomas aquinas spoke of the name '' mary '' as the only word added at his time to the biblical text , to indicate the person who was '' full of grace . '' but at about the same time the name '' jesus '' was also added , to specify who was meant by the phrase '' the fruit of thy womb '' . the western version of the prayer is thus not derived from the greek version : even the earliest western forms have no trace of the greek version 's phrases : '' mother of god and virgin '' and '' for thou hast given birth to the saviour of our souls . '' to the greeting and praise of mary of which the prayer thus consisted , a petition '' holy mary , mother of god , pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death . amen . '' was added later . the petition first appeared in print in 1495 in girolamo savonarola 's esposizione sopra l'ave maria . british library - rare books department , shelfmark : ia 27542 . the '' hail mary '' prayer in savonarola 's exposition reads : '' hail mary , full of grace , the lord is with thee ; blessed art thou amongst women , and blessed is the fruit of thy womb , jesus . holy mary , mother of god , pray for us sinners , now and at the hour of our death . amen . '' the prayer is printed in latin on the first page of the exposition and reads : '' ave maria gratia plena dominus tecum benedicta tu in mulieribus et benedictus fructus uentris tui iesus sancta maria mater dei ora pro nobis peccatoribus nunc et in hora mortis amen . the petition was commonly added around the time of the council of trent . the dutch jesuit st . petrus canisius is credited with adding in 1555 in his catechism the sentence eleven years later , the sentence was included in the catechism of the council of trent of 1566 . the catechism says that to the first part of the hail mary , by which '' we render to god the highest praise and return him most gracious thanks , because he has bestowed all his heavenly gifts on the most holy virgin . the church of god has wisely added prayers and an invocation addressed to the most holy mother of god . we should earnestly implore her help and assistance ; for that she possesses exalted merits with god , and that she is most desirous to assist us by her prayers , no one can doubt without impiety and wickedness . '' the catechism of the council of trent by theodore alois buckley 2010 . '' part iv : the lord 's prayer : prayer : importance of instruction on prayer '' . soon after , in 1568 pope pius v included the full form as now known in his revision of the roman breviary . the current latin version is thus as follows , with accents added to indicate how the prayer is said in the current ecclesiastical pronunciation of latin , as well as macrons to indicate the classical vowel lengths : because recitation of the angelus , a prayer within which the hail mary is recited three times , is usually accompanied by the ringing of the angelus bell , words from the ave maria were often inscribed on bells . . byzantine christian use . the hail mary prayer of the eastern orthodox church and byzantine rite catholic churches is similar to the first part of the latin church form , with the addition of a very brief opening phrase and a short concluding phrase . it is well known and often used , though not quite as frequently as in the western church . it appears in several canons of prayer . it is typically sung thrice at the end of vespers during an all-night vigil , and occurs many times in the course of daily prayer . the greek text , of which those in other languages are translations , is : to the biblical texts this adds the opening invocation '' theotokos virgin '' , the name '' mary '' , and the concluding phrase '' because it was the saviour of our souls that thou borest '' . another english rendering of the same text reads : or : . slavonic versions . there exist two variant versions in church slavonic : the first is the older , and remains in use by the old believers as well as those who follow the ruthenian recension ( among them the ukrainian greek-catholic church and the ruthenian catholic church ) . the second , corresponding more closely to the greek , appeared in 1656 under the liturgical reforms of patriarch nikon of moscow , and is in use by the russian orthodox church , the serbian orthodox church , the bulgarian orthodox church and the ukrainian orthodox church . latin church catholic use . the hail mary is the last prayer in appendix v of the roman missal , the last of seven prayers under the heading “ thanksgiving after mass ” . there it appears with '' with you '' instead of the traditional '' with thee '' , '' are you '' instead of the traditional '' art thou '' and '' your womb '' in place of the traditional '' thy womb '' : hail , mary , full of grace , the lord is with you ; blessed are you among women , and blessed is the fruit of your womb , jesus . holy mary , mother of god , pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death . amen . the hail mary is the central part of the angelus , a devotion generally recited thrice daily by many catholics , as well as broad & high church anglicans , and lutherans who usually omit the second half . the hail mary is an essential element of the rosary , a prayer method in use especially among roman rite ( western ) catholics . the eastern catholic churches say a similar version . the rosary consists traditionally of three sets of five mysteries , each mystery being meditated on while reciting a decade ( a set of ten ) of ave marias . the 150 ave marias of the rosary thus echo the 150 psalms . these mysteries concern events of jesus ' life during his childhood ( joyful mysteries ) , passion ( sorrowful mysteries ) , and from his resurrection onwards ( glorious mysteries ) . another set , the luminous mysteries , is of comparatively recent origin , having been proposed by pope john paul ii in 2002 . each decade of ave marias is preceded by the our father ( pater noster or the lord 's prayer ) and followed by the glory be ( gloria patri ) ( doxology ) . the repetition of the fixed-language prayers assists recitation from the heart rather than the head . pope paul v said that '' the rosary is a treasure of graces . even for those souls who pray without meditating , the simple act of taking the beads in hand to pray is already a remembrance of god – of the supernatural '' . anglican use . some anglicans also employ the hail mary in devotional practice . anglo-catholic anglicanism uses the prayer in much the same way as roman catholics , including use of the rosary and the recitation of the angelus . some anglican churches contain statues of the virgin mary , and the faithful use devotional prayers including the hail mary . society of mary . that manifestation of veneration of mary , decried by certain protestants as worship , was largely removed from anglican churches during the english reformation but was reintroduced to some extent during the oxford movement of the mid-1800s . lutheran use . martin luther believed that mary should be held in highest reverence . although he did not agree with mary 's veneration , he did advocate the use of the first half of the hail mary ( that is , '' hail mary , full of grace , the lord is with thee . blessed art thou amongst women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb , jesus . '' ) as a sign of reverence for and devotion to the virgin . lehmann , h . , ed . ‘ ’ luther 's works , american edition ’ ’ , vol . 43 , p . 40 , fortress , 1968 . luther 's works , 10 ii , 407–409 . in keeping with the principle of sola scriptura , luther exclusively emphasized the quotation from luke 1:42 , without addition . only after his death was the second part ( '' holy mary , mother of god , pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death '' ) added . . musical settings . the hail mary , ave maria in latin , has been set to music numerous times . the title '' ave maria '' has been given also to musical compositions that are not settings of the prayer . one of the most famous is the version by franz schubert ( 1825 ) , composed as ellens dritter gesang ( ellen 's third song ) , d839 , part 6 of his opus 52 , a setting of seven songs from walter scott 's popular epic poem '' the lady of the lake '' , translated into german by adam storck . although it opens with the greeting '' ave maria '' ( '' hail mary '' ) , the text was not that of the traditional prayer , but nowadays it is commonly sung with words of the prayer . its music was used in the final segment of walt disney 's fantasia . ave maria , d.839 ( schubert , franz ) music score in public domain petrucci music library . franz schubert : music and belief by leo black 2005 page 115 . the version by charles gounod ( 1859 ) , adding melody and words to johann sebastian bach 's first prelude from the well-tempered clavier , omits the words '' theotokos '' ( mother of god ) . anton bruckner wrote three different settings , the best known being a ave maria ( bruckner ) . antonín dvořák 's version was composed in 1877 . another setting of ave maria was written by giuseppe verdi for his 1887 opera otello . russian composer césar cui , who was raised roman catholic , set the text at least three times : as the '' ave maria '' , op . 34 , for one or two women 's voices with piano or harmonium ( 1886 ) , and as part of two of his operas : le flibustier ( premiered 1894 ) and mateo falcone ( 1907 ) . settings also exist by mozart , liszt , byrd , elgar , saint-saëns , rossini , brahms , stravinsky , mascagni , lauridsen , david conte and perosi as well as numerous versions by less well-known composers , such as j . b . tresch and ninel samokhvalova . in the renaissance , this text was also set by numerous composers , including josquin des prez , orlando di lasso , tomás luis de victoria , and giovanni pierluigi da palestrina . before the council of trent there were actually different versions of the text , so the earlier composers in the period sometimes set versions of the text different from the ones shown above . josquin des prez , for example , himself set more than one version of the ave maria . here is the text of his motet ave maria . virgo serena , which begins with the first six words above and continues with a poem in rhymed couplets.image : folio 26r - the annunciation.jpg thumb right hail mary ( annunciation ) , les très riches heures du duc de berry , chantilly museum the much anthologized ave maria by jacques arcadelt is actually a 19th-century arrangement by pierre-louis dietsch , loosely based on arcadelt 's three part madrigal nous voyons que les hommes . in the 20th century , franz biebl composed ave maria ( biebl ) , actually a setting of the angelus prayer , in which the ave maria is repeated three times , but the second part only once as the climax . in slavonic , the text was also a popular subject for setting to music by eastern european composers . these include rachmaninov , stravinsky , bortniansky , vavilov ( his version often misattributed to caccini ) , mikhail shukh , lyudmyla hodzyumakha and others . a famous setting for the orthodox version of the prayer in church slavonic ( bogoroditsye djevo ) was composed by sergei rachmaninoff in his all-night vigil . since protestant christianity generally avoids any special veneration of mary , musical settings of the prayer are sometimes sung to other texts that preserve the word boundaries and syllable stresses . ave redemptor ( relph ) . ave redemptor ( ngai ) , choral public domain library . . see also . three hail marys the glories of mary hail mary pass hymns to mary lord 's prayer marian apparitions marian devotions marian shrine mariology , theological study of mary mary , the mother of jesus prayer beads rosary theotokos . references . external links . university of dayton hail mary in various languages audio recordings and texts of the hail mary and other prayers in various languages article 2 , '' the way of prayer '' , 2676–2677 , on the hail mary—catechism of the catholic church , video of andy williams ' performance of a song using '' ave maria '' as its refrain .