Mulatto

puerto rico . in a 2002 genetic study of maternal and paternal direct lines of ancestry of 800 puerto ricans , 61 % had mitochondrial dna ( mtdna ) from an amerindian female ancestor , 27 % inherited mtdna from a female african ancestor and 12 % had mtdna from a female european ancestor . conversely , patrilineal direct lines , as indicated by the y chromosome , showed that 70 % of puerto rican males in the sample have y chromosome dna from a male european ancestor , 20 % inherited y-dna from a male african ancestor , and less than 10 % inherited y-dna from a male amerindian ancestor . as these tests measure only the dna along the direct matrilineal and patrilineal lines of inheritance , they can not tell what total percentage of european , indigenous , or african ancestry any individual has . in keeping with spanish practice , for most of its colonial period , puerto rico had laws such as the regla del sacar or gracias al sacar . a person with african ancestry could be considered legally white if he could prove that at least one person per generation in the last four generations had been legally white . people of black ancestry with known white lineage were classified as white , in contrast to the '' one-drop rule '' put into law in the early 20th century in the united states . in colonial and antebellum times in certain locations , persons of three-quarters or more white ancestry were considered legally white . if born to slave mothers , however , this status did not overrule their being considered slaves , like sally hemings , who was three-quarters white , and her children by thomas jefferson , who were seven-eighths white , and all born into slavery . united states . colonial and antebellum eras . historians have documented sexual abuse of enslaved women during the colonial and post-revolutionary slavery times by white men in power : planters , their sons before marriage , overseers , etc . , which resulted in many multiracial children born into slavery . starting with virginia in 1662 , colonies adopted the principle of partus sequitur ventrem in slave law , which said that children born in the colony were born into the status of their mother . thus , children born to slave mothers were born into slavery , regardless of who their fathers were and whether they were baptized as christians . children born to white mothers were free , even if they were mixed-race . children born to free mixed-race mothers were also free . paul heinegg has documented that most of the free people of color listed in the 1790–1810 censuses in the upper south were descended from unions and marriages during the colonial period in virginia between white women , who were free or indentured servants , and african or african-american men , servant , slave or free . in the early colonial years , such working-class people lived and worked closely together , and slavery was not as much of a racial caste . slave law had established that children in the colony took the status of their mothers . this meant that multi-racial children born to white women were born free . the colony required them to serve lengthy indentures if the woman was not married , but nonetheless , numerous individuals with african ancestry were born free , and formed more free families . over the decades , many of these free people of color became leaders in the african-american community ; others married increasingly into the white community . paul heinegg , free african americans of virginia , north carolina , south carolina , maryland and delaware , 1995–2005 , baltimore , md : genealogical publishing co , 1995-2005 dorothy schneider , carl j . schneider , slavery in america , infobase publishing , 2007 , pp . 86–87 . his findings have been supported by dna studies and other contemporary researchers as well . felicia r lee , '' family tree ’ s startling roots '' , new york times . accessed november 3 , 2013 . a daughter born to a south asian father and irish mother in maryland in 1680 , both of whom probably came to the colony as indentured servants , was classified as a '' mulatto '' and sold into slavery . historian f . james davis says , historically in the american south , the term mulatto was also applied at times to persons with mixed native american and african american ancestry . for example , a 1705 virginia statute reads as follows : '' and for clearing all manner of doubts which hereafter may happen to arise upon the construction of this act , or any other act , who shall be accounted a mulatto , be it enacted and declared , and it is hereby enacted and declared , that the child of an indian and the child , grand child , or great grand child , of a negro shall be deemed , accounted , held and taken to be a mulatto . '' but southern colonies began to prohibit indian slavery in the eighteenth century , so , according to their own laws , even mixed-race children born to native american women should be considered free . the societies did not always observe this distinction . certain native american tribes of the inocoplo family in texas referred to themselves as '' mulatto '' . at one time , florida 's laws declared that a person from any number of mixed ancestries would be legally defined as a mulatto , including white/hispanic , black/native american , and just about any other mix as well . in the united states , due to the influence and laws making slavery a racial caste , and later practices of hypodescent , white colonists and settlers tended to classify persons of mixed african and native american ancestry as black , regardless of how they identified themselves , or sometimes as black indians . but many tribes had matrilineal kinship systems and practices of absorbing other peoples into their cultures . multiracial children born to native american mothers were customarily raised in her family and specific tribal culture . federally recognized native american tribes have insisted that identity and membership is related to culture rather than race , and that individuals brought up within tribal culture are fully members , regardless of whether they also have some european or african ancestry . many tribes have had mixed-race members who identify primarily as members of the tribes . if the multiracial children were born to slave women ( generally of at least partial african descent ) , they were classified under slave law as slaves . this was to the advantage of slaveowners , as indian slavery had been abolished . if mixed-race children were born to native american mothers , they should be considered free , but sometimes slaveholders kept them in slavery anyway . multiracial children born to slave mothers were generally raised within the african-american community and considered '' black '' . . influence . some mixed-race people in the south became wealthy enough to become slave owners themselves . at times they held family members in slavery when there were many restrictions against freeing slaves . by the time of the civil war , many mixed-race persons , or free people of color , who were accepted in the society supported the confederacy . for example , william ellison owned 60 slaves . andrew durnford of new orleans , which had a large population of free people of color , mostly of french descent and catholic culture , was listed in the census as owning 77 slaves . in louisiana free people of color constituted a third class between white colonists and the mass of slaves . joseph conlin ( 2011 ) . the american past : a survey of american history . cengage learning , p . 370 . other multiracial people became abolitionists and supported the union . frederick douglass escaped slavery and became nationally known as an abolitionist in the north . in other examples , mary ellen pleasant and thomy lafon of new orleans used their fortunes to support the abolitionist cause . francis e . dumas , also a free person of color in new orleans , emancipated all his slaves and organized them into a company in the second regiment of the louisiana native guards . the men of color below spanned the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . file : frederick douglass ( 2 ) . jpg frederick douglass file : p . b . s . pinchback - brady-handy.jpg p . b . s . pinchback file : booker t washington portrait.jpg booker t . washington file : norris wright cuney.jpg norris wright cuney . contemporary era . mulatto was used as an official census racial category in the united states , to acknowledge multiracial persons , until 1930 . ( in the early 20th century , several southern states had adopted the one-drop rule as law , and southern congressmen pressed the us census bureau to drop the mulatto category : they wanted all persons to be classified as '' black '' or '' white '' . ) in the 2000 united states census , 6,171 americans self-identified as having mulatto ancestry . since then , persons responding to the census have been allowed to identify as having more than one type of ethnic ancestry . on 4 november 2008 , barack obama became america 's first mulatto president , as he is the son of a european american mother and a luo father from kenya . his official white house biography describes him as african american . . colonial references . fernandino quadroon & ndash ; and other terms denoting the degree of african descent métis mestizo zambo creole peoples . see also . african diaspora in the americas afro-argentines afro-colombians afro-latin americans afro-mexicans brownin cafres cassare , a marriage alliance between european traders and african rulers . casta cholo coloureds free people of color melungeon multiracial rhineland bastard tragic mulatto . references . ; notes ; citations . further reading . beckmann , susan . '' the mulatto of style : language in derek walcott 's drama . '' canadian drama 6.1 ( 1980 ) : 71-89 . online engseng ho , an anthropologist , discusses the role of the muwallad in the region . the term muwallad , used primarily in reference to those of '' mixed blood '' , is analyzed through ethnographic and textual information . . external links . a brief history of census “ race ” surprises in the family tree the mulatto factor in black family genealogy dr . david pilgrim , '' the tragic mulatto myth '' , jim crow museum , ferris state university at '' race relations '' , in-depth research links on mulattoes , about.com encarta 's breakdown of mulatto people ( archived 2009-11-01 )