1972 in literature

events . may 22 – cecil day-lewis , poet laureate of the united kingdom , dies at lemmons , the home of novelists kingsley amis and elizabeth jane howard in north london , which he has shared with his wife and son – actors jill balcon and daniel day-lewis – and at weekends with kingsley 's writer son martin amis and others . june 4 – the poet joseph brodsky is expelled from the soviet union . obituary pp . 4–6 the new york times '' joseph brodsky , exiled poet who won nobel , dies at 55 '' january 29 , 1996 . october 6–7 – the new staatstheater darmstadt is opened . october 8 – the play sizwe bansi is dead has its first performance at the space theatre ( cape town ) , south africa , before a multiracial audience . playwright athol fugard directs , with co-writers john kani and winston ntshona in lead roles . october 10 – sir john betjeman is declared poet laureate of the united kingdom , the first knight ever to be so . '' the three marias '' , maria isabel barreno , maria teresa horta and maria velho da costa , publish in lisbon new portuguese letters ( novas cartas portuguesas ) , a collection challenging the estado novo dictatorship , to immediate success , but banned by censors as '' pornographic and an offense to public morals '' . its authors are imprisoned for '' abuse of freedom of the press '' and '' outrage to public decency '' . only after the 1974 '' carnation revolution '' does their trial end with the authors pardoned and the judge assigning '' outstanding literary merit '' to the book . unknown date – somali latin alphabet is introduced . . new books . fiction . dritëro agolli – the rise and fall of comrade zylo ( shkëlqimi dhe rënja e shokut zylo , published in the magazine hosteni ) srikrishna alanahalli – kaadu jorge amado – teresa batista cansada da guerra ( tereza batista : home from the wars ) martin amis – the rachel papers isaac asimov – the gods themselves john braine – the queen of a distant country taylor caldwell – captains and the kings italo calvino – invisible cities ( le città invisibili ) john dickson carr – the hungry goblin : a victorian detective novel angela carter – the infernal desire machines of doctor hoffman agatha christie – elephants can remember brian cleeve – tread softly in this place michael crichton – the terminal man robertson davies – the manticore l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp , editors – 3000 years of fantasy and science fiction r . f . delderfield – to serve them all my days margaret drabble , b . s . johnson and others – london consequences frederick forsyth – the odessa file günter grass – aus dem tagebuch einer schnecke ( from the diary of a snail ) graham greene – the honorary consul peter handke – a sorrow beyond dreams ( wunschloses unglück ) james herriot – all creatures great and small georgette heyer – lady of quality george v . higgins – the friends of eddie coyle p . d . james – an unsuitable job for a woman dan jenkins – semi-tough thomas keneally – the chant of jimmy blacksmith carl jacobi – disclosures in scarlet derek lambert blackstone the red house halldór laxness – guðsgjafaþula ( mantra of god 's gift ) ira levin – the stepford wives audrey erskine lindop – journey into stone frank belknap long – the rim of the unknown robert ludlum – the osterman weekend david mccullough – the great bridge google books . retrieved 2015-02-22 . john d . macdonald – the scarlet ruse barry n . malzberg – beyond apollo vladimir nabokov – transparent things kenzaburō ōe ( 大江 健三郎 ) – the day he himself shall wipe my tears away ( みずから我が涙をぬぐいたまう日 , mizukara waga namida o nugui tamau hi ) chaim potok – my name is asher lev josef škvorecký – the miracle game ( mirákl ) david storey – pasmore arkady and boris strugatsky – roadside picnic ( « пикник на обочине » , piknik na obochine ) paul theroux – saint jack hunter s . thompson – fear and loathing in las vegas irving wallace – the word . children and young people . richard adams – watership down gillian avery – a likely lad roald dahl – charlie and the great glass elevator rumer godden the diddakoi ( also gypsy girl ) the old woman who lived in a vinegar bottle robert e . howard ( with alicia austin ) – echoes from an iron harp tove jansson – the summer book michael de larrabeiti – the redwater raid ronald mccuaig – gangles james marshall – george and martha ( first in a series of seven eponymous books ) graham oakley – the church mouse ( first in the church mice series of twelve books ) bill peet the ant and the elephant countdown to christmas mary renault – the persian boy marjorie w . sharmat – nate the great judith viorst – alexander and the terrible , horrible , no good , very bad day . drama . alan ayckbourn – absurd person singular samuel beckett – not i caryl churchill – owners hanay geiogamah – body indian eugène ionesco – macbett vijay tendulkar ghashiram kotwal sakharam binder . non-fiction . the american museum of natural history – an introduction jacob bronowski – the ascent of man l . sprague de camp great cities of the ancient world with catherine crook de camp – darwin and his great discovery carlos castaneda – journey to ixtlan : the lessons of don juan winston graham – the spanish armadas bruce joyce and marsha weil – models of teaching ( first edition ) michael kammen – people of paradox : an inquiry concerning the origins of american civilization richard mabey – food for free elaine morgan – the descent of woman robert newton peck – a day no pigs would die frances yates – the rosicrucian enlightenment john howard yoder – the politics of jesus . births . january 1 – maile meloy , american novelist and short story writer february 11 – noboru yamaguchi ( 山口 登 ) , japanese light novelist and game scenario author may 27 – maggie o'farrell , northern ireland-born novelist august 18 – adda djørup , danish poet and fiction writer september 6 – china miéville , english science fiction novelist september 19 cheryl b ( cheryl burke ) , american poet and spoken word artist n . k . jemisin , american science fiction and fantasy writer november 4 – yiyun li ( 李翊雲 ) , chinese american writer of fiction in english unknown dates shimon adaf , israeli poet and novelist zinnie harris , british dramatist rabee jaber , lebanese novelist charlotte mendelson , english novelist marente de moor , dutch novelist and columnist ben rice , english novelist . deaths . january 1 – eberhard wolfgang möller , german playwright and poet ( born 1906 ) january 7 – john berryman , american poet ( suicide ; born 1914 ) january 8 – kenneth patchen , american poet and author ( born 1911 ) february 2 – natalie clifford barney , american writer and patron ( born 1876 ) february 15 – edgar snow , american political writer ( cancer , born 1905 ) march 4 – richard church , english poet and novelist ( born 1893 march 9 – violet trefusis , english writer ( born 1894 ) march 11 – fredric brown , american genre novelist ( born 1906 march 14 – giangiacomo feltrinelli , italian publisher ( born 1926 ) april 10 – laurence manning , canadian science fiction author ( born 1899 ) may 22 – cecil day-lewis , irish-born poet laureate of the united kingdom and ( as nicholas blake ) novelist ( born 1904 ) may 28 – violette leduc , french novelist and memoirist ( born 1907 ) june 24 – r . f . delderfield , english novelist and playwright ( born 1912 ) august 2 – helen hoyt ( helen lyman ) , american poet ( born 1887 ) august 17 – alexander vampilov , russian dramatist ( drowned fishing , born 1937 ) august 22 – ernestine hill , australian travel writer ( born 1899 ) september 21 – henry de montherlant , french novelist , dramatist and essayist ( suicide , born 1895 ) september 27 – s . r . ranganathan , indian mathematician and librarian ( born 1892 ) november 1 – ezra pound , american poet ( born 1885 ) november 29 – victor bridges ( victor george de freyne ) , english genre novelist , playwright and poet ( born 1878 ) december 10 – mark van doren , american poet , writer and critic ( born 1894 ) december 13 – l . p . hartley , english novelist ( born 1895 ) december 23 – abraham joshua heschel , polish-born american theologian and rabbi ( born 1907 ) unknown dates wasif jawhariyyeh , palestinian arab diarist , poet and composer ( born 1897 ) donar munteanu , romanian poet and magistrate ( born 1886 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : heinrich böll . canada . see 1972 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : jean carrière , l'epervier de maheux prix médicis french : maurice clavel , le tiers des étoiles . united kingdom . booker prize : john berger , g . carnegie medal for children 's literature : richard adams , watership down cholmondeley award : molly holden , tom raworth , patricia whittaker eric gregory award : tony curtis , richard berengarten , brian oxley , andrew greig , robin lee , paul muldoon society of authors : eric gregory past winners . retrieved 2015-02-22 . james tait black memorial prize for fiction : john berger , g james tait black memorial prize for biography : quentin bell , virginia woolf . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry , eudora welty hugo award : philip josé farmer , to your scattered bodies go ( 1971 ) nebula award : isaac asimov , the gods themselves newbery medal for children 's literature : robert c . o'brien , mrs . frisby and the rats of nimh pulitzer prize for drama : not awarded pulitzer prize for fiction : wallace stegner – angle of repose pulitzer prize for poetry : james wright , collected poems . elsewhere . miles franklin award : thea astley , the acolyte premio nadal : josé maría carrascal , groovy viareggio prize : romano bilenchi , il bottone di stalingrado . references .