Mrs. Parkington

plot . at christmastime in 1938 , susie parkington , an elderly society matron and widow of the wealthy businessman and financier major augustus parkington , is visited by her many relatives , with the exception of her beloved great-granddaughter jane . except for jane , susie 's heirs are boorish , dissolute , and unhappy despite their wealth . when jane does appear , she informs her great-grandmother that she plans to secretly elope with ned talbot , her father 's employee , who wishes to take her away from her family and their way of life . susie has a flashback to her own life . as a teenager , susie helps her mother run a boarding house for silver miners in leaping rock , nevada . she meets major augustus parkington , the owner of the mine , when he stays at the boardinghouse on a visit ; the miners complain to him about dangerous working conditions , but he refuses to fix them as it would slow down the yield of the mine , instead paying the miners higher salaries to take the risk and telling them to quit if they are so afraid . shortly afterwards , a serious mine accident occurs which kills susie 's mother along with a number of miners . rather than leave susie to an uncertain fate , augustus marries her and takes her away to new york city . susie is introduced to baroness aspasia conti , a french aristocrat and close friend and former mistress of augustus , who helps susie pick out clothes and learn the social graces needed for a woman of her station . back in the present , susie arranges a meeting with ned , where he reveals that jane 's father amory ( susie 's grandson-in-law ) is being investigated for fraud , and ned planned to take jane away in order to avoid telling her or having to testify against amory . susie disapproves of ned 's handling of the situation , prompting jane to send ned away . amory confesses to susie and jane that he did commit fraud , and begs susie for a loan of 31 million to cover his actions in hopes of avoiding prison . susie is inclined to give him the loan , but says he must ask the rest of the family , as amory would be spending their inheritance . susie once again reminisces about her past . she remembers how , on their third anniversary , augustus presented her with a grand house , furnished with aspasia 's help . susie announces that she is pregnant , and an elated augustus holds a ball to celebrate , inviting the wealthiest and most socially prominent citizens of new york , but his happiness turns to fury when most of them refuse to attend due to his blunt , outspoken behavior . his rage upsets susie , and when she runs away from the dinner party , she runs upstairs , faints , falls down the stairs , and has a miscarriage . augustus angrily vows revenge against the non-attendees , and unbeknownst to susie , manages to force many of them out of business over the next few years . susie only finds out after mrs . livingstone , whose husband is about to be put out of business by augustus , pleads with susie for help and informs her that another man committed suicide after augustus ruined him . susie has words with augustus , who remains unrepentant , so she separates from him and takes up new quarters on long island , with frequent visits from aspasia . several weeks pass before augustus begs his wife to return home , revealing that he has been unsuccessful in his mission to put the livingstones out of business . susie then informs him that she has been secretly financially supporting the livingstone business and that his vendetta must stop . augustus agrees and the couple reunite . back in the present , as susie expected , her heirs refuse to lend amory the money . amory , overcoming his fear of going to prison , resolves to make a full confession to the authorities ; susie approves , saying that is what the major would have done . once again , susie has a flashback , this time to when her son herbert ( father of greedy granddaughters madeleine and helen ) was killed in an accident while playing polo . susie becomes a recluse for a year and augustus moves to england , renting a lavish country home and carrying on an affair with lady norah ebbsworth . aspasia convinces susie to fight for her marriage , so susie follows augustus to england and , with the assistance of the edward vii , convinces him to end his affair . following this , aspasia reveals that she will be moving back to paris . she also admits to susie that she has always been in love with augustus . susie reveals that she has always known , and after she herself was sure of augustus ' love for her , she loved aspasia too . augustus and susie have a heart-to-heart in which he hopes that if their grandchildren develop the weaknesses he associates with money that is inherited rather than earned , he or susie will be alive to set them straight . once more in the present , susie realizes she made a mistake in having jane send ned away , and tells jane to follow her heart and go after ned , which jane gladly does . finally , susie makes the decision to bail out amory anyway , as many '' little people '' would otherwise lose their money through his fraud . her daughter , granddaughters , and great grandson leave in disgust after learning they will be cut off by susie . once they leave , susie calls upstairs for her lady 's maid to make ready for the day . she also shouts to her that after the finances are distributed , they 'll be returning to leaping rock , nevada . cast . greer garson as susie parkington walter pidgeon as major augustus parkington edward arnold as amory stilham agnes moorehead as baroness aspasia conti cecil kellaway as edward vii , prince of wales gladys cooper as alice ( née parkington ) , duchess de brancourt frances rafferty as jane stilham tom drake as ned talbot dan duryea as jack stilham helen freeman as helen ( née parkington ) stilham lee patrick as madeleine ( née parkington ) swann rod cameron as al swann peter lawford as lord thornley hugh marlowe as john marbey fortunio bonanova signor cellini harry cording as humphrey hans conried as mr . ernst gerald oliver smith as taylor wallis clark as capt . mctavish ( uncredited ) al ferguson as miner ( uncredited ) byron foulger as norman vance ( uncredited ) howard hickman as dr . herrick ( uncredited ) brandon hurst as footman ( uncredited ) . awards . garson was nominated for an oscar for best actress and agnes moorehead for best supporting actress . moorehead also won the golden globe award for best supporting actress . box office . according to mgm records , the film earned 3,062,000 in the us and canada and 2,569,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of 2,198,000 . . radio adaptation . mrs . parkington was presented on lux radio theatre november 25 , 1946 . pidgeon and garson reprised their roles from the film . . references . external links .