Mika Waltari

biography . early life . waltari was born in helsinki on 19 september 1908 . his parents were toimi waltari and olga johansson ; toimi was a lutheran pastor once , teaching religion in porvoo , and olga one of his pupils . a scandal caused by their relationship had forced them to move to tampere and the two married each other on 18 november 1906 . at the age of five mika waltari suddenly lost his father to illness on 5 july 1914 , and the 25-year old olga waltari was left , with crucial help from toimi 's brother toivo , to support her three children : samuli ( 7 years ) , mika ( 5 years ) and erkki ( 6 months ) . as a boy , he witnessed the finnish civil war , during which his white-sided family fled to the home of his mother 's aunt at laukkoski in pornainen , near porvoo , which was relatively peaceful and where the whites were predominant . later he enrolled in the university of helsinki as a theology student , according to his uncle toivo 's wishes , but soon abandoned theology in favour of philosophy , aesthetics and literature , graduating in 1929 . while studying , he contributed to various magazines and wrote poetry and stories , getting his first book jumalaa paossa published in 1925 - it was a success , selling 3000 copies despite being only 72 pages long . in 1927 he went to paris where he wrote his first major novel suuri illusioni ( 'the grand illusion ' ) , a story of bohemian life . in terms of style , the novel is considered to be the finnish equivalent to the works of the american writers of the lost generation . ( in waltari 's historical novel the adventurer , taking place in the 16th century , the protagonist is a finn who goes to study in paris at much the same age that the author went to the same city in the 20th century ) . suuri illusioni was a surprise hit , selling 8000 copies and turning mika waltari into a famous author . waltari also was , for a while , a member of the liberal literary movement tulenkantajat , though his political and social views later turned conservatism . he was married on 8 march 1931 to marjatta luukkonen , whom he had met during military service the preceding year , and on 4 january 1932 they had a daughter , satu . satu also became a writer . throughout the 1930s and 1940s , waltari worked as a journalist and critic , writing for a number of newspapers and magazines and travelling widely in europe . he directed the magazine suomen kuvalehti . at the same time , he kept writing books in many genres , moving easily from one literary field to another . he had a very busy schedule and strict work ethic . he also suffered from manic-depressive psychosis and became depressed after completion of a book , sometimes to the extent of needing hospital treatment ; in his manic phases he did his writing . he participated , and often succeeded , in literary competitions to prove the quality of his work to critics . one of these competitions gave rise to one of his most popular characters , inspector palmu , a gruff detective of the helsinki police department , who starred in three mystery novels , all of which were filmed ( a fourth film was made without waltari involved ) . waltari also scripted the popular cartoon kieku ja kaiku and wrote aiotko kirjailijaksi , a guidebook for aspiring writers that influenced many younger writers such as kalle päätalo . . world war ii and international break-through . during the winter war ( 1939–1940 ) and the continuation war ( 1941–1944 ) , waltari worked in the government information center , now also placing his literary skills at the service of political propaganda . according to historian eino jutikkala , through this experience as a propagandist waltari became more cynical as he realised the prevalence of historical half-truths shaped by propaganda - later a recurrent theme in his historical novels . although waltari saw ussr communism as dangerous , he was attracted to the national socialist theories about a new man - he visited germany in 1939 , and wrote a mostly favourable article titled tuntematon saksa ( 'unknown germany ' ) . in 1942 he and 6 other finnish writers visited germany to attend the congress of the european writers ' union in weimar , and wrote yet more favourable coverage ; a story goes however that he , being slightly drunk , refused the pocket money brought by their '' patient and attentive german hosts '' to their hotel by tearing it half and throwing it away through the window . 1945 saw the publication of waltari 's first and most successful historical novel , the egyptian . its theme of the corruption of humanist values in a materialist world seemed curiously topical in the aftermath of world war ii , and the book became an international bestseller , serving as the basis of the 1954 hollywood movie of the same name . waltari wrote seven more historical novels , placed in various ancient cultures , among others the dark angel , set during the fall of constantinople in 1453 . in these novels , he gave powerful expression to his fundamental pessimism and also , in two novels set in the roman empire , to his christian conviction . after the war , he also wrote several novellas . he became a member of the finnish academy in 1957 and received an honorary doctorate at the university of turku in 1970 . . later years . waltari 's last two novels tell about early history of christianity : valtakunnan salaisuus ( english title : the secret of the kingdom 1959 ) , and ihmiskunnan viholliset ( english title : the roman 1964 ) . as a member of academy of science and letters he guided younger writers . he was also involved in re-publishing and editing his early works , and gave long interviews to ritva haavikko which were published as a book . haavikko , ritva ( ed . ) : mika waltari . ihmisen ääni : nöyryys ja intohimo . wsoy 1978 . waltari was one of the most prolific finnish writers . he wrote at least 29 novels , 15 novellas , 6 collections of stories or fairy-tales , 6 collections of poetry and 26 plays , as well as screen plays , radio plays , non-fiction , translations , and hundreds of reviews and articles . he is also internationally the best-known finnish writer , and his works have been translated into more than 30 languages . in his later years , waltari wrote less and less . this is partly due to the enormous fees he received from foreign editions of the egyptian and his other books , allowing him to stop '' writing to live '' . mika waltari died on 26 august 1979 in helsinki , the year after his wife marjatta 's death in 1978 . literary themes and style . markéta hejkalová ( who translated many waltari 's works into czech and wrote a biography about him ) identifies 9 common elements in waltari 's historical novels : journeys : the protagonist goes on journeys in foreign lands , is a '' foreigner '' in the world instead of having a home , and often has a comic sidekick . they can be called picaresque novels . waltari himself travelled a lot , wrote two travelogues and researched his material on his trips . isolation : the protagonist often is an orphan , has unknown parents , or was born out of wedlock . his origins are mysterious but possibly from the highest ranks of society . power : the main character becomes acquainted with mighty power-holders , becoming their adviser and often admirer , and gains status and property . this kind of story of rags-to-riches via hard work is common in finnish literature - and even mirrors waltari 's own life , as he at first relied on the help of his friends and relatives but later became a world-famous author . a turning point : all novels take place at the time of a major and significant turning point in world history . the manner in which these are explored is influenced by similar turning points in waltari 's time . conflicts and violence : many kinds of battles , wars and other acts of violence are depicted ( often in gruesome detail ) , within and between societies . attention is devoted to multiple conflicts in a novel instead of specific single ones , and no side is portrayed as more righteous as the other . waltari viewed that the violence of medieval torture sprung from the religious suppression of sexuality . rejection of ideologies : all manipulative ideologies , which on the surface have noble goals but cause people to die in their name , are criticised . there are two common character types : the idealist , who has good intentions but brings about chaos and mayhem , and the realist , who is more immoral or even greedy and power-hungry but gets things done and achieves order and peace . according to hejkalová , this tension between idealism and realism reflects post-world war ii finnish foreign policy : president urho kekkonen is the realist , who maintained the paasikivi–kekkonen line and preserved finnish independence , whereas carl gustaf emil mannerheim she sees as possibly the prototypical idealist . good and wicked women : the main character has relationships with two kinds of women : there is a good but imperfect woman , who tragically dies before the hero 's love for her can be fulfilled ; and a beautiful but wicked femme fatale . witchcraft : the supernatural , mysticism and witchraft are featured - not rationally explained away but treated as part of everyday life , as understood by the characters . there is a profound , personal relationship with god ( or equivalent divine power ) . optimism : counterintuitively in light of the above points , waltari nonetheless holds the view that there is good among people , and that slowly , imperceptibly but inevitably humanity is headed towards goodness and salvation . waltari paid special attention to the final parts of his novels and what mood or message they conveyed , providing a suitable uplifting catharsis . recognition . waltari got the state literature award five times : 1933 , 1934 , 1936 , 1949 , and 1953 . the pro finlandia medal was given to him in 1952 . the 100th anniversary of mika waltari 's birth was celebrated by selecting the writer as the main motif for a high value commemorative coin , the €10 mika waltari commemorative coin , minted in 2008 . the reverse depicts a vigilant pharaoh watchdog referencing his famous book . the obverse is decorated with waltari 's signature and a stylized pen nib that symbolizes the diversity of the writer 's production . waltari 's memorial in töölö by veikko hirvimäki was unveiled in 1985 . two asteroids have been named in honour of waltari : n : o 4266 mika waltari and n : o 4512 sinuhe . . works . novels . . short story collections . . short stories . '' satu kuninkaasta jolla ei ollut sydäntä '' ( 1945 ) . comics . kieku ja kaiku ( 1979 ) . poems . lauluja saatanalle ( 1926 , aka untamo raakki ) . unpublished sinun ristisi juureen ( 1927 ) valtatiet ( 1928 , with olavi lauri ) muukalaislegioona ( 1929 ) sotatalvi ( 1940 , with yrjö jylhä , arvi kivimaa , viljo kajava , ragnar ekelund , lauri viljanen , otto varhia ) runoja 1925-1945 ( 1945 ) 22.30 – pikajuna viipuriin ( 1966 ) pöytälaatikko ( 1967 ) mikan runoja ja muistiinpanoja 1925–1978 ( 1979 ) . plays . . nonfiction .