Video Toaster

first generation systems . the video toaster was designed by newtek founder tim jenison in topeka , kansas . engineer brad carvey ( brother of american actor/comedian dana carvey ) built the first wire wrap prototype , and steve kell wrote the software for the prototype . many other people worked on the toaster as it developed . the toaster was announced at the world of commodore expo in 1987 and released as a commercial product in december 1990 for the commodore amiga 2000 computer system , taking advantage of the video-friendly aspects of that system 's hardware to deliver the product at an unusually low cost of 2,399 . the amiga was well adapted to this application in that its system clock at was precisely double that of the ntsc color carrier frequency , , allowing for simple synchronization of the video signal . the hardware component is a full-sized card that is installed into the amiga 2000 's unique single video expansion slot rather than the standard bus slots , and therefore can not be used with the a500 or a1000 models . the card has several bnc connectors in the rear , which accepts four video input sources and provided two outputs ( preview and program ) . this initial generation system is essentially a real-time four-channel vision mixer . one feature of the video toaster is the inclusion of lightwave 3d , a 3d modeling , rendering , and animation program . this program became so popular in its own right that in 1994 it was made available as standalone product separate from the toaster systems . aside from simple fades , dissolves , and cuts , the video toaster has a large variety of character generation , overlays and complex animated switching effects . these effects are in large part performed with the help of the native amiga graphics chipset , which is synchronized to the ntsc video signals . as a result , while the toaster was rendering a switching animation , the computer desktop display is not visible . while these effects are unique and inventive , they can not be modified . soon toaster effects were seen everywhere , advertising the device as the brand of switcher those particular production companies were using . the toaster hardware requires very stable input signals , and therefore is often used along with a separate video sync time-base corrector to stabilize the video sources . third-party low-cost time-base correctors ( tbcs ) specifically designed to work with the toaster quickly came to market , most of which were designed as standard isa bus cards , taking advantage of the typically unused bridgeboard slots . the cards do not use the bridgeboard to communicate , but simply as a convenient power supply and physical location . as with all video switchers that use a frame buffer to create dves ( digital video effects ) , the video path through the toaster hardware introduced delays in the signals when the signal was in '' digital '' mode . depending on the video setup of the user , this delay could be quite noticeable when viewed along with the corresponding audio , so some users installed audio delay circuits to match the toaster 's video-delay lag , as is common practice in video-switching studios . a user still needs at least three video tape recorders ( vtr ) and a controller to perform b-roll linear video editing ( le ) , as the toaster serves merely as a switcher , which can be triggered through general-purpose input/output ( gpio ) to switch on cue in such a configuration , as the toaster has no edit-controlling capabilities . the frame delays passing through the toaster and other low-cost video switchers make precise editing a frustrating endeavor . internal cards and software from other manufacturers are available to control vtrs ; the most common systems go through the serial port to provide single-frame control of a vtr as a capture device for lightwave animations . a non-linear editing system ( nle ) product was added later , with the invention of the video toaster flyer . although initially offered as just an add-on to an amiga , the video toaster was soon available as a complete turn-key system that included the toaster , amiga , and sync generator . these toaster systems became very popular , primarily because at a cost of around us 5,000 , they could do much of what a 100,000 fully professional video switcher ( such as an evans & sutherland ) could do at that time . the toaster was also the first such video device designed around a general-purpose personal computer that is capable of delivering broadcast-quality ntsc signals . as such , during the early 1990s the toaster was widely used by consumer amiga owners , desktop video enthusiasts , and local television studios , and was even used during the tonight show regularly to produce special effects for comedy skits . it was often easy to detect a studio that used the toaster by the unique and recognizable special switching effects . the nbc also used the video toaster with lightwave for its promotional campaigns , beginning with the 1990-1991 broadcast season ( '' nbc : the place to be ! '' ) . all of the external submarine shots in the tv series seaquest dsv were created using lightwave 3d , as were the outer-space scenes in the tv series babylon 5 ( although amiga hardware was only used for the first three seasons ) . because of the heavy use of dark blues and greens ( for which the ntsc television standard is weak ) , the external submarine shots in seaquest dsv could not have made it to air without the use of the asdg abekas driver , written specifically to solve this problem by aaron avery at asdg ( later elastic reality , inc . ) . an updated version called video toaster 4000 was later released , using the amiga 4000 's video slot . the 4000 was co-developed by actor wil wheaton , who worked on product testing and quality control . nathan rabin . wil wheaton interview , the a.v . club , november 20 , 2002 . conversations with god : wil wheaton , geeks of doom , retrieved may 2 , 2009 . he later used his public profile to serve as a technology evangelist for the product . flying toasters , wired . the amiga video toaster 4000 source code was released in 2004 by newtek & discreetfx . video toaster flyer . for the second generation newtek introduced the video toaster flyer . the flyer is a much more capable non-linear editing system . in addition to just processing live video signals , the flyer makes use of hard drives to store video clips as well as audio and allow complex scripted playback . the flyer is capable of simultaneous dual-channel playback , which allows the toaster 's vision mixer to perform transitions and other effects on video clips without the need for rendering . the hardware component is again a card designed for the amiga 's zorro ii expansion slot , and was primarily designed by charles steinkuehler . the flyer portion of the video toaster/flyer combination is a complete computer of its own , having its own microprocessor and embedded software , which was written by marty flickinger . its hardware includes three embedded scsi controllers . two of these scsi buses are used to store video data , and the third to store audio . the hard drives are thus connected to the flyer directly and use a proprietary filesystem layout , rather than being connected to the amiga 's buses and were available as regular devices using the included dos driver . the flyer uses a proprietary wavelet compression algorithm known as vtasc , which was well-regarded at the time for offering better visual quality than comparable motion jpeg-based nonlinear editing systems . one of the card 's primary uses is for playing back lightwave 3d animations created in the toaster . video toaster screamer . thumb in 1993 , newtek announced the video toaster screamer , a parallel extension to the toaster built by deskstation technology , with four motherboards , each with a mips r4400 cpu running at and of ram . the screamer accelerated the rendering of animations developed using the toaster 's bundled lightwave 3d software , and is supposedly 40 times as powerful as a toaster 4000 . only a handful of test units were produced before newtek abandoned the project and refocused on the flyer . this cleared the way for deskstation technology to release their own cut-down version , the raptor . . later generations . later generations of the product run on windows nt pcs . in 2004 , the source code for the amiga version was publicly released and hosted on discreetfx 's site open video toaster . with the additions of packages such as discreetfx 's millennium and thousands of wipes and backgrounds added over the years , one can still find the video toaster system in use today in fully professional systems . newtek renamed the videotoaster to '' videotoaster2 '' , and later , '' vt3 '' for the pc version and is now at version 5.3 . since vt4 version 4.6 , sdi switching is supported through an add-on called sx-sdi . newtek released a spin-off product , known as the tricaster , a portable live-production , live-projection , live-streaming , and nle system . the tricaster packages the vt system as a turnkey solution in a custom-designed portable pc case with video , audio and remote computer inputs and outputs on the front and back of the case . as of april 2008 , four versions are in production : the basic tricaster 2.0 , tricaster pro 2.0 , tricaster studio 2.0 and the new tricaster broadcast , the latter of which adds sdi and aes-ebu connectivity plus a preview output capability . the tricasterpro fx , a model that was situated in line between the original tricaster pro and tricaster studio was introduced in early 2008 , and has now been discontinued . its feature set has been added to the new tricaster pro 2.0 . tricaster studio 2.0 and tricaster broadcast use successively larger cases than the base model tricaster 2.0 . the units within the product line above the base-model tricaster 2.0 enables use of liveset 3d live virtual set technology developed by newtek , that replaces tens of thousands of u.s . dollars worth of conventional 3d virtual set equipment alone , and is also found in newtek 's venerable vt5 integrated production suite , the modern-day successor to the original video toaster . in late 2009 , newtek released its high definition version of the tricaster , called the tricaster xd300 , a three-input hd system . it is able to accept a variety formats ( ntsc , 720p , or 1080i ; and on multi-standard systems , pal ) that can be mixed to downstream keys . the xd300 also features five m/e style virtual inputs , permitting up to three video sources in one source , accessible like any other input on the switcher . at nab show 2010 newtek announced its tcxd850 , a rack-mountable eight-input switcher with 22 channels . it was released july 15 , 2010 . . decline . by 2009 , the video toaster started to receive less attention from newtek in the run-up to the transition to hd systems . in december 2010 , the discontinuation of vt5 was announced , marking the end of the video toaster as a stand-alone product . tricaster systems based on the vt platform were still made up until august 2012 , when the tricaster studio was replaced by the tricaster 40 . this officially marked the end of the video toaster . subprograms . toastercg is the character generator program inside video toaster . toasteredit is a video-editing subprogram inside of video toaster . toasterpaint is a digital painting subprogram inside of video toaster . see also . lightwave 3d , another high-end graphical system offered by newtek quantel paintbox , earlier ( 1981 ) system