Pedestrian

history . walking has always been the primary means of human locomotion . the first humans to migrate from africa , about 60,000 years ago , walked . they walked along the coast of india to reach australia . they walked across asia to reach the americas , and from central asia into europe . during the 18th and 19th centuries , pedestrianism ( walking ) was a popular spectator sport just as equestrianism still is in places such as the united kingdom and the united states . one of the most famous pedestrians of that period was captain robert barclay allardice , known as '' the celebrated pedestrian '' , of stonehaven in scotland . his most impressive feat was to walk every hour for 1000 hours , which he achieved between 1 june and 12 july 1809 . this feat captured many people 's imagination , and around 10,000 people came to watch over the course of the event . during the rest of the 19th century , many people tried to repeat this feat , including ada anderson who developed it further and walked a half-mile ( 800 & nbsp ; m ) each quarter-hour over the 1,000 hours . since the 20th century , interest in walking as a sport has dropped . racewalking is still an olympic sport , but fails to catch public attention as it did . however major walking feats are still performed , such as the land 's end to john o ' groats walk in the united kingdom , and the traversal of north america from coast to coast . the first person to walk around the world was dave kunst who started his walk travelling east from waseca , minnesota on 20 june 1970 and completed his journey on 5 october 1974 , when he re-entered the town from the west . these feats are often tied to charitable fundraising and are undertaken by celebrities such as sir jimmy savile and ian botham as well as by others . footpaths and roads . outdoor pedestrian networks . roads often have a designated footpath for pedestrian traffic , called the sidewalk in north american english , the pavement in british english , and the footpath in australian and new zealand english . there are also footpaths not associated with a road ; these include urban short cuts and also rural paths used mainly by ramblers , hikers , or hill-walkers . footpaths in mountainous or forested areas may also be called trails . pedestrians share some footpaths with horses and bicycles : these paths may be known as bridleways . other byways used by walkers are also accessible to vehicles . there are also many roads with no footpath . some modern towns ( such as the new suburbs of peterborough in england ) are designed with the network of sidewalks and cycle paths almost entirely separate from the road network . the term trail is also used by the authorities in some countries to mean any footpath that is not attached to a road or street . if such footpaths are in urban environments and are meant for both pedestrians and bicyclists , they can be called shared use paths or multi-use paths in general and official usage . some shopping streets are for pedestrians only . some roads have special pedestrian crossings . a bridge solely for pedestrians is a footbridge . under british law , regardless of whether there is a footpath , pedestrians have the right to use most public roads , excluding motorways and some toll tunnels and bridges such as the blackwall tunnel and the dartford crossing . the highway code advises that pedestrians should walk in the opposite direction to oncoming traffic on a road with no footpath . however sharing roads with fast-moving traffic is highly dangerous . indoor pedestrian networks . indoor pedestrian networks connect the different rooms or spaces of a building . airports , museums , campuses , hospitals and shopping malls might have tools allowing for the computation of the shortest paths between two destinations . their increasing availability is due to the complexity of path finding in these facilities . different mapping tools , such as openstreetmap , are extending to indoor spaces . . pedestrianisation . pedestrianisation might be considered as process of removing vehicular traffic from city streets or restricting vehicular access to streets for use by pedestrians , in order to improve the environment and the safety . efforts are under way by pedestrian advocacy groups to restore pedestrian access to new developments , especially to counteract newer developments , 20 % to 30 % of which in the united states do not include footpaths . some activists advocate large auto-free zones where pedestrians only or pedestrians and some non-motorised vehicles are allowed . many urbanists have extolled the virtues of pedestrian streets in urban areas . in the u.s . the proportion of households without a car is 8 % , but a notable exception is new york city , the only locality in the united states where more than half of all households do not own a car ( the figure is even higher in manhattan , over 75 % ) . the use of cars for short journeys is officially discouraged in many parts of the world , and construction or separation of dedicated walking routes in city centres receives a high priority in many large cities in western europe , often in conjunction with public transport enhancements . in copenhagen , the world 's longest pedestrian shopping area , strøget , has been developed over the last 40 years principally due to the work of danish architect jan gehl , a principle of urban design known as copenhagenisation . safety issues . safety is an important issue where cars can cross the pedestrian way . drivers and pedestrians share some responsibility for improving safety of road users . road traffic crashes are not inevitable ; they are both predictable and preventable . key risks for pedestrians are well known . among the well documented factors are : driver behaviour , ( including speeding , drinking and driving ) ; infrastructure missing facilities ( including sidewalks , crossings and raised medians ) ; and vehicle design which are not forgiving to pedestrians crashed by a vehicle . because pedestrians are not protected by their vehicle while car occupants are , pedestrians are usually classified in the vulnerable road user category , even in canada . most of pedestrian are injured at crossing a street/road . most of pedestrian crash occur by night . most of pedestrians are killed by a frontal impact . in such a situation , a pedestrian is struck by a car front ; for instance the bumper touch either the leg or knee-joint area ; then , the lower part of the body is accelerated forwards , while the upper part of the body rotates and accelerated to the car ; this will likely cause damage to the pelvis and thorax . then the head hits the windscreen with the velocity of the striking car . finally , the victim falls to the ground . some special interest groups consider pedestrian fatalities on american roads a carnage . five states — arizona , california , florida , georgia and texas — produce 46 % of all pedestrians deaths in the country . the advent of suvs is considered a leading cause ; speculation of other factors includes population growth , driver distraction with mobile phones , poor street lighting , alcohol and drugs and speeding . cities have had mixed result in addressing pedestrian safety with vizion zero plan : los angeles has failes while nyc has had success . nonetheless in the us , some pedestrians have just 40 seconds to cross a 10 lanes street . pedestrian fatalities are much more common in accident situations in the european union than in the usa . in the european union countries , more than 200,000 pedestrians and cyclists are injured annually . also , each year , more than 270 000 pedestrians lose their lives on the world 's roads . at a global level pedestrians constitute 22 % of all road deaths , but might be two thirds in some countries . pedestrian fatalities , in 2016 , are 2.6 per million population in the netherlands , 4.3 in sweden , 4.5 per million population in wales , 5.3 in new zealand , 6.0 in germany ; 7.1 in united kingdom , 7.5 in australia , 8.4 in france , 8.4 in spain , 9.4 in italy , 11.1 in israel , 13 in japan , 13.8 in greece , 18.5 in the united states of america , 22.9 in poland , and 36.3 in romania . safety trends . . state policies for pedestrian in the usa . some states developed 3e policies with enforcement , engineering improvements , and public education , based on evidence-based strategies . separation of pedestrians from motor vehicles can be improved with refuge islands , sidewalks , pedestrian overpasses or pedestrian underpasses , countdown pedestrian signals , pedestrian hybrid beacons ( or hawk signals ) . pedestrians can be more visible to drivers with improved street lighting , high-visibility crosswalks , rapid-flashing beacons . engineering and enforcement measures to reduce speeds with increased space for modes other than motor vehicles , roundabouts ( or traffic circles ) , traffic calming devices including speed humps or curb extension , automated traffic enforcement . montana yearly reviews fatalities on high-risk roads and constructs infrastructure improvements ( midblock crossing improvements ; signal coordination and timing improvements ; improved lighting ; and improved signing ) . il also requires pedestrian issues are considered during a construction project . montana pedestrian fatalities decrease by 37 % between first semesters 2016 end 2017 . vermont has a vermont governor ’ s highway safety program since 2015 . vermont pedestrian fatalities decreased by 60 % between first semesters 2016 and 2017 . connecticut dot is also involved in statewide policy . connecticut pedestrian fatalities decreased by 35 % between first semesters 2016 and 2017 . in california , the california department of transportation provides new roundabouts while the office of traffic safety is funds pedestrian assessments in cities where many pedestrian crashes occur , based on engineering , education and enforcement strategies . california pedestrian fatalities decreased by 18 % between first semesters 2016 and 2017 . in texas , the dot worked on pedestrian issues on i-35 in the austin area and distributed reflective bags to at-risk groups ( homeless population and school children ) . education is also provided for bicycle , pedestrian , children and alcohol . texas also relies on engineering with marked crosswalks , pedestrian signals ( including pedestrian hybrid beacons ) , new sidewalks , median islands , and bulb-outs . texas pedestrian fatalities decreased by 18 % between first semesters 2016 and 2017 . . health benefits and environment . regular walking is important both for human health and for the natural environment . frequent exercise such as walking tends to reduce the chance of obesity and related medical problems . in contrast , using a car for short trips tends to contribute both to obesity and via vehicle emissions to climate change : internal combustion engines are more inefficient and highly polluting during their first minutes of operation ( engine cold start ) . general availability of public transportation encourages walking , as it will not , in most cases , take one directly to one 's destination . unicode . in unicode , the hexadecimal code for '' pedestrian '' is 1f6b6 . in xml and html , the string '' x1f6b6 ; produces 🚶 . . see also . dérive aimless walking usually through city streets footpath jaywalking junior safety patrol list of u.s . cities with most pedestrian commuters pedestrian zone traffic calming trail ethics walkability walking audit walking . references . external links .