Badlands National Park

history . native americans . for 11,000 years , native americans have used this area for their hunting grounds . long before the lakota were the little-studied paleo-indians , followed by the arikara people . their descendants live today in north dakota as a part of the three affiliated tribes . archaeological records combined with oral traditions indicate that these people camped in secluded valleys where fresh water and game were available year-round . eroding out of the stream banks today are the rocks and charcoal of their campfires , as well as the arrowheads and tools they used to butcher bison , rabbits , and other game . from the top of the badlands wall , they could scan the area for enemies and wandering herds . if hunting was good , they might hang on into winter , before retracing their way to their villages along the missouri river . the lakota people were the first to call this place '' mako sica '' or '' land bad . '' extreme temperatures , lack of water , and the exposed rugged terrain led to this name . french-canadian fur trappers called it '' les mauvaises terres pour traverser , '' or '' bad lands to travel through . '' '' badlands - frequently asked questions '' . nps.gov . national park service . retrieved march 1 , 2018 . by one hundred and fifty years ago , the great sioux nation consisting of seven bands including the oglala lakota , had displaced the other tribes from the northern prairie . the next great change came toward the end of the 19th century as homesteaders moved into south dakota . the u.s . government stripped native americans of much of their territory and forced them to live on reservations . in the fall and early winter of 1890 , thousands of native americans , including many oglala sioux , became followers of the indian prophet wovoka . his vision called for the native people to dance the ghost dance and wear ghost shirts , which would be impervious to bullets . wovoka had predicted that the white man would vanish and their hunting grounds would be restored . one of the last known ghost dances was conducted on stronghold table in the south unit of badlands national park . as winter closed in , the ghost dancers returned to pine ridge agency . the climax of the struggle came in late december 1890 . headed south from the cheyenne river , a band of minneconjou sioux crossed a pass in the badlands wall . pursued by units of the u.s . army , they were seeking refuge in the pine ridge reservation . the band , led by chief spotted elk , chief spotted elk on u-s-history.com was finally overtaken by the soldiers near wounded knee creek in the reservation and ordered to camp there overnight . the troops attempted to disarm big foot 's band the next morning . gunfire erupted . before it was over , nearly three hundred indians and thirty soldiers lay dead . the wounded knee massacre was the last major clash between plains indians and the u.s . military until the advent of the american indian movement in the 1970s , most notably in the 1973 standoff at wounded knee , south dakota . wounded knee is not within the boundaries of badlands national park . it is located approximately south of the park on pine ridge reservation . the u.s . government and the oglala lakota nation have agreed that this is a story to be told by the oglala of pine ridge and minneconjou of standing rock reservation . the interpretation of the site and its tragic events are held as the primary responsibility of these survivors . fossil hunters . image : badlandsnp l7 16oct00.jpg thumb left upright 1.5 false-color satellite image of the park ( click to enlarge ) the history of the white river badlands as a significant paleontological resource goes back to the traditional native american knowledge of the area . the lakota found large fossilized bones , fossilized seashells and turtle shells . they correctly assumed that the area had once been under water , and that the bones belonged to creatures which no longer existed . paleontological interest in this area began in the 1840s . trappers and traders regularly traveled the from fort pierre to fort laramie along a path which skirted the edge of what is now badlands national park . fossils were occasionally collected , and in 1843 a fossilized jaw fragment collected by alexander culbertson of the american fur company found its way to a physician in st . louis by the name of hiram a . prout . in 1846 , prout published a paper about the jaw in the american journal of science in which he stated that it had come from a creature he called a paleotherium . shortly after the publication , the white river badlands became popular fossil hunting grounds and , within a couple of decades , numerous new fossil species had been discovered in the white river badlands . in 1849 , dr . joseph leidy published a paper on an oligocene camel and renamed prout 's paleotherium , brontotheriidae . by 1854 when he published a series of papers about north american fossils , 84 distinct species had been discovered in north america & nbsp ; – 77 of which were found in the white river badlands . in 1870 a yale professor , o . c . marsh , visited the region and developed more refined methods of extracting and reassembling fossils into nearly complete skeletons . from 1899 to today , the south dakota school of mines has sent people almost every year and remains one of the most active research institutions working in the white river badlands . throughout the late 19th century and continuing today , scientists and institutions from all over the world have benefited from the fossil resources of the white river badlands . the white river badlands have developed an international reputation as a fossil-rich area . they contain the richest deposits of oligocene mammals known , providing a glimpse of life in the area 33 million years ago . list of fossil animals . homesteaders . aspects of american homesteading began before the end of the american civil war ; however , it did not affect the badlands until the 20th century . then , many hopeful farmers traveled to south dakota from europe or the eastern united states to try to seek out a living in the area . in 1929 , the south dakota dept . of agriculture published an advertisement to lure settlers to the state . on this map they called the badlands , '' the wonderlands '' , promising '' . marvelous scenic and recreational advantages '' . the standard size for a homestead was . being in a semi-arid , wind-swept environment , this proved far too small of a holding to support a family . in 1916 , in the western dakotas , the size of a homestead was increased to . cattle grazed the land , and crops such as winter wheat and hay were cut annually . however , the dust bowl events of the 1930s , combined with waves of grasshoppers , proved too much for most of the settlers of the badlands . houses , which had been built out of sod blocks and heated by buffalo chips , were abandoned . military use of stronghold district . as part of the world war ii effort , the u.s . army air force ( usaaf ) took possession of of land on the pine ridge indian reservation , home of the oglala sioux people , for a gunnery range . included in this range was from the badlands national monument . this land was used extensively from 1942 through 1945 as an air-to-air and air-to-ground gunnery range including both precision and demolition bombing exercises . after the war , portions of the bombing range were used as an artillery range by the south dakota national guard . in 1968 , most of the range was declared excess property by the usaf . although were retained by the usaf ( but are no longer used ) the majority of the land was turned over to the national park service . firing took place within most of the present-day stronghold district . land was bought or leased from individual landowners and the tribe in order to clear the area of human occupation . old car bodies and 55 gallon drums painted bright yellow were used as targets . bulls-eyes across were plowed into the ground and used as targets by bombardiers . small automatic aircraft called '' target drones '' and screens dragged behind planes served as mobile targets . today , the ground is littered with discarded bullet cases and unexploded ordnance . in the 1940s , 125 families were forcibly relocated from their farms and ranches , including dewey beard , a survivor of the wounded knee massacre . those that remained nearby recall times when they had to dive under tractors while out cutting hay to avoid bombs dropped by planes miles outside of the boundary . in the town of interior , both a church and the building housing the current post office were struck by six inch ( 152 & nbsp ; mm ) shells through the roof . pilots operating out of ellsworth air force base near rapid city found it a real challenge to determine the exact boundaries of the range . there were no civilian casualties . however , at least a dozen flight crew personnel lost their lives in plane crashes . the stronghold district of badlands national park , co-managed by the national park service and the oglala lakota tribe , is a area . deep draws , high tables and rolling prairie are characteristic of these lands occupied by the earliest plains hunters , the paleo-indians , and the lakota nation . legislative and administrative history . on march 4 . 1929 , president calvin coolidge signed public law no . 1021 , authorizing the badlands national monument in south dakota . the legislation 's conditions for eventual proclamation included , the acquisition of privately owned land within the proposed boundaries of the monument , and the construction of a 30-mile highway throughout the park . the badlands national monument became the seventy-seventh monument within the national park service a decade after its original authorization , when president franklin d . roosevelt signed the enacting proclamation on january 24 . 1939 . the monument was later renamed “ badlands national park ” in 1978 . the badlands national monument was established in order to preserve the natural scenery and educational resources within its boundaries . the bill authorized specific scientific and educational institutions to excavate within the monument in the pursuit of educational , geological , and zoological observation . the bill includes a portion highlighting the potential for fossil excavation in the monument 's geological formations . badlands national park superintendents john e . suter ( 1949–1953 ) john a . rutter ( 1953–1957 ) george h . sholly ( 1958–1959 ) frank e . sylvester ( 1960–1960 ) john w . jay ( 1960–1962 ) frank a . hjort ( 1963–1967 ) john r . earnst ( 1967–1970 ) cecil d . lewis , jr ( 1970–1974 ) james e . jones ( 1974–1979 ) gilbert e . blinn ( 1979–1985 ) james l . monheiser ( 1985–1985 ) donald a . falvey ( 1985–1987 ) lloyd p . kortge ( 1987–1987 ) irvin l . mortenson ( 1987–1996 ) bill supernaugh ( 1997–2004 ) paige baker ( 2005–2010 ) eric brunnemann ( 2010–2015 ) mike pflaum ( 2015– ) . wildlife . animals that inhabit the park include : badger , bighorn sheep , bison , black-billed magpie , black-footed ferret , black-tailed prairie dog , bobcat , coyote , elk , mule deer , pronghorn , crotalus viridis , porcupine , swift fox , and white-tailed deer . 2prairiedogs.jpg prairie dogs mk00658 badlands bighorn sheep.jpg bighorn sheep bison badlands south dakota.jpg bison bull in 1963 , 50 bison from theodore roosevelt national park were released into the parkland . the herd has grown to over 1,000 animals . . visitor services . badlands national park has two campgrounds for overnight visits - cedar pass and sage creek campgrounds . cedar pass lodge offers accommodations in modern cabins and full-service dining . the ben reifel visitor center within the park offers a bookstore , special programs , and museum exhibits . the white river visitors center in the park 's south unit offers information about the regions lakota heritage . climate . according to the köppen climate classification system , badlands national park has a cold semi-arid climate ( bsk ) . gallery . file : badlands national park , south dakota , 04594u.jpg buttes and pinnacles file : window trail pa090087.jpg boardwalk to the windows file : golden glow canyon.jpg door trail file : aerial panorama of badlands national park.jpg a view of the park from an airplane to the north . . current issues and challenges . the badlands national park has been impacted by the rise of oil and gas pipelines/drilling , the debate over native american land rights , and fossil loss due to criminal activity . oil pipelines/drilling the badlands national park faces growing encroachment from oil and gas companies hoping to transport fossil fuels throughout regions of south dakota . pipelines are associated with environmental risks ; breaches and or breaks in the system have the potential to negatively impact the quality of life for surrounding ecosystems and wildlife . additionally , the badlands is quickly being surrounded by drilling and fracking projects . challenges to land rights the badlands national park also faces debate over the federal claims to the land once inhabited by the oglala lakota sioux tribe . supporters of oglala sioux reparations argue against the u.s . government 's seizure and management over sacred native american land . the badlands national park began taking steps to reserve part of the park 's southern unit for management by the tribe 's members , creating jobs and returning ownership to those re-located out during america 's manifest destiny , however this creation of the “ tribe national park ” has yet to come to pass . fossil depletion the badlands national park was first established as a national monument in order to protect the abundance of fossils within the land 's natural stone structures . since the park 's founding , visitors and fossil poachers/hunters have been looting the park 's fossils to keep for sentimental and scientific value or to sell for profit . . see also . list of national parks of the united states . references . external links . badlands national park – national park service website geology of badlands national park – united states geological survey badlands bombing range – united states army corps of engineers