In & Out (film)

plot . howard brackett ( kevin kline ) is a well-liked english literature teacher , living a quiet life in the fictional town of greenleaf , indiana , with his fiancée and fellow teacher emily montgomery ( joan cusack ) , who recently lost 75 pounds . the town is filled with anticipation over the nomination of howard 's former student cameron drake ( matt dillon ) in the best actor category at the academy awards for his portrayal of a gay soldier in to serve and protect . cameron does indeed win the award and , in his acceptance speech , thanks howard , adding , '' . and he 's gay . '' howard 's family , friends , students , co-workers and emily are shocked ; but that is nothing compared to howard 's own reaction of disbelief and indignation . he angrily reassures those who know him that he is heterosexual . reporters invade his hometown , harassing him for interviews , following the awards night telecast . howard is placed under the scrutiny of his boss , principal tom halliwell ( bob newhart ) , who is uncomfortable with the attention being brought to the school . although the other reporters leave after getting their story , one stays behind : on-camera entertainment reporter peter malloy ( tom selleck ) , who wants to wait the week out so he can cover howard 's wedding to emily . howard continues to be harassed and dismayed by the changed attitudes of everyone around him , and decides that he must sleep with emily in order to prove his heterosexuality . howard finds he can not go through with it due to his conflicting emotions and emily 's concern for his well-being . howard crosses paths with peter , who reveals he is gay and , trying to provide a helpful ear , narrates his own experience in coming out to his family . howard insists that he is not gay , prompting peter to kiss him . although shocked , howard reacts somewhat positively to the kiss . howard 's final measure to restore his heterosexuality is the use of a self-help audio cassette , although that fails as well . during the wedding ceremony , emily recites her vow without hesitation , but when howard is prompted by the minister , he instead says , '' i 'm gay . '' the wedding is called off , and although peter is proud of howard , howard is angry with himself for hurting emily . howard is fired from the school because of his outing . despite no longer being on the faculty , howard attends the graduation ceremony to support his students . having learned of the ensuing media blitz while in los angeles , cameron flies to his hometown with his supermodel girlfriend ( shalom harlow ) and shows up at the ceremony . when he learns that his former teacher became ineligible for the '' teacher of the year '' award due to being dismissed for being gay , he publicly questions if the reason given , that the community would not have supported howard 's continued employment , is valid . spurred on by this , when one student who got into college—thanks to howard 's hard work—proclaims to be gay , his classmates join him to proclaim themselves to be gay as well , showing their support . howard 's family follows suit , as do his friends , and all the townsfolk assembled . although howard does not win '' teacher of the year '' , cameron presents him with his oscar . howard 's wedding-crazy mother ( debbie reynolds ) finally gets a wedding—her own , when she and her husband ( wilford brimley ) renew their vows . howard , peter and the rest of the townsfolk attend the reception . among the crowd are emily and cameron , who appear to have begun a relationship . everyone dances to the village people 's song '' macho man '' . cast . kevin kline as howard brackett tom selleck as peter malloy joan cusack as emily montgomery matt dillon as cameron drake debbie reynolds as bernice brackett wilford brimley as frank brackett gregory jbara as walter brackett shalom harlow as sonya shawn hatosy as jack zak orth as mike bob newhart as tom halliwell lauren ambrose as vicky alexandra holden as meredith deborah rush as ava blazer lewis j . stadlen as edward kenrow j . smith-cameron as trina paxton kate mcgregor-stewart as aunt becky debra monk as mrs . lester ernie sabella as aldo hooper john cunningham as the voice on '' be a man '' tape gus rogerson as danny dan hedaya as a military attorney joseph maher as father tim william parry as fred mooney william duell as emmett wilson richard woods as revered morgan kevin chamberlin as carl mickley wally dunn as cousin lenny larry clarke as cousin ernie june squibb as cousin ellen becky ann baker as darlene selma blair as cousin linda adam leferve and bill camp as bachelor party guests whoopi goldberg as herself glenn close as herself jay leno as himself . production . according to frank oz , production had to be stopped temporarily because '' we all got sick.because we all got the flu . '' oz and wilford brimley reportedly did not get along during production , however neither of them have ever elaborated on what caused the friction between the two . selected for its '' beautiful auditorium , a great gymnasium '' and other aesthetic qualities , the pompton lakes high school in pompton lakes , new jersey was used extensively as a filming location for in & out . . soundtrack . at first , frank oz asked miles goodman to do the music for in & out . goodman , who composed several of oz 's previous films , died before he could do so . a soundtrack was released on tuesday , september 23 , 1997 , featuring previously recorded songs as well as marc shaiman 's instrumental music composed for the film . '' i will survive '' - diana ross '' wedding preparations '' ( instrumental ) '' everything 's coming up roses '' - ethel merman '' 'to serve and protect ' '' ( instrumental ) '' howard is outed '' ( instrumental ) '' the morning after '' ( instrumental ) '' the bachelor party '' ( instrumental ) '' interviews with townsfolk '' ( instrumental ) '' homosection '' ( instrumental ) '' i do n't '' ( instrumental ) '' mom & dad '' ( instrumental ) '' cameron & emily '' ( instrumental ) '' crazy '' - patsy cline '' teacher of the year/people/the wedding '' ( instrumental ) '' macho man '' - village people . release . critical reception . the film was well received by critics . the performances were widely praised , especially cusack , who eventually earned an oscar nod , and kline . the film also gained attention for depicting homosexuality in a '' mainstream '' comedy about '' middle america '' in & out , lisa schwarzbaum , entertainment weekly which , rita kempley howe wrote in the washington post , '' manages to simultaneously flaunt and flout gay stereotypes . '' in & out , closet encounters , rita kempley howe , the washington post critics also noted its generally asexual treatment of homosexuality : janet maslin commented in the new york times that the film is not one '' to associate gayness with actual sex , '' while tv guide quipped that it '' finally gets discussion about gay people out of the bedroom and into the record store . '' in & out : review tv guide despite generally positive reviews , several critics , even those who were complimentary , felt that the ending was weak and did not live up to the rest of the film . in & out 's half empty closet desson howe , the washington post the film has a 71 % approval rating on rotten tomatoes based on 51 reviews ; the site 's consensus states : '' it does n't always find comfortable ground between broad comedy and social commentary , but lively performances—especially from kevin kline and joan cusack—enrich in & outs mixture of laughs and sexual tolerance . '' on metacritic the film has a rating of 70 based on reviews from 18 critics . . accolades . cusack was nominated for the academy award for best supporting actress , but lost to kim basinger in l.a . confidential . american film institute recognition : afi 's 100 years . 100 laughs – nominated . box office . the film did well at the box office , grossing 15,019,821 in its opening weekend and 63,856,929 over its entire theatrical run . . home video . in & out was released on region 1 dvd the year following the film 's release , on october 21 , 1998 . in & out at amazon.com the release does not include any extras besides the theatrical trailer . the region 2 dvd was released on april 9 , 2001 . in & out at amazon.co.uk