Coffin

etymology . first attested in english in 1380 , the word coffin derives from the old french , from latin , which means basket , which is the latinisation of the greek κόφινος ( kophinos ) , basket . the earliest attested form of the word is the mycenaean greek ko-pi-na , written in linear b syllabic script . any box in which the dead are buried is a coffin , and while a casket was originally regarded as a box for jewelry , use of the word '' casket '' in this sense began as a euphemism introduced by the undertaker 's trade . a distinction is commonly drawn between '' coffins '' and '' caskets '' , using '' coffin '' to refer to a tapered hexagonal or octagonal ( also considered to be anthropoidal in shape ) box and '' casket '' to refer to a rectangle box , often with a split lid used for viewing the deceased as seen in the picture . receptacles for cremated and cremulated human ashes ( sometimes called cremains funerals.org ) are called urns . history . the earliest evidence of wooden coffin remains , dated at 5000 bc , was found in the tomb 4 at beishouling , shaanxi . clear evidence of a rectangular wooden coffin was found in tomb 152 in an early banpo site . the banpo coffin belongs to a four-year-old girl ; it measures 1.4 & nbsp ; m ( 4.6 & nbsp ; ft ) by 0.55 & nbsp ; m ( 1.8 & nbsp ; ft ) and 3–9 & nbsp ; cm thick . as many as 10 wooden coffins have been found at the dawenkou culture ( 4100–2600 bc ) site at chengzi , shandong . wang ( 1997 ) , 93–96 . underhill ( 2002 ) , 106 . the thickness of the coffin , as determined by the number of timber frames in its composition , also emphasized the level of nobility , as mentioned in the classic of rites , legge ( 2004 ) , 525 . xunzi watson ( 2003 ) , 101 . and zhuangzi . mair ( 1997 ) , 336 . examples of this have been found in several neolithic sites : the double coffin , the earliest of which was found in the liangzhu culture ( 3400–2250 bc ) site at puanqiao , zhejiang , consists of an outer and an inner coffin , while the triple coffin , with its earliest finds from the longshan culture ( 3000–2000 bc ) sites at xizhufeng and yinjiacheng in shandong , consists of two outer and one inner coffins . luan ( 2006 ) , 49–55 . . practices . a coffin may be buried in the ground directly , placed in a burial vault or cremated . alternatively it may be entombed above ground in a mausoleum , a chapel , a church , or in a loculus within catacombs . some countries practice one form almost exclusively , whereas in others it may depend on the individual cemetery . in part of sumatra , indonesia , ancestors are revered and bodies were often kept in coffins kept alongside the longhouses until a ritual burial could be performed . the dead are also disinterred for rituals . mass burials are also practiced . in northern sulawesi , some dead were kept in above ground sarcophagi called waruga until the practice was banned by the dutch in the 19th century . the handles and other ornaments ( such as doves , stipple crosses , crucifix , symbols etc . ) that go on the outside of a coffin are called fittings ( sometimes called 'coffin furniture ' – not to be confused with furniture that is coffin shaped ) while organizing the inside of the coffin with fabric of some kind is known as '' trimming the coffin '' . cultures that practice burial have widely different styles of coffins . in judaism , the coffin must be plain , made of wood and contain no metal parts or adornments . these coffins use wooden pegs instead of nails . all jews are buried in the same plain cloth shroud from shoulder to knees , regardless of status in life , gender or age . in china and japan , coffins made from the scented , decay-resistant wood of cypress , sugi , thuja and incense-cedar are in high demand . certain aboriginal australian groups use intricately decorated tree-bark cylinders sewn with fibre and sealed with adhesive as coffins . the cylinder is packed with dried grasses . sometimes coffins are constructed to permanently display the corpse , as in the case of the glass-covered coffin of the haraldskær woman on display in the church of saint nicolai in vejle , denmark or the glass-coffin of vladimir lenin and mao zedong , which are in red square , moscow and tiananmen square , beijing , respectively . when a coffin is used to transport a death person , it can also be called a pall , a term that also refers to the cloth used to cover the coffin while those who carry a casket are the pallbearers . design . coffins are traditionally made with six sides plus the top ( lid ) and bottom , tapered around the shoulders , or rectangular with four sides . another form of four-sided coffin is trapezoidal ( also known as the '' wedge '' form ) and is considered a variant of the six-sided hexagonal kind of coffin . continental europe at one time favoured the rectangular coffin or casket , although variations exist in size and shape . the rectangular form , and also the trapezoidal form , is still regularly used in germany , austria , hungary and other parts of eastern and central europe , with the lid sometimes made to slope gently from the head down towards the foot . coffins in the uk are mainly similar to the hexagonal design , but with one-piece sides , curved at the shoulder instead of having a join . in medieval japan , round coffins were used , which resembled barrels in shape and were usually made by coopers . in the case of a death at sea , there have been instances where trunks have been pressed into use as coffins . coffins usually have handles on the side so they will be easier to carry . they may incorporate features that claim to protect the body or for public health reasons . for example , some may offer a protective casket that uses a gasket to seal the casket shut after it is closed for the final time . in england , it has long been law that a coffin for interment above ground should be sealed ; this was traditionally implemented as a wooden outer coffin around a lead lining , around a third inner shell . after some decades have passed , the lead may ripple and tear . in the united states , numerous cemeteries require a vault of some kind in order to bury the deceased . a burial vault serves as an outer enclosure for buried remains and the coffin serves as an inner enclosure . the primary purpose of the vault is to prevent collapse of the coffin due to the weight of the soil above . some manufacturers offer a warranty on the structural integrity of the coffin . however , no coffin , regardless of its construction material ( e.g . , metal rather than wood ) , whether or not it is sealed , and whether or not the deceased was embalmed beforehand , will perfectly preserve the body . in some cases , a sealed coffin may actually speed up rather than slow down the process of decomposition . an airtight coffin , for example , fosters decomposition by anaerobic bacteria , which results in a putrefied liquefaction of the body , and all putrefied tissue remains inside the container , only to be exposed in the event of an exhumation . a container that allows air to pass in and out , such as a simple wooden box , allows for clean skeletonization . however the situation will vary according to soil or air conditions , and climate . coffins are made of many materials , including steel , various types of wood , and other materials such as fiberglass or recycled kraft paper . there is emerging interest in eco-friendly coffins made of purely natural materials such as bamboo , x-board , willow or banana leaf . bamboo coffins '' coffin-maker resurrects tradition '' , from bbc business news , published 2001-12-28 in the latter part of the 19th century and the early part of the 20th century in the united states , glass coffins were widely sold by travelling salesmen , who also would try to sell stock of the companies making the coffins . custom coffins are occasionally created and some companies also make set ranges with non-traditional designs . these include printing or painting of peaceful tropical scenes , sea-shells , sunsets , cherubs and patriotic flags . some manufacturers have designed them to look like gym carry bags , guitar cases , cigar humidors , and even yellow dumpster bins . other coffins are left deliberately blank so that friends and family can inscribe final wishes and thoughts upon them to the deceased . in taiwan , coffins made of crushed oyster shells were used in the 18th and 19th centuries . in the 1990s , the rock group kiss released a customized kiss kasket , which featured their trademark makeup designs and kiss logo and could also be used as a cooler . pantera guitarist dimebag darrell was buried in one . xanita xanita.com has developed a new grade of environmentally-friendly coffin board which is designed to cleanly incinerate using around half the gas needed to incinerate traditional veneered mdf coffins . this assists crematoriums meet their co2 emissions targets . . design coffins in ghana . image : daniel mensah '' hello '' 2006 . foto regula tschumi.jpg thumb daniel mensah ( hello ) , 2006 image : kane kwei carpentry workshop.jpg right thumb 240px coffins as an aircraft , a hen , a crab , a cocoa pod in teshie , ghana design coffins in ghana , also called fantasy coffins or figurative coffins , are only made by specialized carpenters in the greater accra region . these colourful objects , which are not only coffins , but considered real works of art , were shown for the first time to a wider western public in the exhibition les magiciens de la terre at the musée national d ’ art moderne in paris in 1989 . the seven coffins shown in paris were done by seth kane kwei ( 1922–1992 ) and by his former assistant paa joe ( b . 1947 ) . a deathbed of a living man . a coffin for the centre pompidou . regula tschumi in sâadane afif ( ed . ) , „ anthologie de l ’ humour noir “ , paris : editions centre pompidou . 2010 . p . 56 . since then coffins of kane kweis successors paa joe , daniel mensah , kudjoe affutu or eric adjetey anang and others have been displayed in many international art museums and galleries around the world . the buried treasures of the ga . coffin art in ghana . regula tschumi . bern : benteli 2008 , pp . 230–31 . the design coffins of the ga have long been celebrated in the western art world as the invention of a single , autonomous artist , the coffin maker kane kwei ( 1924–1992 ) of teshie . but as regula tschumi shows with her recent research this assumption was false . design coffins have existed already before kane kwei and other ga carpenters like ataa oko ( 1919–2012 ) from la have built their first figurative coffins around 1950 . regula tschumi : the figurative palanquins of the ga . history and significance , in : african arts , vol . 46 , nr . 4 , 2013 , s . 60–73 . roberta bonetti , alternate histories of the abebuu adekai , african arts , autumn 2010 , pp . 14–33 : roberta bonetti reached in 2010 the same conclusion as regula tschumi some years before . she actually considers the well-known stories about the origin of the figure-coffins to have been invented : „ . we have seen how the same criteria of authenticity that were fundamental in documenting the uniqueness and truthfulness of ancient works have been adopted for recent coffins . the proof is provided by the presumed origin of the work , which has become even more precious and exceptional ever since the death of its „ invented “ inventor , kane kwei “ . kane kwei and ataa oko had only continued a tradition that already existed in accra where the kings were using figurative palanquins in the forms of their family symbol . and as those chiefs who were using figurative palanquins had to be buried in a coffin looking like their palanquin , their families used figurative coffins which were formerly nothing else than the copies of the design palanquins . today figurative coffins are of course no more reserved for the traditional ga and their kings , many families who use figurative coffins are indeed christians . for them design coffins have no longer a spiritual function , their appeal is more aesthetic , aimed at surprising mourners with strikingly innovative forms like automobiles or aeroplanes , fish or pigs , onions or tomatoes . the buried treasures of the ga . coffin art in ghana . regula tschumi . bern : benteli 2008 , pp . 57 , 221–22 . so the figurative coffins , rather than constituting a new art form as it was long believed , were developed from the figurative palanquins which had existed already a long time . . cremation . with the resurgence of cremation in the western world , manufacturers have begun providing options for those who choose cremation . for a direct cremation a cardboard box is sometimes used . those who wish to have a funeral visitation ( sometimes called a viewing ) or traditional funeral service will use a coffin of some sort . some choose to use a coffin made of wood or other materials like particle board or low-density fibreboard . others will rent a regular casket for the duration of the services . these caskets have a removable bed and liner which is replaced after each use . there are also rental caskets with an outer shell that looks like a traditional coffin and a cardboard box that fits inside the shell . at the end of the services the inner box is removed and the deceased is cremated inside this box . for cremation glasses must be removed from the deceased . industry . traditionally , in the western world , a coffin was made , when required , by the village carpenter , who would frequently manage the whole funeral . the design and workmanship would reflect the skills of that individual carpenter , with the materials and brasses being the materials that were available at the time . in past centuries , if a pauper 's funeral was paid for by the parish , the coffin might have been made of the cheapest , thinnest possible pine . at the other extreme , a coffin bought privately by a wealthy individual might have used yew or mahogany with a fine lining , plated fittings and brass decorations , topped with a decorated velvet drape . in modern times coffins are almost always mass-produced . some manufacturers do not sell directly to the public , and only work with funeral homes . in that case , the funeral director usually sells the casket to a family for a deceased person as part of the funeral services offered , and the price of the casket is included in the total bill for services rendered . some funeral homes have small showrooms to present families with the available caskets that could be used for a deceased family member . in many modern funeral homes the showroom will consist of sample pieces that show only the end pieces of each type of coffin that can be used . they also include samples of the lining and other materials . this allows funeral homes to showcase a larger number of coffin styles without the need for a larger showroom . other types may be available from a catalogue , including decorative paint effects or printed photographs or patterns . under a united states federal regulation , 16 cfr part 453 ( known as the funeral rule ) , if a family provides a casket they purchased elsewhere ( for example from a united states retail warehouse store , as illustrated here ) , the establishment is required to accept the casket and use it in the services . if the casket is delivered direct to the funeral home from the manufacturer or store , they are required to accept delivery of the casket . the funeral home may not add any extra charges or fees to the overall bill if a family decides to purchase a casket elsewhere . if the casket was bought from the funeral home , these regulations require bills to be completely itemized . see also . bier cenotaph coffin plate count dracula count duckula hanging coffins ossuary treetrunk coffin vampire . references . bibliography . regula tschumi : '' the figurative palanquins of the ga . history and significance '' , in : african arts , vol . 46 , nr . 4 , 2013 , pp . & nbsp ; 60–73 . roberta bonetti '' alternate histories of the abebuu adekai '' . african arts , vol . 43 , no . 3 , 2010 , pp . & nbsp ; 14–33 . thierry secretan : going into darkness : fantastic coffins from africa . london 1995 . regula tschumi : the buried treasures of the ga . coffin art in ghana . benteli , 2008 . external links . national museum of australia aboriginal bark coffins