Saguenay, Quebec

economy . saguenay 's economy '' virage économique , '' le quotidien , 27 août 2010 , p . 10 . is in transition . patricia rainville , '' une ville méconnaissable dans quatre ans , '' le quotidien , 23 octobre 2009 , p . 15 . it is increasingly based on developing research and teaching in applied technologies for energy , françois hains , nancy bourgeois , « saguenay , une ville en changement » , urbanité , automne 2011 , p . 36-38 . aluminum , boreal forest , genomics and biomedical sciences . claude côté , « saguenay vogue vers le succès » , industrie & commerce , octobre-novembre 2011 , p.3-5 . saguenay has three large industrial parks totaling of commercial facilities : five city centres and shopping centres , six shopping centres , power centres , and five major commercial arteries . saguenay , in the borough of la baie , opened a pier in 2006 followed by the bagotville wharf cruise terminal in 2009 , in order to accommodate some of the larger cruise ships such as ms eurodam and queen mary 2 . so far 200 cruise ships have visited la baie , including 54 ships and over 50,000 passengers in 2017 . in addition , rio tinto alcan confirmed in december 2010 investment of 750 million dollars to upgrade its pilot plant in jonquière ap-60 . michel munger , « rio tinto alcan lance finalement so technologie ap60 » , argent , 14 décembre 2010 ( texte intégral ( archive ) ) the plant was estimated to be 40 % more productive than the existing aluminum plant . the first phase included 38 tanks equipped with new technology , with an estimated production of 60,000 tons of aluminum per year . the first ingots were cast in the first quarter of 2013 . according to 2010 data from the institute of statistics of québec ( isq ) , the per capita personal income in 2009 amounted to 31,677 versus 31,344 in 2008 , a variation of 1.1 % . on the other hand , the gdp of the saguenay cma in 2009 totaled 6 billion compared to the 9.1 billion gdp of saguenay-lac-st-jean . cobalt aircraft operates a manufacturing plant in the city . on january 17 , 2011 , the company chose saguenay for the assembly plant of the aircraft co50 , an advanced , high-end propeller plane . '' le cobalt co50 sera assemblé à saguenay , '' le quotidien 18 janvier 2011 , p . 2 . . sports . the city has been home to the qmjhl 's chicoutimi saguenéens since 1973 . they play at the centre georges-vézina in the borough of chicoutimi . in 2008 , the lnah professional team saint-jean-sur-richelieu summun-chiefs moved to saguenay and became the saguenay 98.3 . the team is now called jonquière marquis . government . municipal . the mayor of saguenay is josée néron who was elected in the 2017 municipal election . jean tremblay had previously served as mayor of saguenay from 2002 until the municipal merger of 2002 until 2017 . he was also mayor of the now defunct city of chicoutimi from 1997 until 2001 . the governing body of saguenay is saguenay city council , which consists of the mayor and 15 city councillors . the councillors are elected from single-member districts . the city 's three boroughs are jonquière , chicoutimi , and la baie . each borough is subdivided into electoral districts , with each district being represented by a city councillor . each borough has a borough president from among their city councilors . the jonquière borough is represented by six councillors and its borough president is julie dufour . the chicoutimi borough is represented by six councillors and its borough president is michel tremblay . the la baie borough is represented by three councillors and its borough president is éric simard . federal and provincial . federally , saguenay is part of two electoral districts . the riding of chicoutimi—le fjord , which includes the boroughs of chicoutimi and la baie as well as the most of the le fjord-du-saguenay regional county municipality , is represented by richard martel of the conservative party of canada . the riding of jonquière , which includes the borough of jonquière as well as the southern part and parts of the le fjord-du-saguenay rcm , is represented by karine trudel of the new democratic party . provincially , saguenay is represented in four electoral districts . the electoral district of chicoutimi includes the former city of chicoutimi , and is represented by andrée laforest of the coalition avenir québec . the electoral district of dubuc , which covers the part of saguenay as well as the le fjord-du-saguenay rcm , is represented by françois tremblay of the coalition avenir québec . the electoral district of jonquière , which covers most of the borough of jonquière , is represented by sylvain gaudreault of the parti québécois . infrastructure . thrice weekly passenger railway service is provided by via rail canada on the montreal–jonquière train , which runs from montreal central station to jonquière station . the city is connected by highway to quebec city by quebec route 175 to its south , and is also served by quebec route 172 and quebec route 170 , which run east-west to the north and south of the saguenay river , respectively . the city is also served by the bagotville airport , which shares the aerodrome of cfb bagotville . it operates daily flights to montreal-trudeau international airport as well as flights to quebec city and sept-îles . it operates seasonal flights to cancún , mexico , and vacation destinations in cuba . another airfield , chicoutimi/saint-honoré aerodrome former air force base , is located to the north of the city . a pier in la baie has been in operation since 2008 to accommodate cruise ships and tourists . yves ouellet alain dumas , en croisière sur le st-laurent et le saguenay , les éditions de l'homme , 2008 . saguenay , port d'escale archive the project required investment of about 33.75 million for the construction of a wharf , a visitor centre ( 5 million ) and a port village . tp : //www.toutlemondeabord.com/index.html archive saguenay derives power from its water resources . marc st-hilaire , « une centrale sur la shipshaw » , le quotidien , saguenay , 10 septembre 2010 [ texte intégral archive ( page consultée le september 10 , 2010 ) ] the city owns three hydroelectric power stations , one operating in the borough of jonquière and two others , pont-arnaud and chute-garneau , in operation since spring 2011 . louis tremblay , '' les trois axes de promotion saguenay , '' le quotidien , 27 août 2010 , p . 7 . saguenay is one of several '' megacities '' where the pre-merger telephone rate centres have never been amalgamated . it is still split between four rate centres–chicoutimi , jonquière , la baie and laterrière . as a result , north american telephone customers placing calls to saguenay may not recognize the charge details on their bills . education . image : chicoutimi - uqac.jpg thumb the université du québec à chicoutimi main buildings the francophone primary and secondary public schools of saguenay are managed by two boards , the school board of jonquière , which has 11,015 students and the school board of rives-du-saguenay , with 11,048 students . these figures include 38 primary schools , seven secondary schools and five vocational training centres in the city , and institutions of neighboring municipalities of upper and lower saguenay . the private elementary apostolic school of chicoutimi has 160 students . the seminary of chicoutimi has 1,100 high school students . saguenay also has primary and secondary schools in english , with 200 students ; riverside regional school is the responsibility of the central québec school board . at the college level , saguenay has two colleges , located in jonquière and in chicoutimi , with a combined 5,500 students . in addition to offering pre-university programs , and similar curricula , each of the schools has unique programs . for example , the cégep de jonquière offers technical training in art and media technology , while that of chicoutimi offers technical training in piloting aircraft . the université du québec à chicoutimi is located in saguenay ; this francophone campus of the province 's network has 6,500 students . katerine belley-murray , « projet structurant à portée internationale , l'horizon infini de la biobanque » , le quotidien , 25 octobre 2011 , p . 21 . it provides education at university level . as the only university in the saguenay-lac-saint-jean , this campus attracts students from across quebec and la francophonie . located near downtown , the chicoutimi campus includes a sports pavilion and the pavilion of the humanities . the university has a flagship research centre in arctic ice and other conditions ; departments of forestry , medicine , and arts ; and the centre of aluminium technology . research . saguenay has several main components of the regional aluminum sector : the quebec centre for research and development of aluminum ( cqrda ) , the centre for aluminum technology of uqac ( cta ) , the university centre aluminium research ( cural ) and college training programs and government . in 2007 , the quebec government announced , in conjunction with genome quebec , université de montréal , the centre for health and social services and uqac chicoutimi , the creation of a biobank specializing in genomics research . the csss de chicoutimi also specializes in research in primary care medicine and chronic illness and the rehabilitation of neuromuscular disorders . culture . cultural events in the saguenay region include the saguenay international short film festival . jean-baptiste hervé , '' 23e festival regard : accueillir le monde '' . voir , march 7 , 2019 . . media . sister cities . camrose , alberta . see also . list of people from saguenay–lac-saint-jean kingdom of saguenay société de transport du saguenay . references . external links .