Common blackbird

feeding . the common blackbird is omnivorous , eating a wide range of insects , earthworms , seeds and berries . it feeds mainly on the ground , running and hopping with a start-stop-start progress . it pulls earthworms from the soil , usually finding them by sight , but sometimes by hearing , and roots through leaf litter for other invertebrates . small amphibians and lizards are occasionally hunted . this species will also perch in bushes to take berries and collect caterpillars and other active insects . animal prey predominates , and is particularly important during the breeding season , with windfall apples and berries taken more in the autumn and winter . the nature of the fruit taken depends on what is locally available , and frequently includes exotics in gardens . natural threats . near human habitation the main predator of the common blackbird is the domestic cat , with newly fledged young especially vulnerable . foxes and predatory birds , such as the sparrowhawk and other accipiters , also take this species when the opportunity arises . however , there is little direct evidence to show that either predation of the adult blackbirds or loss of the eggs and chicks to corvids , such as the european magpie or eurasian jay , decrease population numbers . this species is occasionally a host of parasitic cuckoos , such as the common cuckoo ( cuculus canorus ) , but this is minimal because the common blackbird recognizes the adult of the parasitic species and its mimicry eggs . in the uk , only three nests of 59,770 examined ( 0.005 % ) contained cuckoo eggs . the introduced merula blackbird in new zealand , where the cuckoo does not occur , has , over the past 130 years , lost the ability to recognize the adult common cuckoo but still rejects non-mimetic eggs . as with other passerine birds , parasites are common . intestinal parasites were found in 88 % of common blackbirds , most frequently isospora and capillaria species . and more than 80 % had haematozoan parasites ( leucocytozoon , plasmodium , haemoproteus and trypanosoma species ) . common blackbirds spend much of their time looking for food on the ground where they can become infested with ticks , which are external parasites that most commonly attach to the head of a blackbird . in france , 74 % of rural blackbirds were found to be infested with ixodes ticks , whereas , only 2 % of blackbirds living in urban habitats were infested . this is partly because it is more difficult for ticks to find another host on lawns and gardens in urban areas than in uncultivated rural areas , and partly because ticks are likely to be commoner in rural areas , where a variety of tick hosts , such as foxes , deer and boar , are more numerous . although ixodid ticks can transmit pathogenic viruses and bacteria , and are known to transmit borrelia bacteria to birds , there is no evidence that this affects the fitness of blackbirds except when they are exhausted and run down after migration . the common blackbird is one of a number of species which has unihemispheric slow-wave sleep . one hemisphere of the brain is effectively asleep , while a low-voltage eeg , characteristic of wakefulness , is present in the other . the benefit of this is that the bird can rest in areas of high predation or during long migratory flights , but still retain a degree of alertness . image : nederlandsche vogelen ( kb ) - turdus merula ( 016f ) . jpg thumb left 180px historic image of blackbird in nederlandsche vogelen ( 1770 ) . status and conservation . the common blackbird has an extensive range , estimated at 10 & nbsp ; million & nbsp ; square kilometres ( 3.8 & nbsp ; million square miles ) , and a large population , including an estimated 79 to 160 million individuals in europe alone . the species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the iucn red list ( i.e . , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and is therefore evaluated as least concern . in the western palearctic , populations are generally stable or increasing , p1215–1218 but there have been local declines , especially on farmland , which may be due to agricultural policies that encouraged farmers to remove hedgerows ( which provide nesting places ) , and to drain damp grassland and increase the use of pesticides , both of which could have reduced the availability of invertebrate food . the common blackbird was introduced to australia by a bird dealer visiting melbourne in early 1857 , and its range has expanded from its initial foothold in melbourne and adelaide to include all of southeastern australia , including tasmania and the bass strait islands . the introduced population in australia is considered a pest because it damages a variety of soft fruits in orchards , parks and gardens , including berries , cherries , stone fruit and grapes . clarke , g . m . ; gross , s . , matthews , m . ; catling , p . c . ; baker , b . ; hewitt , c . l . ; crowther , d . ; saddler , s . r . ( 2000 ) , environmental pest species in australia , australia : state of the environment , second technical paper series ( biodiversity ) , department of the environment and heritage , canberra . it is thought to spread weeds , such as blackberry , and may compete with native birds for food and nesting sites . the introduced common blackbird is , together with the native silvereye ( zosterops lateralis ) , the most widely distributed avian seed disperser in new zealand . introduced there along with the song thrush ( turdus philomelos ) in 1862 , it has spread throughout the country up to an elevation of , as well as outlying islands such as the campbell and kermadecs . falla , r . a . , r . b . sibson , and e . g . turbott ( 1979 ) . the new guide to the birds of new zealand and outlying islands . collins , auckland . it eats a wide range of native and exotic fruit , and makes a major contribution to the development of communities of naturalised woody weeds . these communities provide fruit more suited to non-endemic native birds and naturalised birds than to endemic birds . . in popular culture . the common blackbird was seen as a sacred though destructive bird in classical greek folklore , and was said to die if it consumed pomegranates . like many other small birds , it has in the past been trapped in rural areas at its night roosts as an easily available addition to the diet , and in medieval times the practice of placing live birds under a pie crust just before serving may have been the origin of the familiar nursery rhyme : sing a song of sixpence , a pocket full of rye ; four and twenty blackbirds baked in a pie ! when the pie was opened the birds began to sing , oh , was n't that a dainty dish to set before the king ? the common blackbird 's melodious , distinctive song is mentioned in the poem adlestrop by edward thomas ; and for that minute a blackbird sang close by , and round him , mistier , farther and farther , all the birds of oxfordshire and gloucestershire . in the english christmas carol '' the twelve days of christmas '' , the line commonly sung today as '' four calling birds '' is believed to have originally been written in the 18th century as '' four colly birds '' , an archaism meaning '' black as coal '' that was a popular english nickname for the common blackbird . the common blackbird , unlike many black creatures , is not normally seen as a symbol of bad luck , but r . s . thomas wrote that there is '' a suggestion of dark places about it '' , and it symbolised resignation in the 17th century tragic play the duchess of malfi ; an alternate connotation is vigilance , the bird 's clear cry warning of danger . the common blackbird is the national bird of sweden , which has a breeding population of 1–2 million pairs , and was featured on a 30 & nbsp ; öre christmas postage stamp in 1970 ; it has also featured on a number of other stamps issued by european and asian countries , including a 1966 4d british stamp and a 1998 irish 30p stamp . this bird—arguably—also gives rise to the serbian name for kosovo ( and metohija ) , which is the possessive adjectival form of serbian kos ( '' blackbird '' ) as in kosovo polje ( '' blackbird field '' ) . a common blackbird can be heard singing on the beatles song '' blackbird '' . a blackbird can also be heard along with a woodpigeon on the kate bush song '' aerial tal '' . references . further reading . snow , david w . ( 1987 ) . the blackbird . shire natural history . external links . species information . bbc science & nature – blackbird , with song clip ( archive ) birds of britain – blackbird madeira birdwatching – information on subspecies cabrerae rspb – blackbird , including video and sound clips ibercaja classroom network – blackbird ageing and sexing ( archived pdf ; 5.3 mb ) by javier blasco-zumeta & gerd-michael heinze ornithos – feathers of common blackbird ( turdus merula ) . sounds and videos . blackbird videos , photos & sounds on the internet bird collection other blackbird songs on sonatura . images . arkive – blackbird still images ( archive )