Mechanization

history . ancient times . water wheels date to the roman period and were used to grind grain and lift irrigation water . water powered bellows were in use on blast furnaces in china in 31 ad . by the 13th century , water wheels powered sawmills and trip hammers , to pull cloth and pound flax and later cotton rags into pulp for making paper . trip hammers are shown crushing ore in de re metallica ( 1555 ) . clocks were some of the most complex early mechanical devices . clock makers were important developers of machine tools including gear and screw cutting machines , and were also involved in the mathematical development of gear designs . clocks were some of the earliest mass-produced items , beginning around 1830 . . reprinted by mcgraw-hill , new york and london , 1926 ; and by lindsay publications , inc . , bradley , illinois , . water powered bellows for blast furnaces , used in china in ancient times , were in use in europe by the 15th century . de re metallica contains drawings related to bellows for blast furnaces including a fabrication drawing . improved gear designs decreased wear and increased efficiency . mathematical gear designs were developed in the mid 17th century . french mathematician and engineer desargues designed and constructed the first mill with epicyclic gearing ca . 1650 . in the 18th century involute gears , another mathematical derived design , came into use . involute gears are better for meshing gears of different sizes than epicycloidal . gear cutting machines came into use in the 18th century . . industrial revolution . the newcomen steam engine was first used , to pump water from a mine , in 1712 . john smeaton introduced metal gears and axles to water wheels in the mid to last half of the 18th century . the industrial revolution started mainly with textile machinery , such as the spinning jenny ( 1764 ) and water frame ( 1768 ) . demand for metal parts used in textile machinery led to the invention of many machine tools in the late 1700s until the mid-1800s . after the early decades of the 19th century , iron increasingly replaced wood in gearing and shafts in textile machinery . in the 1840s self acting machine tools were developed . machinery was developed to make nails ca . 1810 . the fourdrinier paper machine paper machine for continuous production of paper was patented in 1801 , displacing the centuries-old hand method of making individual sheets of paper . one of the first mechanical devices used in agriculture was the seed drill invented by jethro tull around 1700 . the seed drill allowed more uniform spacing of seed and planting depth than hand methods , increasing yields and saving valuable seed . in 1817 , history of the bicycle in germany . mechanized agriculture greatly increased in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries with horse drawn reapers and horse powered threshing machines . . by the late nineteenth century steam power was applied to threshing and steam tractors appeared . internal combustion began being used for tractors in the early twentieth century . threshing and harvesting was originally done with attachments for tractors , but in the 1930s independently powered combine harvesters were in use . in the mid to late 19th century , hydraulic and pneumatic devices were able to power various mechanical actions , such as positioning tools or work pieces . pile drivers and steam hammers are examples for heavy work . in food processing , pneumatic or hydraulic devices could start and stop filling of cans or bottles on a conveyor . power steering for automobiles uses hydraulic mechanisms , as does practically all earth moving equipment and other construction equipment and many attachments to tractors . pneumatic ( usually compressed air ) power is widely used to operate industrial valves . twentieth century . by the early 20th century machines developed the ability to perform more complex operations that had previously been done by skilled craftsmen . an example is the glass bottle making machine developed 1905 . it replaced highly paid glass blowers and child labor helpers and led to the mass production of glass bottles . after 1900 factories were electrified , and electric motors and controls were used to perform more complicated mechanical operations . this resulted in mechanized processes to manufacture almost all goods . categories . in manufacturing , mechanization replaced hand methods of making goods . prime movers are devices that convert thermal , potential or kinetic energy into mechanical work . prime movers include internal combustion engines , combustion turbines ( jet engines ) , water wheels and turbines , windmills and wind turbines and steam engines and turbines . powered transportation equipment such as locomotives , automobiles and trucks and airplanes , is a classification of machinery which includes sub classes by engine type , such as internal combustion , combustion turbine and steam . inside factories , warehouses , lumber yards and other manufacturing and distribution operations , material handling equipment replaced manual carrying or hand trucks and carts . mechanized agriculture see : mechanized agriculture see also : productivity improving technologies ( historical ) section 4 see also : list of agricultural machinery in mining and excavation , power shovels replaced picks and shovels . rock and ore crushing had been done for centuries by water powered trip hammers , but trip hammers have been replaced by modern ore crushers and ball mills . bulk material handling systems and equipment are used for a variety of materials including coal , ores , grains , sand , gravel and wood products . construction equipment includes cranes , concrete mixers , concrete pumps , cherry pickers and an assortment of power tools . powered machinery . powered machinery today usually means either by electric motor or internal combustion engine . before the first decade of the 20th century powered usually meant by steam engine , water or wind . many of the early machines and machine tools were hand powered , but most changed over to water or steam power by the early 19th century . before electrification , mill and factory power was usually transmitted using a line shaft . electrification allowed individual machines to each be powered by a separate motor in what is called unit drive . unit drive allowed factories to be better arranged and allowed different machines to run at different speeds . unit drive also allowed much higher speeds , which was especially important for machine tools . a step beyond mechanization is automation . early production machinery , such as the glass bottle blowing machine ( ca . 1890s ) , required a lot of operator involvement . by the 1920s fully automatic machines , which required much less operator attention , were being used . see : mass production . military usage . the term is also used in the military to refer to the use of tracked armoured vehicles , particularly armoured personnel carriers , to move troops that would otherwise have marched or ridden trucks into combat . in military terminology , mechanized refers to ground units that can fight from vehicles , while motorized refers to units that go to battle in vehicles but then dismount and fight without them . thus , a towed artillery unit is considered motorized while a self-propelled one is mechanized . mechanical vs human labour . when we compare the efficiency of a labourer , we see that he has an efficiency of about 1 % -5.5 % ( depending on whether he uses arms , or a combination of arms and legs ) . internal combustion engines mostly have an efficiency of about 20 % , ic engine 20 % efficient although large diesel engines , such as those used to power ships , may have efficiencies of nearly 50 % . industrial electric motors have efficiencies up to the low 90 % range , before correcting for the conversion efficiency of fuel to electricity of about 35 % . when we compare the costs of using an internal combustion engine to a worker to perform work , we notice that an engine can perform more work at a comparative cost . 1 liter of fossil fuel burnt with an ic engine equals about 50 hands of workers operating for 24 hours or 275 arms and legs for 24 hours . 1 liter of fuel yielding 100 arms for 24 hours , when efficiency is 40 % which is never home documentary by yann arthus bertrand too stating that 1 liter of fuel yields 100 arms for 24 hours ; probably from same calculation in addition , the combined work capability of a human is also much lower than that of a machine . an average human worker can provide work good for around 0,9 & nbsp ; hp ( 2.3 mj per hour ) while a machine ( depending on the type and size ) can provide for far greater amounts of work . for example , it takes more than one and a half hour of hard labour to deliver only one kwh - which a small engine could deliver in less than one hour while burning less than one litre of petroleum fuel . this implies that a gang of 20 to 40 men will require a financial compensation for their work at least equal to the required expended food calories ( which is at least 4 to 20 times higher ) . in most situations , the worker will also want compensation for the lost time , which is easily 96 times greater per day . even if we assume the real wage cost for the human labour to be at us 1.00/day , an energy cost is generated of about 4.00/kwh . despite this being a low wage for hard labour , even in some of the countries with the lowest wages , it represents an energy cost that is significantly more expensive than even exotic power sources such as solar photovoltaic panels ( and thus even more expensive when compared to wind energy harvesters or luminescent solar concentrators ) . combined work capability of human vs machines . levels of mechanization . for simplification , one can study mechanization as a series of steps . mechanization and its level many students refer to this series as indicating basic-to-advanced forms of mechanical society . hand/muscle power hand-tools powered hand-tools , e.g . electric-controlled powered tools , single functioned , fixed cycle powered tools , multi-functioned , program controlled powered tools , remote-controlled powered tools , activated by work-piece ( e.g . : coin phone ) measurement selected signaling control , e.g . hydro power control performance recording machine action altered through measurement segregation/rejection according to measurement selection of appropriate action cycle correcting performance after operation correcting performance during operation