John Molson

early life . john molson was born in 1763 , in the parish of moulton near spalding , lincolnshire , england . his father john molson senior ( 1730–1770 ) had , in 1760 , married mary elsdale ( 1739–1772 ) , the eldest daughter of samuel elsdale ( 1704–1788 ) , of surfleet . her brother , robinson elsdale ( 1744–1783 ) , was a privateer , whose unpublished exploits formed the basis of the novel by frederick marryat , the privateersman ( 1846 ) . before the marriage , john molson senior inherited a property known as snake hall , mccord museum snake hall , lincolnshire . photograph : house , copied for mrs molson in 1868 ( anonymous ) retrieved on : 2010-06-25 . in moulton eaugate which consisted of a house and various outbuildings associated with of land . john molson senior died on june 4 , 1770 . his will bequeathed properties to his wife and five surviving children . under their marriage settlement , snake hall went to mary , and was to then pass on to his eldest son , john , upon her death . she died on september 21 , 1772 , and thus john was orphaned when eight years old . john senior had named four guardians and trustees for the estate ; the young john molson 's financial affairs were overseen by his paternal uncle , thomas molson , but in september 1771 thomas turned over the duties of trustee and guardian to samuel elsdale , possibly due to poor health , as he died the following spring . under samuel elsdale 's oversight , snake hall was rented out to the benefit of their trusts . john went to live with a man named william robinson , and at age 12 in 1776 was consigned to the care of a mr whitehead , who was paid for his board and education until 1780 , when he turned 16 . writers have criticized samuel elsdale for his oversight but he seems to have performed his duties prudently , although john molson plainly chafed under his guardianship . hunter , douglas . molson : the birth of a business empire . penguin books canada , 2001 . in 1782 , at the age of 18 , molson immigrated to quebec , in a ship that was leaking so badly he switched ships mid-ocean . in 1783 , molson moved into the home of thomas loid just outside montreal , who had begun brewing beer the previous year . molson became a partner in the brewery and took over on 5 january 1785 , eight days after he had turned twenty-one . in 1786 , he returned briefly to england , and it was during that year that molson picked up the book theoretic hints on an improved practice in brewing by john richardson . molson returned to quebec with more money and a new mindset . many loyalists were immigrating to quebec from the united states and this influx increased the demand for beer . molson worked hard , staying up long into the night . he hired an apprentice , christopher cook , and a loyalist housemaid , sarah insley vaughan . he married her on 7 april 1801 at christ church in montreal after she had borne him three children . sarah ( 1751–1829 ) was the daughter of thomas vaughan of harnham hall , morpeth , northumberland . she was the niece of wilmot vaughan , 1st earl of lisburne and through her mother 's family , the aynsleys , a cousin of the duke of atholl . she emigrated to the american colonies with her first husband , david tetchley , but ten years later left him , and reverting to her maiden name , she made her way to montreal , penniless , until taken in by molson . molson , karen . the molsons : their lives & times , 1780–2000 . firefly books , 2001 . soon molson 's beer was in such demand that according to one of his diary entries '' can not serve half my customers and they are increasing every day . '' one of the major reasons for this was the wide appeal of his beer to different classes of montreal society . high british officers had been drinking imported london porters and the city merchants preferred bristol . yet molson 's beer was special as it was '' universally liked '' ( a quotation from molson 's diary ) . it was at the anglican church that he met many influential and wealthy businessmen like fur trader james mcgill , joseph frobisher , founder of the north west company , and alexander mackenzie . career success and later life . between 1788 and 1800 , molson 's business grew quickly into one of the larger ones in lower canada . already in 1791 , he sold 30,000 gallons of beer . during these years molson and his wife had four children , john junior , thomas ( who died shortly after birth ) , another thomas , and william ( billy ) . the year 1800 marks the first recorded use of ( imported ) bottles by molson . about this time arrived the philosophical principles of the science of brewing by richardson , which marks the introduction of the thermometer and the saccharometer to the english craft . by the start of the 19th century , his small brewery had grown tenfold . molson now had the money to improve his business by buying new technology . steamship pioneer . molson toyed with the idea of buying a steamship after seeing robert fulton ’ s vermont go down the hudson . molson 's steamship would be the first in canada . molson teamed up with john jackson and john bruce who would build a ship for molson in return for putting up the money and part ownership . built in montreal ( with engines produced at forges du saint-maurice in trois-rivières ) in 1809 , accommodation became the first steamship to ride on the waters of the saint lawrence river . this was a great feat for molson but , from a business viewpoint , it was a net loss , costing £4000 by 1810 . marsh , john . '' accommodation '' in the canadian encyclopedia ( edmonton : hurtig publishers , 1988 ) , volume 1 , p.10 . molson was determined to make money on his ships so he dismantled accommodation and purchased in person two steamship engines from boulton & watt in birmingham , england . he combined the two engines and the remains of accommodation to create swiftsure , a magnificent ship that was a vision of elegance and speed , traversing the route at an average of seven miles an hour . swiftsure measured 130 feet on the keel and had a beam of 24 feet . the steamship provided a ready cash business , while the government in london had suspended the transfer of specie from 1800 to 1817 . most other canadian business was carried on with london bills of exchange , and the transfer of those bills from montreal to quebec earned the molsons up to 20 per cent . and since brewing occupied the months when the steamboats were laid up , a harmonious concordance of activities resulted . during this time molson 's business continued to grow and the war of 1812 pushed sales even higher . swiftsure was leased to the british army and brought in a supplemental income . in 1815 , molson was elected to represent montreal east in the legislative assembly on the platform of building a wharf . molson brewery is the second oldest company in all of canada . plutocrat and banker . as molson became more occupied by his multiple businesses and his seat in the assembly , his three sons began to take a much larger role in the companies . john junior managed the steamships , thomas was married in england and would frequently travel sending back tips and advice to his father , and william was in charge of the brewery . in 1816 , the year he took his sons formally into partnership , molson built mansion house hotel which coincided with the assembly 's acceptance of the wharf . molson 's hotel was only for those who could afford luxury . the hotel offered montreal 's first library , boat rides on the river , well-furnished rooms and six-course dinners , famous throughout all of montreal . to the john molsons and sons partnership were leased at 6 % per annum molson 's accumulated capital assets ; the term was seven years . the four partners divided equally , share and share alike , the profits and the losses . if any insoluble difference arose between the partners , two indifferent arbitrators were to be appointed . by december 1816 , molson had accumulated £63,550 . in 1817 , john richardson and george moffatt created the montreal bank . molson declined a partnership in it as the backers of this project had been involved with multiple failed banks in the united states and he felt it was a risky investment . molson changed his mind not long afterwards and the bank became fully canadian-owned when the u.s . partners sold their shares after the u.s . financial crisis in the fall of 1818 . by 1822 , the bank had received a charter from britain and changed its name to the bank of montreal . between 1826 and 1834 , molson presided over its affairs . . hospitaller . in 1819 , molson had a short bout of sickness . it was during this time that he noticed the only hospital in the city , hôtel dieu , only held 30 beds . molson proposed to the assembly that a new hospital be established that would contain 200 beds . although the assembly denied his request , there was much private support and soon donations came pouring in . by may the new hospital , the montreal general hospital , was opened on craig street ( now saint antoine street ) . international beer and spirit merchant . a crisis almost struck the molsons in 1821 when the mansion house hotel caught fire ; some of the books from the library were saved but not much more was salvageable . molson was undaunted by this and had ideas to build an even grander hotel , a true testament to his character . while john junior and william took care of the businesses within canada , thomas was busy working in england . thomas brought over 237 gallons of beer to london , england . the response was encouraging and thomas brought another 1385 gallons on his next trip . molson 's had its first international market . the first canadian distillery on an industrial scale was a molson endeavour . it was in response to the economic collapse that occurred from 1817 to 1820 , that thomas convinced his partners to enter the distillery business , which was industrially a virgin land . from 1820 to 1866 , one or another molson partnership were the largest distillers in canada . the trade in liquor was only wholesale in nature , because trade at the retail level had been forbidden the managers of a distillery under a law passed in 1794 . the molson company official historian maintains that until 1846 , the single most substantial source of revenues were duties on alcoholic beverages . in those pioneer days , alcohol was the primary form by which was monetized grain , and in the absence of scotch supply the british craved canadian whiskey . one historian has concluded that , because the cost of transportation rises with volume shipped , molson shipped concentrated alcohol to his british agents , grayhurst & hewat , who then cut it down for retail . in 1828 , the temperance movement in canada was begun , with methodist preachers setting up shop first in the niagara peninsula , then in montreal and at bedford , nova scotia . prohibitionists called for the elimination of import , manufacture and sale of strong liquor for beverage purposes . . theatre impresario . by 1825 , molson 's hotel was completely rebuilt and renamed the british american hotel . after the hotel was completed molson built a theatre adjacent to it . by november , molson 's theatre royal was completed , the first theatre in montreal . it seated 1,000 guests , presenting shakespeare and restoration authors and was also used for circuses and concerts . wilson , edwin , ed . living theatre : history of the theatre . 5th ed . new york , ny : mcgraw hill , 2008 . print . edmund kean and charles dickens both performed there before it was demolished in 1844 to make way for the bonsecours market . canadian theatre never resting , molson continued to build his empire by purchasing multiple steamships and creating the st lawrence steamboat company . this fleet of ships was so big that it outnumbered all of those operating in the united states . in 1826 molson decided to run against a young louis-joseph papineau but resigned quickly after discovering the amount of support papineau had from the french and the irish . on march 18 , 1829 molson 's wife sarah vaughan , died after treating her rheumatism with laudanum . sarah became addicted to this opium-based painkiller and died from the effects . molson sold the house they lived in together and moved on with his life . his four-year term as president of the bank of montreal ( 1826–1830 ) ended and molson did not run for a second . even at the age of 67 molson did not contemplate retirement ; one of his biggest projects still lay ahead . railway entrepreneur . since 1825 , molson had followed reports of the first railways being built in england . molson had told the head of this project , jason pierce , that he was interested . pierce did not forget about molson 's interest and in 1832 molson 's request for a railroad was accepted by the assembly . the champlain and st lawrence railroad was to connect the st lawrence to the hudson river , making the trip from montreal to new york much quicker . this was the first railway ever constructed in canada . molson became the railroad 's largest shareholder , when a cholera epidemic that struck canada in 1832 and 1834 added to echoes of the economic depression caused by the crisis closure of the second bank of the united states . this all caused the railroad project to lose much of its momentum . many businesses closed in montreal but the molsons continued work as usual . construction of the railroad was begun in 1835 , and was completed on thursday 21 july 1836 with great pomp and ceremony , but without the senior molson . after his multiple successful proposals , john molson was appointed to the legislative council of lower canada . he was considered part of the '' chateau clique '' as he was a rich english businessman . the people were losing their faith in english businessmen like molson and were turning to men like papineau and robert nelson , both members of the patriote movement . in 1833 molson 's hotel burned down again . this time though , molson decided not to rebuild it . . freemason . molson was appointed provincial grand master of the district grand lodge of montreal ( freemasons ) by the duke of sussex by letters patent dated may 15 , 1826 and installed in office by claude dénéchau on september 5 , 1826 ; molson resigned in 1833 . . death and legacy . when things returned to normal after the second cholera epidemic , molson 's railroad project began to gain speed . unfortunately , he did not live long enough to see his last dream realized . molson caught a high fever in december 1835 . he wrote his will on january 11 , 1836 , and died that day . in his will , molson named john molson jr . , thomas molson , william molson , george moffatt and peter mcgill executors . his remains now rest in a family mausoleum at mount royal cemetery . in 1955 , a historian noted that of the many and myriad businesses started in 18th-century montreal , only three remained to that date . the molson coors brewing company still has the dominant share of the beer industry in canada . file : cimetière mont-royal - monument en l'honneur de la famille molson 01.jpg file : funeral monument john molson.jpg file : funeral monument john molson 2.jpg file : funeral monument john molson detail.jpg file : funeral monument john molson detail 2.jpg file : funeral monument john molson detail 3.jpg file : cimetière mont-royal - monument en l'honneur de la famille molson 07.jpg . see also . john carling john labatt william dow john molson school of business molson family . references . bibliography . . external links .