Gelon

early life . gelon was the son of deinomenes . according to herodotus , gelon 's ancestors came from the island of tilos in the aegean sea and were the founders of the city of gela in southern sicily . de sélincourt 's herodotus , p . 494 . one of his later ancestors , telines , was said to have reconciled his people after a period of civil strife through the divine rites of the earth goddesses ; herodotus infers that all of telines ' descendants , including gelon , were priests of this cult . gelon 's three brothers were hieron , thrasybulus and polyzalos . bury & meiggs , p . 189 . deinomenes consulted an oracle about the fates of his children , and was told that gelon , hieron and thrasybulus were all destined to become tyrants . gelon fought in a number of the conflicts between the various tyrant kings of sicily and earned a reputation as a formidable soldier . his performance was so impressive that he was promoted to be commander of the cavalry for his uncle hippocrates , tyrant of gela . from this position he played a key role in a number of battles , including one against syracuse , a city which he himself would later conquer . de sélincourt 's herodotus , p . 495 . . rise to power . but it was not until hippocrates was killed in a battle with the native sicel tribe of sicily at hybla that gelon 's rise to power began . upon hippocrates ’ death his sons retained the throne , but the common people were tired of this family 's rule and revolted . gelon quelled the revolt on the pretext of helping hippocrates ’ sons gain power . instead , he took power for himself with the help of the army in 491 bc . the territory now under his control as tyrant included that of gela , naxos in the east , zancle in the northeast , and camarina in the south . tyrant of syracuse . gelon ruled over gela and his other territories in eastern sicily peacefully for the next five years . in 485 bc , the aristocracy of syracuse called the gamori , who had been forced out of the city by the common people , came to gelon seeking his aid . seeing an opportunity for expansion , gelon used his now large military force to capture the city of syracuse with little or no resistance , reinstating the exiled gamori . gelon now ruled as the new tyrant of syracuse and left his brother hiero to rule over gela . according to herodotus , he forced half the citizens of gela to move to syracuse . similarly , he removed all the aristocracy from camarina . he continued this strategy as he conquered nearby euboea and megara hyblaea ( 483 bc ) , forcibly removing the aristocracy from each city and placing the rest of the population in slavery . according to herodotus , because he was raised as a noble and was constantly in the presence of nobility , gelon did not care for the lower class , and “ found the common people unpleasant to share a house with ” . under gelon 's rule , syracuse soon became prosperous . along with grand building program in syracuse , gelon sought also to create a powerful mercenary army . most of the recruits for his army came from the native sicel tribes . however , some were recruited from the greek mainland , men who had most likely fought with gelon at some point in the past , and their total number was said to be around 10,000 . all of these men were granted citizenship of syracuse . gelon found a powerful ally in theron , tyrant of acragas , a city west of gela , after he married theron 's daughter , demareta . in 481 bc representatives of athens came to him asking for his aid in the upcoming war against xerxes i and his persian army . gelon replied that he could supply 28,000 men as well as 200 ships if he was appointed commander of either the greek navy or army . he was denied both positions and , therefore , refused to supply the greeks with any supplies or men . in fact , he went so far as to prepare gifts for xerxes in case the persian king won his war against the greek alliance . battle of himera . his unwillingness to support the greeks could have been related to the threat posed by the carthaginians on the west coast of sicily . theron of acragas had jeopardized the independence of all of sicily from the powerful carthaginians when he defeated the tyrant terillus at himera . seeking a powerful ally to assist in recapturing himera , terillus went to carthage for assistance . the carthaginians were happy to respond to his plea . the carthaginians were keen to increase their influence and territory in sicily and the opportunity came at a perfect time because of the coming persian invasion of greece . some scholars argue that xerxes and the carthaginians were in contact with each other and coordinated a simultaneous attack on both the western and eastern fronts of greece and its colonies , in the hopes that it would prevent either front from aiding the other . in any case , in 480 bc a carthaginian force of 300,000 men landed at palermo on the north coast of sicily and advanced east towards himera , led by their general hamilcar . gelon , upon hearing the danger his ally theron was in , led an army of 50,000 men and 5,000 cavalry to himera . a contingent of gelon 's men gained access to the carthaginian camp by posing as allies from the nearby city of selinus . once inside they signalled to the rest of gelon 's troops , who were stationed in the mountains overlooking the camp , by setting fire to hamilcar 's ships . the ensuing battle was a decisive victory for gelon and theron , with carthaginian casualties estimated at 150,000 , including hamilcar . the riches collected from the carthaginian camp , as well as the 2,000 talents of silver that resulted from the peace treaty with carthage , were dispersed by gelon among his troops and his allies , with a large amount designated for the construction of a new temple in syracuse . according to herodotus , upon his return to his capital , gelon organized a meeting with the people of syracuse , and described to them his actions during the war with hamilcar , and the manner in which he dispersed the spoils . he told them that if they found anything wrong in his conduct , they were free to kill him and take control of syracuse for themselves . the people of syracuse decided to keep gelon as their tyrant , and he continued his reign in peace for the next two years . death and succession . gelon died in 478 bc after ruling syracuse for seven years . control of his kingdom passed to his brother hieron , who ruled for the next 10 years until his death , when a dispute over to whom the crown should pass led to the dissolution of the syracusan state . analysis of contribution to sicily and greek history . gelon 's first major contribution to greek , and more specifically sicilian , history was the foundation of syracuse as his capital , which he turned into “ the greatest greek city in the west . ” the location of the city itself made it a prime spot for such a role . the city was located on an island , connected to the mainland by a peninsula constructed in the 6th century bc . the city faced east towards the greek mainland and had its own harbour . gelon constructed a wall that ran from the fort of achradina on the mainland to the sea , making syracuse virtually impregnable . also , by bringing in the wealthy citizens from conquered cities , a tactic never before used in sicily , he greatly increased the prosperity of the city . he constructed a theatre which improved the city 's culture , and following the victory at himera , he built an ornate temple dedicated to the goddess athena . all of these improvements influenced the history of syracuse for many years . the city was an important outpost for both the roman and byzantine empires , and today is a location of great historical importance for sicily and italy . the other great contribution of gelon was the victory at himera over the carthaginians . the battle was significant because of the timing and location of the event . there is little doubt that if hamilcar had managed to defeat the large sicilian force of gelon and theron , he could have conquered the entire island of sicily if he so wished . the greek states on the mainland would have been unable to send troops due to their own war with the persians . if , as many historians believe , the persian and carthaginian armies were in contact with each other , a defeat at himera for gelon could have led to a two pronged attack on the greek mainland by the persian and the carthaginians , and perhaps to the eventual demise of greek civilisation . but by defeating hamilcar in 480 bc , gelon managed to keep sicily free from carthaginian invasion for the next seventy years . gelon seems to have been highly regarded by his subjects at least partially due to his victory at the battle of himera . this respect is apparent from the elaborate tomb and statue built in his memory at public expense . despite gelon 's mistreatment of conquered people , his reputation as a respected tyrant and generous king survived the passage of time . perhaps the greatest testament to his influence over sicily is how his statue was spared as timoleon tried to erase all memory of the reign of tyrants when sicily became a democracy 150 years after gelon 's death . references . sources . j . b . bury history of greece to the death of alexander the great . macmillan , 1922 . 298-303 . freeman , edward a . the history of sicily from the earliest times : from the beginning of greek settlement to the beginning of athenian intervention . vol . 2 . at the clarendon p , 1891 . 122-33 . '' gelon . '' encyclopædia britannica . 2008 . encyclopædia britannica online school edition . 4 december 2008 hippocrates width 25 % align center tyrant of gela 491 bc – 485 bc width 25 % align center succeeded by : hieron i - width 25 % align center preceded by : - width 25 % align center tyrant of syracuse 485 bc – 478 bc width 25 % align center succeeded by : hieron i -