Power pop

1970s : emergence . in the 1970s , the rock scene fragmented into many new styles . artists drifted away from the influence of early beatles songs , and anyone who cited the beatles or the who as influences were a minority . in paul lester 's description , '' powerpop is really a 70s invention . it 's about young musicians missing the 60s but taking its sound in new directions . not just an alternative to prog and the hippy troubadours , but a cousin to glam . '' novelist michael chabon believed that the genre did not truly come into its own until the emergence of '' second generation '' power pop acts in the early 1970s . lester added that it was '' essentially an american response to the british invasion , made by anglophiles a couple of years too young to have been in bands the first time round . '' for many fans of power pop , according to caferelli , the '' bloated and sterile '' aspect of 1970s rock was indicative of the void left by the beatles ' breakup in 1970 . during the early to middle part of the decade , only a few acts continued the tradition of beatlesque pop . some were younger glam/glitter bands , while others were '' '60s holdovers '' that refused to update their sound . one of the most prominent groups in the latter category was badfinger , the first artists signed to the beatles ' apple records . although they had international top 10 chart success with '' come and get it '' ( 1969 ) , '' no matter what '' ( 1970 ) , and '' day after day '' ( 1971 ) , they were criticized in the music press as beatles imitators . caferelli describes them as '' one of the earliest -- and finest purveyors '' of power pop . conversely , allmusic states that while badfinger were among the groups that established the genre 's sound , the raspberries were the only power pop band of the era to have hit singles . noel murray wrote that badfinger had '' some key songs '' that were power pop '' before the genre really existed '' . 1972 , according to magnets andrew earles , was '' year zero '' for power pop : big star and the raspberries emerged , todd rundgren released something/anything ? , the flamin ' groovies recorded '' shake some action '' , and many garage bands stopped emulating the rolling stones . chabon additionally credited the raspberries , badfinger , big star , and rundgren 's '' could n't i just tell you '' and '' i saw the light '' with '' inventing '' the genre . on a television performance from that year , rundgren introduced '' could n't i just tell you '' as a part of '' the latest musical trend , power pop . '' lester called the studio recording of the song a '' masterclass in compression '' and said that rundgren '' staked his claim to powerpop immortality and set the whole ball rolling '' . raspberries were the only american band that had hit singles . murray recognized the raspberries as the most representative power pop band and described their 1972 us top 10 '' go all the way '' as '' practically a template for everything the genre could be , from the heavy arena rock hook to the cooing , teenybopper-friendly verses and chorus . '' caferelli described the follow-up '' i wan na be with you '' ( 1972 ) as '' perhaps the definitive power pop single '' . however , like badfinger , the raspberries were derided as '' beatles clones '' . singer eric carmen remembered that there '' were a lot of people in 1972 who were not ready for any band that even remotely resembled the beatles . '' raspberries dissolved in 1977 as carmen pursued a solo career . . 1970s–1980s : commercial peak and decline . a recognizable movement of power pop bands following in the tradition of the raspberries started emerging in the late 1970s , with groups such as cheap trick , the jam , the romantics , shoes , and the flamin ' groovies , who were seen as 1960s revivalist bands . much of these newer bands were influenced by late 1960s am radio , which fell in a rapid decline due to the popularity of the aor and progressive rock fm radio format . by 1977 , there was a renewed interest in the music and culture of the 1960s , with examples such as the beatlemania musical and the growing mod revival . aaba forms and double backbeats also made their return after many years of disuse in popular music . spurred on by the emergence of punk rock and new wave , power pop enjoyed a prolific and commercially successful period from the late 1970s into the early 1980s . throughout the two decades , the genre existed parallel to and occasionally drew from developments such as glam rock , pub rock , punk , new wave , college rock , and neo-psychedelia . allmusic states that these new groups were '' swept along with the new wave because their brief , catchy songs fit into the post-punk aesthetic . '' most bands rejected the irreverence , cynicism , and irony that characterized new wave , believing that pop music was an art that reached its apex in the mid 1960s , sometimes referred to as the '' poptopia '' . this in turn led many critics to dismiss power pop as derivative work . ultimately , the groups with the best-selling records were cheap trick , the knack , the romantics , and dwight twilley , whereas shoes , the records , the nerves , and 20/20 only drew cult followings . writing for time in 1978 , jay cocks cited nick lowe and dave edmunds as '' the most accomplished purveyors of power pop '' , which he described as '' the well-groomed stepbrother of punk rock '' . edmunds was quoted : '' before the new wave . there was no chance for the little guy who buys a guitar and starts a band . what we 're doing is kids ' music , really , just four-four time and good songs . '' cheap trick became the most successful act in the genre 's history thanks to the band 's constant touring schedule and stage theatrics . according to andrew earles , the group 's '' astonishing acceptance in japan ( documented on 1979 's at budokan ) and hits 'surrender ' and ' i want you to want me , ' the trick took power pop to an arena level and attained a degree of success that the genre had never seen , nor would ever see again . '' the biggest chart hit by a power pop band was the knack 's debut single , '' my sharona '' , which topped the billboard hot 100 chart for six weeks in august–september 1979 . however , the song 's ubiquitous radio presence that summer spawned a popular and critical backlash against the band , which in turn led to a backlash against the power pop genre in general . once the knack failed to maintain their commercial momentum , record companies generally stopped signing power pop groups . most bands of the 1970s milieu broke up in the early 1980s . . succeeding waves . 1980s–1990s : alternative rock . in the 1980s and 1990s , power pop continued as a commercially modest genre with artists such as redd kross and the spongetones , the later records of xtc also became a touchstone for bands such as jellyfish and the apples in stereo , while big star developed an avid cult following among members of later bands like r.e.m . and the replacements who expressed esteem for the group 's work . many bands who were primarily influenced by big star blended power pop with the ethos and sounds of alternative rock . allmusic cited teenage fanclub , material issue , and the posies as '' critical and cult favorites '' . in 1991 , the los angeles times chris willman identified jellyfish , the posies , and redd kross as the leaders of a '' new wave of rambunctious power pop bands that recall the days when moptops were geniuses , songs were around three minutes long and a great hook -- a catchy melodic phrase that '' hooks '' the listener—was godhead . '' members of jellyfish and posies said that they were drawn to 1960s artists because of the 1980s music they influenced . at the time , it was uncertain whether the movement could have mainstream success . karen glauber , editor of hits magazine , said that '' the popular conception is that these bands are 'retro , ' or not post-modern enough because they 're not grunge and because the posies are from seattle and do n't sound like mudhoney . '' velvet crush 's ric menck credited nirvana with ultimately making it '' possible for people like matthew sweet matthew sweet and the posies and material issue and , to some extent , us to get college radio play . '' as power pop '' gained the attention of hip circles '' , many older bands reformed to record new material that was released on independent labels . chicago label numeru uno issued a series of albums called yellow pills that compiled new tracks by these groups as well as contemporary bands . for the rest of decade , allmusic writes , '' this group of independent , grass-roots power-pop bands gained a small but dedicated cult following in the united states . '' . 1990s–2010s : continued interest . power pop has had varying levels of success since the 1990s . in 1994 , green day and weezer popularized pop punk , an alternative rock variant genre that fuses power pop harmonies with uptempo punk moods . according to louder than wars sam lambeth , power pop has '' ebbed and flowed '' while remaining an object of critical derision . despite this , he cites fountains of wayne with inspiring '' yet another new era for the format '' during the late 1990s , '' one they ’ d perfect with the magnetic welcome interstate managers ( 2003 ) . '' he writes that as of 2017 , '' you can still hear some of power pop ’ s core traits in bands such as best coast , sløtface , diet cig and dude york . '' in 1998 , international pop overthrow ( ipo ) —named after the album of the same name by material issue—began holding a yearly festival for power pop bands . originally taking place in los angeles , the festival expanded to several locations over the years , including canada and liverpool , england ( the latter event included performances at the cavern club ) . paul collins of the beat and the nerves hosted the power pop-a-licious music festival in 2011 and 2013 , featuring a mixture of classic and rising bands with an emphasis on power pop , punk rock , garage and roots rock . the concerts were held at asbury lanes in asbury park , new jersey and the cake shop in new york city . paul collins and his group the beat headlined the two-day events . . see also . paisley underground britpop . references . bibliography . further reading .