Friar Park

overview . the main house is listed grade ii on the national heritage list , and the gardens of friar park are also listed grade ii on the register of historic parks and gardens . in addition to the main house , the lower lodge , middle lodge , and upper lodge are all also individually listed grade ii . the entrance walls and piers of the lower lodge , and the railed wall piers and gates of the middle lodge are also listed grade ii . since the early 1970s , the property has become synonymous with the former beatle 's home studio , known as fpshot ( i.e . , '' friar park studio , henley-on-thames '' ) . harrison biographer alan clayson has described the friar park estate as being '' as synonymous with his name as the queen 's with windsor castle '' . harrison put the whole property up as collateral in order to fund the monty python comedy team 's movie life of brian after their original backers , emi , pulled out at the last minute . as a huge fan of the pythons , harrison simply wanted to get to see the film − something that his friend eric idle has often described as '' the most expensive cinema ticket in movie history '' . history . the friar park estate was owned by sir frank crisp from 1889 until his death in 1919 . the property was then sold at an auction to sir percival david . following their divorce , lady david moved into the coachman 's cottage on the south-west corner of the property when the rest of the estate was donated for the use of nuns belonging to the salesians of don bosco order . the nuns ran a local school in henley , the sacred heart school , but by the late 1960s friar park was in a state of disrepair and due to be demolished . . george harrison and fpshot . in early 1972 , harrison installed a 16-track tape-based recording studio in a guest suite , which at one stage was superior to the one at emi 's abbey road studios . by 1974 , the facility had become the recording headquarters for his company , dark horse records . the album covers for projects harrison recorded there usually mentioned '' f.p.s.h.o.t . '' − or friar park studio , henley-on-thames . these include the bulk of his own albums , from 1973 's living in the material world onwards ; among them , dark horse , thirty three & 1/3 , george harrison , cloud nine and brainwashed . in addition to harrison 's solo albums , overdubs for the two traveling wilburys releases , and the recording and filming of the beatles ' 1995 anthology project were also recorded at friar park studio henley-on-thames . in 1996 , harrison recorded and produced the critically acclaimed album chants of india for ravi shankar at fpshot . interviews with family and friends for posthumous documentaries such as 2003 's concert for george , the 2005 concert for bangladesh dvd release , and martin scorsese 's george harrison : living in the material world in 2011 were all conducted at fpshot or just downstairs in the main part of the house . besides the records by harrison or artists he produced , the studio was also used by shakespears sister to record their 1992 album hormonally yours . . the gardens . writing in i , me , mine , derek taylor says of harrison 's purchase of friar park : '' it is a dream on a hill and it came , not by chance , to the right man at the right time . '' friar park has extensive gardens and water features designed by henry ernest milner for crisp , including a grotto , and stones just underneath the surface of the pond ( providing a walking-on-water illusion ) . the park also includes a sandstone replica of the matterhorn reflecting crisp 's sense of humour , among the statuary is a monk holding a frying pan with holes in it , and a plaque reading '' two holy friars '' . the year harrison and his first wife , pattie boyd , moved in , he was photographed among four garden gnomes located on the main lawn for the cover of all things must pass , and again with his father harry six years later , with the photo appearing inside the gatefold cover of thirty three & 1/3 . harrison immortalised the grand building and its surrounds in his 1976 song '' crackerbox palace '' , which was his nickname for the mansion ( after lord buckley 's home in california ) . the all things must pass track '' ballad of sir frankie crisp ( let it roll ) '' was inspired by friar park 's history , and the lyrics of later songs such as '' ding dong , ding dong '' and '' the answer 's at the end '' directly quote from the many carvings around the property . his humorous video clips for the likes of '' ding dong , ding dong '' , '' true love '' , and '' crackerbox palace '' were all shot within the gardens and grounds of friar park , as were the album covers for some of his fpshot-recorded dark horse acts − splinter 's the place i love and the album ravi shankar 's music festival from india being the most obvious . harrison and his second wife olivia restored the gardens . until his death in november 2001 , he loved tending to them personally − an activity that a visiting rolling stone journalist in 1987 deemed a '' decidedly un-rock-star-ish pastime '' the editors of rolling stone , harrison , rolling stone press/simon & schuster ( new york , ny , 2002 ) , p . 136 . − and among the groundskeepers were his older brothers peter and harry . george 's son dhani would later recall for the scorsese documentary : '' he 'd garden at night-time until midnight . he 'd be out there squinting because he could see , at midnight , the moonlight and shadows , and that was his way of not seeing the weeds or imperfections that would plague him during the day . '' talking of the tranquility he felt at friar park , harrison once said : '' sometimes i feel like i 'm actually on the wrong planet , and it 's great when i 'm in my garden . but the minute i go out the gate i think : 'what the hell am i doing here ? ' '' . security concerns . during crisp 's time at friar park , the grounds were regularly open to the public . following the murder of john lennon , harrison 's beatles bandmate , in december 1980 , the gates were locked and security features such as fences and video cameras were installed . despite these measures , an intruder , michael abram , broke into the residence in the early hours of 30 december 1999 , attacking harrison and his wife olivia , leaving him with five stab wounds and a punctured lung . in 2009 , eight years after harrison 's death , olivia won the right to put in a permanent fence for her protection , to which some of the neighbours objected , out of concern that their cats could be injured by the sharp edges of the razor-wire . . references . ; bibliography . further reading . . external links . friar park historical and contemporary photographs and illustrations friar park photographs friar park photographs and comments video with discussion of friend on george harrison buying friar park