Ash'ari

history . founder . abu al-hasan al-ashʿari was noted for his teachings on atomism , ash'ari - a history of muslim philosophy among the earliest islamic philosophy , and for al-ashʿari this was the basis for propagating the view that god created every moment in time and every particle of matter . he nonetheless believed in free will , elaborating the thoughts of dirar ibn 'amr and abu hanifa into a '' dual agent '' or '' acquisition '' ( iktisab ) account of free will . watt , montgomery . free-will and predestination in early islam . luzac & co . : london 1948 . while al-ashʿari opposed the views of the rival mu'tazili school , he was also opposed to the view which bi-la kaifa , held by certain schools such as the zahiri ( '' literalist '' ) , mujassimite ( '' anthropotheism '' ) and muhaddithin ( '' traditionalist '' ) schools for their over-emphasis on taqlid ( imitation ) in his istihsan al‑khaud : m . abdul hye , ph.d , ash ’ arism , philosophia islamica . . development . ashʿarism became the main school of early islamic philosophy whereby it was originally based on the foundations laid down by abu al-hasan al-ashʿari who founded the school in the 10th century based on the methodology taught to him by his teacher abdullah ibn sa'eed ibn kullaab . however , the school underwent many changes throughout history resulting in the term ashʿari , in modern usage , being extremely broad , e.g . differences between ibn furak ( d . ah 406 ) and al-bayhaqi ( d . ah 384 ) . for example , the asharite view was that comprehension of the unique nature and characteristics of god were beyond human capability . the solution proposed by abu al-hasan al-ashʿari to solve the problems of tashbih and ta'til concedes that the divine being possesses in a real sense the attributes and names mentioned in the quran . insofar as these names and attributes have a positive reality , they are distinct from the essence , but nevertheless they do not have either existence or reality apart from it . the inspiration of al-ashʿari in this matter was on the one hand to distinguish essence and attribute as concepts , and on the other hand to see that the duality between essence and attribute should be situated not on the quantitative but on the qualitative level — something which mu'tazili thinking had failed to grasp . corbin ( 1993 ) , pp . 115 and 116 ash'aris were referred to as the muthbita ( those who make firm ) by the mutazilites . . beliefs . the ashʿarite view holds that : god is all-powerful ; therefore , good is what god commands and evil is what god forbids . john l . esposito the oxford history of islam oxford university press 2000 p . 281 what god does or commands – as revealed in the quran and hadith – is by definition just . what he prohibits is by definition unjust . right and wrong are not objective realities . it is an error to insist–as did the opposing muʿtazila–that , because god is just he can not do/command something unjust ( such as condemn someone to hell over something beyond their control ) , as this would limit his power and he is all-powerful . some divine acts/commands might seem unfair/unjust to human beings , but this only demonstrates human error . the unique nature and attributes of god can not be understood fully by human reasoning and the senses . reason is god-given and must be employed judge over source of knowledge . intellectual inquiry is decreed by the qur'an and by muhammad , thus interpretations of the quran ( tafsir ) and the hadith should keep developing with the aid of older interpretations . alexander knysh islam in historical perspective taylor & francis 2016 page 163 only god knows the qalb and knows who belongs to the faithful and who does not . ron geaves islam today : an introduction a & c black 2010 page 21 god may forgive the sins of those in hell . ian richard netton encyclopaedia of islam routledge 2013 page 183 support of kalam . although humans possess free will ( or , more accurately , freedom of intention ) , they have no power to create anything , thus simply decide between god 's given possibilities . this doctrine is now known in western philosophy as occasionalism . according to the doctrine of kasb ( acquisition ) , any and all human acts , even the raising of a finger , are created by god , but the human being who performs the act is responsible for it , because they have '' acquired '' the act . the quran is the uncreated word of god in essence ; however , it is created when it takes on a form in letters or sound . cyril glassé , huston smith the new encyclopedia of islam rowman altamira 2003 page 62-3 knowledge of god comes from studying the holy names and attributes in addition to studying the quran and the hadith of muhammad . muslims must believe in the five pillars of islam ; abdullah saeed islamic thought : an introduction routledge 2006 chapter 5 in all the prophets in islam from adam to muhammad ; and in angels . ash'aris also have beliefs about allah 's attributes that are unique to them such as : existence permanence without beginning endurance without end absoluteness and independence dissimilarity to created things oneness allah is all powerful , willful , knowing , living , seeing , hearing and speaking ( signifying attributes ) . criticism . ibn taymiyyah criticised ashari thought as ( in the words of one historian , jonathan a . c . brown ) '' a greek solution to greek problems '' that should '' never '' have concerned muslims . both shah wali allah and ibn taymiyyah rejected the lack of literalism in ashʿari '' speculative theology '' and advocated '' straightforward acceptance of god 's description of himself '' . german scholar eduard sachau says the theology of ashʿari and its biggest defender , al-ghazali , was responsible for the decline of islamic science starting in the tenth century , and stated that the two clerics were the only obstacle to the muslim world becoming a nation of '' galileos , keplers and newtons '' . muzaffar iqbal , science and islam , p . 120 . from the greenwood guides to science and religion series . westport : greenwood publishing group , 2007 . joseph e . b . lumbard offered a different view , claiming that there is no historical evidence to substantiate such a claim , and that science continued to prosper . he asserts that this viewpoint originates from a poor reading of ghazali warning against the abuse of new technology and how it can disrupt and harm society if not properly implemented , similar to how nuclear weapons , artificial intelligence and stem cell research today are restricted to a degree for ethical reasons . ziauddin sardar says that some of the greatest muslim scientists , such as ibn al-haytham and abū rayhān al-bīrūnī , who were pioneers of the scientific method , were themselves followers of the ashʿari school of islamic theology . like other ashʿarites who believed that faith or taqlid should apply only to islam and not to any ancient hellenistic authorities , ibn al-haytham 's view that taqlid should apply only to prophets of islam and not to any other authorities formed the basis for much of his scientific skepticism and criticism against ptolemy and other ancient authorities in his doubts concerning ptolemy and book of optics . some authors have questioned the spiritual value of discussion methods employed by the ashʿarites and other dialectical theologians . fakhr al-din al-razi , himself a leading figure of the ashʿari school , said at the end of his life : '' i employed all the methods which philosophy and dialectic had provided , but in the end i realised that these methods neither could bring solace to the weary heart nor quench the thirst of the thirsty . the best method and the nearest one to reality was the method provided by the qur'an . '' rashid ahmad jullundhry , quranic exegesis in classical literature , pp . 53–54 . islamic book trust/the other press , 2010 . . see also . list of prominent ash'aris 2016 international conference on sunni islam in grozny muʿtazila bi-la kaifa . notes . bibliography . . external links . who are the ash'arites ? dar al-iftaa al-missriyyah the ash'ari 's school of theology dar al-iftaa al-missriyyah ashariyys - the knights of knowledge and the pioneers of success www.sunna.info