Glycerol

synthetic glycerol . although usually not cost-effective , glycerol can be produced by various routes from propene . the epichlorohydrin process is the most important : it involves the chlorination of propylene to give allyl chloride , which is oxidized with hypochlorite to dichlorohydrins , which reacts with a strong base to give epichlorohydrin . this epichlorohydrin is then hydrolyzed to give glycerol . chlorine-free processes from propylene include the synthesis of glycerol from acrolein and propylene oxide . : because of the large-scale production of biodiesel from fats , where glycerol is a waste product , the market for glycerol is depressed . thus , synthetic processes are not economical . owing to oversupply , efforts are being made to convert glycerol to synthetic precursors , such as acrolein and epichlorohydrin . ( see the chemical intermediate section of this article ) . applications . food industry . in food and beverages , glycerol serves as a humectant , solvent , and sweetener , and may help preserve foods . it is also used as filler in commercially prepared low-fat foods ( e.g . , cookies ) , and as a thickening agent in liqueurs . glycerol and water are used to preserve certain types of plant leaves . as a sugar substitute , it has approximately 27 food energy per teaspoon ( sugar has 20 ) and is 60 % as sweet as sucrose . it does not feed the bacteria that form plaques and cause dental cavities . as a food additive , glycerol is labeled as e number e422 . it is added to icing ( frosting ) to prevent it from setting too hard . as used in foods , glycerol is categorized by the u.s . academy of nutrition and dietetics as a carbohydrate . the u.s . food and drug administration ( fda ) carbohydrate designation includes all caloric macronutrients excluding protein and fat . glycerol has a caloric density similar to table sugar , but a lower glycemic index and different metabolic pathway within the body , so some dietary advocates accept glycerol as a sweetener compatible with low-carbohydrate diets . it is also recommended as an additive when using polyol sweeteners such as erythritol and xylitol which have a cooling effect , due to its heating effect in the mouth , if the cooling effect is not wanted . . medical , pharmaceutical and personal care applications . glycerin is mildly antimicrobial and antiviral and is an fda approved treatment for wounds . the red cross reports that an 85 % solution of glycerin shows bactericidal and antiviral effects , and wounds treated with glycerin show reduced inflammation after roughly 2 hours . due to this it is used widely in wound care products , including glycerin based hydrogel sheets for burns and other wound care . it is approved for all types of wound care except third degree burns , and is used to package donor skin used in skin grafts . there is no topical treatment approved for third degree burns , and so this limitation is not exclusive to glycerin . glycerol is used in medical , pharmaceutical and personal care preparations , often as a means of improving smoothness , providing lubrication , and as a humectant . ichthyosis and xerosis have been relieved by the topical use of glycerin . it is found in allergen immunotherapies , cough syrups , elixirs and expectorants , toothpaste , mouthwashes , skin care products , shaving cream , hair care products , soaps , and water-based personal lubricants . in solid dosage forms like tablets , glycerol is used as a tablet holding agent . for human consumption , glycerol is classified by the u.s . fda among the sugar alcohols as a caloric macronutrient . glycerol is also used in blood banking to preserve red blood cells prior to freezing . glycerol is a component of glycerin soap . essential oils are added for fragrance . this kind of soap is used by people with sensitive , easily irritated skin because it prevents skin dryness with its moisturizer properties . it draws moisture up through skin layers and slows or prevents excessive drying and evaporation . taken rectally , glycerol functions as a laxative by irritating the anal mucosa and inducing a osmotic laxative , expanding the colon by drawing water into it to induce peristalsis resulting in defecation . it may be administered undiluted either as a suppository or as a small-volume ( 2–10 & nbsp ; ml ) enema . alternatively , it may be administered in a dilute solution , e.g . , 5 % , as a high volume enema . taken orally ( often mixed with fruit juice to reduce its sweet taste ) , glycerol can cause a rapid , temporary decrease in the intraocular pressure . this can be useful for the initial emergency treatment of severely elevated eye pressure . glycerol has also been incorporated as a component of bio-ink formulations in the field of bioprinting . the glycerol content acts to add viscosity to the bio-ink without adding large protein , carbohydrate , or glycoprotein molecules . botanical extracts . when utilized in '' tincture '' method extractions , specifically as a 10 % solution , glycerol prevents tannins from precipitating in ethanol extracts of plants ( tinctures ) . it is also used as an '' alcohol-free '' alternative to ethanol as a solvent in preparing herbal extractions . it is less extractive when utilized in a standard tincture methodology . alcohol-based tinctures can also have the alcohol removed and replaced with glycerol for its preserving properties . such products are not '' alcohol-free '' in a scientific or fda regulatory sense , as glycerol contains three hydroxyl groups . fluid extract manufacturers often extract herbs in hot water before adding glycerol to make glycerites . does alcohol belong in herbal tinctures ? newhope.com when used as a primary '' true '' alcohol-free botanical extraction solvent in non-tincture based methodologies , glycerol has been shown to possess a high degree of extractive versatility for botanicals including removal of numerous constituents and complex compounds , with an extractive power that can rival that of alcohol and water–alcohol solutions . that glycerol possesses such high extractive power assumes it is utilized with dynamic ( i.e . critical ) methodologies as opposed to standard passive '' tincturing '' methodologies that are better suited to alcohol . glycerol possesses the intrinsic property of not denaturing or rendering a botanical 's constituents inert like alcohols ( i.e . ethyl ( grain ) alcohol , methyl ( wood ) alcohol , etc . ) do . glycerol is a stable preserving agent for botanical extracts that , when utilized in proper concentrations in an extraction solvent base , does not allow inverting or mitigates reduction-oxidation ( redox ) of a finished extract 's constituents , even over several years . both glycerol and ethanol are viable preserving agents . glycerol is bacteriostatic in its action , and ethanol is bactericidal in its action . lawrie , james w . ( 1928 ) glycerol and the glycols – production , properties and analysis . the chemical catalog company , inc . , new york , ny . leffingwell , georgia and lesser , miton ( 1945 ) glycerin – its industrial and commercial applications . chemical publishing co . , brooklyn , ny . the manufacture of glycerol – vol . iii ( 1956 ) . the technical press , ltd . , london , uk . . electronic cigarette liquid . glycerin , along with propylene glycol , is a common component of e-liquid , a solution used with electronic vaporizers ( electronic cigarettes ) . this glycerol is heated with an atomizer ( a heating coil often made of kanthal wire ) , producing the aerosol that delivers nicotine to the user . . antifreeze . like ethylene glycol and propylene glycol , glycerol is a non-ionic kosmotrope that forms strong hydrogen bonds with water molecules , competing with water-water hydrogen bonds . this interaction disrupts the formation of ice . the minimum freezing point temperature is about corresponding to 70 % glycerol in water . glycerol was historically used as an anti-freeze for automotive applications before being replaced by ethylene glycol , which has a lower freezing point . while the minimum freezing point of a glycerol-water mixture is higher than an ethylene glycol-water mixture , glycerol is not toxic and is being re-examined for use in automotive applications . proposed astm engine coolant standards focus on glycerin . astmnewsroom.org . retrieved on 15 august 2012 . in the laboratory , glycerol is a common component of solvents for enzyme reagents stored at temperatures below 0 & nbsp ; °c due to the freezing-point depression . it is also used as a cryoprotectant where the glycerol is dissolved in water to reduce damage by ice crystals to laboratory organisms that are stored in frozen solutions , such as fungi , bacteria , nematodes , and mammalian embryos . chemical intermediate . glycerol is used to produce nitroglycerin , which is an essential ingredient of various explosives such as dynamite , gelignite , and propellants like cordite . reliance on soap-making to supply co-product glycerol made it difficult to increase production to meet wartime demand . hence , synthetic glycerol processes were national defense priorities in the days leading up to world war ii . nitroglycerin , also known as glyceryl trinitrate ( gtn ) is commonly used to relieve angina pectoris , taken in the form of sub-lingual tablets , or as an aerosol spray . an oxidation of glycerol affords mesoxalic acid . dehydrating glycerol affords hydroxyacetone . vibration damping . glycerol is used as fill for pressure gauges to damp vibration . external vibrations , from compressors , engines , pumps , etc . , produce harmonic vibrations within bourdon gauges that can cause the needle to move excessively , giving inaccurate readings . the excessive swinging of the needle can also damage internal gears or other components , causing premature wear . glycerol , when poured into a gauge to replace the air space , reduces the harmonic vibrations that are transmitted to the needle , increasing the lifetime and reliability of the gauge . pneumatic systems : principles and maintenance by s . r . majumdar -- mcgraw-hill 2006 page 74 . niche uses . . film industry . glycerol is used by the film industry when filming scenes involving water to stop areas from drying out too quickly . chemicals in film . reagent.co.uk glycerine is used—combined with water ( around in a 1:99 proportion ) —to create a smooth smoky environment . the solution is vaporized and pushed into the room with a ventilator . ultrasonic couplant . glycerol can be sometimes used as replacement for water in ultrasonic testing , as it has favourably higher acoustic impedance ( 2.42mrayl vs 1.483mrayl for water ) while being relatively safe , non-toxic , non-corrosive and relatively low cost . acoustic properties for liquids . nde-ed.org . internal combustion fuel . glycerol is also used to power diesel generators supplying electricity for the fia formula e series of electric race cars . formula e uses pollution-free glycerine to charge cars . fiaformulae.com . 13 september 2014 . research on uses . research has been conducted to produce value-added products from glycerol obtained from biodiesel production . examples ( aside from combustion of waste glycerol ) : hydrogen gas production glycerine acetate is a potential fuel additive . glycerol is one of the most used additive for starch thermoplastic . conversion to propylene glycol conversion to acrolein conversion to ethanol conversion to epichlorohydrin , a raw material for epoxy resins . metabolism . glycerol is a precursor for synthesis of triacylglycerols and of phospholipids in the liver and adipose tissue . when the body uses stored fat as a source of energy , glycerol and fatty acids are released into the bloodstream . glycerol is mainly metabolized in the liver . glycerol injections can be used as a simple test for liver damage , as its rate of absorption by the liver is considered an accurate measure of liver health . glycerol metabolization is reduced in both cirrhosis and fatty liver disease . glycerol clearance in alcoholic liver disease . gut ( british society of gastroenterology ) . 1982 apr ; 23 ( 4 ) : 257–264 . d g johnston , k g alberti , r wright , p g blain fatty liver disrupts glycerol metabolism in gluconeogenic and lipogenic pathways in humans . september 2018 the journal of lipid research , 59 , 1685-1694 . jeffrey d . browning , eunsook s . jin1 , rebecca e . murphy , and craig r . malloy blood glycerol levels are highly elevated during diabetes , and is believed to be the cause of reduced fertility in patients who suffer from diabetes and metabolic syndrome . blood glycerol levels in diabetic patients average three times higher than healthy controls . direct glycerol treatment of testes has been found to cause significant long-term reduction in sperm count . further testing on this subject was abandoned due to the unexpected results , as this was not the goal of the experiment . molecular human reproduction , volume 23 , issue 11 , november 2017 , pages 725–737 circulating glycerol does not glycate proteins as do glucose or fructose , and does not lead to the formation of advanced glycation endproducts ( ages ) . in some organisms , the glycerol component can enter the glycolysis pathway directly and , thus , provide energy for cellular metabolism ( or , potentially , be converted to glucose through gluconeogenesis ) . before glycerol can enter the pathway of glycolysis or gluconeogenesis ( depending on physiological conditions ) , it must be converted to their intermediate glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate in the following steps : the enzyme glycerol kinase is present mainly in the liver and kidneys , but also in other body tissues , including muscle and brain . in adipose tissue , glycerol 3-phosphate is obtained from dihydroxyacetone phosphate ( dhap ) with the enzyme glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase . glycerol has very low toxicity when ingested ; its ld50 oral dose for rats is 12600 & nbsp ; mg/kg and 8700 & nbsp ; mg/kg for mice . it does not appear to cause toxicity when inhaled , although changes in cell maturity occurred in small sections of lung in animals under the highest dose measured . a sub-chronic 90-day nose-only inhalation study in sprague-dawley ( sd ) rats exposed to 0.03 , 0.16 and 0.66 & nbsp ; mg/l glycerin ( per liter of air ) for 6-hour continuous sessions revealed no treatment-related toxicity other than minimal metaplasia of the epithelium lining at the base of the epiglottis in rats exposed to 0.66 & nbsp ; mg/l glycerin . . historical cases of contamination with diethylene glycol . on 4 may 2007 , the us food and drug administration advised all us makers of medicines to test all batches of glycerol for the toxic diethylene glycol . this followed an occurrence of toxic cough syrup resulting from a falsified import customs declaration by panamanian import/export firm aduanas javier de gracia express , s . a . the cheaper diethylene glycol was relabeled as the more expensive glycerol . between 1990 and 1998 , incidents of deg poisoning reportedly occurred in argentina , bangladesh , india , and nigeria , and resulted in hundreds of deaths . in 1937 , more than one hundred people died in the united states after ingesting deg-contaminated elixir sulfanilamide , a drug used to treat infections . . etymology . the origin of the gly- and glu- prefixes for glycols and sugars is from greek γλυκύς glukus which means sweet . glyco- , dictionary.com . see also . dioxalin epichlorohydrin nitroglycerin oleochemicals saponification/soapmaking solketal sugar alcohol transesterification . references . external links . mass spectrum of glycerol cdc – niosh pocket guide to chemical hazards – glycerin ( mist )