1961 in film

events . any events ? -- > . top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1961 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . 1961 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1961 6 january the marriage-go-round 16 january the girl on the boat 21 january pigs and battleships ( japan ) 24 january his and hers la notte ( italy/france ) 25 january one hundred and one dalmatians 26 january the mark 27 january jhumroo ( india ) 28 january a fever in the blood a soldier 's prayer ( japan ) february 1961 1 february the misfits 2 february garibaldi ( italy ) 9 february girl with a suitcase ( italy ) mother joan of the angels ( poland ) no love for johnnie 10 february cry for happy 15 february the coachman ( south korea ) 16 february the long and the short and the tall 20 february nude on the moon 22 february the great impostor march 1961 1 march posse from hell 2 march the rebel 3 march lola ( france ) 10 march five golden hours ( italy ) go naked in the world ( italy ) 15 march the terror of the tongs 16 march the absent-minded professor 20 march blast of silence 22 march all in a night 's work 23 march carry on regardless 24 march town without pity ( u.s./west germany/switzerland ) underworld u.s.a . 26 march the hoodlum priest 27 march the assassin ( italy ) 29 march gorgo violent life ( italy ) 30 march one-eyed jacks . april–june . april 1961 2 april the sins of rachel cade 4 april the greengage summer mr . topaze two living , one dead ( u.k./sweden ) 13 april madison avenue nazrana ( india ) 17 april master of the world 18 april sanctuary 19 april hercules and the conquest of atlantis ( italy ) please , not now ! ( france ) 24 april the secret ways 25 april yojimbo ( japan ) 27 april the guns of navarone may 1961 3 may atlantis , the lost continent 4 may parrish 5 may return to peyton place teen kanya ( india ) 12 may mad dog coll 14 may angel baby goliath against the giants ( italy ) viridiana ( mexico/spain ) 17 may the long absence ( france ) professor mamlock ( east germany ) the right approach 21 may a bomb was stolen ( romania ) 24 may the young savages 27 may the last time i saw archie 29 may a raisin in the sun june 1961 1 june the pleasure of his company 5 june taste of fear 6 june the deadly companions 7 june the curse of the werewolf scarlet sails 8 june the last sunset romanoff and juliet wild in the country 11 june the big bankroll 13 june the lovemakers ( france ) 16 june the colossus of rhodes ( italy ) 21 june the parent trap two loves 22 june antigone ( greece ) black silk ( thailand ) flame in the streets 25 june last year at marienbad ( france ) 28 june fanny homicidal the ladies man the naked edge question 7 ( west germany/u.s . ) 29 june goodbye again ( france/u.s . ) . july–september . july 1961 3 july the miracle of father malachia ( west germany ) 9 july armored command 12 july francis of assisi voyage to the bottom of the sea 13 july the exiles 16 july the big gamble 19 july by love possessed 20 july whistle down the wind 26 july tammy tell me true two rode together 30 july mothra ( japan ) 31 july and love has vanished ( yugoslavia ) august 1961 9 august come september the frightened city 12 august the pit and the pendulum 15 august marines , let 's go 23 august the fascist ( italy ) the honeymoon machine the young doctors 25 august ada gunga jumna ( india ) 26 august the houseguest and my mother ( south korea ) 29 august the black monocle ( france ) 30 august victim 31 august accattone ( italy ) september 1961 4 september peace to him who enters ( ussr ) 6 september a woman is a woman ( france ) 8 september harry and the butler ( denmark ) striped trip ( ussr ) 15 september a taste of honey 16 september immortal love ( japan ) 20 september claudelle inglish man-trap nefertiti , queen of the nile ( italy ) 21 september the fabulous baron munchausen ( czechoslovakia ) 22 september léon morin , priest ( france ) 25 september the hustler 26 september murder , she said a thunder of drums 27 september paris blues 30 september then nilavu ( india ) . october–december . october 1961 5 october breakfast at tiffany's 8 october the last war ( japan ) 10 october splendor in the grass 11 october back street the explosive generation king of kings 16 october through a glass darkly ( sweden ) 17 october bridge to the sun what a whopper 18 october the devil at 4 o'clock mr . sardonicus west side story 21 october dersu uzala ( ussr ) il posto ( italy ) 23 october johnny nobody 26 october the last judgment ( italy ) 28 october the mask 29 october the end of summer ( japan ) november 1961 1 november the comancheros 2 november bachelor in paradise 8 november susan slade too late blues 9 november flower drum song 16 november hercules in the haunted world ( italy ) summer and smoke 22 november blue hawaii the george raft story valley of the dragons 23 november the day the earth caught fire 24 november the innocents 28 november the errand boy december 1961 6 december el cid ( u.s./italy ) tintin and the golden fleece ( france ) 7 december five minutes to live 13 december paris belongs to us the young ones 14 december babes in toyland judgment at nuremberg the outsider 15 december one , two , three 19 december the children 's hour a difficult life ( italy ) pocketful of miracles when the trees were tall ( ussr ) 20 december cash on demand divorce italian style ( italy ) everything 's ducky lover come back mysterious island sail a crooked ship something wild 22 december the second time around two women ( italy/west germany ) 23 december barabbas ( italy ) 27 december a majority of one 28 december flight of the lost balloon 30 december the steamroller and the violin ( ussr ) . notable films released in 1961 . us unless stated . a . the absent-minded professor , starring fred macmurray accattone , directed by pier paolo pasolini – ( italy ) ada , starring dean martin and susan hayward all in a night 's work , starring dean martin and shirley maclaine and love has vanished ( dvoje ) – ( yugoslavia ) angel baby , starring salome jens and mercedes mccambridge antigone , starring irene papas – ( greece ) armored command , starring howard keel and tina louise the artillery sergeant kalen ( ogniomistrz kaleń ) – ( poland ) the assassin ( l'assassino ) , starring marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) atlantis , the lost continent , starring john dall . b . babes in toyland , starring ray bolger , tommy sands , annette funicello bachelor in paradise , starring bob hope , lana turner , janis paige , jim hutton , paula prentiss back street , starring susan hayward , john gavin , vera miles banditi a orgosolo – ( italy ) barabbas , starring anthony quinn , silvana mangano and jack palance – ( italy ) the big bankroll , aka king of the roaring 20s , starring david janssen , mickey rooney , diana dors the big gamble , starring stephen boyd the black monocle ( le monocle noir ) , directed by georges lautner black silk ( prae dum ) – ( thailand ) blast of silence , directed by and starring allen baron the blonde from buenos aires ( una americana en buenos aires ) , starring mamie van doren and jean-pierre aumont – ( argentina/france ) blue hawaii , starring elvis presley ( his biggest box-office success ) , with joan blackman and angela lansbury boatmen of thessaloniki ( солунските атентатори ) – ( yugoslavia ) a bomb was stolen ( s-a furat o bombă ) – ( romania ) bootleggers ( samogonshchiki ) – ( ussr ) breakfast at tiffany 's , directed by blake edwards , starring audrey hepburn , george peppard , patricia neal , buddy ebsen bridge to the sun , starring carroll baker and james shigeta – ( france/u.s . ) by love possessed , starring lana turner , efrem zimbalist , jr . , george hamilton . c . carry on regardless , starring sid james , kenneth connor and charles hawtrey – ( u.k . ) cash on demand , starring peter cushing and andré morell – ( u.k . ) on the tiger 's back ( a cavallod della tigre ) , starring nino manfredi – ( italy ) the children 's hour , starring audrey hepburn , shirley maclaine , james garner and miriam hopkins chronicle of flaming years ( povest plamennykh let ) – ( ussr ) claudelle inglish , starring diane mcbain and arthur kennedy the coachman ( mabu ) – ( south korea ) the colossus of rhodes , directed by sergio leone , starring rory calhoun – ( italy ) the comancheros , starring john wayne , stuart whitman , lee marvin and ina balin come september cry for happy , starring glenn ford , miyoshi umeki and donald o'connor the curse of the werewolf , starring clifford evans and oliver reed – ( u.k . ) . d . the day the earth caught fire , starring edward judd – ( u.k . ) the deadly companions , directed by sam peckinpah , starring maureen o'hara and brian keith dersu uzala – ( ussr ) the devil at 4 o'clock , directed by mervyn leroy , starring frank sinatra , spencer tracy , grégoire aslan a difficult life ( una vita difficile ) , directed by dino risi , starring alberto sordi – ( italy ) divorce italian style ( divorzio all'italiana ) , directed by pietro germi , starring marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) dondi , starring david janssen . e . el cid , directed by anthony mann , starring charlton heston and sophia loren – ( u.s./italy ) the end of summer ( kohayagawa-ke no aki ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) a morte comanda o cangaço ( a morte comanda o cangaço ) – ( brazil ) the errand boy , directed by and starring jerry lewis everything 's ducky , starring buddy hackett the exiles – documentary the explosive generation , starring william shatner and patty mccormack . f . the fabulous baron munchausen ( baron prášil ) , directed by karel zeman – ( czechoslovakia ) fanny , starring charles boyer and leslie caron the fascist ( il federale ) , starring ugo tognazzi – ( italy ) a fever in the blood , starring efrem zimbalist , jr . , angie dickinson , don ameche and jack kelly five golden hours , starring robert wagner , cyd charisse , ernie kovacs five minutes to live , starring johnny cash flight of the lost balloon , directed by nathan juran and starring mala powers and marshall thompson flooded out ( los inundados ) , directed by fernando birri – ( argentina ) flower drum song , starring nancy kwan francis of assisi , directed by michael curtiz , starring bradford dillman and dolores hart the frightened city , starring sean connery , john gregson , yvonne romain . g . garibaldi ( viva l'italia ! ) , directed by roberto rossellini – ( italy ) the george raft story , starring jayne mansfield and ray danton gidget goes hawaiian , starring deborah walley the girl on the boat , starring norman wisdom – ( u.k . ) girl with a suitcase ( la ragazza con la valigia ) , starring claudia cardinale – ( italy ) go naked in the world , starring gina lollobrigida and anthony franciosa – ( italy ) goliath against the giants ( goliath contro i giganti ) , directed by guido malatesta – ( italy ) goodbye again , starring ingrid bergman and yves montand – ( france/u.s . ) gorgo , starring bill travers – ( u.k . ) the great impostor , starring tony curtis the greengage summer , starring kenneth more and susannah york – ( u.k . ) gunga jumna , starring dilip kumar and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) the guns of navarone , directed by j . lee thompson , starring gregory peck , david niven and anthony quinn – ( u.k . ) . h . harry and the butler ( harry og kammertjeneren ) – ( denmark ) havoc in heaven ( aka the monkey king ) , an animated films – ( china ) hercules and the conquest of atlantis , ( ercole alla conquista di atlantide ) , directed by vittorio cottafavi – ( italy ) hercules in the haunted world ( ercole al centro della terra ) , directed by mario bava – ( italy ) his and hers , directed by brian desmond hurst , starring terry-thomas and janette scott – ( u.k . ) hogs and warships ( buta to gunkan ) , directed by shohei imamura – ( japan ) homicidal , directed by william castle the honeymoon machine , starring steve mcqueen , brigid bazlen , jim hutton , paula prentiss the hoodlum priest , starring don murray the human condition , directed by masaki kobayashi – ( japan ) the houseguest and my mother – ( south korea ) the hustler , directed by robert rossen , starring paul newman , piper laurie , george c . scott , jackie gleason . i . immortal love ( eien no hito ) – ( japan ) the innocents , starring deborah kerr – ( u.k . ) . j . jhumroo , starring madhubala and kishore kumar – ( india ) johnny nobody , directed by and starring nigel patrick – ( u.k . ) judgment at nuremberg , directed by stanley kramer , starring spencer tracy , burt lancaster , marlene dietrich , maximilian schell , judy garland , montgomery clift , richard widmark , william shatner . k . king of kings , directed by nicholas ray , starring jeffrey hunter , robert ryan , siobhán mckenna , hurd hatfield , rita gam , rip torn the knife ( het mes ) , directed by fons rademakers – ( netherlands ) . l . the ladies man , directed by and starring jerry lewis the last judgment ( il giudizio universale ) , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) the last sunset , starring rock hudson , kirk douglas , dorothy malone , joseph cotten , carol lynley the last time i saw archie , starring robert mitchum and jack webb the last war ( sekai daisensō ) – ( japan ) last year at marienbad ( l'année dernière à marienbad ) , directed by alain resnais , starring delphine seyrig – golden lion winner – ( france ) léon morin , priest ( léon morin , prêtre ) , starring jean-paul belmondo – ( france ) lola , directed by jacques demy , starring anouk aimée – ( france ) the long absence ( une aussi longue absence ) , directed by henri colpi – ( france ) the long and the short and the tall , starring laurence harvey and richard harris – ( u.k . ) look in any window , starring paul anka and ruth roman the lovemakers ( la viaccia ) , starring claudia cardinale and jean-paul belmondo – ( italy ) lover come back , starring doris day and rock hudson . m . mad dog coll , directed by burt balaban and starring john davis chandler a majority of one , starring rosalind russell and alec guinness man-trap , starring jeffrey hunter , david janssen and stella stevens marines , let 's go , starring tom tryon and david hedison the mark , starring stuart whitman and maria schell – ( u.k . ) the marriage-go-round , starring james mason and julie newmar the mask , starring paul stevens – ( canada ) master of the world , directed by william witney , starring vincent price and charles bronson the miracle of father malachia ( das wunder des malachias ) , directed by bernhard wicki – ( west germany ) the misfits , directed by john huston , starring marilyn monroe , clark gable and montgomery clift mother joan of the angels ( matka joanna od aniołów ) , directed by jerzy kawalerowicz – ( poland ) mothra , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) mr . sardonicus , directed by william castle mr . topaze ( a.k.a . i like money ) , directed by and starring peter sellers – ( u.k . ) murder , she said , directed by george pollock and starring margaret rutherford – ( u.k . ) mysterious island , starring michael craig , michael callan and joan greenwood . n . the naked edge , starring gary cooper ( in his final film ) and deborah kerr nazrana ( gift ) , starring raj kapoor and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) nefertiti , queen of the nile ( nefertiti , regina del nilo ) , starring jeanne crain and vincent price – ( italy ) no love for johnnie , starring peter finch – ( u.k . ) la notte ( the night ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni , starring marcello mastroianni and jeanne moreau – golden bear winner – ( italy/france ) nude on the moon , directed by doris wishman . o . one-eyed jacks , directed by and starring marlon brando , with karl malden , katy jurado , ben johnson one hundred and one dalmatians , featuring the voices of rod taylor and betty lou gerson one , two , three , directed by billy wilder , starring james cagney , horst buchholz , pamela tiffin , arlene francis the outsider , a biography starring tony curtis as world war ii marine ira hayes . p . the parent trap , starring hayley mills , maureen o'hara and brian keith paris belongs to us ( paris nous appartient ) , directed by jacques rivette – ( france ) paris blues , starring sidney poitier , paul newman , joanne woodward and diahann carroll parrish , starring troy donahue , connie stevens , claudette colbert peace to him who enters ( mir vkhodyashchemu ) – ( ussr ) pigs and battleships ( buta to gunkan ) , directed by shohei imamura – ( japan ) the pit and the pendulum , starring vincent price plácido , directed by luis garcía berlanga – ( spain ) please , not now ! ( la bride sur le cou ) , starring brigitte bardot – ( france ) the pleasure of his company , starring fred astaire and debbie reynolds pocketful of miracles , final film of director frank capra , starring bette davis , glenn ford , hope lange and arthur o'connell portrait of a mobster , starring vic morrow posse from hell , directed by herbert coleman , starring audie murphy and john saxon il posto , directed by ermanno olmi – ( italy ) professor mamlock , directed by konrad wolf – ( east germany ) . q . question 7 , directed by stuart rosenberg – ( u.s./west germany ) . r . a raisin in the sun , starring sidney poitier and ruby dee the rebel , starring tony hancock – ( u.k . ) return to peyton place , directed by josé ferrer , starring carol lynley , tuesday weld and eleanor parker the right approach , starring martha hyer , frankie vaughan and juliet prowse romanoff and juliet , starring peter ustinov and sandra dee the roman spring of mrs . stone , starring vivien leigh and warren beatty – ( u.k . ) . s . sail a crooked ship , starring ernie kovacs , robert wagner , dolores hart and frank gorshin sanctuary , starring lee remick and yves montand scarlet sails ( алые паруса ) , directed by alexandr ptushko – ( ussr ) the second time around , starring debbie reynolds , andy griffith and juliet prowse the secret ways , starring richard widmark seetarama kalyanam , directed by and starring n . t . rama rao – ( india ) sennin buraku ( hermit village ) – ( japan ) the sins of rachel cade , starring angie dickinson a soldier 's prayer ( ningen no jôken ) , directed by masaki kobayashi – ( japan ) something wild , starring carroll baker and ralph meeker a song about the gray pigeon ( piesen o sivém holubovi ) , directed by stanislav barabáš – ( czechoslovakia ) splendor in the grass , starring natalie wood and warren beatty spotlight on a murderer ( pleins feux sur l'assassin ) , directed by georges franju – ( france ) the steamroller and the violin ( katok i skripka ) , directed by andrei tarkovsky – ( ussr ) summer and smoke , starring geraldine page and laurence harvey susan slade , starring troy donahue and connie stevens . t . tammy tell me true , starring sandra dee taste of fear , starring susan strasberg – ( u.k . ) taxi for tobruk ( un taxi pour tobrouk ) , directed by denys de la patellière – ( france ) then nilavu ( honeymoon ) , starring gemini ganesan and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) a taste of honey , directed by tony richardson , starring rita tushingham – ( u.k . ) the terror of the tongs , starring geoffrey toone , christopher lee and yvonne monlaur – ( u.k . ) three daughters ( teen kanya ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) through a glass darkly ( såsom i en spegel ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) a thunder of drums , starring richard boone , george hamilton and luana patten tintin and the golden fleece ( tintin et le mystère de la toison d'or ) , directed by jean-jacques vierne – ( france ) too late blues , starring bobby darin town without pity ( stadt ohne mitleid ) , directed by gottfried reinhardt and starring kirk douglas – ( u.s./west germany/switzerland ) two living , one dead , directed by anthony asquith , starring patrick mcgoohan – ( u.k./sweden ) two loves , starring shirley maclaine two rode together , starring james stewart and richard widmark . u . underworld u.s.a . , directed by samuel fuller , starring cliff robertson . v . valley of the dragons victim , directed by basil dearden , starring dirk bogarde and sylvia syms – ( u.k . ) violent life ( una vita violenta ) – ( italy ) viridiana , directed by luis buñuel – palme d'or winner – ( mexico/spain ) voyage to the bottom of the sea , starring walter pidgeon , joan fontaine , robert sterling , peter lorre , barbara eden . w . we were young ( a byahme mladi ) – ( bulgaria ) west side story , starring natalie wood , richard beymer , russ tamblyn , rita moreno , george chakiris what a whopper , directed by gilbert gunn , starring adam faith , sid james , carole lesley and terence longdon – ( u.k . ) when the trees were tall ( kogda derevya byli bolshimi ) – ( ussr ) whistle down the wind , directed by bryan forbes , starring hayley mills and alan bates – ( u.k . ) wife number 13 ( al zouga talattashar ) – ( egypt ) wild in the country , starring elvis presley with hope lange , tuesday weld , millie perkins a woman is a woman ( une femme est une femme ) , directed by jean-luc godard , starring jean-paul belmondo and anna karina – ( france ) . y . yojimbo , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) the young doctors , starring ben gazzara and dick clark the young ones , starring cliff richard and the shadows – ( u.k . ) the young savages , starring burt lancaster and dina merrill . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) goofy ( 1961 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1967 ) noveltoons ( 1943–1967 ) the alvin show ( 1961–1962 ) . births . january 2 – todd haynes , american director january 9 - candi milo , american actress , voice actress and singer january 13 – julia louis-dreyfus , american actress january 24 – nastassja kinski , german actress february 11 – carey lowell , american actress february 21 – christopher atkins , american actor march 8 – camryn manheim , american actress march 21 – kassie depaiva , american actress and singer march 29 - amy sedaris , american actress , comedian and writer april 3 – eddie murphy , american actor and comedian april 6 – gene eugene , canadian actor , lead singer of adam again ( died 2000 ) april 14 – robert carlyle , scottish actor april 18 - jane leeves , english actress april 23 þröstur leó gunnarsson , icelandic actor george lopez , american comedian and actor may 6 george clooney american actor , writer , director and producer wally wingert , american actor , voice actor , singer and former radio personality may 8 – david winning , canadian-american director , producer and screenwriter may 14 – tim roth , english actor may 16 - kevin mcdonald , canadian actor , voice actor and comedian may 31 – lea thompson , american actress june 5 : mary kay bergman , american voice actress and voice-over teacher ( died 1999 ) catherine mcgille , american actress june 9 – michael j . fox , canadian actor june 25 – ricky gervais , english comedian , actor , writer , producer and director june 27 - tim whitnall , english playwright , screenwriter and actor july 14 – jackie earle haley , american actor july 15 – forest whitaker , american actor july 18 – elizabeth mcgovern , american actress july 23 – woody harrelson , american actor july 30 – laurence fishburne , american actor august 5 – janet mcteer , english actress august 22 - stephen stanton , american actor , voice actor , comedian and visual effects artist august 28 – jennifer coolidge , american actress september 11 – e . g . daily , american actress september 15 - colin mcfarlane , english actor september 16 - jen tolley , american-canadian actress , voice actress and singer september 18 – james gandolfini , american actor ( died 2013 ) september 22 – bonnie hunt , american actress and comedian september 25 - heather locklear , american actress october 10 - jodi benson , american actress , voice actress and singer october 25 – hong sang-soo , south korean director october 26 – dylan mcdermott , american actor october 31 – peter jackson , new zealand director november 4 – ralph macchio , american actor november 14 – d . b . sweeney , american actor november 19 – meg ryan , american actress november 22 – mariel hemingway , american actress november 28 – alfonso cuarón , mexican director november 29 – tom sizemore , american actor . deaths . january 13 – blanche ring , 89 , american singer and actress , the yankee girl , it 's the old army game january 14 – barry fitzgerald , 72 , irish actor , going my way , the quiet man february 2 – anna may wong , 56 , american actress , shanghai express , the thief of bagdad february 17 – nita naldi , 66 , american actress , blood and sand , dr . jekyll and mr . hyde february 26 – harry bannister , 71 , american actor , the girl of the golden west march 6 – george formby , 56 , british actor , entertainer , it 's in the air , off the dole march 12 – belinda lee , 25 , british actress , long night in 1943 , the goddess of love ( automobile accident ) march 14 – lies noor , 23 , indonesian actress , pulang ( encephalitis ) march 29 – fritzi ridgeway , 62 , american actress , ruggles of red gap , this is heaven april 27 – roy del ruth , 67 , american director , the maltese falcon , broadway melody of 1938 may 4 – anita stewart , 66 , american silent-film actress , the combat , the suspect may 13 – gary cooper , 60 , american actor , high noon , meet john doe , the pride of the yankees , sergeant york may 18 – henry o'neill , 69 , american actor , shadow of the thin man , anchors aweigh may 19 – ben corbett , 69 , american actor , the fighting renegade , six-gun trail may 22 edward f . cline , 69 , american director , you ca n't cheat an honest man , never give a sucker an even break joan davis , 53 , american actress , hold that ghost , if you knew susie june 2 – george s . kaufman , 71 , american playwright , a night at the opera june 10 – vivienne osborne , 64 , american actress , supernatural , luxury liner june 14 – eddie polo , 86 , austrian-american actor , the vanishing dagger june 15 – luther reed , 72 , american director , rio rita , hit the deck june 17 – jeff chandler , 42 , american actor , broken arrow , merrill 's marauders june 27 – paul guilfoyle , 58 , american actor , winterset , the grapes of wrath june 30 – lee de forest , 87 , american inventor of phonofilm july 4 – franklyn farnum , 83 , american actor , the life of emile zola , the lost weekend , the greatest show on earth july 9 – alan marshal , 52 , australian actor , the adventures of sherlock holmes , house on haunted hill july 23 – valentine davies , 55 , american screenwriter and director , the glenn miller story , the benny goodman story july 28 – harry gribbon , 76 , american silent comedy actor , fatty and mabel at the san diego exposition , down on the farm , a small town idol , the cameraman august 4 – maurice tourneur , 85 , french director , the last of the mohicans , the poor little rich girl august 17 – violet kemble-cooper , 74 , british actress , the invisible ray , david copperfield august 20 – dorothy burgess , 54 , american actress , in old arizona , black moon august 27 – gail russell , 36 , american actress , angel and the badman , seven men from now august 30 – charles coburn , 84 , american actor , gentlemen prefer blondes , the lady eve september 10 – leo carrillo , 81 , american actor , viva villa ! , phantom of the opera september 22 – marion davies , 64 , american actress , show people , cain and mabel september 23 john eldredge , 57 , american actor , the woman in red , his brother 's wife billy house , 72 , american actor , rogues of sherwood forest , bedlam september 25 – frank fay , 69 , american actor , under a texas moon , the matrimonial bed september 26 – juanita hansen , 66 , american actress , the magic cloak of oz , the phantom foe october 1 – donald cook , 60 , american actor , the public enemy , baby face october 11 – chico marx , 74 , american actor , member of the marx brothers , a night at the opera , duck soup october 13 maya deren , 44 , american experimental filmmaker , meshes of the afternoon , at land zoltan korda , 66 , hungarian director , the four feathers , cry , the beloved country october 18 – tsuru aoki , 69 , japanese-born american actress , the dragon painter october 22 – joseph schenck , 82 , russian-born american pioneer motion picture executive , the general , sherlock jr . october 29 – astrid holm , 68 , danish actress , the phantom carriage , häxan november 15 elsie ferguson , 78 , american actress , the witness for the defense , scarlet pages douglas walton , 51 , canadian actor , bride of frankenstein , murder , my sweet november 24 – ruth chatterton , 68 , american actress , dodsworth , female december 20 – moss hart . 57 , american playwright , gentleman 's agreement , a star is born december 27 – bernard mcconville , 74 , american screenwriter , a connecticut yankee in king arthur 's court , the phantom of the opera . film debuts . ann-margret – pocketful of miracles warren beatty – splendor in the grass sandy dennis – splendor in the grass louis gossett jr . – a raisin in the sun gene hackman – mad dog coll lance henriksen – the outsider ron howard – five minutes to live george kennedy – the little shepherd of kingdom come dudley moore – the third alibi mary tyler moore – x-15 joe pesci – hey , let 's twist ! burt reynolds – angel baby george segal – the young doctors . notes .