1974 in music

specific locations . 1974 in british music 1974 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1974 in country music 1974 in heavy metal music 1974 in jazz . events . january–april . january 1 – english jazz musician john dankworth is named cbe in the united kingdom 's new year 's honours list . george clark , '' mr feather made a life peer : mr whitelaw honoured '' . the times ( 2 january 1974 ) : 1 . january 3 – bob dylan and the band kick off their 40-date concert tour at chicago stadium . it is dylan 's first time on the road since 1966 . january 17 joni mitchell releases her monumental album court and spark , supported by the single '' help me '' reaching the highest moment of commercial success . dino martin , singer and son of dean martin , is arrested on suspicion of possession and sale of two machine guns . february 12 – new york 's rock club , the bottom line , opens in greenwich village . the first headlining act is dr . john . february 14 – the captain & tennille are married in virginia city , nevada . february 16 – two years of litigation between grand funk and former manager terry knight are finally resolved . the band gets the rights to its name but knight wins a cash settlement . february 18 yes sells out the first of two nights at madison square garden , without a bit of advertising for the show . kiss releases their kiss ( kiss album ) . february 19 – the first american music awards are broadcast on abc , two weeks before the grammys . helen reddy & jim croce win february 20 – cher files for divorce from her husband of 10 years , sonny bono . february 22 – the english chamber orchestra conducted by raymond leppard performs the world premiere of three regions from terrain by douglas young . stephen walsh , '' eco/leppard '' , the times ( 23 february 1974 ) : 9 . february 27 – the württemberg chamber orchestra heilbronn , conducted by jörg faerber , makes its english debut at the queen elizabeth hall , london . stanley sadie , '' württemberg chamber orchestra '' , the times ( 28 february 1974 ) : 16 . march 1 – rush release their rush ( rush album ) . march 2 – the 16th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by andy williams . stevie wonder 's innervisions wins album of the year , while roberta flack 's version of '' killing me softly with his song '' wins both record of the year and song of the year . bette midler wins best new artist . march 4 ivan stepanov and his balalaikas make their london debut at the wigmore hall . anon . , '' royal festival hall '' classified ad , the times ( 2 march 1974 ) : 11 ; bryce morrison , '' london debuts '' , the times ( 13 march 1974 ) : 19 . baritone hermann prey cuts short a vocal recital in the royal festival hall , london , due to vocal fatigue . william mann , '' prey/hokanson '' , the times ( 5 march 1974 ) : 10 . march 10 – hans vonk makes his london debut in the royal festival hall , conducting the royal philharmonic orchestra in a programme of berlioz and schubert , as well as the violin concerto by roberto gerhard , with erich gruenberg as soloist . stanley sadie , '' rpo/vonk '' , the times ( 11 march 1974 ) : 11 . march 12 – john lennon is involved in an altercation with a photographer outside the troubadour in los angeles , california . lennon and friend harry nilsson have been heckling comedian tommy smothers and are forced to leave the club . march 16 – country music 's grand ole opry moves to a new location at the opryland usa in nashville , tennessee march 30 – the ramones play their first concert at the performance studio in new york . march 31 – record producer phil spector is badly injured in a car accident in hollywood , details of which are largely suppressed at the time . april 5 – van halen play their first gig on the sunset strip in hollywood at gazzarri 's . april 6 200,000 music fans attend the california jam rock festival . artists performing at the event include emerson , lake & palmer , black sabbath , deep purple , black oak arkansas , and the eagles . swedish group abba wins the 19th eurovision song contest in the dome , brighton , england , with the song '' waterloo '' , kickstarting their stellar international career . the 1967 eurovision winner , sandie shaw , attends . april 14 – ladies and gentlemen : the rolling stones , a concert movie filmed during the band 's 1972 north american tour , premieres at the ziegfeld theatre in new york . april 16 – queen play their first north american concert , opening for mott the hoople in denver , colorado . april 24–25 – music aired on the radio in portugal acts as a secret signal to trigger the carnation revolution there : at 10:55 & nbsp ; p.m . on april 24 , paulo de carvalho 's '' e depois do adeus '' ( portugal 's entry in the 1974 eurovision song contest ) on emissores associados de lisboa alerts rebel captains and soldiers that the coup is beginning ; at 12:20 & nbsp ; a.m . on april 25 , rádio renascença broadcasts '' grândola , vila morena '' , a song by josé afonso , an influential political folk singer-songwriter , signalling the armed forces movement ( mfa ) to begin the takeover of strategic points of power in the country from 3.00 & nbsp ; a.m . april 25 sotheby 's galleries in london sell a violin made in 1733 by cremonese master giuseppe guarneri , formerly belonging to violinist elaine weldon , for the equivalent of 140,000 , the second-highest price ever paid for a violin . agence france-presse , '' violin by guarnieri sold for 140,000 '' , the boston globe ( 26 april 1974 ) : 28 . pam morrison , jim morrison 's widow , is found dead in her hollywood apartment from an apparent heroin overdose . may–december . may 7 – led zeppelin announces their new record label , swan song records , with a lavish party at the four seasons hotel in new york . may 11 – the new york police bagpipe band performs shortly after midnight at the portsmouth , ri ramada inn , in connection with a national police week event , prompting a drunken spree lasting until dawn by at least a dozen off-duty members of the boston police department , who ran naked through the motel , '' smashing chairs and tables , soiling rugs , discharging fire extinguishers , exploding firecrackers , setting off a burglar alarm , disconnecting a security camera , slashing automobile tires and throwing pictures into the motel courtyard '' , jerry taylor , '' r.i . chief confirms motel vandalism '' , the boston globe ( 16 may 1974 ) : 3 causing an estimated 1027.75 in damage , including liquor stolen from a locked cabinet and unpaid breakfast bills . ken hartnett , '' several policemen from boston accused of r . i . hotel spree '' , the boston globe ( 14 may ) : 3 ; ken hartnett , '' r . i . spree story exaggerate , policeman says '' , the boston globe ( 15 may ) : 3 ; david b . wilson , '' bagpipes made them do it & nbsp ; . '' , the boston globe ( 20 may 1974 ) : 17 ; anon . , '' patrolmen 's association asked to pay for motel damage '' , the boston globe ( 18 may 1974 ) : 3 . may 25 – twenty years after it was recorded , '' rock around the clock '' by bill haley and his comets returns to the billboard top 40 , after it gains renewed popularity from its use in the film american graffiti and the tv series happy days . may 28 – experimental orchestra , the portsmouth sinfonia , plays a concert at the royal albert hall , with its regular conductor john farley . the performers included michael nyman and brian eno . sunday telegraph , 23 may 2004 . accessed 1 april 2013 june 1 – kevin ayers , john cale , brian eno , nico and other musicians perform at the rainbow theatre in london . the performances are later released as june 1 , 1974 . june 5 sly stone married model-actress kathy silva on june 5 , 1974 , during a sold-out performance at madison square garden . patti smith records '' hey joe '' , her debut single , which arguably becomes the first punk rock single when released in august . june 14 – david bowie launches his diamond dogs tour at the montreal forum . one year previously he had announced that he was retiring from touring as ziggy stardust . july 4 – barry white marries love unlimited lead singer glodean james . july 19–21 – ozark music festival is held in sedalia , missouri , with a crowd estimated between 100,000 and 350,000 people . july 20 – the first knebworth concert is held in england , headlined by the allman brothers band . july 29 having performed at two sold-out concerts at the london palladium , cass elliot dies in her sleep after suffering a heart attack in a mayfair flat in london , aged 32 . neil peart officially joins rush . august 6 – hugh maccallum , of stirling , wins the silver chanter for the third time , playing '' mrs macleod of callisker 's salute '' at the invitational bagpipe competition held at dunvegan castle on the isle of skye . second place was given to the previous year 's winner , donald morrison from south uist , who performed '' rory macleod 's lament '' . seton gordon , '' a strange tune gains silver chanter '' , the times ( saturday , 24 august 1974 ) : 12 . andrew t . lenz , jr . '' andrew ’ s tips : silver chanter winners '' , andrew lenz 's bagpipe journey website , 2010 ( accessed 24 june 2014 ) . august 7 during a performance of carmina burana , conducted by andré previn , at the proms , soloist thomas allen collapses because of the heat and eventually has to be carried out by members of the orchestra . prommer patrick mccarthy , just embarking on his professional singing career , offers his services as a replacement and completes the performance . peter wolf , lead singer of the j . geils band , marries actress faye dunaway . august 16 – ramones ' first appearance on nyc 's venue cbgb . as stated on johnny ramone 's official facebook page . the venue would help establish their place at the forefront of punk rock . september 15 – gary thain of uriah heep is shocked on stage at the moody coliseum in dallas , texas , and is seriously injured . october 3 – idi amin , the president of uganda , instructs his country 's acting high commissioner in london to recruit two six-foot-tall scots bagpipers with military backgrounds to serve as his bodyguards . anon . '' uganda leader wants 2 pipers '' . the boston globe ( 4 october 1974 ) : 10 . october 5 ac/dc performs its first official show with bon scott as its new lead singer . the north coast band invitational competition , sponsored by st . ann 's cyo band of neponset , is held for the first time , at nickerson field on the boston university campus . herb cole , '' drum corps notes : 13 units compete in invitational '' , the boston globe ( sunday , 29 september ) : a 12 . october 18 – al green is attacked while bathing by a girlfriend of several weeks , mrs . mary woodson , a 29-year-old mother of three . she scalds his body with a pan of boiling grits and commits suicide a few moments later , reportedly because he rejected her marriage proposal . anon . , '' names and faces in the news '' , the boston globe ( 20 october 1974 ) : 2 . november 2 – george harrison launches his '' george harrison & friends north american tour '' in vancouver . it is his first tour since the the beatles ' 1966 us tour of 1966 . november 21 – wilson pickett is arrested in andes , new york , after allegedly firing a bullet through the door of a hotel room where he was staying while on a hunting trip with the isley brothers . november 28 – john lennon joins elton john on stage at madison square garden for three songs . december 12 – mick taylor leaves the rolling stones after six years . december 31 lindsey buckingham and stevie nicks join fleetwood mac . the third annual new year 's rockin ' eve , moving this year from nbc to abc , is aired with performances by herbie hancock , the beach boys , chicago , olivia newton-john and the doobie brothers . unknown date . lord shorty 's endless vibrations is the first soca lp and the first major soca hit worldwide . eric bogle 's '' and the band played waltzing matilda '' comes to prominence when he enters it in a national folk festival songwriting competition in brisbane , australia . rover thomas claims to have been visited in a dream by a deceased friend near warmun , australia , and receives the krill krill song cycle . the original alice cooper group breaks up . the band 's leader , vincent furnier , changes his name to alice cooper and goes on to a solo career . journey signs to columbia records . roland re-201 and 101 space echo tape-based audio analog delay effects units introduced . bands formed . see : category : musical groups established in 1974 . bands disbanded . the moody blues ( reformed in 1977 ) the stooges ( reformed in 2003 ) king crimson ( reformed in 1981 ) . albums released . january . . other selected singles . published popular music . '' annie 's song '' – w.m . john denver '' cat 's in the cradle '' – harry chapin '' happy days '' – w.m . pratt & mcclain from the abc-tv series happy days '' hasta mañana '' – w.m . benny andersson , stig anderson & björn ulvaeus '' i honestly love you '' – w.m . peter allen & jeff barry '' i wo n't send roses '' – w.m . jerry herman introduced by robert preston and reprised by bernadette peters in the musical mack & mabel '' i 've got the music in me '' – w.m . bias boshell '' midnight at the oasis '' – w.m . david nichtern '' murder on the orient express '' – m . richard rodney bennett from the film murder on the orient express '' freebird '' – lynyrd skynyrd '' no goodbyes '' – w.m . richard m . sherman & robert b . sherman from the musical over here ! '' pencil thin mustache '' – w.m . jimmy buffett '' ring ring '' – w.m . benny andersson , stig anderson , björn ulvaeus , neil sedaka & phil cody '' she '' – w . herbert kretzmer m . charles aznavour '' southern nights '' – w.m . allen toussaint '' sundown '' – w.m . gordon lightfoot '' sunshine on my shoulders '' – w.m . john denver , richard kniss & michael taylor '' tap your troubles away '' – w.m . jerry herman from the musical mack & mabel '' time heals everything '' – w.m . jerry herman . introduced by bernadette peters in the musical mack & mabel '' waterloo '' – w.m . benny andersson , stig anderson & björn ulvaeus '' we may never love like this again '' – w.m . al kasha & joel hirschorn . from the film the towering inferno '' whatever happened to randolph scott '' – w.m . don reid '' ( you 're ) having my baby '' – w.m . paul anka '' gigi l'amoroso '' – dalida '' anima mia '' – dalida '' ta femme '' – dalida . classical music . anne boyd – angklung for piano george crumb – makrokosmos volume iii for two amplified pianos and percussion ( two players ) . mario davidovsky synchronisms no . 7 , for orchestra and tape synchronisms no . 8 , for woodwind quintet and tape einar englund – piano concerto no . 2 luc ferrari petite symphonie intuitive pour une paysage de printemps éphémère i , for tape and undetermined instrumentation nicolas flagello – the passion of martin luther king ( oratorio ) joaquin homs – trio wojciech kilar – krzesany , for orchestra györgy ligeti – san francisco polyphony , for orchestra ( 1973–74 ) olivier messiaen – des canyons aux étoiles . for solo piano , solo horn , solo glockenspiel , solo xylorimba , small orchestra with 13 string players krzysztof penderecki – the dream of jacob wolfgang regel – requiem '' à la mémoire de césar geoffray '' steve reich – music for 18 musicians wolfgang rihm dis-kontur for orchestra hervorgedunkelt ( text : paul celan ) , for mezzo-soprano , flute , harp , vibraphone , cello , organ , and percussion klavierstück nr . 4 siebengestalt , for organ and tam-tam alfred schnittke symphony no . 1 hymn i , for cello , harp and timpani hymn ii , for cello and double-bass hymn iii , for cello , bassoon , harpsichord and bells or timpani dmitri shostakovich – string quartet no . 15 ( shostakovich ) karlheinz stockhausen – inori : adorations for one or two soloists with orchestra . opera . robert ashley – music with roots in the aether friedrich goldmann – r.hot bzw . die hitze . jazz . musical theater . candide ( leonard bernstein ) – broadway revival cole london production opened at the mermaid theatre on july 2 . cast included julia mckenzie , bill kerr , una stubbs and rod mclennan gypsy ( jule styne and stephen sondheim ) – broadway revival hans christian andersen – london production lorelei – broadway production opened at the palace theatre and ran for 321 performances mack and mabel – broadway production opened at the majestic theatre and ran for 66 performances the magic show – off-broadway production over here ! – broadway production opened at the schubert theatre and ran for 341 performances west side story ( bernstein ) – london revival . musical films . huckleberry finn mame phantom of the paradise that 's entertainment ! son of dracula . births . january 4 – tricky stewart , american record producer , musician and songwriter january 6 – wolfgang dimetrik , austrian accordionist january 10 – jemaine clement , new zealand bassist , guitarist , pianist and singer ( flight of the conchords ) january 11 – giuseppe filianoti , italian opera singer ( tenor ) january 12 – melanie chisholm , english singer , songwriter , entrepreneur , actress and television personality ( spice girls ) january 25 – emily haines , canadian singer-songwriter january 26 – rokia traoré , malian singer-songwriter february 11 – d'angelo , american singer-songwriter , multi-instrumentalist and record producer february 13 – robbie williams , british singer-songwriter february 17 bernt moen , norwegian pianist bryan white , american singer-songwriter and guitarist february 24 – chad hugo , american multi-instrumentalist and record producer . ( the neptunes , n.e.r.d , pharrell williams ) march 13 – phil burton , australian singer ( human nature ) april 11 – david jassy , swedish musician , songwriter and music producer april 12 – belinda emmett , australian singer , musician and actress ( d . 2006 ) april 14 – da brat , american rapper and actress april 17 victoria beckham , english businesswoman , fashion designer , model and singer ( spice girls ) mikael åkerfeldt , swedish musician ( opeth ) april 18 – millie corretjer , puerto rican singer and actress april 20 – tina cousins , english singer-songwriter april 26 nerina pallot , british singer , songwriter and producer greg laswell , american musician , recording engineer , and producer ( ingrid michaelson ) may 1 – kellie crawford , australian singer , dancer , actress and children 's performer may 10 – quentin elias , french-algerian singer and actor ( alliage ) ( d . 2014 ) may 16 – laura pausini , italian singer may 17 – andrea corr , irish singer ( the corrs ) may 18 – chantal kreviazuk , canadian singer-songwriter may 20 – mikael stanne , swedish musician ( dark tranquillity ) may 21 – adriano cintra , brazilian multi-instrumentalist and producer ( css ( band ) ) may 23 – jewel , american singer-songwriter , poet and musician may 30 ceelo green , american singer , rapper big l , freestyle rapper june 1 – alanis morissette , canadian singer-songwriter june 7 – cassius khan , canadian singer and tabla player june 20 – andrew tierney , australian singer ( human nature ) june 24 – vinnie fiorello , american drummer and songwriter ( less than jake ) july – amanda ghost , english singer-songwriter , record producer and music executive , president of epic records ( 2009–10 ) ( elle king , beyoncé ) july 2 – rocky gray , american drummer , guitarist and songwriter ( evanescence , we are the fallen , living sacrifice and soul embraced ) july 7 – e.d.i . mean , american rapper and producer ( outlawz ) july 9 – nikola sarcevic , swedish singer and bassist ( millencolin ) july 11 – lil ' kim , american rapper july 12 – sharon den adel , dutch singer july 13 – deborah cox , canadian r & b singer july 16 – jeremy enigk , american singer/songwriter ( sunny day real estate , the fire theft ) july 19 – ramin djawadi , iranian-german composer july 21 – terry coldwell , singer ( east 17 ) july 22 – rell , soul singer july 31 – leona naess , british singer-songwriter ( evan ross , diana ross ) august 8 preta gil , brazilian singer brian harvey , british singer ( east 17 ) august 13 – niklas sundin , swedish guitarist ( dark tranquillity ) august 14 – ana matronic , american singer ( scissor sisters ) august 17 – salem abraha , singer-songwriter august 23 – shifty shellshock , american musician august 30 – aaron barrett , lead singer and guitarist ( reel big fish ) september 4 – carmit bachar , american singer , dancer , model , actress and showgirl ( pussycat dolls ) september 6 – nina persson , swedish singer-songwriter ( the cardigans ) september 19 – jimmy fallon , american comedian & musician october 1 – keith duffy , irish pop singer and actor october 4 – ramazan kubat , turkish folk singer and composer october 5 – heather headley , trinidadian-american singer , songwriter , record producer and actress october 14 natalie maines , american singer-songwriter shaggy 2 dope , american rapper and producer october 18 – peter svensson , swedish guitarist ( the cardigans ) november 2 – nelly , american rapper november 3 – franko božac , croatian accordionist november 4 – louise nurding , english singer , television personality and member of eternal november 5 – ryan adams , american musician ( mandy moore , phoebe bridgers , leona naess ) november 14 – chad kroeger , canadian singer-songwriter and musician december 3 – trina , american rapper and musician december 7 – nicole appleton , canadian television presenter , singer-songwriter and actress ( all saints ) december 10 – meg white , american drummer and singer ( the white stripes ) december 24 julian rachlin , lithuanian-austrian violinist ryan seacrest , american musical/entertainment television host , radio personality and producer . deaths . january 2 – tex ritter , american country music singer , 68 january 23 – lena machado , hawaiian singer , 70 january 30 – olav roots , estonian pianist and composer , 63 february 2 – jean absil , organist and composer , 80 february 15 – kurt atterberg , composer , 86 february 28 – bobby bloom , singer-songwriter , 28 march 7 – alberto rabagliati , italian singer and actor , 67 march 28 dorothy fields , lyricist , 68 dino ciani , pianist , 32 ( road accident ) arthur crudup , singer , 68 april 5 – jennifer vyvyan , operatic soprano , 49 ( bronchial condition ) april 7 – pete wendling , pianist and composer , 85 april 15 – giovanni d'anzi , italian songwriter , 68 april 17 – blossom seeley , us singer and vaudeville entertainer , 87 april 25 – pamela courson , jim morrison 's widow , 27 ( heroin overdose ) may 8 – graham bond , r & b musician , 36 ( hit by train ) may 15 – paul gonsalves , jazz saxophonist , 53 may 24 – duke ellington , jazz musician , and composer , 75 june 8 – rodolfo lipizer , violinist and conductor , 79 june 22 – darius milhaud , composer , 81 june 27 – cliff friend , us composer july 18 – gabrielle ritter-ciampi , operatic soprano , 77 july 27 – lightnin ' slim , blues musician , 61 july 29 – '' mama '' cass elliott , singer ( the mamas & the papas ) , 32 ( heart attack ) august 6 – gene ammons , tenor saxophonist , 49 ( cancer ) august 9 – bill chase , jazz rock trumpeter , 39 august 11 – maria maksakova , sr . , opera singer , 72 september 3 – harry partch , composer , 73 september 22 – marta fuchs , operatic soprano , 76 september 23 – robbie mcintosh , drummer ( average white band ) , 24 october 5 – ebe stignani , operatic soprano , about 70 october 13 – josef krips , violinist , 72 october 24 – david oistrakh , violinist , 66 november 5 – marguerite namara , operatic soprano , 85 november 8 – ivory joe hunter , r & b singer , songwriter and pianist november 9 – egon wellesz , austrian composer , musicologist and teacher ( emigrated to england ) , 89 november 11 – alfonso leng , composer , 80 november 19 – george brunies , jazz musician , 72 november 21 – frank martin , composer , 84 november 25 – nick drake , singer/songwriter , 26 ( overdose ) . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1974 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1974 . references .