Neapolitan Republic of 1799

origins of the republic . on the outbreak of the french revolution king ferdinand iv of naples and queen maria carolina did not at first actively oppose reform ; but after the fall of the french monarchy they became violently opposed to it , and in 1793 joined the first coalition against france , instituting severe persecutions against all who were remotely suspected of french sympathies . republicanism , however , gained ground , especially among the aristocracy . in 1796 , peace with france was concluded , but in 1798 , during napoleon 's absence in egypt and after nelson 's victory at the battle of the nile , maria carolina induced ferdinand to go to war with france once more . nelson himself arrived at naples in september 1798 , where he was enthusiastically received . the neapolitan army had 70,000 men hastily summoned under the command of the austrian general karl mack . on 29 november , this army entered rome , which had been evacuated by the french , to restore pope authority . however , after a sudden french counter-attack , his troops were forced to retreat and eventually routed . a contemporary satirist said of the king 's conquest of rome : '' he came , he saw , he fled '' . between salt water and holy water : a history of southern italy , tommaso astarita , p . 250 the king hurried back to naples . although the lazzaroni ( the lowest class of the people ) were devoted to the bourbon house and ready to defend it , he embarked on nelson 's vanguard and fled with his court to palermo in a panic . the prince francesco pignatelli strongoli took over the city and the fleet was burned . the wildest confusion prevailed , and the lazzaroni massacred numbers of persons suspected of republican sympathies , while the nobility and the educated classes , finding themselves abandoned by their king , began to contemplate a republic under french auspices to avoid anarchy . on 12 january 1799 , pignatelli signed in sparanise the surrender to the french general jean étienne championnet . pignatelli also fled to palermo on 16 january 1799 . when the news of the treaty with the french reached naples and the provinces , the lazzaroni rebelled . though ill-armed and ill-disciplined , they resisted the enemy with desperate courage . in the meantime , the jacobin and republican parties of naples surged , and civil war broke out . on 20 january 1799 , the republicans under general championnet conquered the fortress of castel sant'elmo , and the french entered the city the next day . the casualties were 8,000 neapolitans and 1,000 french . the republic . on 21 or 23 january 1799 , the parthenopean republic was proclaimed . the name referred to an ancient greek colony parthenope on the site of the future city of naples . the republic had no real domestic constituency and existed solely due to the power of the french army . the republic 's leaders were men of culture , high character and birth , such as gennaro serra , prince of cassano irpino but they were doctrinaire and impractical , and they knew very little of the lower classes of their own country . the new government soon found itself in financial difficulties , owing to championnet 's demands for money ( he was later relieved for graft ) ; it failed to organise an army ( and was therefore dependent on french protection ) and met with little success in its attempts to '' democratise '' the provinces . meanwhile , the court at palermo sent cardinal fabrizio ruffo , a wealthy and influential prelate , to calabria to organize a counter-revolution . he succeeded beyond expectation with his '' christian army of the holy faith '' ( esercito cristiano della santa fede ) . an english squadron approached naples and occupied the island of procida , but after a few engagements with the republican fleet commanded by francesco caracciolo , an ex-officer in the bourbon navy , it was recalled to palermo , as the franco–spanish fleet was expected . ruffo , supported by russian and turkish ships under the command of admiral ushakov , now marched on the capital , whence the french , except for a small force under méjean , withdrew . the scattered republican detachments were defeated , only naples and pescara holding out . on 13 june 1799 . ruffo and his troops reached naples , and after a desperate battle at the ponte della maddalena , entered the city . for weeks the calabresi and lazzaroni continued to pillage and massacre , and ruffo was unable , even if willing , to restrain them . however , the royalists were not masters of the city , for the french in castel sant'elmo and the republicans in castel nuovo and castel dell'ovo still held out and bombarded the streets , while the franco-spanish fleet might arrive at any moment . consequently , ruffo was desperately anxious to come to terms with the republicans for the evacuation of the castles , in spite of the queen 's orders to make no terms with the rebels . after some negotiation , the parties concluded an armistice and agreed on capitulation ( onorevole capitolazione ) , whereby the castles were to be evacuated , the hostages liberated and the garrisons free to remain in naples unmolested or to sail for toulon . the capitulation was signed by ruffo , and british , russian and turkish officers , as well as , for the republicans , the french commander . while the vessels were being prepared for the voyage to toulon all the hostages in the castles were liberated save four ; but on 24 june 1799 nelson arrived with his fleet , and on hearing of the capitulation he refused to recognise it except insofar as it concerned the french . ruffo indignantly declared that once the treaty was signed , not only by himself but by the russian and turkish commandants and by the british captain edward foote , it must be respected , and on nelson 's refusal , he said that he would not help him to capture the castles . on 26 june 1799 , nelson changed his attitude and authorised sir william hamilton , the british minister , to inform the cardinal that he ( nelson ) would do nothing to break the armistice ; while captains bell and troubridge wrote that they had nelson 's authority to state that the latter would not oppose the embarcation of the republicans . although these expressions were equivocal , the republicans were satisfied and embarked on the vessels prepared for them . however , on 28 june , nelson received despatches from the court ( in reply to his own ) , in consequence of which he had the vessels brought under the guns of his ships , and many of the republicans were arrested . caracciolo , who had been caught whilst attempting to escape from naples , was tried by a court-martial of royalist officers under nelson 's auspices on board the admiral 's flagship , condemned to death and hanged at the yard arm . aftermath . on 10 july 1799 , king ferdinand entered the bay of naples on a neapolitan frigate , the sirena . at four o'clock that afternoon , he went aboard the british foudroyant , which was to be his headquarters for the next four weeks . of some 8,000 political prisoners , 99 were executed , including prince gennaro serra , who was publicly beheaded , and others , such as the intellectual mario pagano , who had written the republican constitution ; the scientist , domenico cirillo ; luisa sanfelice ; gabriele manthoné , the minister of war under the republic ; massa , the defender of castel dell'ovo ; ettore carafa , the defender of pescara , who had been captured by treachery ; and eleonora fonseca pimentel , court-poet turned revolutionary and editor of il monitore napoletano , the newspaper of the republican government . more than 500 other people were imprisoned ( 222 for life ) , 288 were deported and 67 exiled . the subsequent censorship and oppression of all political movement was far more debilitating for naples . after these events were reported in britain , charles james fox denounced nelson in the house of commons for the admiral 's part in '' the atrocities at the bay of naples '' . . see also . naples lazzaroni giuseppe abbamonte altamuran revolution . references . . further reading . acton , harold . the bourbons of naples ( 1731–1825 ) ( 2009 ) davis , john . naples and napoleon : southern italy and the european revolutions , 1780–1860 ( oxford university press , 2006 . gregory , desmond . napoleon 's italy ( 2001 ) north , jonathan . nelson at naples : revolution and retribution in 1799 ) ( 2018 )