Chitin

etymology . the english word '' chitin '' comes from the french word chitine , which was derived in 1821 from the greek word χιτών ( khitōn ) meaning covering . a similar word , '' chiton '' , refers to a marine animal with a protective shell . chemistry , physical properties and biological function . the structure of chitin was determined by albert hofmann in 1929 . hofmann hydrolyzed chitin using a crude preparation of the enzyme chitinase , which he obtained from the snail helix pomatia . chitin is a modified polysaccharide that contains nitrogen ; it is synthesized from units of n-acetylglucosamine ( to be precise , 2- ( acetylamino ) -2-deoxy- d -glucose ) . these units form covalent β- ( 1→4 ) -linkages ( like the linkages between glucose units forming cellulose ) . therefore , chitin may be described as cellulose with one hydroxyl group on each monomer replaced with an acetyl amine group . this allows for increased hydrogen bonding between adjacent polymers , giving the chitin-polymer matrix increased strength . image : lyristes plebejus.jpg thumb right a cicada emerges from its chitinous larval exoskeleton . in its pure , unmodified form , chitin is translucent , pliable , resilient , and quite tough . in most arthropods , however , it is often modified , occurring largely as a component of composite materials , such as in sclerotin , a tanned proteinaceous matrix , which forms much of the exoskeleton of insects . combined with calcium carbonate , as in the shells of crustaceans and molluscs , chitin produces a much stronger composite . this composite material is much harder and stiffer than pure chitin , and is tougher and less brittle than pure calcium carbonate . campbell , n . a . ( 1996 ) biology ( 4th edition ) benjamin cummings , new work . p.69 another difference between pure and composite forms can be seen by comparing the flexible body wall of a caterpillar ( mainly chitin ) to the stiff , light elytron of a beetle ( containing a large proportion of sclerotin ) . in butterfly wing scales , chitin is organized into stacks of gyroids constructed of chitin photonic crystals that produce various iridescent colors serving phenotype signaling and communication for mating and foraging . the elaborate chitin gyroid construction in butterfly wings creates a model of optical devices having potential for innovations in biomimicry . scarab beetles in the genus cyphochilus also utilize chitin to form extremely thin scales ( five to fifteen micrometres thick ) that diffusely reflect white light . these scales are networks of randomly ordered filaments of chitin with diameters on the scale of hundreds of nanometres , which serve to scatter light . the multiple scattering of light is thought to play a role in the unusual whiteness of the scales . in addition , some social wasps , such as protopolybia chartergoides , orally secrete material containing predominantly chitin to reinforce the outer nest envelopes , composed of paper . kudô , k . nest materials and some chemical characteristics of nests of a new world swarm-founding polistine wasp , ( hymenoptera vespidae ) . ethology , ecology & evolution 13.4 oct 2001 : 351-360 . dipartimento di biologia animale e genetica , università di firenze . 16 oct 2014 . chitosan is produced commercially by deacetylation of chitin ; chitosan is soluble in water , while chitin is not . nanofibrils have been made using chitin and chitosan . . health effects . chitin-producing organisms like protozoa , fungi , arthropods , and nematodes are often pathogens in other species . . humans and other mammals . humans and other mammals have chitinase and chi3l1 that can degrade chitin ; they also possess several immune receptors that can recognize chitin and its degradation products in a pathogen-associated molecular pattern , initiating an immune response . chitin is sensed mostly in the lungs or gastrointestinal tract where it can activate the innate immune system through eosinophils or macrophages , as well as an adaptive immune response through t helper cells . keratinocytes in skin can also react to chitin or chitin fragments . according to in vitro studies , chitin is sensed by receptors , such as fibcd1 , klrb1 , reg3g , toll-like receptor 2 , clec7a , and mannose receptors . the immune response can sometimes clear the chitin and its associated organism , but sometimes the immune response is pathological and becomes an allergy ; allergy to house dust mites is thought to be driven by a response to chitin . . plants . plants also have receptors that can cause a response to chitin , namely chitin elicitor receptor kinase 1 and chitin elicitor-binding protein . the first chitin receptor was cloned in 2006 . when the receptors are activated by chitin , genes related to plant defense are expressed , and jasmonate hormones are activated , which in turn activate systematic defenses . commensal fungi have ways to interact with the host immune response that , , were not well understood . some pathogens produce chitin-binding proteins that mask the chitin they shed from these receptors . zymoseptoria tritici is an example of a fungal pathogen that has such blocking proteins ; it is a major pest in wheat crops . . fossil record . chitin was probably present in the exoskeletons of cambrian arthropods such as trilobites . the oldest preserved chitin dates to the oligocene , about , consisting of a scorpion encased in amber . . uses . agriculture . chitin is a good inducer of plant defense mechanisms for controlling diseases . it has potential for use as a soil fertilizer or conditioner to improve fertility and plant resilience that may enhance crop yields . . industrial . chitin is used in industry in many processes . examples of the potential uses of chemically modified chitin in food processing include the formation of edible films and as an additive to thicken and stabilize foods and food emulsions . processes to size and strengthen paper employ chitin and chitosan . . research . how chitin interacts with the immune system of plants and animals has been an active area of research , including the identity of key receptors with which chitin interacts , whether the size of chitin particles is relevant to the kind of immune response triggered , and mechanisms by which immune systems respond . chitin and chitosan have been explored as a vaccine adjuvant due to its ability to stimulate an immune response . chitin and chitosan are under development as scaffolds in studies of how tissue grows and how wounds heal , and in efforts to invent better bandages , surgical suture , and materials for allotransplantation . sutures made of chitin have been explored for many years , but , none were on the market ; their lack of elasticity and problems making thread have prevented commercial development . in 2014 , a method for using chitosan as a reproducible form of biodegradable plastic was introduced . chitin nanofibers are extracted from crustacean waste and mushrooms for possible development of products in tissue engineering , medicine , and industry . in 2020 , chitin was proposed for use in building structures , tools , and other solid objects from a composite material of chitin combined with martian soil . in this scenario , the biopolymers in the chitin act as the binder for the regolith aggregate to form a concrete-like composite material . the authors believe that waste materials from food production ( e.g . scales from fish , exoskeletons from crustaceans and insects , etc . ) could be put to use as feedstock for manufacturing processes . see also . biopesticide chitobiose lorica sporopollenin tectin