Towel

history . according to middle ages archaeological studies , '' . closely held personal items included the ever present knife and a towel . '' hatcler , margret . family ties that bind , middle ages family life . oxford university press , 1968 , p . 112 . however , the invention of the towel is commonly associated with the city of bursa , turkey , in the 17th century . these turkish towels began as a flat , woven piece of cotton or linen called a pestamel , often hand-embroidered . long enough to wrap around the body , pestamel were originally fairly narrow , but are now wider and commonly measure . pestamel were used in turkish baths as they stayed light when wet and were very absorbent . as the ottoman empire grew , so did the use of the towel . weavers were asked to embroider more elaborate designs , aided by their knowledge of carpet-weaving . by the 18th century , towels began to feature loops sticking up from the pile of the material . these looped towels became known as havly ; over time , this word has changed to havlu , the turkish word for towel , and means ‘ with loops ’ . towels did not become affordable until the 19th century , with the cotton trade and industrialization . with mechanization , cotton terry-towelling became available by the yard as well as being stocked in shops as pre-made towels . today towels are available in a variety of sizes , materials and designs . some hotels which provide towels and bath robes embed washable rfid tags into their linens to deter theft . . types . a bath towel is used for drying the body when it is wet , such as after bathing or showering . it is typically rectangular , with a typical size around , and is made of terry cloth . a beach towel is usually a little bit larger than a bath towel . although it is often used for drying off after being in the water , its chief purpose is to provide a surface on which to lie . they are also worn for privacy while changing clothes in a public area , and for wiping sand from the body or objects . beach towels often have colorful patterns . a sheet towel or bath sheet is larger than a bath towel . the classic bath sheet size is 80×160 cm . a large bath sheet that can wrap the entire body is 100×150 or 90×160 cm . they are used in baths , saunas , on beaches , and for massage ; a foot towel is a small , rectangular towel which , in the absence of a rug , carpet or bathroom mat , is placed on the bathroom floor to stand on after finishing a shower or bath . a hand towel is significantly smaller than a bath towel ( perhaps , and is used for drying the hands after washing them . an oven towel or confectioner 's mitten is a multipurpose household towel used for a kitchen or shop applications . the term came into use within irish communities after a textile mogul , owen valley , created the line based on his own towel experiences . a paper towel is a piece of paper that can be used once as a towel and then be disposed of . a perforated roll of paper towels is normally mounted on a rod a little longer than the width of the roll , or in an alternative type of hanger that has protrusions on ears , the protrusions fitting into the ends of the paper towel roll . paper towels can also be found packaged like facial tissue , as individual folded sheets . a disposable towel ( or non-woven towel ) is a towel intended for a single user , but not necessarily for a single use , as it can be reused but not washed . it is often made of non-woven fibers , and popular for the hospital , hotel , geriatric and salon or beauty industries because it guarantees cleanliness and hygiene every time . a show towel is a bath or hand towel that has had trim—such as satin , lace or linen stitched onto it , or embroidery done on it—mainly to simply '' look nice '' . they are used to add a decorative touch—usually to a bathroom—most commonly in the united states . they are generally not to be used to for drying , as regular washing ruins the added trim , and the towel buckles as well ( because the towel usually shrinks differently than the trim ) . a sports towel , or ( synthetic ) chamois , is a towel originally developed for swimmers and divers , favored for its super-absorbent qualities . sports towels can be wrung out when saturated , leaving the towel able to absorb water again , although not dry . those qualities , along with their compact nature , have further popularized sports towels amongst general outdoor and athletic enthusiasts . the absorbent material in sports towels may be composed of viscose , pva or microfiber , with polyester woven in for durability . some manufacturers incorporate a silver ion or compound treatment into their towels to better inhibit microbial growth and associated odors . a sweat towel or gym towel , often of similar size to a hand towel , is used during a workout to dry oneself from sweat or make a barrier between the gym machines and the skin . it may also be required in gyms in order to wipe down the machines after use . the term kitchen towel refers to a dish towel in american english ( called a tea towel in uk and canadian english ) and to a paper towel in british english . tea towels or tea cloths ( uk and canadian english ) , called dishtowels or dish towels in america , originated in 18th-century england . they are absorbent towels made from soft , lint-free linen . they are used in the kitchen to dry dishes , cutlery , etc . after they are washed . the towels are also used during tea time . they can be wrapped around the tea pot to keep the tea warm , prevent drips , and keep one 's hand from being burned by the hot tea pot handle when serving the tea . they are commonly made of cotton rather than linen ; they are also used for drying glassware , but sometimes a special glass cloth is used for that purpose . a cloth towel dispenser or continuous cloth towel is a towel manipulated by a series of rollers , used as an alternative to paper towels and hand dryers in public washrooms . these may have a lower environmental impact than paper towels , celsias retrieved on 31 oct 09 though concerns over hygiene mean they are not used by some organisations and have greatly declined in popularity . they can also be used in dangerous '' choking games '' . a bar towel is an absorbent , usually small towel used in bars and often given away free as promotional items . a fingertip towel is a small towel that is folded and placed next to the sink or in the guest bedroom . hosts often pin a note to these towels indicating that they are for guest use . a golf towel is a small towel which usually comes with a loop or clip to attach to a golf bag for drying hands , balls , and clubs . a baby towel is a smaller towel characterized by an extra sewn-on hood at one corner to cover a baby 's head . a peshtemal ( or pestemal ) is a unique multipurpose towel from anatolia with over 600 years of history . a fouta towel is a tunisian hammam and beach towel , which is also used as a pareo . see also . terrycloth towel day . references . external links .