Bertrand Barère

early life . betrand barère was born in tarbes , a commune part of the gascony region . the name barère de vieuzac , by which he continued to call himself long after the abolition of feudalism in france , originated from a small fief belonging to his father , jean barère , who was a lawyer at vieuzac ( now argelès-gazost ) . barère 's mother , jeanne-catherine marrast , was of old nobility . gershoy 1962 , p . 4 . barére attended parish school when he was a child , and by the time he was of age , his brother , jean-pierre , became a priest . bertrand barère cite note-3 3 jean-pierre would later earn a spot in the council of five hundred alongside the very men who discarded any notion of accepting bertrand barére as a member . after finishing parish school , barère attended a college before delving into his career in revolutionary politics . in 1770 , he began to practice as a lawyer at the parlement of toulouse , one of the most celebrated parliaments of the kingdom . barère practiced as an advocate with considerable success and wrote some small pieces , which he sent to the principal literary societies in the south of france . his fame as an essayist was what led to his election as a member of the academy of floral games of toulouse in 1788 . this body held a yearly meeting of great interest to the whole city , at which flowers of gold and silver were awarded for odes , idyls , and eloquence . although barère never received any of these bounties , one of his performances was mentioned with honor . at the academy of floral games of montauban , he was awarded many prizes , including one for a panegyric on king louis xii , and another for a panegyric on franc de pompignan . shortly after , barère wrote a dissertation on an old stone with three latin words engraved on it . this earned him a seat in the toulouse academy of sciences , inscriptions , and polite literature . in 1785 , barère married a young lady of considerable fortune . in one of his works titled melancholy pages , barère proclaims that his marriage '' was one of the most unhappy of marriages . '' in 1789 , he was elected deputy by the estates of bigorre to the estates-general – he had made his first visit to paris in the preceding year . barère de vieuzac at first belonged to the constitutional party , but he was less known as a speaker in the national constituent assembly than as a journalist . according to françois victor alphonse aulard , barère 's paper , the point du jour , owed its reputation not so much to its own qualities as to the depiction of barére in the tennis court oath sketch . the painter jacques-louis david illustrated barère kneeling in the corner and writing a report of the proceedings for posterity . political career ( 1789–93 ) . barère was elected to the estates-general in 1789 and elected judge of the constituent assembly in 1791 . bertrand barère cite note-4 4 soon after the king 's flight to varennes ( june 1791 ) , barère joined the republican party and the feuillants . however , he continued to keep in touch with the duke of orléans , whose natural daughter , pamela , he tutored . after the constituent assembly ended its session , he was nominated one of the judges of the newly instituted cour de cassation from october 1791 to september 1792 . in september 1792 he was elected to the national convention for the département of the hautes-pyrénées . bertrand barère cite note-lee 1902.2c p.151-5 5 barère served as presiding officer in the national convention and chaired the trial of louis xvi in december 1792–january 93 . bertrand barère cite note-7 7 he voted with the mountain for the king 's execution '' without appeal and without delay , '' and closed his speech with : '' the tree of liberty grows only when watered by the blood of tyrants . '' he was a member of the constitution committee that drafted the girondin constitutional project in february 1793 . on 18 march barère proposed to establish a committee of public safety . on 7 april , barère was elected to the committee of public safety . gershoy 1962 , p . 156 . a member of '' the plain , '' schama , 1989 , p . 661 . who was unaligned with either the mountain or the girondins , he was the first member elected to the committee of public safety and one of two members ( with robert lindet ) , who served on it during its entire existence . in this role he utilized his eloquence and popularity within the convention to serve as the voice of the committee . of 923 orders signed by the committee of public safety in the fall of 1793 , barère was the author or first signatory on 244 , the second most behind carnot , with the majority of his orders dealing with police activities . palmer , 1949 , p . 109 . the majority of the plain was formed by independents as barère , cambon and carnot but they were dominated by the radical mountain . j.f . bernard ( 1973 ) talleyrand : a biography , p . 106 despite his popularity , barère was regarded by more extreme revolutionaries as a vacillating politician without true revolutionary ideals . palmer ( 1949 ) analyzed that 'his commitment to the revolution rather than any distinct faction separated him from other major revolutionary figures' . palmer , 1949 , p . 31 . jean-paul marat used the last edition of his paper publiciste de la république française ( no . 242 , 14 july 1793 ) to attack barère directly : '' there is one whom i regard as the most dangerous enemy of the nation : i mean barère . i 'm convinced that he plays both sides of every issue until he sees which one is coming out ahead . he has paralysed all vigorous efforts ; he enchains us in order to strangle us . '' clifford d . conner , jean paul marat , scientist and revolutionary , humanities press , new jersey 1997 p . 254 on 1 august , on a report by barère , the convention decreed the systematic destruction of the vendée . june to october 1793 . the ‘ federalist ’ uprisings , the committee of public safety , the assassination of marat , the enragés and the popular movement , the general maximum on 5 september 1793 barère incited the french national convention with a speech glorifying terror and the founding of revolutionary armies by sans-culottes : '' the aristocrats of internal affairs are since many days meditating a movement . oh well ! they 'll have it , that movement , but they 'll have it against them ! it will be organized , regularized by a revolutionary army that at last will fulfil that great word that it owes to the paris commune : let 's make terror the order of the day ! '' noah shusterman – the french revolution . faith , desire , and politics . routledge , london and new york , 2014 . chapter 7 ( pp . 175–203 ) : the federalist revolt , the vendée , and the start of the terror ( summer–fall 1793 ) . '30 août 1793 – la terreur à l'ordre du jour ! ' website vendéens & chouans . retrieved 6 july 2017 . { { efn barère voiced the committee of public safety 's support for the measures desired by the assembly . he presented a decree that was passed immediately , establishing a paid armed force of 6,000 men and 1,200 gunners ‘ designed to crush the counter-revolutionaries , to execute wherever the need arises the revolutionary laws and the measures of public safety that are decreed by the national convention , and to protect provisions . in a proclamation , barère said , '' it is time that equality bore its scythe above all heads . it is time to horrify all the conspirators . so legislators , place terror on the order of the day ! let us be in revolution because everywhere counter-revolution is being woven by our enemies . the blade of the law should hover over all the guilty . '' on 12 october when hébert accused marie-antoinette of incest with her son , robespierre had dinner with barère , saint-just and joachim vilate . discussing the matter , robespierre broke his plate with his fork and called hébert an '' imbécile '' . barère voted for the death of the 21 girondists in october 1793 . his role as the chief communicator throughout the reign of terror , combined with his lyrical eloquence , led to his nickname '' anacreon of the guillotine . '' carlyle , 1837 , p . 161 he changed opinion when the hébertists called for another revolution in march 1794 ; the voluntary guards and militant sans-culottes lost influence quickly . he can be seen as a '' weathervane '' after changing his opinion on the revolutionary armies . in summer he was one of the leading men in the power struggles between the mountain and the plain , involved in the downfall of robespierre . ideas , philosophy . after january 1793 , barère began publicly speaking of his newfound faith in '' la religion de la patrie '' . gershoy 1927 , p . 425 . he wanted everyone to have faith in the fatherland , and called for the people of the republic to be virtuous citizens . barère mainly focused on four aspects about '' la religion de la patrie '' – the belief that a citizen would be consecrated to the fatherland at birth , the citizen should then come to love the fatherland , the republic would teach the people virtues , and the fatherland would be the teacher to all . gershoy 1927 , p . 427 . barère went on to state that '' the republic leaves the guidance of your first years to your parents , but as soon as your intelligence is developed , it proudly claims the rights that it holds over you . you are born for the republic and not for the pride or the despotism of families . '' he also claimed that because citizens were born for the republic , they should love it above anything else . barére reasoned that eventually the love for the fatherland would become a passion in everyone and this is how the people of the republic would be united . bertrand barère cite note-gershoy427-10 10 barère also urged further issues of nationalism and patriotism . he said , '' i was a revolutionary . i am a constitutional citizen . '' he pushed for freedom of press , speech , and thought . barère felt that nationalism was founded by immeasurable emotions that could only be awakened by participating in national activities such as public events , festivals , and through education . gershoy 1927 , p . 426 . he believed in unity through '' diversity and compromise . '' in 1793 and 1794 , barère focused on speaking of his doctrine , which included the teaching of national patriotism through an organized system of universal education , the national widespread of patriotic devotion , and the concept that one owed his nation his services . bertrand barère cite note-12 12 barère also stated that one could serve the nation by giving his labor , wealth , counsel , strength , and/or blood . therefore , all sexes and ages could serve the fatherland . gershoy 1927 , p . 429 . he outlined his new faith in the fatherland , which replaced the national state religion , catholicism . barère was trying to make nationalism a religion . besides being concerned for the fatherland , barère believed in universal elementary education . his influence on education is seen in american schools today as they recite the pledge of allegiance , and teach the alphabet and the multiplication table . bertrand barère cite note-gershoy425-9 9 barère believed that the fatherland could educate all . on 27 march on proposal of barère the armée revolutionnaire , for seven months active in paris and surroundings , was disbanded , except their artillery . le moniteur universel 28 march 1793 collection complète des lois , décrets d'intérêe général , traités . , band 7 , p . 149 cobb , r . ( 1987 ) the people 's armies , p . 601 , 607 , 611 , 617 nationality and citizenship in revolutionary france : the treatment of foreigners by michael rapport , p . 203 during the festival of the supreme being robespierre was not only criticized by barère , but also by vadier , courtois and fouché , the other members of the committee of general security . conflicts within the government . as 1794 progressed , tensions mounted inside the committee of public safety as well as with other committees and the convention 's representatives on mission . some members of the committee of public safety , such as jean-marie collot d'herbois and billaud-varenne , had pursued aggressive campaigns of terror . another clique on the committee , consisting of robespierre , couthon , and saint-just believed in their own vision of the direction of the revolution . in his memoirs written years later about this time , barère described the committee of public safety of having at least three factions : the '' experts '' consisting of lazare carnot , robert lindet , and pierre louis prieur ; the '' high-hands '' consisting of robespierre , couthon , and saint-just ; and the '' true revolutionaries '' consisting of billaud-varenne , collot , and barère himself . at the same time , the committee of general security , nominally the police committee of the national convention , had seen its place superseded by the law of 22 prairial , leaving members like marc-guillaume alexis vadier and jean-pierre-andré amar concerned for their status . , schama , 1989 , p . 839 these were the laws that led to the streamlining of the revolutionary tribunal and the great terror , in which there were more executions in the final seven weeks before 9 thermidor by the paris tribunal than in the previous fourteen months . scurr , 2006 , p . 361 finally , aggressive representatives on mission , including joseph fouche , paul barras , and jean-lambert tallien , had been recalled to paris to face scrutiny for their actions in the countryside and all feared for their safety . citizens , schama , p . 840 in this atmosphere , barère attempted to forge a compromise between these splintering factions . on 4 thermidor , barère offered to help enforce the ventose decrees in exchange for an agreement to not pursue a purge of the national convention . these decrees , a program of property confiscation that had seen little support in the previous four months , was received with cautious optimism by couthon and saint-just . however , the following day , at a joint meeting of the committees , robespierre once again proclaimed his dedication to purging the committees of potential , though unnamed , enemies . schama , 1989 , p . 841 saint-just declared in negotiations with barère that he was prepared to make concessions on the subordinate position of the committee of general security . albert soboul ( 1974 ) the french revolution , 1787–1799 : from the storming of the bastille to napoleon , pp . ? . thermidor crisis ( july 1794 ) . robespierre continued down this path until 8 thermidor , when he gave a famous oration alluding to multiple threats within the national convention . a bitter debate ensued until barère forced an end to it . richard t . bienvenu ( 1968 ) the ninth of thermidor , p . 175–176 however , to his surprise , robespierre was pushed for more evidence by members of the committee of general security . this led to a fierce debate and a lack of support from the deputies of the plain , both of which robespierre was not used to . schama , 1989 , p . 842 after being ejected from the jacobin club that night , collot and billaud-varenne returned to the committee of public safety to find saint-just at work on a speech for the next day . though barère had been pushing saint-just to give a speech regarding the new unity of the committees , both collot and billaud-varenne assumed he was working on their final denunciation . this led to the final fracturing of the committee of public safety , and a heated argument ensued , in which barère allegedly insulted couthon , saint-just and robespierre , saying : : '' who are you then , insolent pygmies , that you want to divide the remains of our country between a cripple , a child and a scoundrel ? i would n't give you a farmyard to govern ! '' palmer , 1949 , p . 374 the final pieces of the plot fell into place that night . laurent lecointre was the instigator of the coup , assisted by barère , fréron , barras , tallien , thuriot , courtois , rovère , garnier de l ’ aube and guffroy . ( fouché was no longer involved and had hidden . g . rudé ( 1967 ) robespierre , p . 110 ) each one of them prepared his part in the attack . on 9 thermidor , as saint-just rose to give his planned speech , he was interrupted by tallien and billaud-varenne . after some denunciations of robespierre , a cry went up for barère to speak . a possibly apocryphal tale held that as barère rose to speak he held two speeches in his pocket : one for robespierre and one against him . here barère played his role in 9 thermidor , by submitting a bill that would blunt the ability of the paris commune to be used as a military force . palmer , 1949 , p . 377 according to barère , the committees asked themselves why there still existed a military regime in paris ; why all these permanent commanders , with staffs , and immense armed forces ? the committees have thought it best to restore to the national guard its democratic organization . richard t . bienvenu ( 1968 ) the ninth of thermidor , p . 190–191 , 195 , 196 the day after robespierres death , barère described him as the '' tyrant '' and '' the terror itself '' . arrest . nevertheless , barère was still questioned on the grounds of being a terrorist . before barère was sentenced to prison , '' carnot defended him on the ground that barère was hardly worse than himself . '' dalberg-acton , 1920 , p . 270 however , the defense proved ineffective . on 2nd germinal of the year iii ( march 22 , 1795 ) , the leaders of thermidor decreed the arrest of barère and his colleagues in the reign of terror , jean marie collot d'herbois and jacques nicolas billaud-varenne . the court hearings continued until being interrupted by the insurrection of 12 germinal , year iii ( 1 april 1795 ) . after the insurrection was dealt with , the assembly voted the deportation of collot , billaud , and barere to guiana without further ado . significant disturbances occurred in paris on the day of deportation . barère was sentenced for his betrayal of king louis xvi ( by voting to execute him ) , for being a traitor to france , and for being a terrorist . the three prisoners were moved to the island of oléron in preparation for being transported to french guiana . barère 's increasing depression while in prison led him to write his own epitaph . while the other two prisoners were sent to guiana , barère still remained at oléron . meanwhile the political developments in paris resulted in the decision to put him on trial again . thomas babington macaulay baron macaulay , critical and historical essays . appleton , 1866 , p . 183 he was moved to saintes , charente-maritime , where he spent four months awaiting trial . eventually , the convention decided without trial to confirm the old sentence of deportation . escape from prison . when barère learned about this , his cousin , hector barère , and two other people helped him escape prison . although barère was reluctant to escape , his friends believed that he should leave at the earliest opportunity . according to his own later memoirs , the original plan was to escape over the garden walls or from the dormitory with the help of a long rope-ladder . 1795 - saintes : nuit du 4 brumaire an iv ( 25 octobre ) : barère s ’ évade de l ’ abbaye aux dames . ( memoires of barère ) this plan soon proved impossible as it was discovered that the garden was out of barère 's reach and that the dormitory was closed . the escape plan was soon reconfigured , as it was decided that barère would escape by the cloister and garden of the convent . barère escaped on 4 brumaire iv ( 26 october 1795 ) , with the help also of a local man named eutrope vanderkand . he went to bordeaux , where he lived in hiding for several years . in early 1798 ( while still in hiding ) , he was elected to the directory 's council of five hundred from his native hautes-pyrénées , but he was not allowed to take his seat . in april of 1799 , the directory issues an order for his arrest , so he leaves bordeaux and hides out in saint-ouen-sur-seine near paris . amnesty . on 24 december 1799 , napoleon issued an amnesty for some politicians of both the right and the left , including barère . under the first empire , he was engaged in literary work . it was rumoured that he served as a confidential informant for napoleon . thomas babington macaulay baron macaulay , critical and historical essays . appleton , 1866 , p . 192 starting in 1803 , he published an anti-british magazine '' le mémorial anti-britannique '' subsidized by the government . this publication continued until 1807 . in february 1814 , he moved back to his native region of france . he became a member of the chamber of deputies during the hundred days on 1815 . but when the final restoration of the bourbons took place on 8 july 1815 , he was banished from france for life '' as a regicide '' . barère then withdrew to brussels , where he lived until 1830 . lee , 1902 , p . 151 he returned to france and served louis philippe under the july monarchy until his death on january 13 , 1841 . he was the last surviving member of the committee of public safety . see also . society of the friends of truth . notes . references . ; attribution