Kenny McCormick

character . creation and design . image : kennyunhooded.jpg thumb left 165px kenny 's entire face was revealed for the first time in south park : bigger , longer & uncut . when developing the character , the show 's creators had observed that most groups of childhood friends in small middle-class towns always included '' the one poor kid '' and decided to portray kenny in this light . an unnamed precursor to kenny first appeared in the first the spirit of christmas short , dubbed jesus vs . frosty , created by parker and stone in 1992 while they were students at the university of colorado . the character was composed of construction paper cutouts and animated through the use of stop motion . when tasked three years later by friend brian graden to create another short as a video christmas card that he could send to friends , parker and stone created another similarly-animated the spirit of christmas short , dubbed jesus vs . santa . in this short , kenny is given his first name , and first appears as he does in the series . kenny next appeared on august 13 , 1997 , when south park debuted on comedy central with the episode '' cartman gets an anal probe '' . in tradition with the show 's animation style , kenny is composed of simple geometrical shapes and primary colors . he is not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand-drawn characters ; his character is mostly shown from only one angle , and his movements are animated in an intentionally jerky fashion . ever since the show 's second episode , '' weight gain 4000 '' ( season one , 1997 ) , kenny , like all other characters on the show , has been animated with computer software , though he is portrayed to give the impression that the show still utilizes its original technique . the effect of kenny 's speech is achieved by stone mumbling into his own hand as he provides kenny 's lines . while he originally voiced kenny without any computer manipulation , stone now does so by speaking in his normal vocal range and then adding a childlike inflection . the recorded audio is then edited with pro tools , and the pitch is altered to make the voice sound more like that of a fourth grader . as the technique of kenny 's muzzled enunciation frequently implies , many of his lines are indeed profane and sexually explicit , the lengthier of which are mostly improvised by stone . he first appeared unobscured by his hood in south park : bigger , longer & uncut , where it was revealed that he had messy blonde hair . mike judge provided the voice for kenny 's one line of uninsulated dialogue : '' goodbye , you guys . '' on a few occasions during episodes that have originally aired since the film 's release , he has been seen without the parka ; including '' the tooth fairy tats 2000 '' , '' super best friends '' , '' lil ' crime stoppers '' , '' the jeffersons '' , '' good times with weapons '' , '' the losing edge '' , '' south park is gay ! '' , '' lice capades '' , '' margaritaville '' , '' w.t.f . '' , '' pee '' , and '' you 're getting old '' . however , unlike in bigger , longer & uncut his entire face has been only seen three times in the television series without being partially obscured or otherwise altered , this being in '' the losing edge , '' '' the jeffersons , '' and '' you 're getting old '' . he also speaks unmuffled during some of these instances , in which case co-producer eric stough provides kenny 's voice . during '' the coon '' episodes of seasons 13 and 14 , kenny has his first major speaking role as the character mysterion . personality and traits . while most child characters on the show are foul-mouthed , kenny is often even more risqué with his dialogue . parker and stone state that they depict kenny and his friends in this manner in order to display how young boys really talk when they are alone . while kenny is often cynical and profane , parker notes that there nonetheless is an '' underlying sweetness '' aspect to the character , and time magazine described kenny and his friends as '' sometimes cruel but with a core of innocence '' . he is amused by toilet humor and bodily functions , and his favorite television personalities are terrance and phillip , a canadian duo whose comedy routines on their show-within-the-show revolve substantially around fart jokes . kenny is shown to desire intercourse in the episode '' the ring '' , when kenny gets a girlfriend and is overjoyed to find out that she has a reputation as a slut . kenny is also lecherous , and often portrayed as being eager to do and say disgusting things in an attempt to impress others or earn money . conversely , his alter-ego mysterion is seemingly mature , principled , and serious-minded , the only exception being one instance in '' mysterion rises '' in which he takes delight in irritating cartman . as mysterion , he convinces his parents to take better care of themselves and their children , as seen by their reaction when he questions them about the cult of cthulhu . he also uses his disguise to protect his sister karen ( who refers to mysterion as her '' guardian angel '' ) , as revealed in '' the poor kid '' ; however , in all of his guises , kenny is depicted as being uncommonly altruism , dying for the sake of others and spending all of his time working so he could buy his little sister a doll . in the trilogy of episodes '' black friday '' , '' a song of ass and fire '' and '' titties and dragons '' , in which the boys play-act characters from the tv series game of thrones , kenny cross-dresses as a fantasy-style princess with a wig and dress similar to the video game character princess zelda , and becomes a japanese-speaking moe anime character at one point . when cartman complains , '' you 're never going to be a real princess '' , princess kenny responds ( via her translator , stan ) angrily to cartman , calling him a '' ball-licking lesbian '' . this portrayal continues in the video game south park : the stick of truth where cartman notes that playing a '' chick '' is '' just how kenny seems to be rolling right now '' . kenny 's sister also refers to kenny as a girl , if you talk to her in the mccormick house . throughout the game , kenny posts 'status updates ' referring to herself as '' the cutest of them all '' . cultural impact . kenny 's deaths are well known in popular culture , and was one of the things viewers most commonly associated with south park during its earlier seasons . the exclamation of '' oh my god ! they killed kenny ! '' quickly became a popular catchphrase , while both kenny and the phrase have appeared on some of the more popular pieces of south park merchandise , including shirts , bumper stickers , calendars and baseball caps , and inspired the rap song '' kenny 's dead '' by master p , which was featured on chef aid : the south park album . the running gag of kenny 's deaths in earlier seasons was incorporated into the season 9 ( 2005 ) episode '' best friends forever '' when kenny , in a vegetative state , is kept alive by a feeding tube while a media circus erupted over whether the tube should be removed and allow kenny to die . the episode received much attention as it served to provide commentary on the terri schiavo case , originally airing just one day before schiavo died . the episode earned south park its first emmy award for outstanding animated program . kenny 's deaths have been subject to much critical analysis in the media and literary world . in the book south park and philosophy : bigger , longer , and more penetrating , an essay by southern illinois university philosophy professor randall auxier , entitled '' killing kenny : our daily dose of death '' , suggests that the fashion of the recurring gag serves to help the viewer become more comfortable with the inevitability of their own death . in the book south park and philosophy : you know , i learned something today , university of wisconsin–stevens point professor karin fry wrote an essay concerning the parallels between kenny 's role in the show and the different concepts of existentialism . when sophie rutschmann of the university of strasbourg discovered a mutated gene that causes an adult fruit fly to die within two days after it is infected with certain bacteria , she named the gene '' kenny '' in honor of the character . ign ranked kenny at 6 on their '' the top 25 south park characters '' list . on the uss john f . kennedy ( cv-67 ) , one of the most famous carrier qualification patches shows a landing fighter jet hooking kenny with the line '' you hooked kennedy ! ! you bastards ! ! '' with cv-67 nov . 1 on the bottom of the patch . kenny qualification patch . retrieved 3/5/2020 on south park bro down 2020 , a fan bracket on the show 's official social media to decide the best character on the show , kenny beat big mesquite murph , wendy testaburger , timmy burch , and butters stotch , before losing to the eventual champion , eric cartman in the final four . . in other media . kenny had a major role in south park : bigger , longer & uncut , the full-length film based on the series , and appeared on the film 's soundtrack singing ( albeit muffled ) several lines of the song '' mountain town '' from the film . as a tribute to the dead parrot sketch , a short that features kenny as a '' dead friend '' being returned by cartman to a shop run by kyle aired during a 1999 bbc television special commemorating the 30th anniversary of monty python 's flying circus . kenny was also featured in the documentary film the aristocrats , listening to cartman tell his version of the film 's titular joke , and in '' the gauntlet '' , a short spoofing both gladiator and battlefield earth that aired during the 2000 mtv movie awards . short that aired during the 2000 mtv movie awards kenny also appears in six south park-related video games : in south park , kenny is controlled by the player through the first person shooter mode who attempts to ward off enemies from terrorizing the town of south park . in south park : chef 's luv shack , a user has the option of playing as kenny when participating in the game 's several '' minigames '' based on other popular arcade games . in the racing game south park rally , a user can race as kenny against other users playing as other characters , while choosing to place him in any of a variety of vehicles . in south park let 's go tower defense play ! , kenny can be selected as a playable character used to establish a tower defense against the game 's antagonists . in south park : the stick of truth , kenny ( as princess kenny ) can be selected as a companion over the course of much of the game . in south park : the fractured but whole , kenny is seen as his alter-ego mysterion . notes . references . external links . kenny mccormick on southparkstudios.com