HMS Good Hope (1901)

design and description . good hope was designed to displace . the ship had an length overall of , a beam of and a deep draught of . she was powered by two 4-cylinder triple-expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of and gave a maximum speed of . the engines were powered by 43 belleville boilers . chesneau & kolesnik , p . 69 she carried a maximum of of coal and her complement consisted of 900 officers and ratings . friedman , p . 336 her main armament consisted of two breech-loading ( bl ) mk x guns in single gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . her secondary armament of sixteen bl 6-inch mk vii guns was arranged in casemates amidships . eight of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . friedman , pp . 243 , 260–61 a dozen quick-firing gun 12-pounder 12 cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . two additional 12-pounder 8 cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore . friedman , pp . 250 , 336 good hope also carried three 3-pounder hotchkiss guns and two submerged torpedo tubes . the ship 's waterline belt armor had a maximum thickness of and was closed off by transverse bulkheads . the armour of the gun turrets and their barbettes was 6 inches thick while the casemate armour was 5 inches thick . the protective deck armour ranged in thickness from and the conning tower was protected by of armour . . service . good hope , named after the cape colony on the cape of good hope , was laid down on 11 september 1899 with the name of africa silverstone , p . 235 by fairfield shipbuilding & engineering at their govan shipyard . she was renamed good hope on 2 october and launched on 21 february 1901 , when she was formally named by mrs . ( ethel ) elgar , wife of francis elgar , manager of the shipbuilding company . she arrived in portsmouth to be completed and armed in late december 1901 . captain charles edward madden was appointed in command for her first commission on 8 november 1902 . she was to be commissioned as flagship of rear-admiral wilmot fawkes as he succeeded as commander of the cruiser squadron in the home fleet , but was ordered first to convey joseph chamberlain , secretary of state for the colonies , to south africa in late 1902 . fawkes hoisted his flag on 23 november , and the ship left portsmouth with chamberlain and his wife on board two days later . during the outward voyage , the good hope docked at port said , suez , aden , mombasa , and zanzibar , before landing chamberlain at durban in late december . after staying through christmas at port elizabeth , she visited simon 's town before returning home along the west coast of africa . in 1906 she became the flagship of the 1st cruiser squadron , atlantic fleet and was the flagship of the 2nd cruiser squadron when she visited south africa two years later . good hope was placed in reserve in 1913 . gardiner & gray , p . 12 good hope was re-commissioned in mid-1914 with a crew composed mainly of naval reservists and was briefly assigned to the 6th cruiser squadron in august , before being despatched to halifax , nova scotia to join the 4th cruiser squadron , commanded by rear-admiral christopher cradock . cradock transferred his flag to her because she was faster than his previous flagship . in halifax , the crew of good hope was joined by four young canadian midshipmen to assist cradock with his command . they would become the first royal canadian navy casualties of the first world war . cradock 's command was despatched to the coast of south america later that month at his own suggestion to better hunt for the german ships preying upon british merchant ships . on the way south , good hope 's crew was strenghened by the recuitment of 26 stokers in the west indies , probably in st . lucia . his ships were generally unsuccessful in this and he moved his squadron further south in late september to search for the east asia squadron , under the command of vice admiral graf maximilian von spee , in the vicinity of cape horn and the strait of magellan in accordance to his orders from the admiralty . corbett , pp . 40 , 51 , 257 , 261 , 309–10 at the end of september , cradock made his first fruitless search of the tierra del fuego area and later detached three of his ships to search up the chilean coast , reaching valparaiso on 15 october , while good hope returned to port stanley , in the falkland islands , to recoal and to reestablish communications with the admiralty . he received word on 7 october that spee 's ships were definitely bound for the cape horn region and waited for the elderly predreadnought battleship to reinforce his squadron . she was in poor mechanical condition when she arrived at port stanley and required time to make repairs . good hope sailed on 22 october without her , going around cape horn , while canopus and three colliers departed the following day , taking the shorter route through the strait of magellan . massie , pp . 210–19 . battle of coronel . good hope rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron at vallenar roads in the remote chonos archipelago of chile on 27 october to recoal . they departed two days later , just as canopus arrived , cradock ordering the battleship to follow as soon as possible . he sent the light cruiser to scout ahead and to enter coronel , chile to pick up any messages from the admiralty and acquire intelligence regarding german activities . the cruiser began to pick up german radio signals from the light cruiser on the afternoon of 29 october , and delayed entering coronel for two days with cradock 's permission to avoid being trapped by the fast german ships . a german supply ship was already there and radioed spee that glasgow had entered the harbour around twilight . the cruiser departed on the morning of 1 november , but spee had already made plans to catch her when informed of her presence the previous evening . massie , pp . 221–24 glasgow departed coronel at 09:15 after having picked up the squadron 's mail and rendezvoused with the rest of the squadron four hours later . cradock ordered his ships to form line abreast with an interval of between ships to maximise visibility at 13:50 , and steered north at a speed of . at 16:17 leipzig spotted glasgow , the easternmost british ship , to its west and she spotted leipzigs funnel smoke three minutes later . at 17:10 cradock ordered his ships to head for glasgow , the closest ship to the germans . once gathered together , he formed them into line astern , with good hope in the lead , steering southeasterly at at 18:18 . as the sixteen guns aboard the armoured cruisers scharnhorst and were only matched by the two 9.2-inch guns on his flagship , he needed to close the range to bring his more numerous 6-inch guns to bear . the force 7 winds and high seas , however , prevented the use of half of those guns as they were too close to the water . he also wanted to use the setting sun to his advantage so that its light would blind the german gunners . spee was well aware of the british advantages and refused to allow cradock to close the range . his ships were faster than the british , slowed by the 16-knot maximum speed of the armed merchant cruiser , and he opened up the range to until conditions changed to suit him . the sun set at 18:50 , which silhouetted the british ships against the light sky while the german ships became indistinguishable from the shoreline behind them . massie , pp . 223–28 spee immediately turned to close and signalled his ships to open fire at 19:04 when the range closed to . spee 's flagship , scharnhorst , engaged good hope while gneisenau fired at monmouth . cradock 's flagship was hit on the scharnhorsts third salvo , when shells knocked out her forward 9.2-inch turret and set her forecastle on fire . cradock , knowing his only chance was to close the range , continued to do so despite the battering that spee 's ships inflicted . by 19:23 the range was almost half of that when the battle began and the british ships bore onwards . spee tried to open the range , fearing a torpedo attack , but the british were only away at 19:35 . seven minutes later , good hope charged directly at the german ships , although they dodged out of her way . spee ordered his armoured cruisers to concentrate their fire on the british flagship and she soon drifted to a halt with her topsides all aflame . at 19:50 her forward magazine exploded , severing the bow from the rest of the ship , and she later sank in the darkness . spee estimated that his flagship had made 35 hits on good hope , suffering only two hits in return that did no significant damage and failed even to wound one crewman . massie , pp . 228–30 , 236 good hope was sunk with all hands , a total of 926 officers and ratings . four of the midshipmen aboard the ship were the first casualties of the newly formed royal canadian navy . first canadian casualties in the rcn . notable commanding officers . charles douglas carpendale , 1911–1912 '' vice-admiral sir c . d . carpendale '' ( obituary ) in the times dated 23 march 1968 , issue 57208 , column f , p . 10 . notes . footnotes . bibliography . . external links . the coronel memorial lives of the first world war : commemorating all those who were lost aboard hms good hope , 1 november 1914 lives of the first world war : four canadian midshipmen who lost their lives aboard hms good hope , 1 november 1914 lives of the first world war : 26 west indian stokers who lost their lives aboard hms good hope , 1 november 1914 the battle of coronel , at naval-history.net