Raymond Carver

early life , 1938 - 1958 . carver was born in clatskanie , oregon , a mill town on the columbia river , and grew up in yakima , washington , the son of ella beatrice ( née casey ) and clevie raymond carver . his father , a sawmill worker from arkansas , was a fisherman and heavy drinker . carver 's mother worked on and off as a waitress and a retail clerk . his brother , james franklin carver , was born in 1943 . carver was educated at local schools in yakima , washington . in his spare time , he read mostly novels by mickey spillane or publications such as sports afield and outdoor life , and hunted and fished with friends and family . after graduating from yakima high school in 1956 , carver worked with his father at a sawmill in california . in june 1957 , at age 19 , he married 16-year-old maryann burk , who had just graduated from a private episcopal school for girls . their daughter , christine la rae , was born in december 1957 . their second child , a boy named vance lindsay , was born a year later . carver supported the family by working as a delivery man , janitor , library assistant , and sawmill laborer , while maryann supported the family as administrative assistant and high school english teacher , salesperson , and waitress . . writing career . carver moved to paradise , california with his family to be close to his mother-in-law . he became interested in writing while attending chico state college , and enrolled in a creative writing course taught by the novelist john gardner , then a recent doctoral graduate of the iowa writers ' workshop , who became a mentor and had a major influence on carver 's life and career . in 1961 , carver 's first published story , '' the furious seasons '' , appeared . more florid than his later work , the story strongly bore the influence of william faulkner . '' furious seasons '' was later used as a title for a collection of stories published by capra press , and is part of the collection , no heroics , please and call if you need me . carver continued his studies under the short story writer richard cortez day ( like gardner , a recent ph.d . alumnus of the iowa program ) at humboldt state college in arcata , california . he chose not to take the foreign language courses required by the english program and received a b.a . in general studies in 1963 . during this period he was first published and served as editor for toyon , the college 's literary magazine , in which he published several of his own pieces under his own name as well as the pseudonym john vale . with his b- average , exacerbated by his penchant to forsake coursework for literary endeavors , ballasted by a sterling recommendation from day , carver was accepted into the iowa writers ' workshop on a 1,000 fellowship for the 1963–1964 academic year . homesick for california and unable to fully acclimatize to the program 's upper middle class milieu , he only completed 12 credits out of the 30 required for a m.a . degree or 60 for the m.f.a . degree . although program director paul engle awarded him a fellowship for a second year of study after maryann carver personally interceded and compared her husband 's plight to tennessee williams ' deleterious experience in the program three decades earlier , carver decided to leave the university of iowa at the end of the semester . according to biographer carol sklenicka , carver falsely claimed to have received an m.f.a . from iowa in 1966 on later curricula vitae . maryann , who postponed completing her education to support her husband 's educational and literary endeavors , eventually graduated from san jose state college in 1970 and taught english at los altos high school until 1977 . after completing graduate work at stanford , she briefly enrolled in the university of california , santa barbara 's english doctoral program when carver taught at the institution as a visiting lecturer in 1974 . in the mid-1960s , carver and his family resided in sacramento , california , where he briefly worked at a bookstore before taking a position as a night custodian at mercy hospital . he did all of the janitorial work in the first hour and then wrote through the rest of his shift . he audited classes at what was then sacramento state college , including workshops with poet dennis schmitz . carver and schmitz soon became friends , and carver wrote and published his first book of poems , near klamath , under schmitz 's guidance . 1967 was a landmark year for carver with the appearance of '' will you please be quiet , please ? '' in martha foley 's annual best american short stories anthology and the impending publication of near klamath by the english club of sacramento state college . he briefly enrolled in the library science graduate program at the university of iowa that summer but returned to california following the death of his father . shortly thereafter , the carvers relocated to palo alto , california , so he could take his first white-collar job at science research associates ( a subsidiary of ibm in nearby menlo park , california ) , where he worked intermittently as a textbook editor and public relations director through 1970 . following a 1968 sojourn to israel , the carvers relocated to san jose , california ; as maryann finished her undergraduate degree , he continued his graduate studies in library science at san jose state through the end of 1969 before failing once again to take a degree . during this period , he established vital literary connections with gordon lish , who worked across the street from carver as director of linguistic research at behavioral research laboratories , and the poet/publisher george hitchcock . after the publication of '' neighbors '' in the june 1971 issue of esquire at the instigation of lish ( by now ensconced as the magazine 's fiction editor ) , carver began to teach at the university of california , santa cruz at the behest of provost james b . hall , an iowa alumnus and early mentor to ken kesey at the university of oregon , commuting from his new home in sunnyvale , california . having endured a succession of failed applications to the stegner fellowship , carver was admitted to the prestigious non-degree stanford university graduate creative writing program for the 1972–1973 term , where he cultivated friendships with kesey-era luminaries ed mcclanahan and gurney norman in addition to contemporaneous fellows chuck kinder , max crawford , and william kittredge . the 4,000 stipend enabled the carvers to buy a house in cupertino , california . he also took on another teaching job at the university of california , berkeley that year and briefly rented a pied-à-terre in the city ; this development was precipitated by his initiation of an extramarital affair with diane cecily , a university of montana administrator and mutual friend of kittredge who would subsequently marry kinder . during his years of working at miscellaneous jobs , rearing children , and trying to write , carver started alcohol abuse . by his own admission , he gave up writing and took to full-time drinking . in the fall semester of 1973 , carver was a visiting lecturer in the iowa writers ' workshop with john cheever , but carver stated that they did less teaching than drinking and almost no writing . with the assistance of kinder and kittredge , he attempted to simultaneously commute to berkeley and maintain his lectureship at santa cruz ; after missing all but a handful of classes due to the inherent logistical hurdles of this arrangement and various alcohol-related illnesses , hall gently enjoined carver to resign his position . the next year , after leaving iowa city , carver went to a treatment center to attempt to overcome his alcoholism , but continued drinking for another three years . his first short story collection , will you please be quiet , please ? , was published in 1976 . the collection itself was shortlisted for the national book award , though it sold fewer than 5,000 copies that year . . personal life and death . decline of first marriage . the following excerpt from scott driscoll 's review of maryann burk carver 's 2006 memoir describes the decline of maryann 's and raymond 's marriage . after being hospitalized three times between june 1976 and february or march 1977 , carver began his '' second life '' and stopped drinking on june 2 , 1977 , with the help of alcoholics anonymous . while he continued to regularly smoke marijuana and later experimented with cocaine at the behest of jay mcinerney during a 1980 visit to new york city , carver believed he would have died of alcoholism at the age of 40 had he not overcome his drinking . . second marriage . in november 1977 carver met the poet tess gallagher at a writers ' conference in dallas , texas . gallagher later remembered feeling “ as if my life until then had simply been a rehearsal for meeting him . ” beginning in january 1979 , carver and gallagher lived together in el paso , texas , in a borrowed cabin near port angeles , washington , and in tucson , arizona . in 1980 , the two moved to syracuse , new york , where gallagher had been appointed the coordinator of the creative writing program at syracuse university ; carver taught as a professor in the english department . he and gallagher jointly purchased a house in syracuse , at 832 maryland avenue . in ensuing years , the house became so popular that the couple had to hang a sign outside that read '' writers at work '' in order to be left alone . in 1982 , he and his first wife , maryann , were divorced . in 1988 , six weeks prior to his death , carver and gallagher married in reno , nevada . death . on august 2 , 1988 , carver died in port angeles , washington , from lung cancer at the age of 50 . in the same year , he was inducted into the american academy of arts and letters . he is buried at ocean view cemetery in port angeles , washington . the inscription on his tombstone reads : late fragment and did you get what you wanted from this life , even so ? i did . and what did you want ? to call myself beloved , to feel myself beloved on the earth . his poem '' gravy '' is also inscribed . as carver 's will directed , tess gallagher assumed the management of his literary estate . . awards and memorials . carver was nominated for the national book award for his first major-press collection , '' will you please be quiet , please '' in 1977 and the pulitzer prize for fiction for his third major-press collection , cathedral ( 1984 ) , the volume generally perceived as his best . included in the latter collection are the award-winning stories '' a small , good thing '' , and '' where i 'm calling from '' . john updike selected the latter for inclusion in the best american short stories of the century . for his part , carver perceived cathedral as a watershed in his career for its shift toward a more optimistic and confidently poetic style amid the diminution of lish 's literary influence . carver won five o . henry awards with '' are these actual miles '' ( originally titled '' what is it ? '' ) ( 1972 ) , '' put yourself in my shoes '' ( 1974 ) , '' are you a doctor ? '' ( 1975 ) , '' a small , good thing '' ( 1983 ) , and '' errand '' ( 1988 ) . in carver 's birth town of clatskanie , oregon , a memorial park and statue are at the corner of lillich and nehalem streets , across from the library . a block away is the building where carver was born . legacy and posthumous publications . in december 2006 , gallagher published an essay in the sun magazine , titled '' instead of dying '' , about alcoholism and carver 's having maintained his sobriety . the essay is an adaptation of a talk she initially delivered at the welsh academy 's academi intoxication conference in 2006 . the first lines read : '' instead of dying from alcohol , raymond carver chose to live . i would meet him five months after this choice , so i never knew the ray who drank , except by report and through the characters and actions of his stories and poems . '' chuck kinder 's honeymooners : a cautionary tale ( 2001 ) is a roman à clef about his friendship with carver in the 1970s . carver 's high school sweetheart and first wife , maryann burk carver , wrote a memoir of her years with carver , what it used to be like : a portrait of my marriage to raymond carver ( 2006 ) . in 2009 , the new york times book review and san francisco chronicle named carol sklenicka 's unauthorized biography , raymond carver : a writer 's life ( 2009 ) , published by scribner , one of the best ten books of that year ; and the san francisco chronicle deemed it : '' exhaustively researched and definitive biography '' . carver 's widow , tess gallagher , refused to engage with sklenicka . his final ( incomplete ) collection of seven stories , titled elephant in britain ( included in '' where i 'm calling from '' ) was composed in the five years before his death . the nature of these stories , especially '' errand '' , have led to some speculation that carver was preparing to write a novel . only one piece of this work has survived – the fragment '' the augustine notebooks '' , first printed in no heroics , please . tess gallagher fought with knopf for permission to republish the stories in what we talk about when we talk about love as they were originally written by carver , as opposed to the heavily edited and altered versions that appeared in 1981 under the editorship of gordon lish . for further details of the extent of the original editing , see blake morrison , raymond-carver-beginners-blake-morrison the guardian 2009/oct/17 and james ley , 'carved up , or kindly cut ? ' the australian on october 1 , 2009 the book , entitled beginners , and re-edited by william stull and maureen carroll was released in hardback in great britain , followed by its publication in the library of america edition which collected all of carver 's short fiction in a single volume . . literary characteristics . carver 's career was dedicated to short stories and poetry . he described himself as '' inclined toward brevity and intensity '' and '' hooked on writing short stories '' ( in the foreword of where i 'm calling from , a collection published in 1988 and a recipient of an honorable mention in the 2006 new york times article citing the best works of fiction of the previous 25 years ) . another stated reason for his brevity was '' that the story or poem can be written and read in one sitting . '' this was not simply a preference but , particularly at the beginning of his career , a practical consideration as he juggled writing with work . his subject matter was often focused on blue-collar experience , and was clearly reflective of his own life . characteristics of minimalism are generally seen as one of the hallmarks of carver 's work , although , as reviewer david wiegand notes : carver never thought of himself as a minimalist or in any category , for that matter . '' he rejected categories generally , '' sklenicka says . '' i do n't think he had an abstract mind at all . he just was n't built that way , which is why he 's so good at picking the right details that will stand for many things . '' carver 's editor at esquire , gordon lish , was instrumental in shaping his prose in this direction – where his earlier tutor john gardner had advised carver to use fifteen words instead of twenty-five , lish instructed carver to use five in place of fifteen . objecting to the '' surgical amputation and transplantation '' of lish 's heavy editing , carver eventually broke with him . the carver chronicles for more on lish 's editing of carver at esquire , see carol polsgrove , it was n't pretty , folks , but did n't we have fun ? esquire in the sixties ( 1995 ) , pp . 241–243 . during this time , carver also submitted poetry to james dickey , then poetry editor of esquire . carver 's style has also been described as dirty realism , which connected him with a group of writers in the 1970s and 1980s that included richard ford and tobias wolff with both of whom carver was closely acquainted , as well as others such as ann beattie , frederick barthelme , and jayne anne phillips . with the exception of beattie , who wrote about upper-middle-class people , these were writers who focused on sadness and loss in the everyday lives of ordinary people—often lower-middle class or isolated and marginalized people . in his essay '' on influence '' , carver states that , while he was an admirer of ernest hemingway 's fiction , he never saw him as an influence , citing instead the work of lawrence durrell . works . fiction . . collections . will you please be quiet , please ? ( first published 1976 ) furious seasons and other stories ( 1977 ) what we talk about when we talk about love ( 1981 ) cathedral ( 1983 ) elephant ( 1988 ) – this title only published in great britain ; included as a section of where i 'm calling from : new & selected stories in the u.s . compilations . where i 'm calling from ( 1988 ) short cuts : selected stories ( 1993 ) – published to accompany the robert altman film short cuts collected stories ( 2009 ) – complete short fiction including beginners . poetry . . collections . near klamath ( 1968 ) winter insomnia ( 1970 ) at night the salmon move ( 1976 ) fires ( 1983 ) where water comes together with other water ( 1985 ) ultramarine ( 1986 ) a new path to the waterfall ( 1989 ) gravy ( unknown year ) . compilations . in a marine light : selected poems ( 1988 ) all of us : the collected poems ( 1996 ) . screenplays . dostoevsky ( 1985 , with tess gallagher ) . films and theatre adaptations . short cuts directed by robert altman ( 1993 ) , based on nine carver short stories and a poem everything goes directed by andrew kotatko ( 2004 ) , starring hugo weaving , abbie cornish and sullivan stapleton based on carver 's short story '' why do n't you dance ? '' whoever was using this bed , also directed by andrew kotatko ( 2016 ) , starring jean-marc barr , radha mitchell and jane birkin , based on carver 's short story of the same name jindabyne directed by ray lawrence ( 2006 ) , based on carver 's short story '' so much water so close to home '' '' after the denim '' directed by gregory d . goyins ( 2010 ) starring tom bower and chris mulkey , based on carver 's short story '' if it please you '' everything must go directed by dan rush ( 2010 ) , and starring will ferrell , based on carver 's short story '' why do n't you dance ? '' carver a production directed by william gaskill at london 's arcola theatre in 1995 , adapted from five carver short stories including '' what 's in alaska ? '' '' put yourself in my shoes '' and '' intimacy '' studentova žena ( croatian ) directed by goran kovač , based on '' the student 's wife '' carousel ( croatian ) directed by toma zidić , inspired by '' ashtray '' men who do n't work directed by alexander atkins and andrew franks , based on '' what do you do in san francisco ? '' birdman ( film ) , directed by alejandro g . iñárritu , depicts the mounting of a broadway production of '' what we talk about when we talk about love '' as its central storyline . the film 's main character , riggan thomson , attributes his choice of acting as a profession to a complimentary note he once received from raymond carver written on a cocktail napkin . the film also preludes with carver 's poem '' late fragment . '' in february 2015 , birdman won four oscars , including the academy award for best picture . musical adaptions . everything 's turning to white is a folk rock track written and performed by paul kelly on the album so much water so close to home ( 1989 ) , which was based on carver 's short story of the same name . references . further reading . amir , ayala ( 2010 ) . the visual poetics of raymond carver . lexington books . a review . miceli , barbara . '' rivers , memories and reflections in raymond carver 's where water comes together with other water '' in comparative american studies ' ( 2021 ) , pp . 1-9 . . external links . the raymond carver papers the ohio state university libraries rare books and manuscripts collection a review of raymond carver a writer 's life by carol sklenicka and of raymond carver collected stories edited by william l . stull and maureen p . carroll carver talks about his father , his early writing , his characters , and the '' dark humour '' in some of his stories . provides numerous links to carver sites on the web and links to his work a review of raymond carver : a writer 's life by carol sklenicka and raymond carver collected stories edited by william l . stull and maureen p . carroll historian carol polsgrove interviews carver biographer carol sklenicka