Lotharingia

name . because lotharingia lacked a single historic or ethnic identity , contemporaries were unsure what to call it and so it became regnum quondam lotharii or regnum lotharii ( '' kingdom once lothair 's '' ) and its inhabitants lotharii ( from lotharius ) , lotharienses ( from lothariensis ) , or lotharingi ( which gives the modern dutch , german , and luxembourgish names for the province lotharingen , lothringen , and lothringen respectively ) . the latter term , formed with the germanic suffix -ing , indicating ancestral or familial relationships , gave rise to the latin term lotharingia ( from the latin suffix -ia , indicating a country ) in the tenth century . later french terms like '' lorraine '' and '' lothier '' are derived from this latin term . middle francia , 843–855 . in 817 , emperor louis the pious made plans for division of the carolingian empire among his three sons after his death . unforeseen in 817 was a further heir besides louis 's three grown sons . a fourth son , charles the bald , was born to louis 's second wife judith of bavaria in 823 . when louis tried in 833 to re-divide the empire for the benefit of charles , he met with opposition from his adult sons , lothair , pepin , and louis . a decade of civil war and fluctuating alliances followed , punctuated by brief periods of peace . pepin died in 838 , and louis the pious in 840 . the remaining three brothers made peace and divided the empire with the 843 treaty of verdun . lothair , as the eldest , kept the imperial title and received a long strip of territories stretching from the north sea to southern italy . the logic of the division was that lothair had the crown of kingdom of italy , which had been his subkingdom under louis the pious , and that as emperor he should rule in aachen , the capital of the first carolingian emperor , charlemagne , and in rome , the ancient capital of emperors . middle francia ( latin francia media ) thus included all the land between aachen and rome and it has sometimes been called by historians the '' lotharingian axis '' . kingdom of lotharingia , 855–900 . in 855 , when lothair i was dying in prüm abbey , he divided his kingdom between his three sons with the treaty of prüm . to the eldest son , louis ii , went italy , with the imperial title . to the youngest , charles , still a minor , went provence . to the middle son , lothair ii , went the remaining territories to the north of provence , a kingdom which lacked ethnic or linguistic unity . lothair ii ruled from aachen and did not venture outside his kingdom . when he died in 869 , lothair ii left no legitimate children , but one illegitimate son - hugh , duke of alsace . his uncles , king of east francia louis the german and west francia charles the bald ( who wanted to rule the whole of lotharingia ) agreed to divide lotharingia between them with the 870 treaty of meerssen - the western half went to west francia and the eastern half to east francia . thus , lotharingia , as a united kingdom , ceased to exist for some years . in 876 , charles the bald invaded eastern lotharingia with the intent to capture it , but was defeated near andernach by louis the german . in 879 , louis 's son , king louis the younger , was invited by a faction of the west frankish nobility to succeed king louis the stammerer , charles 's son , on the throne of west francia . after a brief war , louis the stammerer 's young sons , carloman ii and louis iii , ceded western lotharingia to louis . the border between the two kingdoms was established at saint-quentin in 880 by the treaty of ribemont . in november 887 , arnulf of carinthia called a council of east frankish nobility to depose emperor charles the fat , who by 884 had succeeded to the thrones of all the kingdoms of the empire . the lotharingian aristocracy , in an attempt to assert its right to elect a sovereign , joined the other east frankish nobles in deposing charles the fat in 887 and elected arnulf as their king . the rule of arnulf in east francia was initially opposed by guy iii of spoleto , who became king of italy , and by rudolph i of burgundy , who was elected king in the southern half of former middle francia - upper burgundy . rudolph had intended to make himself king over the whole of lothair ii 's former kingdom , but had to be content with burgundia . arnulf defeated the vikings in 891 and dislodged them from their settlements at louvain . in 895 , he appointed his illegitimate son zwentibold as the king of lotharingia who ruled semi-independently until he was overthrown and killed by reginar on august 13 , 900 . the kingdom then ceased to exist and became a duchy . duchy of lotharingia , 900–959 . the young king of east francia louis the child appointed gebhard to be the duke of lotharingia in 903 . his title was recorded in contemporary latin as dux regni quod a multis hlotharii dicitur : '' duke of the kingdom that many call lothair 's '' . he died in 910 fighting hungarians . when non-carolingian conrad i of germany was elected king of east francia in 911 , lotharingian nobles under the new duke reginar voted to attach their duchy to west francia , still ruled by the carolingian dynasty . in 915 , charles rewarded him by granting him the title of margrave . reginar was succeeded by his son gilbert who used the title dux lotharingiae : '' duke of lotharingia '' . when the west franks deposed charles the simple in 922 , he remained king in lotharingia , from where he attempted to reconquer his kingdom in 923 . he was captured and imprisoned by heribert ii of vermandois until his death in 929 . in 923 , king henry the fowler of east francia used this opportunity and invaded lotharingia ( including alsace ) . in 925 , lotharingians under gilbert elected henry the fowler to be their king . in 930 , gilbert 's loyalty was rewarded and he received the prestigious hand of henry 's daughter gerberga in marriage . on henry 's death in 936 , gilbert rebelled and tried to swap lotharingian allegiance to the west franks , since their king rudolph was weak and would interfere less in local affairs . in 939 , henry 's son and successor , otto i , holy roman emperor , invaded lotharingia , and at the battle of andernach defeated gilbert who drowned trying to flee across the rhine . the dukes of lotharingia were thereafter royal appointees . henry i , duke of bavaria was duke for two years , followed in 941 by duke otto , who , in 944 , was followed by conrad . lotharingia was turned into a junior stem duchy whose dukes had a vote in royal elections . while the other stem duchies had tribal or historic identities , lotharingia 's identity was solely political . king louis iv of west francia tried to maintain a claim to lotharingia by marrying gilbert 's widow and otto 's sister gerberga . in his turn , otto i accepted homage from west francia 's hugh the great and herbert ii , count of vermandois at attigny in 942 . the weak louis iv had no choice but to agree to otto 's continued suzerainty over lotharingia . the carolingians : a family who forged europe in 944 , west francia invaded lotharingia , but retreated after otto i responded with mobilization of a large army under herman i , duke of swabia . partition of 959 and later history . in 953 , duke conrad rebelled against otto i , was removed from power and replaced by otto 's brother bruno the great who finally pacified lotharingia in 959 by dividing it in duchy of lorraine ( upper lorraine or southern lorraine ) under frederick i and lower lorraine ( lower lotharingia , lower lorraine or northern lotharingia ) under godfrey i . in 978 , king lothair of west francia invaded the region and captured aachen , but otto ii , holy roman emperor , counterattacked and reached the walls of paris . in 980 , lothair renounced his rights to lotharingia . except for one brief period ( 1033–44 , under gothelo i ) , the division was never reversed and the margraves soon raised their separate fiefs into duchies . in the twelfth century the ducal authority in lower lotharingia ( or lower lorraine ) fragmented , causing the formation of the duchy of limburg and the duchy of brabant , whose rulers retained the title duke of lothier ( derived from '' lotharingia '' ) . with the disappearance of a '' lower '' lorraine , the duchy of upper lorraine became the primary referent for '' lorraine '' within the holy roman empire . after centuries of french invasions and occupations , lorraine was finally ceded to france at the close of the war of the polish succession ( 1737 ) . in 1766 , the duchy was inherited by the french crown and became lorraine . in 1871 , after the franco-prussian war , the northern portions of lorraine were merged with alsace to become the province of alsace-lorraine in the german empire . today the greater part of the french side of the franco-german border belongs to the lorraine region of france . see also . list of rulers of lorraine duchy of lorraine duchy of lower lorraine . references . bibliography . primary sources . annales vedastini at the latin library . annales xantenses qui dicuntur at the latin library . secondary sources . bartholomew , john , and wakelyn nightingale . monasteries and patrons in the gorze reform : lotharingia c.850-1000 ( 2001 ) clark , samuel . state and status : the rise of the state and aristocratic power in western europe ( 1995 ) pp 53–79 excerpt maclean , simon . ( 2013 ) . '' shadow kingdom : lotharingia and the frankish world , c.850–c.1050 '' . history compass , 11 : 443–457 . timothy reuter , ed . the new cambridge medieval history , iii : c . 900–c . 1024 , cambridge : cambridge university press , 2005 . excerpts . further reading . neal ascherson , '' a mess of tiny principalities '' ( review of simon winder , lotharingia : a personal history of europe 's lost country , farrar , straus , and giroux , 2019 , 504 pp . ) , the new york review of books , vol . lxvi , no . 20 ( 19 december 2019 ) , pp . 66–68 .