Salvatore Maranzano

early life . salvatore maranzano was the youngest of 12 children born to domenico maranzano and antonina piscotta . five of his siblings lived to adulthood : mariano , angelo , nicolo , giuseppe , and angela . as a youngster , maranzano had wanted to become a priest and even studied to become one , but later became associated with the mafia in his homeland . critchley , p . 144 maranzano had a very commanding presence and was greatly respected by his underworld peers . he had a fascination with julius caesar and the roman empire , and enjoyed talking to his less-educated american mafia counterparts about these subjects . raab , pp . 26-27 because of this , he was nicknamed '' little caesar '' by his underworld peers . early career . maranzano emigrated from sicily to the united states in the 1920s , settling in brooklyn . the sicilian mafioso don vito ferro decided to make a bid for control of mafia operations in the united states . from his base in castellammare del golfo , maranzano was sent to seize control . while building a legitimate business as a real estate broker , maranzano also maintained a growing rum-running business , using the real estate company as a front for his illegal operations . he soon became involved in prostitution and the illegal smuggling of narcotics ; he also took a liking to a young joseph bonanno and became his mentor . . castellammarese war . to protect the criminal empire that maranzano had built up , he declared war on his rival joe masseria , the capo dei capi , in 1930 , starting the castellammarese war . in early 1931 , lucky luciano decided to eliminate his boss , masseria . in a secret deal with maranzano , luciano agreed to engineer masseria 's death in return for receiving masseria 's rackets and becoming maranzano 's second-in-command . on april 15 , luciano invited masseria and two other associates to lunch in a coney island restaurant . after finishing their meal , the mobsters decided to play cards . at that point , according to mob legend , luciano went to the bathroom . four gunmen – vito genovese , albert anastasia , joe adonis and bugsy siegel – then walked into the dining room and shot and killed masseria . with maranzano 's blessing , luciano took over masseria 's gang and became maranzano 's lieutenant . . boss of all bosses . with masseria gone , maranzano reorganized the italian american gangs in new york city into the five families , headed by luciano , joe profaci , tommy gagliano , vincent mangano and himself . each family would have a boss , underboss , capos , soldato , and associates , would be composed of only full-blooded italian americans , while associates could come from any background . however , maranzano called a meeting of crime bosses in wappingers falls , new york , and declared himself capo dei capi ( '' boss of all bosses '' ) . maranzano also whittled down the rival families ' rackets in favor of his own . luciano appeared to accept these changes , but was merely biding his time before removing maranzano . although maranzano was slightly more forward-thinking than masseria , luciano had come to believe that maranzano was even more greedy and hidebound than masseria had been . raab , pp . 28-29 maranzano 's scheming , his arrogant treatment of his subordinates and his fondness for comparing his organization to the roman empire ( he attempted to model the organization after caesar 's military chain of command ) did not sit well with luciano and his ambitious friends , such as vito genovese , frank costello and others . despite his advocacy for modern methods of organization , including crews of soldiers doing the bulk of a family 's illegal work under the supervision of a caporegime , at heart maranzano was a '' mustache pete '' — an old-school mafioso too steeped in old world ways . he was opposed to luciano 's partnership with jewish gangsters such as meyer lansky and bugsy siegel . luciano and his colleagues had intended all along to bide their time before getting rid of maranzano . . death . by september 1931 , maranzano realized luciano was a threat , and hired vincent coll , an irish gangster , to kill him . however , tommy lucchese alerted luciano that he was marked for death . maas , p . 80 on september 10 , maranzano ordered luciano and genovese to come to his office at the new york central building ( now the helmsley building ) , at 230 park avenue in manhattan . convinced that maranzano planned to murder them , luciano decided to act first . he sent to maranzano 's office four jewish gangsters whose faces were unknown to maranzano 's people . they had been secured with the aid of lansky and siegel . '' lucky luciano : criminal mastermind , '' time , dec . 7 , 1998 disguised as government agents , two of the gangsters disarmed maranzano 's bodyguards . the other two , aided by lucchese , who was there to point maranzano out , stabbed the boss multiple times before shooting him . '' the genovese family , '' crime library , crime library this assassination was the first of what would later be fabled as the '' night of the sicilian vespers . '' although there would have been few objections had luciano declared himself capo di tutti capi , he abolished the title , believing the position created trouble among the families and would make himself a target for another ambitious challenger . luciano subsequently created the commission to serve as the governing body for organized crime . maranzano is buried in saint john 's cemetery , queens , new york , near luciano 's grave . . photographs . the only known photographs of maranzano are from the scene of his death . in 2009 , informer author david critchley had identified the picture once claimed to be a mugshot of maranzano , as that of the london-based gangster messina brothers instead . in august 2019 , the informer had issued another photo believed to be maranzano , but later retracted the statement in september due to european historians identifying the image to be that of german criminal peter kürten . . in popular culture . maranzano plays a small fictionalized role in mario puzo 's the godfather . maranzano refused don vito corleone 's proposal to share his monopoly on gambling in new york city , in exchange for police and political contacts and expansion into brooklyn and the bronx . maranzano arranged for two of al capone 's gunmen to come to new york and finish corleone . through his contacts in chicago , corleone found out , and sent luca brasi to murder the gunmen . with capone out of the picture , the great mob war of 1933 had begun . desperate for peace , maranzano agreed to a sit down in a restaurant in brooklyn , where he was killed by salvatore tessio , a capo in the corleone family . afterwards , corleone took over maranzano 's organization and held a meeting to reorganize the american mafia , something that the real-life maranzano did . in the 1972 film the valachi papers , maranzano is portrayed by joseph wiseman . in the 1981 nbc mini-series the gangster chronicles , maranzano is portrayed by joseph mascolo . in the 1990 film mobsters , maranzano is portrayed by michael gambon , but is known as '' faranzano '' . in the 1999 film lansky , maranzano is portrayed by ron gilbert . in the 1999 lifetime film bonanno : a godfather 's story , maranzano is portrayed by edward james olmos . in the 2011 torchwood episode '' immortal sins '' , maranzano is portrayed by cris d'annunzio . in the fifth season of boardwalk empire , maranzano is portrayed by giampiero judica . in the show , his assassination is depicted as being ordered by nucky thompson , and nucky 's brother eli is one of the participating gunmen , finishing maranzano off by shooting him in the head . see also . black hand ( extortion ) . references . further reading . davis , john h . mafia dynasty : the rise and fall of the gambino crime family . new york : harpercollins , 1993 . reppetto , thomas . american mafia : a history of its rise to power . new york : henry holt and company , 1994 .