Castor oil

etymology . the name probably comes from a confusion between the ricinus plant that produces it and another plant , the vitex agnus-castus . irene jacob , '' ricinus communis — the miracle tree through four thousand years '' , the healing past : pharmaceuticals in the biblical and rabbinic world , ed . irene and walter jacob ( brill , 1993 ) , 81-93 . however , an alternative etymology suggests that it was used as a replacement for castoreum . . composition . thumb castor oil is well known as a source of ricinoleic acid , a unsaturated fat , 18-carbon fatty acid . among fatty acids , ricinoleic acid is unusual in that it has a hydroxyl functional group on the 12th carbon . this functional group causes ricinoleic acid ( and castor oil ) to be more polar than most fats . the chemical reactivity of the alcohol group also allows chemical derivatization that is not possible with most other seed oils . because of its ricinoleic acid content , castor oil is a valuable chemical in feedstocks , commanding a higher price than other seed oils . as an example , in july 2007 , indian castor oil sold for about us 0.90 per kilogram ( us 0.41 per pound ) whereas u.s . soybean , sunflower and canola oils sold for about us 0.30 per kilogram ( us 0.14 per pound ) . . uses . annually 270,000–360,000 tonnes ( 600–800 million pounds ) of castor oil are produced for a variety of uses . . food and preservative . in the food industry , food grade castor oil is used in food additives , flavorings , candy ( e.g . , polyglycerol polyricinoleate or pgpr in chocolate ) , as a mold inhibitor , and in packaging . polyoxyethylated castor oil ( e.g . , kolliphor el ) safety datawsheet cremophor el castor oil is also used in the food industries . in india , pakistan and nepal food grains are preserved by the application of castor oil . it stops rice , wheat , and pulses from rotting . for example , the legume pigeon pea is commonly available coated in oil for extended storage . traditional medicine . use of castor oil as a laxative is attested to in the circa 1550 bc ebers papyrus , and was in use several centuries earlier . bryan , p . xvii the united states food and drug administration ( fda ) has categorized castor oil as '' generally recognized as safe and effective '' ( grase ) for over-the-counter use as a laxative with its major site of action the small intestine , where it is digested into ricinoleic acid . although used in traditional medicine to induce labor in pregnant women , there is insufficient evidence that castor oil is effective to dilate the cervix or induce labor . castor oil , or a castor oil derivative such as kolliphor el ( polyethoxylated castor oil , a nonionic surfactant ) , is an excipient added to prescription drugs , including : miconazole , an antifungal agent ; see page 1 , methods and materials . see page 6 , /192 , clinical studies paclitaxel , a mitotic inhibitor used in cancer chemotherapy ; sandimmune ( cyclosporine injection , usp ) , an immunosuppressant drug widely used in connection with organ transplant to reduce the activity of the patient 's immune system ; nelfinavir mesylate , an hiv protease inhibitor ; tacrolimus , an immunosuppressive drug ( contains hco-60 , polyoxyl 60 castor wax ) ; xenaderm ointment , a topical treatment for skin ulcers , is a combination of balsam of peru , castor oil , and trypsin ; aci-jel ( composed of ricinoleic acid from castor oil , with acetic acid and oxyquinoline ) , used to maintain the acidity of the vagina ; optive plus ( carboxymethylcellulose , castor oil ) and refresh ultra ( glycerine , castor oil ) , artificial tears to treat dry eye ; castor oil is also one of the components of vishnevsky liniment . . alternative medicinal use . in naturopathy , castor oil is promoted as a treatment for several human health conditions , including cysts . according to the american cancer society , '' available scientific evidence does not support claims that castor oil on the skin cures cancer or any other disease . '' . skin and hair care . castor oil has been used in cosmetic products included in creams and as a moisturizer . small amounts of castor oil are frequently used in cold process soap to increase lathering in the finished bar . it also has been used to enhance hair conditioner in other products and for supposed anti-dandruff properties . . coatings . castor oil is used as a bio-based polyol in the polyurethane industry . the average functionality ( number of hydroxyl groups per triglyceride molecule ) of castor oil is 2.7 , so it is widely used as a rigid polyol and in coatings . one particular use is in a polyurethane concrete where a castor-oil emulsion is reacted with an isocyanate ( usually polymeric mdi methylene diphenyl diisocyanate ) and a cement and construction aggregate . this is applied fairly thickly as a slurry which is self-levelling . this base is usually further coated with other systems to build a resilient floor . it is not a drying oil , meaning that it has a low reactivity with air compared to oils such as linseed oil and tung oil . dehydration of castor oil yields linoleic acids , which do have drying properties . in this process , the oh group on the ricinoleic acid along with a hydrogen from the next carbon atom are removed yielding a double bond which then has oxidative cross-linking properties yielding the drying oil . precursor to industrial chemicals . castor oil can be broken down into other chemical compounds that have numerous applications . transesterification followed by steam cracking gives undecylenic acid , a precursor to specialized polymer nylon 11 , and heptanal , a component in fragrances . ashford 's dictionary of industrial chemicals , third edition , 2011 , page 6162 breakdown of castor oil in strong base gives 2-octanol , both a fragrance component and a specialized solvent , and the dicarboxylic acid sebacic acid . hydrogenation of castor oil saturates the alkenes , giving a waxy lubricant . castor oil may be epoxidized by reacting the oh groups with epichlorohydrin to make the triglycidyl ether of castor oil which is useful in epoxy technology . this is available commercially as heloxy . the production of lithium grease consumes a significant amount of castor oil . hydrogenation and saponification of castor oil yields 12-hydroxystearic acid which is then reacted with lithium hydroxide or lithium carbonate to give high performance lubricant grease . since it has a relatively high dielectric constant ( 4.7 ) , highly refined and dried castor oil is sometimes used as a dielectric fluid within high performance high voltage capacitors . lubrication . vegetable oils like castor oil are typically unattractive alternatives to petroleum-derived lubricants because of their poor oxidation stability . castor oil has better low-temperature viscosity properties and high-temperature lubrication than most vegetable oils , making it useful as a lubricant in jet , diesel , and racing engines . the viscosity of castor oil at 10 & nbsp ; °c is 2,420 centipoise . however , castor oil tends to form gums in a short time , and therefore its usefulness is limited to engines that are regularly rebuilt , such as racing engines . the lubricant company castrol took its name from castor oil . castor oil has been suggested as a lubricant for bicycle pumps because it does not degrade natural rubber seals . . early aviation and aeromodelling . castor oil was the preferred lubricant for rotary engines , such as the gnome engine after that engine 's widespread adoption for aviation in europe in 1909 . it was used almost universally in rotary engined allied aircraft in world war i . germany had to make do with inferior ersatz oil for its rotary engines , which resulted in poor reliability . the methanol-fueled two-cycle glow plug engines used for aeromodelling , since their adoption by model airplane hobbyists in the 1940s , have used varying percentages of castor oil as a lubricant . it is highly resistant to degradation when the engine has its fuel-air mixture leaned for maximum engine speed . gummy residues can still be a problem for aeromodelling powerplants lubricated with castor oil , however , usually requiring eventual replacement of ball bearings when the residue accumulates within the engine 's bearing races . one british manufacturer of sleeve valved four-cycle model engines has stated the '' varnish '' created by using castor oil in small percentages can improve the pneumatic seal of the sleeve valve , improving such an engine 's performance over time . turkey red oil . turkey red oil , also called sulphonated ( or sulfated ) castor oil , is made by adding sulfuric acid to vegetable oils , most notably castor oil . it was the first synthetic detergent after ordinary soap . it is used in formulating lubricants , softeners , and dye . . biodiesel . castor oil , like currently less expensive vegetable oils , can be used as feedstock in the production of biodiesel . the resulting fuel is superior for cold winters , because of its exceptionally low cloud point and pour point . biodiesel from castor oil : a promising fuel for cold weather ( pdf ) by carmen leonor barajas forero , 2004-10-12 . retrieved 2012-01-24 . initiatives to grow more castor for energy production , in preference to other oil crops , are motivated by social considerations . tropical subsistence farmers would gain a cash crop . the promise of the castor bean by elizabeth johnson , biodiesel magazine , 2004-12-01 . retrieved 2012-01-24 . . punishment . some parents child discipline with a dose of castor oil . for an american example see for a canadian examples see physicians recommended against the practice because they did not want medicines associated with punishment . a heavy dose of castor oil could be used as a humiliating punishment for adults . colonial officials used it in the british raj ( india ) to deal with recalcitrant servants . belgian military officials prescribed heavy doses of castor oil in belgian congo as a punishment for being too sick to work . the most famous use as punishment came in fascist italy under benito mussolini . it was a favorite tool used by the blackshirts to intimidate and humiliate their opponents . political dissidents were force-fed large quantities of castor oil by fascist squads . this technique was said to have been originated by gabriele d'annunzio or italo balbo . '' bearded like a medieval condottiere , bluff yet suave , fearless and supple , italo balbo was not the type to pass unnoticed anywhere . his admirers here chose to forget the blackshirt club-wielder and reputed inventor of the castor-oil treatment for fascist foes '' marshal balbo , the new york times , july 1 , 1940 , p . 18 . victims of this treatment did sometimes die , as the dehydrating effects of the oil-induced diarrhea often complicated the recovery from the nightstick beating they also received along with the castor oil ; however , even those victims who survived had to bear the humiliation of the laxative effects resulting from excessive consumption of the oil . it is believed that the nazi sa used this torture method against german jews shortly after the appointment of adolf hitler as chancellor of germany in 1933 . it is said that mussolini 's power was backed by '' the bludgeon and castor oil '' . in lesser quantities , castor oil was also used as an instrument of intimidation , for example , to discourage civilians or soldiers who would call in sick either in the factory or in the military . it took decades after mussolini 's death before the myth of castor oil as a panacea for a wide range of diseases and medical conditions was totally demystified , as it was also widely administered to pregnant women and elderly or mentally ill patients in hospitals in the false belief it had no negative side effects . today , the italian terms manganello and olio di ricino , even used separately , still carry strong political connotations ( especially the latter ) . these words are still used to satirize patronizing politicians , or the authors of disliked legislation . they should be used with caution in common conversation . the terms usare l'olio di ricino , ( '' to use castor oil '' ) and usare il manganello ( '' to use the bludgeon '' ) mean '' to coerce or abuse '' , and can be misunderstood in the absence of proper context . also in greece , during the 4th of august regime , castor oil was used as a form of punishment . σπύρος λιναρδάτος , 4η αυγούστου , ε ' έκδοση , εκδ . θεμέλιο , 1988 , σελ . 63 . safety . the castor seed contains ricin , a toxic lectin . heating during the oil extraction process denatures and deactivates the lectin . however , harvesting castor beans may not be without risk . the international castor oil association faq document states that castor beans contain an allergenic compound called cb1a . this chemical is described as being virtually non-toxic but has the capacity to sensitize people with hypersensitivity . the allergen may be neutralized by treatment with a variety of alkaline agents . the allergen is not present in the castor oil itself . these health issues , in addition to concerns about the toxic byproduct ( ricin ) from castor oil production , have encouraged the quest for alternative sources for hydroxy fatty acids . sources of hydroxy fatty acids alternatively , some researchers are trying to genetically modify the castor plant to prevent the synthesis of ricin . since castor oil is sometimes used to induce labor in full-term pregnancies ( scientific evidence of its effectiveness is lacking , however ) , consuming castor oil to treat constipation is not considered safe in pregnancies that are not at full term yet , as it may cause contractions of the womb . . see also . castor wax list of unproven and disproven cancer treatments . references . further reading . – overview of chemical properties and manufacturing of castor oil . external links . castor biofuel farming starts in ethiopia