Penny-farthing

history . origins and development . eugène meyer of paris , france is now regarded as the father of the high bicycle by the international cycling history conference in place of james starley . meyer patented a wire wheel with individually adjustable spokes in 1869 . they were called '' spider '' wheels in britain when introduced there . meyer produced a classic high bicycle design during the 1880s . james starley in coventry added the tangent spokes and the mounting step to his famous bicycle named '' ariel '' . he is regarded as the father of the british cycling industry . ball bearings , bicycle tire solid and hollow-section steel frames became standard , reducing weight and making the ride much smoother . penny-farthing bicycles are dangerous because of the risk of headers ( taking a fall over the handlebars head-first ) . makers developed '' moustache '' handlebars , allowing the rider 's knees to clear them , '' whatton '' handlebars that wrapped around behind the legs , and ultimately ( though too late , after development of the safety bicycle ) , the american '' eagle '' and '' star '' bicycles , whose large and small wheels were reversed . norcliffe , p.53 . this prevented headers but left the danger of being thrown backwards when riding uphill . other attempts included moving the seat rearward and driving the wheel by levers or treadles , as in the '' xtraordinary '' and '' facile '' , or gears , by chain as in the '' kangaroo '' or at the hub , as in the '' crypto '' ; another option was to move the seat well back , as in the '' rational '' . even so , bicycling remained the province of the urban well-to-do , and mainly men , until the 1890s , norcliffe , pp.31-2 & 124 . and was a salient example of conspicuous consumption . norcliffe , pp.31-2 , 35 , 124 , & 243-6 . . attributes . the penny-farthing used a larger wheel than the velocipede , thus giving higher speeds on all but the steepest hills . in addition , the large wheel gave a smoother ride , important before the invention of bicycle tire . although the high riding position seems daunting to some , mounting can be learned on a lower velocipede . once the technique is mastered , a high wheeler can be mounted and dismounted easily on flat ground and some hills . an attribute of the penny-farthing is that the rider sits high and nearly over the front axle . when the wheel strikes rocks and ruts , or under hard braking , the rider can be pitched forward off the bicycle head-first . headers were relatively common and a significant , sometimes fatal , hazard . riders coasting down hills often took their feet off the pedals and put them over the tops of the handlebars , so they would be pitched off feet-first instead of head-first . penny-farthing bicycles often used similar materials and construction as earlier velocipedes : cast iron frames , solid rubber tires , and plain bearings for pedals , steering , and wheels . they were often quite durable and required little service . for example , when cyclist thomas stevens rode around the world in the 1880s , he reported only one significant mechanical problem in over , caused when the local military confiscated his bicycle and damaged the front wheel . end of an era . the well-known dangers of the penny-farthing were , for the time of its prominence , outweighed by its strengths . while it was a difficult , dangerous machine , it was simpler , lighter , and faster than the safer velocipedes of the time . two new developments changed this situation , and led to the rise of the safety bicycle . the first was the chain drive , originally used on tricycles , allowing a gear ratio to be chosen independent of the wheel size . the second was the pneumatic bicycle tire , allowing smaller wheels to provide a smooth ride . the nephew of one of the men responsible for popularity of the penny-farthing was largely responsible for its demise . james starley had built the ariel ( spirit of the air ) high-wheeler in 1870 ; but this was a time of innovation , and when chain drives were upgraded so that each link had a small roller , higher and higher speeds became possible without the large wheel . in 1885 , starley 's nephew john kemp starley took these new developments to launch the modern bicycle , the rover safety bicycle , so-called because the rider , seated much lower and farther behind the front wheel contact point , was less prone to a header . in 1888 , when john dunlop re-invented the pneumatic tire for his son 's tricycle , the high wheel was made obsolete . the comfortable ride once found only on tall wheels could now be enjoyed on smaller chain-driven bicycles . by 1893 , high-wheelers were no longer being produced . use lingered into the 1920s in track cycling until racing safety bicycles were adequately designed . today . today , enthusiasts ride restored penny-farthings , and a few manufacturers build new ones with modern materials . . characteristics . the penny-farthing is a direct-drive bicycle , meaning the cranks and pedals are fixed directly to the hub . instead of using gears to multiply the revolutions of the pedals , the driven wheel is enlarged to be close to the rider 's inseam , to increase the maximum speed . this shifts the rider nearly on top of the wheel and makes it impossible for the rider to reach the ground while sitting on the seat . . construction . the frame is a single tube following the circumference of the front wheel , then diverting to a trailing wheel . a mounting peg is above the rear wheel . the front wheel is in a rigid fork with little if any trail . a spoon brake is usually fitted on the fork crown , operated by a lever from one of the handlebars . the bars are usually mustache shaped , dropping from the level of the headset . the saddle mounts on the frame less than behind the headset . one particular model , made by pope manufacturing company in 1886 , weighs , has a 60-spoke front wheel and a 20-spoke rear wheel . it is fitted with solid rubber tires . the rims , frame , fork , and handlebars are made from hollow , steel tubing . the steel axles are mounted in adjustable ball bearings . the leather saddle is suspended by springs . another model , made by humber cycles , of beeston , nottingham , england , weighs only , and has and wheels . it has no step and no brakes , in order to minimize weight . a third model , also made by pope manufacturing company , weighs and has forged steel forks . a brake lever on the right of a straight handlebar operates a spoon brake against the front wheel . all three have cranks that can be adjusted for length . operation . mounting requires skill . the rider must first grasp the handlebar and place one foot on a peg above the back wheel . then the rider scoots the bicycle forward to gain momentum and quickly jumps up onto the seat while continuing to steer the bicycle and maintain balance . although easy to ride slowly because of their high center of mass and the inverted pendulum effect , penny-farthings are prone to accidents . to stop , the rider presses back on the pedals while applying a spoon-shaped brake pressing the tire . the center of mass being high and not far behind the front wheel means any sudden stop or collision with a pothole or other obstruction can send the rider over the handlebars . on long downhills , some riders hooked their feet over the handlebars . this made for quick descents but left no chance of stopping . a new type of handlebar was introduced , called whatton bars , that looped behind the legs so that riders could still keep their feet on the pedals and also be able to leap forward feet-first off the machine . file : zbraslav 2011 , jízda elegance ( 07 ) . jpg a rider stands on the mounting peg to lift his other leg to a pedal file : zbraslav 2011 , jízda elegance ( 19 ) . jpg the rider astride the bicycle file : zbraslav 2011 , jízda elegance ( 22 ) . jpg a second person can be carried on the mounting peg . performance . the first recorded hour record was set in 1876 when frank dodds of england pedalled in an hour on a high wheeler around the cambridge university ground . on this day : 25 march , espn , the furthest ( paced ) hour record ever achieved on a penny-farthing bicycle was by william a . rowe , an american , in 1886 . until the 21st century , the last paced hour record to be set on a penny-farthing was probably bw attlee 's 1891 english amateur record of . this was beaten by scots cyclist mark beaumont at herne hill velodrome on 16th june 2018 when he covered . on 17 september 2019 , chris opie set the guinness world record of 34.547 kilometres in an hour . in 1884 , thomas stevens rode a columbia penny-farthing from san francisco to boston —the first cyclist to cross the united states . in 1885–86 , he continued from london through europe , the middle east , china , and japan , to become the first to ride around the world . tremendous feats of balance were reported , including negotiating a narrow bridge parapet and riding down the u.s . capitol steps with the american star bicycle which has the small wheel in front . . in popular culture . the bike , with the one wheel dominating , led to riders being referred to in america as '' wheelmen '' , a name that lived on for nearly a century in the league of american wheelmen until renamed the league of american bicyclists in 1994 . the history of the league of american bicyclists clubs of racing cyclists wore uniforms of peaked caps , tight jackets and knee-length breeches , with leather shoes , the caps and jackets displaying the club 's colors . in 1967 collectors and restorers of penny-farthings ( and other early bicycles ) founded the wheelmen , a non-profit organization '' dedicated to keeping alive the heritage of american cycling '' . the high-wheeler lives on in the gear inch units used by cyclists in english-speaking countries to describe gear ratios . these are calculated by multiplying the wheel diameter in inches by the number of teeth on the front chain-wheel and dividing by the teeth on the rear sprocket . the result is the equivalent diameter of a penny-farthing wheel . a 60-inch gear , the largest practicable size for a high-wheeler , is nowadays a middle gear of a utility bicycle , while top gears on many exceed 100 & nbsp ; inches . there was at least one columbia made in the mid-1880s , but 60 was the largest in regular production . a penny-farthing is the logo of the village in the cult 1960s television series the prisoner , and is also featured in the show 's closing titles . co-creator and star patrick mcgoohan stated that the bike represented slowing down the wheels of progress . it is a symbol of the cities of sparta , wisconsin ; davis , california ; and redmond , washington . . events . each february in evandale , tasmania , penny-farthing enthusiasts from around the world converge on the small village for a series of penny-farthing races , including the national championship . in october there is a bicycle ride from the statue of an 1890s bicyclist on a penny-farthing in port byron , illinois named '' will b . rolling '' to a similar statue in sparta , wisconsin named '' ben bikin ' '' . in 2004 , british leukemia patient and charity fundraiser lloyd scott ( 43 ) rode a penny-farthing across the australian outback to raise money for a charitable cause . in november 2008 , briton joff summerfield completed a round-the-world trip on a penny-farthing . summerfield spent two-and-a-half years cycling through 23 countries , visiting locations including the taj mahal , angkor wat and mount everest . knutsford in england has hosted the knutsford great race every 10 years since 1980 . the 1980 race had 15 team entries , and there were 16 in 1990 and 2000 . the 2010 race was limited to 50 teams and was in aid of the shelterbox charity . each year in the us the wheelmen hold a national meet that celebrates antique bicycles . in 2012 , the first clustered spires high wheel race took place in frederick , maryland , usa . this is the country 's only race of its kind - a one-hour criterium race around a course through the historic downtown district .