Mystery fiction

beginnings . the genre of mystery novels is a young form of literature that has developed since the early-19th century . the rise of literacy began in the years of the english renaissance and , as people began to read over time , they became more individualistic in their thinking . as people became more individualistic in their thinking , they developed a respect for human reason and the ability to solve problems . perhaps a reason that mystery fiction was unheard of before the 19th century was due in part to the lack of true police forces . before the industrial revolution , many of the towns would have constables and a night watchman at best . naturally , the constable would be aware of every individual in the town , and crimes were either solved quickly or left unsolved entirely . as people began to crowd into cities , police forces became institutionalized , and the need for detectives was realized – thus the mystery novel arose . an early work of modern mystery fiction , mademoiselle de scuderi by e . t . a . hoffmann ( 1819 ) , was an influence on the murders in the rue morgue by edgar allan poe ( 1841 ) as may have been voltaire 's zadig . wilkie collins ' novel the woman in white was published in 1860 , while the moonstone ( 1868 ) is often thought to be his masterpiece . in 1887 arthur conan doyle introduced sherlock holmes , whose mysteries are said to have been singularly responsible for the huge popularity in this genre . the genre began to expand near the turn of the century with the development of dime novels and pulp magazines . books were especially helpful to the genre , with many authors writing in the genre in the 1920s . an important contribution to mystery fiction in the 1920s was the development of the juvenile mystery by edward stratemeyer . stratemeyer originally developed and wrote the hardy boys and nancy drew mysteries written under the franklin w . dixon and carolyn keene pseudonyms respectively ( and were later written by his daughter , harriet adams , and other authors ) . the 1920s also gave rise to one of the most popular mystery authors of all time , agatha christie , whose works include murder on the orient express ( 1934 ) , death on the nile ( 1937 ) , and the world 's best-selling mystery and then there were none ( 1939 ) . the massive popularity of pulp magazines in the 1930s and 1940s increased interest in mystery fiction . pulp magazines decreased in popularity in the 1950s with the rise of television , so much that the numerous titles available then are reduced to two today : alfred hitchcock 's mystery magazine and ellery queen 's mystery magazine—both now published by dell magazines , a division of crosstown publications . the detective fiction author ellery queen ( pseudonym of frederic dannay and manfred b . lee ) is also credited with continuing interest in mystery fiction . 21st century . interest in mystery fiction continues to this day because of various television shows which have used mystery themes and the many juvenile and adult novels which continue to be published . there is some overlap with '' thriller '' or '' suspense '' novels and authors in those genres may consider themselves mystery novelists . comic books and graphic novels have carried on the tradition , and film adaptations or the even-more-recent web-based detective series , have helped to re-popularize the genre in recent times . j . madison davis : '' how graphic can a mystery be ? '' , world literature today , july–august 2007 . classifications . detective fiction . though the origins of the genre date back to ancient literature and one thousand and one nights , the modern detective story as we know it was invented by edgar allan poe in the mid-19th century through his short story , the murders in the rue morgue , which featured arguably the world 's first fictional detective , c . auguste dupin . however , detective fiction was pioneered and popularized only later , in the late 19th century , by sir arthur conan doyle 's sherlock holmes stories , considered milestones in crime fiction . the detective story shares some similarities with mystery fiction in that it also has a mystery to be solved , clues , red herrings , some plot twists along the way and a detective denouement , but differs on several points . most of the sherlock holmes stories feature no suspects at all , while mystery fiction , in contrast , features a large number of them . as noted , detective stories feature professional and retired detectives , while mystery fiction almost exclusively features amateur detectives . finally , detective stories focus on the detective and how the crime was solved , while mystery fiction concentrates on the identity of the culprit and how the crime was committed , a distinction that separated and then there were none from other works of agatha christie . true crime . the true crime is a literary genre that recounts real crimes committed by real people , almost half focusing on serial killers . criticized by many as being insensitive to those personally acquainted with the incidents , it is often categorized as trash culture . having basis on reality , it shares more similarities with docufiction than the mystery genre . unlike fiction of the kind , it does n't focus much on the identity of the culprit and has no red herrings or clues , but often emphasizes how the culprit was caught and their motivations behind their actions . cozy mystery . cozy mysteries began in the late 20th century as a reinvention of the golden age whodunit ; these novels generally shy away from violence and suspense and frequently feature female amateur detectives . modern cozy mysteries are frequently , though not necessarily in either case , humorous and thematic . this genre features minimal violence , sex and social relevance , a solution achieved by intellect or intuition rather than police procedure with order restored in the end , honorable and well bred characters , and a setting in a closed community . the murders are often committed by less violent tools such as poison and the wounds inflicted are rarely if ever used as clues . the writers who innovated and popularized the genre include agatha christie , dorothy l sayers and elizabeth daly . legal thriller . the legal thriller or courtroom novel is also related to detective fiction . the system of justice itself is always a major part of these works , at times almost functioning as one of the characters . in this way , the legal system provides the framework for the legal thriller as much as the system of modern police work does for the police procedural . the legal thriller usually starts its business with the court proceedings following the closure of an investigation , often resulting in a new angle on the investigation , so as to bring about a final outcome different from the one originally devised by the investigators . in the legal thriller , court proceedings play a very active , if not to say decisive part in a case reaching its ultimate solution . erle stanley gardner popularized the courtroom novel in the 20th century with his perry mason series . contemporary authors of legal thrillers include michael connelly , linda fairstein , john grisham , john lescroart , paul levine , lisa scottoline and scott turow . police procedural . many detective stories have police officers as the main characters . these stories may take a variety of forms , but many authors try to realistically depict the routine activities of a group of police officers who are frequently working on more than one case simultaneously , providing a stark contrast to the detective-as-superhero archetype holmes brought . some of these stories are whodunits ; in others , the criminal is well known , and it is a case of getting enough evidence . in the 1940s the police procedural evolved as a new style of detective fiction . unlike the heroes of christie , chandler , and spillane , the police detective was subject to error and was constrained by rules and regulations . as gary huasladen says in places for dead bodies , '' not all the clients were insatiable bombshells , and invariably there was life outside the job . '' the detective in the police procedural does the things police officers do to catch a criminal . writers include ed mcbain , p . d . james and bartholomew gill . howcatchem . an inverted detective story , also known as a '' howcatchem '' , is a murder mystery fiction structure in which the commission of the crime is shown or described at the beginning , usually including the identity of the perpetrator . the story then describes the detective 's attempt to solve the mystery . there may also be subsidiary puzzles , such as why the crime was committed , and they are explained or resolved during the story . this format is the opposite of the more typical '' whodunit '' , where all of the details of the perpetrator of the crime are not revealed until the story 's climax . hardboiled fiction . martin hewitt , created by british author arthur morrison in 1894 , is one of the first examples of the modern style of fictional private detective . this character is described as an '' 'everyman ' detective meant to challenge the detective-as-superman that holmes represented . '' by the late 1920s , al capone and the mob were inspiring not only fear , but piquing mainstream curiosity about the american crime underworld . popular pulp fiction magazines like black mask capitalized on this , as authors such as carrol john daly published violent stories that focused on the mayhem and injustice surrounding the criminals , not the circumstances behind the crime . very often , no actual mystery even existed : the books simply revolved around justice being served to those who deserved harsh treatment , which was described in explicit detail . '' the overall theme these writers portrayed reflected '' the changing face of america itself . '' in the 1930s , the private eye genre was adopted wholeheartedly by american writers . one of the primary contributors to this style was dashiell hammett with his famous private investigator character , sam spade . his style of crime fiction came to be known as '' hardboiled '' , which is described as a genre that '' usually deals with criminal activity in a modern urban environment , a world of disconnected signs and anonymous strangers . '' '' told in stark and sometimes elegant language through the unemotional eyes of new hero-detectives , these stories were an american phenomenon . '' according to the best-selling author michael connelly , '' chandler credited hammett with taking the mystery out of the drawing-room and putting it out on the street where it belongs . '' in the late 1930s , raymond chandler updated the form with his private detective philip marlowe , who brought a more intimate voice to the detective than the more distanced '' operative 's report '' style of hammett 's continental op stories . despite struggling through the task of plotting a story , his cadenced dialogue and cryptic narrations were musical , evoking the dark alleys and tough thugs , rich women and powerful men about whom he wrote . several feature and television movies have been made about the philip marlowe character . james hadley chase wrote a few novels with private eyes as the main heroes , including blonde 's requiem ( 1945 ) , lay her among the lilies ( 1950 ) , and figure it out for yourself ( 1950 ) . the heroes of these novels are typical private eyes , very similar to or plagiarizing raymond chandler 's work . ross macdonald , pseudonym of kenneth millar , updated the form again with his detective lew archer . archer , like hammett 's fictional heroes , was a camera eye , with hardly any known past . '' turn archer sideways , and he disappears , '' one reviewer wrote . two of macdonald 's strengths were his use of psychology and his beautiful prose , which was full of imagery . like other 'hardboiled ' writers , macdonald aimed to give an impression of realism in his work through violence , sex and confrontation . the 1966 movie harper starring paul newman was based on the first lew archer story the moving target ( 1949 ) . newman reprised the role in the drowning pool in 1976 . michael collins , pseudonym of dennis lynds , is generally considered the author who led the form into the modern age . his private investigator , dan fortune , was consistently involved in the same sort of david-and-goliath stories that hammett , chandler , and macdonald wrote , but collins took a sociological bent , exploring the meaning of his characters ' places in society and the impact society had on people . full of commentary and clipped prose , his books were more intimate than those of his predecessors , dramatizing that crime can happen in one 's own living room . the pi novel was a male-dominated field in which female authors seldom found publication until marcia muller , sara paretsky and sue grafton were finally published in the late 1970s and early 1980s . each author 's detective , also female , was brainy and physical and could hold her own . their acceptance , and success , caused publishers to seek out other female authors . historical mystery . these works are set in a time period considered historical from the author 's perspective , and the central plot involves the solving of a mystery or crime ( usually murder ) . though works combining these genres have existed since at least the early 20th century , many credit ellis peters 's the cadfael chronicles ( 1977–1994 ) for popularizing what would become known as the historical mystery . locked-room mystery . the locked-room mystery is a subgenre of detective fiction . the crime—almost always murder—is committed in circumstances under which it was seemingly impossible for the perpetrator to commit the crime and/or evade detection in the course of getting in and out of the crime scene . the genre was established in the 19th century . poe 's the murders in the rue morgue ( 1841 ) is considered the first locked-room mystery ; since then , other authors have used the scheme . john dickson carr was recognized as a master of the genre and his the hollow man was recognized by a panel of 17 mystery authors and reviewers as the best locked-room mystery of all time in 1981 . the crime in question typically involves a crime scene with no indication as to how the intruder could have entered or left , i.e . , a locked room . following other conventions of classic detective fiction , the reader is normally presented with the puzzle and all of the clues , and is encouraged to solve the mystery before the solution is revealed in a dramatic climax . references . external links . stop , you 're killing me ! is an anthony award-winning website that compiles resources for lovers of mystery , crime , thriller , spy , and suspense books . mystery weekly magazine presents crime and mystery short stories by some of the world 's best established and emerging mystery writers . german mystery blog with daily news .