1973 in literature

events . march 6 – the montenegrin academy of sciences and arts , founded as the montenegrin society for science and arts ( crnogorsko društvo za nauku i umjetnost ) in podgorica , elects its first members . may 14 new orthography for the greenlandic language is introduced . françois truffaut 's film day for night ( la nuit américaine ) premieres ; novelist grahame greene ( credited as henry graham ) has a cameo role as an english insurance company representative . june 21 the supreme court of the united states delivers its decision in the landmark case miller v . california , establishing the '' miller test '' for determining obscenity . virago press , registered on june 18 in the u.k . by carmen callil mainly to publish classics by women writers , holds its first board meeting ; its first book will be published in 1975 . july 26 – peter shaffer 's drama equus is premièred in london by the national theatre company at the old vic . september – following the overthrow of president allende by a military regime , book burnings in chile . september 16 – chilean poet and playwright víctor jara , detained four days earlier as a political prisoner in estadio chile and tortured during the 1973 chilean coup d'état , is shot and killed . his last poem , '' estadio chile '' , is preserved in memories and scraps of paper retained by fellow detainees . september 25 – the funeral of chilean poet pablo neruda becomes a focus for protests against the new government of augusto pinochet . the washington post . december 3 – french police of the direction de la surveillance du territoire , disguised as plumbers , are caught trying to install a spy microphone in the directors ' office of the paris satirical paper le canard enchaîné . c . december 27 – aleksandr solzhenitsyn 's novel the gulag archipelago ( архипелаг гулаг , written 1958–1968 ) is first published , by the paris publisher éditions du seuil from a typescript smuggled out of the soviet union . unknown dates andré brink 's novel kennis van die aand ( '' looking on darkness '' ) becomes the first afrikaans book banned by the government of south africa . mikhail bulgakov 's novel the master and margarita ( ма́стер и маргари́та ) is first published complete in moscow ( in the form left at the author 's death in 1940 ) , by khudozhestvennaya literatura . frank herbert becomes director-photographer of the television show , the tillers . robert b . parker starts the boston-based spenser book series with his debut crime novel the godwulf manuscript . new books . fiction . nelson algren – the last carousel ( short stories ) martin amis – the rachel papers j . g . ballard – crash rené barjavel – the immortals donald barr - space relations thomas berger – regiment of women joseph payne brennan – stories of darkness and dread rita mae brown – rubyfruit jungle john brunner – the stone that never came down ramsey campbell – demons by daylight jerome charyn – the tar baby agatha christie – postern of fate arthur c . clarke – rendezvous with rama basil copper – from evil 's pillow julio cortázar – libro de manuel ( a manual for manuel ) l . sprague de camp – the fallible fiend l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp , editors – tales beyond time michel déon – un taxi mauve august derleth – the chronicles of solar pons michael ende – momo paul e . erdman – the billion dollar sure thing j . g . farrell – the siege of krishnapur leon forrest – there is a tree more ancient than eden william goldman – the princess bride graham greene – the honorary consul elisabeth harvor – women and children ( 11 stories revised as our lady of all distances in 1991 ) l.p . hartley – the will and the way robert a . heinlein – time enough for love hammond innes – golden soak joseph joffo – a bag of marbles ( un sac de billes ) b . s . johnson – christie malry 's own double-entry james jones – a touch of danger anna kavan – who are you ? brian killick – the heralds dean r . koontz – demon seed jerzy kosiński – the devil tree milan kundera – life is elsewhere ( život je jinde , first published in french as la vie est ailleurs ) derek lambert beau blackstone blackstone 's fancy clarice lispector – água viva robert ludlum – the matlock paper john d . macdonald – the turquoise lament cormac mccarthy – child of god robert marasco – burnt offerings toni morrison – sula iris murdoch – the black prince tim o'brien – if i die in a combat zone , box me up and ship me home robert b . parker – the godwulf manuscript mervyn peake ( died 1968 ) – the rhyme of the flying bomb anthony powell – temporary kings thomas pynchon – gravity 's rainbow ernst von salomon – der tote preuße irwin shaw – evening in byzantium aleksandr solzhenitsyn – the gulag archipelago ( архипелаг гулаг ) richard g . stern – other men 's daughters rex stout – please pass the guilt jacqueline susann – once is not enough hunter s . thompson – fear and loathing on the campaign trail '72 jack vance – the anome mario vargas llosa – captain pantoja and the special service ( pantaleón y las visitadoras ) gore vidal – burr kurt vonnegut , jr . – breakfast of champions patrick white – the eye of the storm rudy wiebe – temptations of big bear venedikt yerofeyev – moscow-petushki ( moscow to the end of the line ; first commercial publication , in israel ) roger zelazny to die in italbar today we choose faces . children and young people . nina bawden – carrie 's war thea beckman – crusade in jeans ( kruistocht in spijkerbroek ) lois duncan – i know what you did last summer penelope lively – the ghost of thomas kempe ruth manning-sanders – a book of ogres and trolls ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat and the bush band bill peet – the spooky tail of prewitt peacock dick roughsey – the giant devil dingo doris buchanan smith – a taste of blackberries patricia wrightson – the nargun and the stars . drama . alan ayckbourn – the norman conquests griselda gambaro – information for foreigners ( información para extranjeros ) jean poiret – la cage aux folles david rudkin – cries from casement as his bones are brought to dublin ( radio play ) peter shaffer – equus . poetry . allen curnow – an abominable temper and other poems tomás rivera – always and other poems . non-fiction . ernest becker – the denial of death howard w . bergerson – palindromes and anagrams allan w . eckert – the court-martial of daniel boone antonia fraser – cromwell , our chief of men christopher lloyd – foliage plants peter maas – serpico biblica – new testament , new international version ( translated into modern american english ) tim o'brien – if i die in a combat zone , box me up and ship me home bill owens – suburbia john pearson – james bond : the authorised biography of 007 flora rheta schreiber – sybil e . f . schumacher – small is beautiful binod bihari verma – maithili karna kayasthak panjik sarvekshan ( in maithili ) maureen and tony wheeler – across asia on the cheap paula wolfert – couscous and other good food from morocco . births . january 8 – madhulika liddle , indian writer january 13 – lois pryce , scottish-born travel writer and journalist february 21 – jacob m . appel , american short story writer and bioethicist may 10 – tana french , american-born mystery novelist and actress june 2 – david bezmozgis , latvian-canadian writer august 13 – kamila shamsie , pakistan-born novelist august 18 – victoria coren mitchell , english writer , presenter and poker player , daughter of alan coren december 20 – maarja kangro , estonian author and poet december 24 – stephenie meyer , american young-adult vampire romance writer and film producer unknown dates frances hardinge , english young people 's fiction writer ahmed saadawi , iraqi writer juan gabriel vásquez , colombian novelist . deaths . january 15 – neil m . gunn , scottish novelist , dramatist and critic ( born 1891 ) february 22 – elizabeth bowen , anglo-irish novelist and short story writer ( born 1899 ) march 6 – pearl s . buck , american novelist ( born 1892 ) march 18 – roland dorgelès , french novelist and memoirist ( born 1885 ) march 26 – sir noël coward , english dramatist and humorist ( born 1899 ) april 9 – warren lewis , irish author ( born 1895 ) april 20 – elisabeth hauptmann , german writer ( born 1897 ) april 28 – jacques maritain , french philosopher ( born 1882 ) april 30 – jirō osaragi ( 大佛 次郎 , haruhiku nojiri ) , japanese novelist ( born 1897 ) may 21 – carlo emilio gadda , italian poet and linguist ( born 1893 ) june 4 – arna bontemps , american poet ( born 1902 ) june 9 – john creasey , english crime writer ( born 1908 ) june 30 – nancy mitford , english novelist and biographer ( born 1904 ) july 11 – nobuko yoshiya ( 吉屋 信子 , yoshiya nobuko ) , japanese romantic novelist ( born 1896 ) july 29 – henri charrière , french writer and criminal ( born 1906 ) august 1 – ann quin , english novelist ( born 1936 ) september 2 – j . r . r . tolkien , english fantasy writer and scholar ( born 1892 ) september 23 – pablo neruda , chilean poet ( born 1904 ) september 29 – w . h . auden , english poet ( born 1907 ) october 6 – margaret wilson , american novelist ( born 1882 ) october 28 – sergio tofano , italian dramatist ( born 1886 ) november 13 – b . s . johnson , english novelist ( born 1933 ) december 7 – benn levy , english playwright and politician ( born 1900 ) december 9 – anthony gilbert , english crime writer ( born 1899 ) december 11 – may wedderburn cannan , english poet ( born 1893 ) december 14 – josef magnus wehner , german poet and playwright ( born 1891 ) unknown datekathleen lindsaykathleen lindsay , english-born south african romance novelist ( born 1903 ) . awards . nobel prize in literature : patrick white . canada . see 1973 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : jacques chessex , l'ogre prix médicis french : tony duvert , paysage de fantaisie prix médicis international : milan kundera , life is elsewhere . united kingdom . booker prize : j . g . farrell , the siege of krishnapur carnegie medal for children 's literature : penelope lively , the ghost of thomas kempe cholmondeley award : patric dickinson , philip larkin eric gregory award : john beynon , ian caws , james fenton , keith harris , david howarth , philip pacey james tait black memorial prize for fiction : iris murdoch , the black prince james tait black memorial prize for biography : robin lane fox , alexander the great queen 's gold medal for poetry : john heath-stubbs . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry , john crowe ransom hugo award : isaac asimov , the gods themselves nebula award : arthur c . clarke , rendezvous with rama newbery medal for children 's literature : jean craighead george , julie of the wolves pulitzer prize for drama : jason miller , that championship season pulitzer prize for fiction : eudora welty , the optimist 's daughter pulitzer prize for poetry : maxine kumin , up country . elsewhere . miles franklin award : no award presented premio nadal : josé garcía blázquez , el rito viareggio prize : achille campanile , manuale di conversazione . references .