Pehr Evind Svinhufvud

family background and early life . pehr evind svinhufvud af qvalstad was born in sääksmäki . he was the son of pehr gustaf svinhufvud af qvalstad , a sea captain , and olga von becker . his father drowned at sea off greece in 1863 , when pehr evind was only two years old . he spent his early childhood at the home of his paternal grandfather , pehr gustaf svinhufvud af qvalstad ( a provincial treasurer of häme ) , at rapola , where the family had lived for five generations . the svinhufvuds ( literally translated as '' swine-head '' ) are a finland-swedish noble family tracing their history back to dalarna , sweden . pehr gustaf svinhufvud af qvalstad , an army lieutenant in the reign of charles xii , had moved from there to rapola after the great northern war . the family had been ennobled in sweden in 1574 , and it was also introduced to the finnish house of nobility in 1818 . rapola was sold when his grandfather shot himself in 1866 , and svinhufvud moved to helsinki with his mother and his sister . he attended the swedish language high school in helsinki . in 1878 , at the age of 16 , he enrolled at the university of helsinki . there he gained a bachelor 's degree in 1881 , and then completed a master 's degree in 1882 ; his main subjects being finnish , russian and scandinavian history . after this , he took a master of laws degree , graduating in 1886 . in 1889 , svinhufvud married alma ( ellen ) timgren ( 1869–1953 ) . they had six children , yngve ( 1890–1991 ) , ilmo gretel ( 1892–1969 ) , aino mary ( 1893–1980 ) , eino ( 1896–1938 ) , arne ( 1904–1942 ) , and veikko ( 1908–1969 ) . a lawyer and a politician . svinhufvud 's career in law followed a regular course : he worked as a lawyer , served at district courts , and served as a deputy judge at the turku court of appeal . in 1892 he was appointed as a member of the senate 's law-drafting committee at the relatively young age of 31 . for six years he worked in the committee , initially redrafting taxation laws . as head of his family , svinhufvud participated as a member of the estate of nobles in the diet of finland in 1894 and 1899–1906 . he found his work on the law-drafting committee tedious and moved to the court of appeal as an assistant judge in 1902 , his long-term goal being the easy life of a rural judge . svinhufvud stayed mainly in the background until 1899 , when imperial russia initiated a russification policy for the autonomous grand duchy . the finnish answer was mainly legislative and constitutional resistance , of which svinhufvud became a central figure as a judge in the court of appeals . when some inhabitants of helsinki lodged a complaint with the turku court of appeal in 1902 , concerning violence employed by the russian governor of uusimaa to break up a demonstration against military call-ups , the court initiated proceedings against governor-general bobrikov . bobrikov demanded that they be stopped , and when this did not happen , he used a decree which the finns regarded as illegal to dismiss sixteen officials of the court , including svinhufvud . originally a moderate of the finnish party or old finnish party , after his dismissal svinhufvud became a strict constitutionalist who regarded the resistance of judges and officials as a question of justice , not believing that political expediency offered compromises . he moved to helsinki to work as a lawyer and participated in the political activities both of the diet and of a secret society , kagal . svinhufvud played a key role in the birth of a new parliamentary system in 1905 and he was elected as a young finnish party member of the new parliament in 1906 . svinhufvud went on to serve as a member of parliament on four occasions ( 1907–1908 , 1908–1914 , 1917 , and 1930–1931 ) . after being appointed as a judge in heinola in 1906 , he attempted to keep out of the front line of politics . however he was elected speaker of the parliament in 1907 , largely because the majority social democrats considered him '' the best-known opponent of illegality '' . svinhufvud 's parliamentary opening speeches , in which he laid emphasis on legality , led to the tsar dissolving parliament in both 1909 and 1910 . he served as speaker until 1912 . svinhufvud also served as a judge in lappee 1908–1914 . during the world war i russia replaced various finnish officials with russians . svinhufvud refused to obey the orders of the russian procurator konstantin kazansky , which he considered illegal , and this led to his removal from office as a judge and being exiled to tomsk in siberia in november 1914 . in his siberian exile , he spent his time hunting and mending his clothes , still keeping secret contact with the independence movement . when he left finland , he had promised to return '' with the help of god and hindenburg '' . when news of the february revolution reached svinhufvud , he walked to the town 's police station and bluntly announced , '' the person who sent me here has been arrested . now i 'm going home . '' in helsinki he was greeted as a national hero . independence and the civil war . svinhufvud was appointed as chairman of the senate on 27 november 1917 , and was a key figure in the announcement of finland 's declaration of independence on 6 december 1917 . he also personally went to saint petersburg with carl enckell and gustaf idman to meet vladimir ilyich lenin , who gave his official recognition of finnish independence . is : lenin tunnusti suomen tasan sata vuotta sitten – kohtasi suomalaisdelegaation pää painuksissa ja harmitteli myöhemmin lipsahdustaan ( in finnish ) this is how the meeting is told in svinhufvud 's biography svinhufvud ja itsenäisyyssenaatti written by erkki räikkönen : svinhufvud 's senate also authorized general mannerheim to form a new finnish army on the basis on white guard , the ( chiefly rightist ) volunteer militia called the suojeluskunta , an act simultaneously coinciding with the beginning of the civil war in finland . during the civil war , svinhufvud went underground in helsinki and sent pleas for intervention to germany and sweden . the conflict also turned him into an active monarchist , though not a royalist . in march 1918 he managed to escape via berlin-stockholm to the senate , now located in vaasa , where he resumed his function as head of government . in this role he pardoned 36,000 red prisoners in the autumn of 1918 . on 18 may , svinhufvud became protector of state or regent , retaining this post as head of state after he stood down as chairman of the senate on 27 may . after germany 's defeat in world war i , and the failed attempt to make finland a monarchy under the king of finland ( frederick charles of hesse was elected ) , svinhufvud withdrew from public life and was active only in the rightist suojeluskunta-militia . prime minister and president . in 1925 he was the presidential candidate for the conservative kokoomus party , but was not elected . after the emergence of the anti-communist lapua movement , president relander appointed him as prime minister of finland on the lapua movement 's insistence . svinhufvud was elected president in 1931 , and appointed mannerheim as chairman of the defence council , not least of all as an answer to the lapua movement 's fear of having fought the civil war in vain . he resisted both communism agitation and the lapua movement 's exploits . all communist members of parliament were arrested . in february 1932 there was a so-called mäntsälä rebellion , when the white guard ( finland ) and the lapua movement demanded the cabinet 's resignation . the turning point came with the president 's broadcast radio speech , in which he called on the rebels to surrender and ordered all civil guard members who were heading for mäntsälä to return to their homes : his speech stopped the rebellion before anything serious happened . svinhufvud was not a supporter of parliamentarism , or to put it differently , he believed that the president had a right to choose the cabinet ministers after first consulting the parliamentary parties . evidence of this semi-presidential attitude was the minority government of toivo m . kivimäki , which survived for 3 years and 10 months ( december 1932 – october 1936 ) . svinhufvud strongly supported it , because he believed that it could effectively fight the great depression ( which it did , generally speaking ) , he believed that kivimäki had a strong personality like himself , and possibly because he hoped that the agrarians and swedish people 's party would let the kivimäki government remain in office as a lesser evil , the greater evil being an agrarian-social democratic government . on the other hand , when a right-wing conservative member of parliament , edwin linkomies , proposed in 1934 that finland abandon parliamentarism in favour of a government led by the president and that the president be given an absolute veto power over the laws passed by the parliament , svinhufvud opposed his ideas . in svinhufvud 's opinion , the finnish president had enough power to lead the country , provided that the president had a strong personality . he believed it to be better for finland if the social democrats could be kept outside of the cabinet . in his opinion , they would implement too radical reforms that would lead the finnish society into chaos or marxism . on the other hand , he was realistic enough to admit privately to the german ambassador to finland , wipert von blücher , that if he was re-elected , he would be unable to keep the social democrats in the opposition . they were , after all , finland 's largest political party with over 40 % of the deputies ( see , for example , seppo zetterberg et al . , ed . , '' a small giant of the finnish history '' / suomen historian pikkujättiläinen , helsinki : werner söderström publications ltd . , 2003 ; virkkunen , '' the finnish presidents i '' ) . it was due to this that , in the presidential election of 1937 , the social democrats and the agrarian party voted against him . he was not re-elected . at the end of winter war , he unsuccessfully sought audience with both adolf hitler and benito mussolini but met only pope pius xii . during the continuation war he supported the idea of an expansionistic war . svinhufvud 's most important and beloved hobbies were hunting and precision shooting . his grandson jorma svinhufvud describes : svinhufvud died at luumäki in 1944 , while finland was seeking peace with the soviet union . he refused to finnicize the name of his 500-year-old noble house . cabinets . pehr evind svinhufvud 's first senate svinhufvud ii cabinet . honours . awards and decorations . : grand cross of the order of the white rose ( finland ) : grand cross of the order of the cross of liberty : collar of the order of the white lion , czechoslovakia ( 12 december 1931 ) : knight of the order of the seraphim , sweden ( 3 december 1932 ) : order of the white eagle ( poland ) : order of the cross of the eagle : order of merit of the kingdom of hungary