Benjamin Constant

biography . henri-benjamin constant was born in lausanne to descendants of french huguenot protestants who had fled from artois to switzerland during the huguenot wars in the 16th century . his father , jules constant de rebecque , served as a high-ranking officer in the dutch states army , like his grandfather , his uncle and his cousin jean victor de constant rebecque . when constant 's mother , henriette-pauline de chandieu-villars , died soon after his birth , both his grandmothers took care of him . private tutors educated him in brussels ( 1779 ) and in the netherlands ( 1780 ) . while at the protestant university of erlangen ( 1783 ) , he gained access to the court of duchess sophie caroline marie of brunswick-wolfenbüttel . he had to leave after an affair with a girl , and moved to the university of edinburgh . there he lived at the home of andrew duncan and was befriended by james mackintosh and malcolm laing . benjamin constant : philosophe , historien , romancier , homme d'état , p . 38 when he left the city , he promised to pay back his gambling debts . in 1787 , he returned to continental europe , travelling on horseback through scotland and england . in those years european nobility , with their prerogatives , come under heavy attack from those , like constant , who were influenced by rousseau 's discourse on inequality . constant 's family criticized him for leaving out part of his last name . in paris , at the home of jean-baptiste-antoine suard he became acquainted with isabelle de charriere , a 46-year-old dutch woman of letters , who later helped publish rousseau 's confessions , and who knew his uncle david-louis constant de rebecque extremely well by virtue of a 15-year correspondence . while he stayed at her home in colombier switzerland , together they wrote an epistolary novel . she acted as a maternal mentor to him until constant 's appointment to the court of charles william ferdinand , duke of brunswick-wolfenbüttel that required him to move north . he left the court when the war of the first coalition began in 1792 . in braunschweig , he married wilhelmina von cramm , but she divorced him in 1793 . in september 1794 , he met and became interested in the famous and wealthy already married germaine de staël , herself brought up on the principles of rousseau . they both admired jean lambert tallien and talleyrand . their intellectual collaboration between 1795 and 1811 made them one of the most celebrated intellectual couples of the time . their affair resulted in one presumed daughter albertine . . paris . after the reign of terror in france ( 1793–1794 ) , constant became an advocate of bicameralism and of an assembly like the parliament of great britain . in revolutionary france this strand of political thought resulted in the constitution of the year iii , the council of five hundred and the council of ancients . in 1799 , after 18 brumaire , constant was reluctantly appointed , on the insistence of abbe sieyes , by napoleon bonaparte to the tribunat , despite grave reservations on the latter 's part . eventually , in 1802 , the first consul confirmed in his doubts , forced constant to withdraw because of the tenor of his speeches and his close connection with mme de staël . étienne hofmann , les « principes de politique » de benjamin constant , librairie droz , 1980 , vol . 1 . p.187-193 . constant became acquainted with julie talma , the salonnière wife of actor françois-joseph talma , who wrote many letters to him of compelling human interest . in 1800 , the plot of the rue saint-nicaise , an attempt to assassinate napoleon , failed . in 1803 , at a time when britain and france were at peace , jean gabriel peltier , while living in england , argued that napoleon should be assassinated . the lawyer james mackintosh defended the french refugee , peltier against a libel suit instigated by napoleon – then first consul of france . mackintosh 's speech was widely published in english and also across europe in a french translation by madame de staël . she was forced to leave paris as a result . de staël , disappointed by french rationalism , became interested in german romanticism . she and constant set out for prussia and saxony and travelled with her two children to weimar . duchess anna amalia of brunswick-wolfenbüttel welcomed them the day after their arrival . in weimar they met friedrich von schiller . due to illness johann wolfgang goethe at first hesitated . in berlin , they met august wilhelm schlegel , and his brother , friedrich schlegel . constant left de staël in leipzig and in 1806 lived in rouen and meulan , where he started work on his novel adolphe . in 1808 , he secretly married caroline von hardenberg , a woman who had been divorced twice , ( she was related to novalis and to karl august von hardenberg ) . he moved back to paris in 1814 , where the french restoration took place and louis xviii had become king . as a member of the council of state , constant proposed a constitutional monarchy . he became friends with madame récamier while he fell out with germaine de staël , who had asked him to pay back his gambling debts when their daughter , albertine , married victor de broglie . during the hundred days of napoleon , who had become more liberal , constant fled to the vendée , but returned when he was invited several times to the tuileries to set up changes for the charter of 1815 . after the battle of waterloo ( 18 june 1815 ) , constant moved to london with his wife . in 1817 , the year when madame de staĕl died , he was back in paris , and was elected to the chamber of deputies , the lower legislative house of the restoration-era government . one of its most eloquent orators , he became a leader of the parliamentary bloc first known as the independents and later as '' liberals '' . he became an opponent of charles x of france during the restoration between 1815 and 1830 . g . lanson , p . tuffrau , manuel d'histoire de la littérature française , hachette , paris 1953 in 1822 , goethe praised constant in the following terms : i spent many instructive evenings with benjamin constant . whoever recollects what this excellent man accomplished in later years , and with what zeal he advanced without wavering along the path which , once chosen , was forever followed , realizes what noble aspirations , as yet undeveloped , were fermenting within him . in 1830 , king louis philippe i gave constant a large sum of money to help him pay off his debts , and appointed him to the conseil d'etat . constant is said to have fathered albertine de staël-holstein ( 1797–1838 ) , who later married victor de broglie ( 1785–1870 ) . constant died in paris on 8 december 1830 and was buried in the pere la chaise cemetery . location : in division 29 . . political philosophy . image : isabelle de charrière - jens juel.gif thumb isabelle de charrière , a dutch-swiss intellectual with whom constant conducted an extensive correspondence . ancient and modern freedom . one of the first thinkers to go by the name of '' liberal '' , constant looked to britain rather than to ancient rome for a practical model of freedom in a large mercantile society . he drew a distinction between the '' liberty of the ancients '' and the '' liberty of the moderns '' . the liberty of the ancients was a participatory republican liberty , which gave the citizens the right to influence politics directly through debates and votes in the public assembly . to support this degree of participation , citizenship was a burdensome moral obligation requiring a considerable investment of time and energy . generally , this required a sub-society of slaves to do much of the productive work , leaving the citizens free to deliberate on public affairs . ancient liberty was also limited to relatively small and homogenous male societies , in which they could be conveniently gathered together in one place to transact public affairs . the liberty of the moderns , in contrast , was based on the possession of civil liberties , the rule of law , and freedom from excessive state interference . direct participation would be limited : a necessary consequence of the size of modern states , and also the inevitable result of having created a mercantile society in which there were no slaves but almost everybody had to earn a living through work . instead , the voters would elect legislator , who would deliberate in parliament on behalf of the people and would save citizens from daily political involvement . . critique of the french revolution . he criticised several aspects of the french revolution , and the failures of the social and political upheaval . he stated how the french attempted to apply ancient republican liberties to a modern state . constant realized that freedom meant drawing a line between a person 's private life and that of state interference . rosenblatt 2004 he praised the noble spirit of regenerating the state . however , he stated that it was naïve for writers to believe that two thousand years had not brought some changes in the customs and needs of the people . the dynamics of the state had changed . ancient populations paled in comparison to the size of modern countries . he even argued that with a large population , man had no role in government regardless of its form or type . constant emphasised how citizens in ancient states found more satisfaction in the public sphere and less in their private lives whereas modern people favoured their private life . constant 's repeated denunciation of despotism pervaded his critique of french political philosophers jean-jacques rousseau and abbé de mably . these writers , influential in the french revolution , according to constant , mistook authority for liberty and approved any means of extending the action of the state . alleged reformers used the model of public force of the ancien régime , and organised the most absolute despotism in the name of the republic . he continually condemned despotism , citing the contradiction of a liberty derived from despotism , and the vacuous nature of this ideology . furthermore , he pointed out the detrimental nature of the reign of terror , as an inexplicable delirium . in françois furet 's words , constant 's '' entire political thought '' revolved around this question , namely the problem of how to justify the terror . furet 1981 , p . 27 constant understood the revolutionaries ' disastrous over-investment in the political sphere . the french revolutionaries such as the sans-culottes were the primary force in the streets . they promoted constant vigilance in public . constant pointed out how despite the most obscure life , the quietest existence , the most unknown name , it offered no protection during the reign of terror . the pervasive mob mentality deterred many right thinking people and helped to usher in despots such as napoleon . commerce preferable to war . moreover , constant believed that , in the modern world , commerce was superior to war . he attacked napoleon 's belligerence , on the grounds that it was illiberal and no longer suited to modern commercial social organization . ancient liberty tended to rely on war , whereas a state organized on the principles of modern liberty would tend to be at peace with all other peaceful nations . constant believed that if liberty were to be salvaged from the aftermath of the revolution , then the chimera of ancient liberty had to be reconciled with the practical to achieve modern liberty . england , since the glorious revolution of 1688 , and the united kingdom after 1707 , had demonstrated the practicality of modern liberty and britain was a constitutional monarchy . constant concluded that constitutional monarchy was better suited than republicanism to maintaining modern liberty . he was instrumental in drafting the '' acte additional '' of 1815 , which transformed napoleon 's restored rule into a modern constitutional monarchy . english text of the charter this was only to last for '' one hundred days '' before napoleon was defeated , but constant 's work nevertheless provided a means of reconciling monarchy with liberty . indeed , the french constitution ( or charter ) of 1830 could be seen as a practical implementation of many of constant 's ideas : a hereditary monarchy existing alongside an elected chamber of deputies and a senatorial chamber of peers , with the executive power vested in responsible ministers . thus , although often ignored in france , because of his anglo-saxon sympathies , constant succeeded in contributing in a profound ( albeit indirect ) way to french constitutional traditions . constitutional monarchy . secondly , constant developed a new theory of constitutional monarchy , in which royal power was intended to be a neutral power , protecting , balancing and restraining the excesses of the other active powers ( the executive , legislature , and judiciary ) . this was an advance on the prevailing theory in the english-speaking world , which , following the opinion of william blackstone , the 18th-century english jurist , had regarded the king as head of the executive branch . in constant 's scheme , the executive power would be entrusted to a council of ministers ( or cabinet ) who , although appointed by the king , were ultimately accountable to parliament . in making this clear theoretical distinction between the powers of the king ( as head of state ) and the ministers ( as executive ) , constant was responding to the political reality which had become apparent in britain for more than a century : that is , the ministers , and not the king , are responsible actors , and the king '' reigns but does not rule '' . this was important for the development of parliamentary government in france and elsewhere . the king was not to be a powerless cipher in constant 's scheme . he would have many powers , including the power to make judicial appointments , to dissolve the chamber and call new elections , to appoint the peers , and to dismiss ministers – but he would not be able to govern , make policy , or direct the administration , since that would be the task of the responsible ministers . this theory was literally applied in portugal ( 1822 ) and brazil ( 1824 ) , where the king/emperor was explicitly given '' moderating powers '' rather than executive power . elsewhere ( for example , the 1848 '' statuto albertino '' of the kingdom of sardinia , which later became the basis of the italian constitution from 1861 ) the executive power was notionally vested in the king , but was exercised only by the responsible ministers . he advocated the separation of powers as a basis for a liberal state , but unlike montesquieu and most of the liberal thinkers , he advocated five powers instead of three . they were : the monarch or moderator , the executive , the representative power of opinion , the representative power of tradition and the judiciary . thus the moderating power was a monarch , a type of judge , who was not part of government , but served as a neutral power to the government , the executive power was vested in the ministers that the monarch appointed and they were , collectively , the head of government , the representative powers were a separation of the monstesquieu 's legislative power , with the representative power of opinion being an elected body to represent the opinion of the citizenry and the representative power of tradition was a hereditary house of peers and the judiciary was similar to the montesquieu 's judicial power . constant 's other concerns included a '' new type of federalism '' : a serious attempt to decentralize french government through the devolution of powers to elected municipal councils . this proposal reached fruition in 1831 , when elected municipal councils ( albeit on a narrow suffrage ) were created . comparative religion . aside from his political and literary output , constant spent forty years working on religion and religious feeling . his publications demonstrate his desire to grasp this social phenomenon inherent to human nature , which , in whatever forms it may present , is always a search for perfectibility . if its manifestations become rigid , splitting becomes inevitable . thus , however religious feeling may present , it needs to adapt and evolve . constant is adamant that political authority should not meddle in the religious beliefs of the citizenry , even to defend them . in his view it is up to each person to decide where to seek their consolation , moral compass or faith . external authority can not act upon someone 's convictions , it can only act upon their interests . constant . principes de politique , livre viii , chapitre iv he also condemns a religion that is commonly regarded as utilitarian , since it degrades authentic religious feeling . he considers that it was necessary for polytheism to decline in line with human progress . the more humans progress in their understanding , the more beneficial the effects of theism . constant . polythéisme romain , ii , p.312 belief in a god has itself evolved . christianity , especially protestantism is , he argues , its most tolerant form and an indicator of intellectual , moral and spiritual evolution . novels . constant published only one novel during his lifetime , adolphe ( 1816 ) , the story of a young , indecisive man 's disastrous love affair with an older mistress . a first-person novel in the sentimentalist tradition , adolphe examines the thoughts of the young man as he falls in and out of love with ellenore , a woman of uncertain virtue . constant began the novel as an autobiographical tale of two loves , but decided that the reading public would object to serial passions . the love affair depicted in the finished version of the novel is thought to be based on constant 's affair with anna lindsay , who describes the affair in her correspondence ( published in the revue des deux mondes , december 1930 – january 1931 ) . the book has been compared to chateaubriand 's rené or mme de stael 's corinne . as a young man , constant became acquainted with a literary friend of his uncle , david-louis constant de rebecque . she was isabelle de charrière , a dutch woman of letters with whom he jointly wrote an epistolary novel , under the title , les lettres d'arsillé fils , sophie durfé et autres . wood , dennis . isabelle de charrière et benjamin constant . à propos d'une découverte récente . sur les lettres d'arsillé fils , sophie durfé et autres , roman écrit par benjamin constant et madame de charrière . in : studies on voltaire and the eighteenth century ; 215 . ( oxford , voltaire foundation , 1982 ) , . . legacy . the importance of constant 's writings on the liberty of the ancients and of that of his time has dominated understanding of his work , as has his critique of the french revolution . the british philosopher and historian of ideas , sir isaiah berlin has acknowledged his debt to constant . according to berlin , the most eloquent of all defenders of freedom and privacy was benjamin constant , who had not forgotten the jacobin dictatorship . constant 's wider literary and cultural writings ( most importantly the novella adolphe and his extensive history of comparative religion ) emphasised the importance of self-sacrifice and effect of human emotions as a basis for social living . thus , while he pleaded for individual liberty as vital for individual and moral development and appropriate for modernity , he felt that egoism and self-interest were not part of a true definition of individual liberty . emotional authenticity and fellow-feeling were critical . in this , his moral and religious thought was strongly influenced by the moral writings of jean-jacques rousseau and german thinkers such as immanuel kant , whom he read in reference to his religious history . bibliography . essays . de la force du gouvernement actuel de la france et de la nécessité de s ' y rallier ( 1796 ) des réactions politiques ( 1797 ) des effets de la terreur ( 1797 ) principes de politique ( 1806 ) fragments d'un ouvrage abandonné sur la possibilité d'une constitution républicaine dans un grand pays ( published in 1991 by aubier , manuscript probably written between 1795 and 1810 ) benjamin constant , '' de l ’ esprit de conquête et de l ’ usurpation dans leur rapports avec la civilisation européenne '' , hanovre , londres et paris , hahn et h . nicolle , 1814 , , , réflexions sur les constitutions , la distribution des pouvoirs et les garanties dans une monarchie constitutionnelle ( 1814 ) de l'esprit de conquête et d'usurpation dans leurs rapports avec la civilisation actuelle ( 1815 ) ( against napoleon bonaparte ) principes de politique applicables à tous les gouvernements représentatifs ( 1815 ) mémoires sur les cent-jours de la liberté de l'industrie ( 1818 ) cours de politique constitutionnelle ( 1818–1820 ) « de la liberté des anciens comparée à celle des modernes » ( famous speech delivered in 1819 ) commentaire sur l'ouvrage de filangieri ( 1822–1824 ) de la religion considérée dans sa source , ses formes et son développement ( 5 vols . 1824–1831 ) ( on ancient religion ) appel aux nations chrétiennes en faveur des grecs . ( 1825 ) mélanges de littérature et de politique ( 1829 ) du polythéisme romain considéré dans ses rapports avec la philosophie grecque et la religion chrétienne ( 1833 ) correspondance de benjamin constant et d'anna lindsay – l'inconnue d'adolphe , publiée par la baronne constant de rebecque . ( plon , 1933 ) . novels . dennis wood , isabelle de charrière et benjamin constant . à propos d'une découverte récente . sur les lettres d'arsillé fils , sophie durfé et autres , roman écrit par benjamin constant et madame de charrière . in : studies on voltaire and the eighteenth century ; 215 . ( oxford , voltaire foundation , 1982 ) , . adolphe ( 1816 ) — quotes . autobiographical writings . le cahier rouge ( 1807 ) , published posthumously ( 1907 ) cécile ( écrit vers 1809 ) , published posthumously ( 1951 ) henriot , émile . « benjamin constant inédit » , sur lemonde.fr , 20 juin 1951 ( accessed 17 february 2020 ) . . letters . lettre à m . odilon barrot , avocat en la cour de cassation , sur l'affaire de wilfrid regnault , condamné à mort ( 1818 puis publié chez p . plancher en 1819 ) deuxième lettre à m . odilon barrot , avocat en la cour de cassation , sur l'affaire de wilfrid regnault , condamné à mort ( 1818 puis publié chez p . plancher en 1819 ) de l'appel en calomnie de m . le marquis de blosseville , contre wilfrid-regnault ( 1818 puis publié chez p . plancher en 1819 ) correspondance isabelle de charrière et benjamin constant ( 1787–1805 ) , éd . jean-daniel candaux . paris , desjonquères , 1996 renée weingarten , germaine de staël & benjamin constant . a dual biography , yale , 2008 . lettres à madame récamier ( 1807–1830 ) , edition critique par ephraïm harpaz , paris , librairie c . klincksieck , 1977 . intimate diary . journaux intimes , édition de jean-marie roulin , éd . gallimard , collection folio classique n°6382 , paris , 2017 . see also . contributions to liberal theory institut constant de rebecque , a swiss free-market , classical liberal and libertarian think tank named after benjamin constant . references . further reading . biancamaria fontana , benjamin constant and the post-revolutionary mind ( 1991 . yale u.p . , new haven – london ) carpenter , catrine . '' benjamin constant 's religious politics '' history of european ideas 35 4 ( 2009 ) , 503–09 . constant , benjamin . constant : political writings ( cambridge up , 1988 ) . dodge , guy howard . benjamin constant 's philosophy of liberalism : a study in politics & religion ( 1980 ) 195pp . gauchet , marcel . '' constant , '' in a critical dictionary of the french revolution , ed . françois furet and mona ozouf ( 1989 ) , p . & nbsp ; 924 . pitt , a . '' the religion of the moderns : freedom and authenticity in constant 's de la religion '' , in history of political thought ; 21 1 ( 2000 ) , 67–87 . rosenblatt , helena , ed . the cambridge companion to constant , ( 2009 . cambridge university press , cambridge ) steven , vincent , k . '' benjamin constant , the french revolution , and the origins of french romantic liberalism '' , french historical studies ; 23:4 ( 2000 fall ) , pp . & nbsp ; 607–37 in project muse vincent , k . steven . benjamin constant and the birth of french liberalism ( springer , 2011 ) online . vincent , k . steven . benjamin constant and the birth of french liberalism . wood , dennis . benjamin constant : a biography ( 1993 ) . other languages . furet , f . ( 1981 ) . '' la révolution sans la terreur ? le débat des historiens du xixe siècle '' , in le débat pp . & nbsp ; 13 , 41 . mauro barberis , benjamin constant . rivoluzione , costituzione , progresso ( 1988 . il mulino , bologna ) paul bastid , benjamin constant et sa doctrine , i–ii ( 1966 . colin , paris ) pierre deguise , benjamin constant méconnu . le livre de la religion , avec des documents inédits ( 1966 . droz , genève ) stefano de luca , il pensiero politico di benjamin constant ( 1993 . laterza , roma-bari ) béatrice fink ( dir . ) , benjamin constant : philosophe , historien , romancier et homme d'état ( actes du colloque de l'université du maryland , octobre 1989 ) , lausanne , institut benjamin constant ; paris , j . touzot , 1991 , 186 p . luca fezzi , il rimpianto di roma . 'res publica ' , libertà 'neoromane ' e benjamin constant , agli inizi del terzo millennio ( 2012 , firenze , le monnier ) henri guillemin , benjamin constant , muscadin , paris , gallimard , 1958 kurt kloocke , benjamin constant . une biographie intellectuelle ( 1984 . droz , genève ) giovanni paoletti , benjamin constant et les anciens . politique , réligion , histoire ( 2006 . champion , paris ) tzvetan todorov , benjamin constant : la passion democratique ( 1997 . hachette , paris ) . external links . institut benjamin constant homepage rebecq liberal intellectual portrait of b . c . by emile faguet ( in french ) the liberty of the ancients compared with that of the moderns ( 1816 ) principles of politics applicable to all governments lecture on ancient and modern liberty contains a readable version for contemporary students