Cirencester

sites of interest . the church of st . john the baptist is renowned for its perpendicular gothic porch , fan vaults and merchants ' tombs . the town also has a roman catholic church dedicated to st peter ; the foundation stone was laid on 20 june 1895 . coxwell street to the north of market square was the original home of the baptist church that was founded in 1651 , making it one of the oldest baptist churches in england ; cirencester baptist church website the church moved in january 2017 to a new building on chesterton lane . the town 's salvation army hall in thomas street occupies the former temperance hall built by the quaker christopher bowly in 1846 , and is the oldest such hall in the west of england . david grace . 'defeating the demon drink ' in s . emson and m . ball ( ed . ) cirencester 2002 pp91–98 the salvation army first met in cirencester in 1881 . to the west of the town is cirencester park , the seat of earl bathurst and the site of one of the finest landscape gardens in england , laid out by allen bathurst , 1st earl bathurst after 1714 . he inherited the estate from his father , sir benjamin bathurst , a tory member of parliament and statesman who made his wealth from his involvement in the slave trade through the royal africa company and the east india company . abbey house was a country house built on the site of the former cirencester abbey following its dissolution and demolition at the reformation in the 1530s . the site was granted in 1564 to richard master , physician to elizabeth i . the house was rebuilt and altered at several dates by the master family , who still own the agricultural estate . by 1897 the house was let , and it remained in the occupation of tenants until shortly after the second world war . it was demolished in 1964 . on cotswold avenue is the site of a roman amphitheatre which , while buried , retains its shape in the earthen topography of the small park setting . cirencester was one of the most substantial cities of roman-era britain . local politics . the liberal democrats are the dominant political party in cirencester , gaining all 8 cirencester seats available on cotswold district council in may 2019 ; the party has an overall majority on the district council . the liberal democrats also took 13 out of 16 seats on cirencester town council at the 2019 local elections ; rather than forming a political group , all councillors agreed to work apolitically . the liberal democrats have also held the two county council seats since the 2013 local elections . as of may 2019 , the mayor of cirencester is cllr patrick coleman . article in wilts & glos standard retrieved 17 june 2019 liberal democrat candidate joe harris , aged 18 , was elected for cirencester park ward in may 2011 , and became the youngest councillor in the country . in 2013 he became the youngest mayor in british history when fellow councillors elected him to the post at the age of 20 . harris was also elected to gloucestershire county council in the 2013 local elections , winning the cirencester park division . . education . the town and the surrounding area have several primary schools and two secondary schools , cirencester deer park school on stroud road and cirencester kingshill school on kingshill lane . it also has an independent school , rendcomb college , catering for 3 to 18-year-olds . the town used to have a 500-year-old grammar school , which in 1966 joined with the secondary modern to form cirencester deer park school . in 1991 , cirencester college was created , taking over the joint sixth form of cirencester deer park and cirencester kingshill schools and the cirencester site of stroud college ; it is adjacent to deer park school on stroud road . until 1994 the town had a private preparatory school , oakley hall . run in its later years by the letts family , it closed in 1994 shortly after the retirement of r f b letts who had led the school since 1962 . the grounds of the school are now occupied by housing . the royal agricultural university campus is between the stroud and tetbury roads . culture . the sundial theatre , part of cirencester college the bingham hall and the barn theatre host drama and musical events by community groups and professional companies . cirencester operatic society , cirencester philharmonia orchestra , cirencester band , cirencester male voice choir and cirencester creative dance academy are also based in the town . sport . cirencester town f.c . , play in the southern league premier division . the team , known as the centurions , moved in 2002 from their former ground at smithsfield on tetbury road to the purpose-built corinium stadium . the club is designated by the football association as a community club . as well as the main pitch , there are six additional football pitches , mainly used by the junior football teams . the club has also developed a full-size indoor training area , known as the arena , which is used for training , for social events , and for 5-a-side leagues throughout the year . cirencester has two athletics clubs , cirencester athletics and triathlon club and running somewhere else . cirencester ladies netball club has three squads . the a team play in the 1st division of the gloucestershire league . the b team in the 3rd division and the c team in the 5th division . the rugby club are based at the whiteway . they have four main teams , a colts , a youth and mini sections . cirencester park polo club , founded in 1896 , is the oldest polo club in the uk . social season – warwickshire cup , debrett 's , accessed 31 january 2012 its main grounds are located in earl bathurst 's cirencester park . it is frequently used by the prince of wales and his sons the duke of cambridge and prince harry . . notable people . pam ayres , poet , actor , broadcaster elizabeth brown , astronomer willie carson , retired jockey , television commentator john clinch , clergyman-physician , the first man to practice vaccination in north america charlie cooper , actor , writer daisy may cooper , actor , writer frank cadogan cowper , the 'last preraphaelite artist' jacquie de creed , stunt woman sir peter maxwell davies , composer , director of music at cirencester grammar school from 1959 to 1962 dom joly , comedian , journalist , broadcaster william sinclair marris , civil servant , colonial administrator , classical scholar cozy powell , drummer theophila townsend , quaker writer and activist john woolrich , composer . references . bibliography . h . p . r . finberg . '' the origin of gloucestershire towns '' in gloucestershire studies , edited by h.p.r . finberg . leicester : university press , 1957 . external links . town council read a detailed historical record about cirencester roman amphitheatre bbc archive film of cirencester from 1979