Sari Nusseibeh

family background . the nusseibeh boast of a 1,300 year presence in jerusalem , being descended from ubayda ibn as-samit , the brother of nusaybah bint ka'ab , a female warrior from the banu khazraj of arabia , and one of the four women leaders of the 14 tribes of early islam . ubadya , a companion of umar ibn al-khattab , was appointed the first muslim high judge of jerusalem after its conquest in 638 c.e . , together with an obligation to keep the calvary clean . . despite the noble origins , family tradition , in keeping with the belief that all great families have roots in brigandage , transmits a legend that their descent can also be traced through a long line of thieves . . according to family tradition , they retained an exclusive right to the keys of the church of the holy sepulchre down to the ottoman empire , when the joudeh family obtained a warrant to share possession . the joudeh family conserve a different version , according to which saladin handed the keys over to their clan 10 days after his conquest of the kingdom of jerusalem from the crusades.historic records attest to a transfer of the keys to a muslim family , neutral to the contentious issue , when squabbling christian families could not agree on the right of possession . to this day , the nusseibeh family are said to be trustees , and upon receiving the keys from a member of the joudeh clan , the nusseibeh are said to turn them over to the warden of the church of the holy sepulchre around dawn every day . . moshe amirav reports nusseibeh as quipping , nonetheless , when replying in the negative to a query about his family ’ s possession of the keys , that : 'no , there is no longer any need for it . jesus isn ’ t there any more . ' . nusseibeh 's grandfather successively married into three different palestinian families of notables , the shihabi , noted for their scholarship ; the darwish of the powerful al-husayni clan ; and to the nashashibi , and thus , in nusseibeh 's words : 'in a matter of a few years . managed to stitch together four ancient jerusalem families , two of which were bitter rivals' . . biography . nusseibeh was born in damascus , syria , to the politician anwar nusseibeh who was a distinguished statesman , prominent in palestinian and ( after 1948 ) palestinian-jordanian politics and diplomacy . his mother , nuzha al-ghussein , daughter of palestinian political leader yaqub al-ghusayn was born in ramle , . into a family of landed nobility with land in wadi hnein ( now the israeli town of nes ziona ) , . his mother had left palestine in 1948 to avoid the fighting , and his father lost a leg when wounded while participating in the 1947–48 civil war in mandatory palestine . . they moved to cairo some years later , where his father participated in the formation of the all-palestine government in exile . . on returning to jerusalem , he lived just a few hundred yards over the other side of no man 's land from amos oz , and in reading the latter 's memoir of his upbringing , was struck by the profound differences between their respective experiences as children in the same city . their family owned farmland in karameh which he helped till by driving a tractor during summer vacations . it was to be the site of what in palestinian memory became known as the bloodbath of their battle of karameh . . during israel 's conquest of the west bank in the six-day war , israel troops sacked the family home in jerusalem , looting it of all of their heirlooms , though the family car was later returned . . some months later , the occupation authorities then expropriated the family 's 200 acre country estate in the jordan valley . . in the fall of 1967 , nusseibeh went to study philosophy at christ church , oxford . there he became friends with avishai margalit , as well as ahmad walidi , the only other palestinian undergraduate there at the time , and son of the distinguished scholar walid khalidi . . it was a period marked by protests of 1968 and it was at this time that ahmad introduced him to the intricacies of palestinian political factions , parodied in monty python 's the life of brian . the summers he spent back in jerusalem , where , in 1968 he began studying hebrew did a stint of work at the hazore ' a kibbutz , . and , the following year , was on hand to help quench the flames caused by australian christian fundamentalist arsonist michael rohan when the latter tried to burn down the al-aqsa mosque by setting alight saladin 's 1,000 year old aleppo pulpit . . at oxford , nusseibeh met lucy austin , the daughter of british philosopher j.l . austin , and future founder of the ngo mend . they were married in late 1973 by grand mufti of jerusalem , and their marriage gave them four children : three sons , jamal , absal , buraq , and one daughter , nuzha . . while at oxford sari was much drawn to the linguistic philosophy introduced by ludwig wittgenstein and developed by austin . after completing his oxford degree , he spent a year at the warburg institute in london , after hearing a lecture by a . i . sabra which attracted him to the study of the muʿtazila , the thought of al-ghazali and the subsequent discursive victory of the latter , as formulated by the ash'ari school of theologians . . after a brief period working in abu dhabi , nusseibeh took up doctoral studies on the topic of islamic philosophy at from harvard university , beginning in the fall of 1974 , and gained his ph.d . in ( 1978 ) . . he returned to the west bank in 1978 to teach at birzeit university ( where he remained as professor of philosophy until the university was closed from 1988 to 1990 during the first intifada ) . at the same time , he taught classes in islamic philosophy at the hebrew university in jerusalem , israel . through the early 1980s , he helped to organize the teachers ' union at birzeit , and served three terms as president of the union of faculty and staff there . nusseibeh is also co-founder of the federation of employees in the education sector for all of the west bank . political activism . sari nusseibeh has long been viewed as a palestinian moderate . in july 1987 , nusseibeh and faisal husseini met with moshe amirav , a member of israel 's likud party becoming the first prominent palestinians to meet with a member of the israeli right . amirav was testing the waters for a group close to then prime minister yitzhak shamir on the possibility of making a historic pact with the plo and fatah . after years of working toward the establishment of a functioning palestinian state alongside the state of israel , nusseibeh was by 2011 referring to the two-state solution as a '' fantasy '' . in what 's a palestinian state worth ? ( harvard university press , 2011 ) he called for a '' thought experiment '' of a single state in which israel annexed all the territories , and palestinians would be '' second-class citizens '' with '' civil but not political rights '' in which '' jews could run the country while the arabs could live in it . '' . this specific suggestion has been dismissed as '' disingenuous '' . . during this time , nusseibeh has been speaking of steps toward one version or another of a single-state solution , such as a binational state . . . the first intifada . nusseibeh was also an important leader during the first intifada , authoring the palestinian declaration of principles see journal of palestine studies , vol . 17 , no . 3 , spring 1988 , p.63–65 for the text of the declaration of principles , also known as the fourteen demands and working to strengthen the fatah movement in the west bank ; nusseibeh helped to author the '' inside '' palestinians ' declaration of independence issued in the first intifada , and to create the 200 political committees and 28 technical committees that were intended to as an embryonic infrastructure for a future palestinian administration . first gulf war . following the firing of scud missiles at tel aviv , nusseibeh worked with israeli peace now on a common approach to condemn the killing of civilians in the war . but he was arrested and placed under administrative detention on 29 january 1991 , effectively accused of being an iraqi agent . . the arrest was then questioned by british and american officials , and the u.s . administration urged that he should either be charged or else the suspicion would be that the arrest was political . he was adopted as a prisoner of conscience by amnesty international . . and letters of protest were written to the times by such luminaries as peter strawson , isaiah berlin and h . l . a . hart . . some israelis said the move was designed to discredit nusseibeh before international opinion . palestinians saw the arrest as a political warning that israel did not intend to negotiate with any palestinian leader , no matter how moderate . for example , saeb erekat of an-najah university said : '' this is a message to us palestinian moderates . the message is , 'you can forget about negotiations after the war because we are going to make sure there is no one to talk to ' '' . he was released without charge shortly after the end of the war , after 90 days of imprisonment in ramla . . . peace initiatives and activities since 2000 . nusseibeh was not politically active during much of the oslo peace process but was appointed as the plo representative in jerusalem in 2001 . . during this period nusseibeh began to strongly suggest that palestinians give up their right of return in exchange for a palestinian state in the west bank and gaza strip . a number of palestinian organizations have strongly condemned his views on this issue . nusseibeh criticised the militarization of the intifada in january 2002 and called for the renunciation of suicide bombings and the establishment of palestine as a demilitarized state : '' a palestinian state should be demilitarized—not because that 's what israel demands , but in our own interest . '' some senior israel figures , such as uzi landau rebuffed the proposal as a trick . . in 2002 sari nusseibeh and former shin bet director , ami ayalon published the people 's voice , an israeli-palestinian civil initiative that aims to advance the process of achieving peace between israel and the palestinians , and a draft peace agreement that called for a palestinian state based on israel 's 1967 borders and for a compromise on the palestinian right of return . the people 's voice initiative was officially launched on june 25 , 2003 . in 2002 , yasser arafat appointed nusseibeh as the plo 's representative in east jerusalem , a position he assumed after the sudden death of faisal husseini . in 2008 , nusseibeh said that the quest for the two-state solution was floundering . he called on palestinians to start a debate on the idea of a one-state solution . ross , oakland . palestinians revive idea of one-state solution . the toronto star . . affiliations . nusseibeh is head and founder of the palestinian consultancy group , co-founder and member of several palestinian institutions including the jerusalem friends of the sick society , the federation of employees in the education sector in the west bank , the arab council for public affairs , the committee confronting the iron fist , and the jerusalem arab council . he is also on the advisory board of the international center for ethics , justice and public life at brandeis university . internationally , nusseibeh is a member of the mcgill middle east program 's executive and management committees . in november 2007 , following the publication of once upon a country : a palestinian life , he traveled to montreal , canada , to lecture on the mmep and his vision of peace . see also . nusaybah ( disambiguation ) the people 's voice timeline of the israeli–palestinian conflict projects working for peace among israelis and arabs list of peace activists . endnotes . references . sylvia murphy , candy 's children ( novel ) partially set in a remembered palestine . ( s.a.greenland imprint , 2007 ) . published writings . books . no trumpets , no drums : a two-state solution of the israeli- palestinian conflict , new york : hill & wang , 1991 once upon a country : a palestinian life , written with anthony david ; new york : farrar , straus and giroux , london : halban publishers , 2007 palestine : a state is born ( selections of newspapers/magazines articles between 1987-1990 ) palestine information office : the hague , 1990 . the story of reason in islam . stanford university press , 2016 . other works . a formula for narrative selection : a commentary on writing the arab- israeli conflict , perspectives on politics , vol 3/no1 ( march,2005 ) the limit of reason ( or why dignity is not negotiable ) , apa newsletters , ( vo.04 , number1 ) , 2004 . singularidad y pluralidad en la identidad : el caso del prisionero palestino , la pluralidad y sus atributos ( fundacion duques de soria ) 2002 . personal and national identity : a tale of two wills . philosophical perspectives on the israeli-palestinian conflict , ed . tomas kapitan , ( armonk , n.y . , and london : sharpe , n.e . ) 1997 . epistemology , the routledge history of islamic philosophy , ed . oliver leaman . ( london : routledge , kegan and paul ) , 1995 . al-hurriyyah bayn alhadd wa ’ l mutlaq ( absolute and restricted freedom ) . london : al-saqi , 1995 . al-hizb al-siyasi wa ’ l dimoqratiyyah ( political parties and democracy ) . in azmat al-hizb al-siyasi al-falastini . ( ramallah : muwatin ) 1996 can wars be just ? in but was it just ? reflections on the morality of the gulf war , with jean elshtaine , et al . ( new york : doubleday ) 1992 . review of f . zimmermann ’ s al-farabi ’ s commentary and short treatise on aristotle ’ s de interpretatione , history and philosophy of logic , 13 ( 1992 ) , 115-132 . al-aql al qudsi : avicenna ’ s subjective theory of knowledge . studia islamica ( 1989 ) , 39-54 . selections ( including translations ) from the holy qur'an . in bartlett ’ s familiar quotations , 15th ed . , 1984 . review of islamic life and thought , by s . a . nasr . ( tls ) march 1982:267 . masharif al-mantiq ( introductory symbolic logic ) . ( jerusalem : arab studies society ) 1982 . on subatomic particles and scientific posits , with basheer el-issa . ( birzeit journal of chemistry ) 1981 . avicenna : medicine and scepticism . koroth vol.8 , no 1- 2 ( 1981 ) : 9-20 . quelques figures et themes de la philosophie islamique . review in asian and african studies 14 ( 1980 ) , 207-209 . herbert marcuse wa ’ l metamarxiyyah . '' al-jadid , july 1 . external links . sari nusseibeh 's web page npr interview on oct 18 , 2001 . one on one with sari nusseibeh : once upon a conflict - interview with the jerusalem post 26 april 2007 haaretz interview , aug . 15 , 2008 symposium : sari nusseibeh 's '' what is a palestinian state worth ? '' , reason papers : a journal of interdisciplinary normative studies , october 2012 , pp . 15-69