Prince Naruhiko Higashikuni

early life . prince naruhiko was born in kyoto , the ninth son of prince kuni asahiko ( kuni no miya asahiko shinnō ) and the court lady terao utako . his father , prince asahiko , was a son of prince fushimi kuniie ( fushimi no miya kuniie shinnō ) , the twentieth head of the fushimi-no-miya , the oldest of the shinnōke or cadet branches of the imperial dynasty from whom an emperor might be chosen in default of a direct heir . prince naruhiko was a half-brother of prince kuni kuniyoshi , the father of the future empress kōjun , the wife of emperor hirohito . his other half-brothers , prince asaka yasuhiko , prince nashimoto morimasa , and prince kaya kuninori , all formed new branches of the imperial family ( ōke ) during the meiji period . marriage and family . emperor meiji granted prince naruhiko the title higashikuni-no-miya and permission to start a ōke on 3 november 1906 . prince naruhiko married the ninth daughter of emperor meiji , princess toshiko ( 11 may 1896 – 5 march 1978 ) , on 18 may 1915 . the couple had four sons . ; married princess shigeko , the eldest daughter of emperor hirohito and empress kōjun . ; died in the great kantō earthquake . ; renounced imperial title and created marquis awata akitsune , 1940 ; renounced imperial title and created count tarama toshihiko , 1943 ; relocated to lins , são paulo , brazil , 1950 . military career . prince higashikuni naruhiko was a career officer in the imperial japanese army . in 1908 , he graduated from the imperial japanese army academy as a second lieutenant , was promoted to lieutenant in 1910 and to captain in 1913 . in 1914 , he graduated from the army war college . he was commissioned a captain in the 29th infantry brigade , and promoted to major in the ija 7th division in 1915 . prince higashikuni then studied military tactics at the école spéciale militaire de saint-cyr and école polytechnique in paris france , from 1920 to 1926 , during which time he was promoted to lieutenant-colonel in 1920 and to colonel in 1926 . always somewhat of a rebel , prince higashikuni 's behavior in paris scandalized the imperial court . he had a french mistress , enjoyed fast cars and high living . he left his wife and children in japan , and the death of his second son did not prompt his return . in 1926 , the imperial household agency dispatched a chamberlain to paris to collect him . upon his return to japan , he was assigned to the imperial japanese army general staff headquarters . promoted to major-general in august 1930 and appointed commander of the 5th infantry brigade ( 1930–1934 ) , he was promoted to lieutenant-general in august 1934 and given command of the ija 4th division ( 1934–1937 ) . after the start of the second sino-japanese war , he headed the imperial japanese army air service ( 1937–1938 ) , and the ija 2nd army stationed in china from 1938–1939 . he was promoted to general in august 1939 . according to a memo discovered by historian yoshiaki yoshimi , prince higashikuni authorized the use of poison gas against the chinese on 16 august 1938 . wakabayashi , bob tadashi ( 1991 ) . '' emperor hirohito on localized aggression in china '' . sino-japanese studies 4 ( 1 ) , p.7 . on 13 may 1939 the imperial general headquarters authorized the use of poison gas to japanese northern china area army（大陸指第四百五十二号 ) . only riot control agents were used till then . prince higashikuni moved to the post at home dated 4 january 1939 . promoted to full general , the prince was awarded the order of the golden kite , 1st class in 1940 . before japan entered the second world war , on 15 october 1941 , outgoing prime minister fumimaro konoe proposed prince higashikuni to emperor hirohito as his successor for prime minister . peter wetzler , hirohito and war , 1998 , p.41 konoe believed that only a member of the imperial family with a distinguished military background could restrain the pro-war faction led by generals hajime sugiyama , hideki tōjō , and akira mutō . prince higashikuni was also the choice of both chief of staffs of the army and the navy . however , both emperor hirohito and the lord privy seal , kido kōichi , believed that it would be inappropriate for a member of the imperial family to serve in that position , as he could be blamed for anything which went wrong in the war . thus , two days later , hirohito chose general hideki tōjō as prime minister . in 1946 , he explained this decision : '' i actually thought prince higashikuni suitable as chief of staff of the army ; but i think the appointment of a member of the imperial house to a political office must be considered very carefully . above all , in time of peace this is fine , but when there is a fear that there may even be a war , then more importantly , considering the welfare of the imperial house , i wonder about the wisdom of a member of the imperial family serving as prime minister . '' wetzler , ibid . , p.44 , terasaki hidenari , shōwa tennō dokuhakuroku , 1991 , p.118 six weeks later , japan attacked pearl harbor . during the early stages of the pacific war , prince higashikuni served as commander of the general defense command from 1941 to 1944 . prince higashikuni remained steadfast in his opposition to the war with the allied powers , and was part of the conspiracy ( with prince asaka , prince takamatsu , and former prime minister konoe ) which finally ousted tōjō in july 1944 following the fall of saipan to american forces . the american researchers with scap also found out that he had planned towards the end of the war to depose hirohito , placing the minor akihito on the throne instead , governing the country with himself as regent . vgl . records of the army staff : the investigative records repository ( irr ) released under the japanese imperial government disclosure act of 2000 . prime minister . image : cabinet of prince higashikuni naruhiko.jpg right higashikuni 's cabinet with mamoru shigemitsu , mitsumasa yonai and fumimaro konoe in front row. thumb after the course of the war turned against japan , and the decision was made to accept the potsdam declaration , emperor hirohito appointed prince higashikuni to the position of prime minister on 16 august 1945 , replacing admiral kantarō suzuki . the mission of the higashikuni cabinet was twofold : first , to ensure the orderly cessation of hostilities and demobilization of the japanese armed forces ; and second , to reassure the japanese people that the imperial institution remained secure . prince higashikuni resigned in october over a dispute with the american occupation forces over the repeal of the 1925 peace preservation law . life after resignation . on 27 february and 4 march 1946 , prince higashikuni gave interviews to the yomiuri-hōchi and the new york times newspapers in which he claimed that many members of the imperial family had approved emperor hirohito 's abdication , with prince takamatsu serving as regent until crown prince akihito came of age . in the government , only prime minister kijūrō shidehara and the imperial household minister opposed this . in 1946 , prince higashikuni asked the emperor for permission to renounce his membership in the imperial family and become a commoner . the emperor denied the request . however , along with other members of the imperial branch families ( shinnōke and ōke ) , prince higashikuni lost his title and most of his wealth as a result of the american occupation ’ s abolition of the princely houses on 17 october 1947 . as a private citizen , higashikuni operated several unsuccessful retail enterprises ( including a provisions store , second-hand goods store , and dressmaker 's shop ) . he even created his own new zen buddhism-based religious sect , the higashikuni-kyo , which was subsequently banned by the american occupation authorities . the former prince became the honorary chairman of the international martial arts federation ( imaf ) in 1957 , and honorary president of several other organizations . in 1958 , higashikuni published his wartime journals under the title , ichi kozoku no senso nikki ( or the war diary of a member of the imperial family ) . he published his autobiographical memoirs , higashikuni nikki , in 1968 . higashikuni died of heart failure in tokyo on 20 january 1990 at the age of , having outlived his wife , two of his sons , his siblings , and his nephew , emperor hirohito . higashikuni is today mainly remembered as japan 's first postwar prime minister . he was one of the longest-lived prime ministers of all time , along with antoine pinay , willem drees and christopher hornsrud , and at his death was the last surviving full general of the imperial japanese army . from 14 may 1988 , when former netherlands prime minister willem drees died until his own death , higashikuni was the world 's oldest living former head of government . footnotes . gallery . image : hih prince higashikuni naruhiko.jpg hih prince naruhiko image : hih princess higashikuni toshiko.jpg hih princess toshiko ( wife ) image : hih prince higashikuni morihiro.jpg hih prince morihiro ( son and heir ) . references . john w . dower embracing defeat : japan in the wake of world war ii . w . w . norton & company ( 2000 ) . richard b . frank downfall : the end of the imperial japanese empire . penguin ( non-classics ) ; reissue edition ( 2001 ) . william manchester . american caesar . little , brown and company ( 1978 ) . spector , ronald . eagle against the sun : the american war with japan . vintage ; vintage edition ( 1985 ) . toland , john . the rising sun : the decline and fall of the japanese empire , 1936–1945 . modern library ; reprint edition ( 2003 ) . -