List of Holocaust memorials and museums

argentina . museo del holocausto de buenos aires ( holocaust memorial museum , buenos aires ) . australia . adelaide holocaust museum and andrew steiner education centre ( adelaide , south australia ) the jewish holocaust centre ( melbourne , victoria ) leo baeck centre for progressive judaism ( kew , victoria ) holocaust memorial melbourne general cemetery holocaust memorial ( parkville , victoria ) sydney jewish museum ( sydney ) magen shoah , the central synagogue ( sydney ) . austria . the judenplatz holocaust memorial ( vienna ) holocaust and tolerance center styria , '' house of names '' ( holocaust und toleranzzentrum steiermark , haus der namen ) ( graz ) house of responsibility ( braunau am inn ) mauthausen-gusen concentration camp ( mauthausen ) learning and memorial site charlotte taitl house ( ried im innkreis ) memorial against war and fascism ( vienna ) . belarus . the pit , minsk khatyn , minsk . belgium . kazerne dossin memorial , museum and documentation centre ( mechelen ) national monument to the jewish martyrs of belgium ( brussels ) . brazil . holocaust victims memorial at rio de janeiro – cemitério israelita do caju ( sephardic ) – inaugurated in september 1975 holocaust victims memorial at salvador – cemitério israelita da bahia – inaugurated in 2007 holocaust museum in curitiba – inaugurated in 2011 ( paraná ) memorial of jewish immigration and of the holocaust ( são paulo ) – 2011 . bulgaria . jewish historical museum ( sofia ) dimitar peshev museum ( kyustendil ) monument of gratitude ( plovdiv ) . canada . holocaust memorial sculpture ( edmonton , alberta ) sarah and chaim neuberger holocaust education centre ( toronto ) the vancouver holocaust education centre ( vancouver , british columbia ) montreal holocaust museum . china ( people 's republic of china ) . hong kong holocaust and tolerance centre ( hong kong ) shanghai jewish refugees museum '' wall of shanghai list '' and holocaust memorial statue ( shanghai ) . croatia . the jasenovac memorial area ( jasenovac ) memorial centre lipa remembers ( lipa , matulji ) . cuba . holocaust memorial santa clara sephardic center holocaust exhibit ( havana ) . czech republic . holocaust memorial ( valašské meziříčí ) pinkas synagogue/old jewish cemetery ( prague ) old new synagogue ( prague ) theresienstadt concentration camp ( terezín ) hodonin concentration camp ( hodonín u kunštátu ) lety concentration camp ( lety u písku ) . estonia . holocaust memorial at the site of klooga concentration camp ( klooga ) memorial at the site of kalevi-liiva ( jägala ) . france . maison d'izieu mémorial des enfants juifs exterminés ( izieu ) izieu.alma.fr centre de la mémoire d'oradour at the site of the oradour-sur-glane massacre holocaust memorial at drancy internment camp ( mémorial de la shoah de drancy ) center of contemporary jewish documentation ( paris ) mémorial de la shoah ( paris ) mémorial des martyrs de la déportation ( paris ) memorial to the patients of the clermont psychiatric ward memorial at gurs internment camp royallieu-compiègne internment camp memorial camp des milles memorial ( aix-en-provence ) vélodrome d ’ hiver memorial ( paris ) memorial museum to the children of vel d'hiv ( orléans ) european centre of deported resistance members and struthof museum at the former natzweiler-struthof concentration camp . germany . holocaust tower , jewish museum berlin memorial to the murdered jews of europe ( berlin ) memorial to homosexuals persecuted under nazism ( berlin ) memorial to the sinti and roma victims of national socialism ( berlin ) ( soest ) memorial to the victims of national socialist 'euthanasia ' killings ( german : gedenk- und informationsort für die opfer der nationalsozialistischen » euthanasie « -morde ) stolperstein – holocaust memorials all over germany and in 21 further european countries topf and sons . museum and place of remembrance ( erfurt ) european holocaust memorial ( landsberg am lech ) citizens´association '' landsberg in the 20th century '' - founder of the european holocaust memorial - founded 9th november 1983 - since over 30 year active within the remembrance of the local holocaust concentration camp kaufering/landsberg dachau concentration camp nordenstadt memorial wollheim memorial eckerwald memorial kz-transport 1945 memorial angel of peace ( mannheim ) freight wagon memorial forced laborer memorial transit european holocaust memorial in landsberg memorial neuer börneplatz concentration camp memorial hailfingen-tailfingen documentation centre ns forced labor memorial in memory of the burning of books memorial at the frankfurt grossmarkthalle jewish cemetery ( anklam ) '' dejudaization institute '' memorial ( eisenach ) . greece . the athens holocaust memorial ( athens ) cemetery and monument for the victims of the holocaust – 3rd cemetery of athens , nikea ( piraeus ) holocaust memorial outside of the archaeological site of kerameikos ( athens ) jewish museum of greece – shoah exhibit ( athens ) jewish museum of thessaloniki – shoah exhibit ( thessaloniki , central macedonia ) monument of the victims of the holocaust in the jewish martyrs square ( rhodes ) monument to young jews ( in memory of young jews murdered in the holocaust ) – pafos square athens rhodes jewish museum holocaust memorial of corfu ( new fortress square , corfu ) holocaust museum of salonica ( under construction ) . hungary . holocaust memorial center ( budapest ) dohány street synagogue ( budapest ) shoes on the danube bank ( budapest ) . israel . yad vashem , the holocaust martyrs ' and heroes ' remembrance authority ( jerusalem ) ghetto fighters ' house ( kibbutz lohamei hageta'ot ) beit theresienstadt , the theresienstadt martyrs remembrance association ( in kibbutz givat haim ( ihud ) ) massuah institute for the study of the holocaust ( kibbutz tel yitzhak ) from holocaust to revival museum ( yad mordechai ) kiryat białystok archive and community center ( yehud ) chamber of the holocaust ( mount zion , jerusalem ) ani ma'amin holocaust museum ( jerusalem ) forest of the martyrs ( jerusalem ) lgbt memorial to lgbt people persecuted by the nazis ( tel aviv ) the sculpture garden of holocaust to resurrection ( karmiel ) memorial to the deportation of jews from france monument to the children in yad vashem ( jerusalem ) beit terezin holocaust and revival memorial sculpture , by igael tumarkin ( rabin square , tel aviv ) . italy . memoriale della shoah ( milan ) museo della deportazione ( prato ) fondazione museo della shoah ( rome ) museo diffuso della resistenza torino ( torino ) museum of italian judaism and the shoah ( ferrara ) museo della deportazione great synagogue of rome ( rome ) jewish museum of rome ( rome ) . japan . holocaust education center ( fukuyuma ) tokyo holocaust education resource center ( tokyo ) anne 's rose church ( nishinomiya , hyogo ) アンネのバラの教会 ( congregation of jesus anne 's rose church ) port of humanity tsuruga museum ( tsuruga , fukui ) chiune sugihara memorial hall auschwitz peace museum ( shirakawa , fukushima ) auschwitz peace museum retrieved 2 march 2019 . . latvia . memorial complex at rumbula memorial complex at salaspils museum of tolerance at the site of kaiserwald jews in latvia ( museum ) riga ghetto and holocaust in latvia museum . lithuania . holocaust exhibition at the vilna gaon jewish state museum ( vilnius ) ponary massacre memorial ( paneriai ) holocaust memorial in ( šeduva ) ninth fort museum ( kaunas ) sugihara house ( kaunas ) the green house holocaust museum ( vilnius ) . luxembourg . memorial to the victims of the shoah ( luxembourg city ) . mexico . the tuvia maizel holocaust museum ( mexico city ) . netherlands . the anne frank house ( amsterdam ) the hollandsche schouwburg ( amsterdam ) the joods historisch museum ( amsterdam ) the homomonument ( amsterdam ) the dock worker monument the westerbork camp and information centre ( westerbork ) camp vught national memorial at herzogenbusch concentration camp . new zealand . the holocaust centre of new zealand ( hcnz ) . north macedonia . holocaust memorial center for the jews of macedonia ( skopje ) . norway . center for studies of holocaust and religious minorities ( oslo ) . philippines . quezon memorial circle ( quezon city ) . poland . auschwitz-birkenau state museum ( oświęcim ) the oświęcim synagogue ( oświęcim ) bełżec extermination camp ( bełżec , lublin voivodeship ) ghetto heroes monument ( warsaw ) polin museum of the history of polish jews ( warsaw ) eagle pharmacy ( krakow ) radegast train station ( łódź ) survivors ' park in łódź treblinka extermination camp , treblinka , masovian voivodeship monument to the memory of children - victims of the holocaust umschlagplatz monument ( warsaw ) memorial in palmiry sobibór museum . romania . bucharest holocaust memorial elie wiesel memorial house ( sighetu marmației ) memorial to the victims of the 1941 pogrom ( bucharest ) holocaust memorial in târgu mures northern transylvania holocaust memorial museum ( şimleu silvaniei ) memorial to the deported jews of oradea . russia . holocaust memorial synagogue ( moscow ) russian research and educational holocaust center ( moscow ) formula of sorrow monument ( pushkin , saint petersburg ) kaliningrad north railway station memorial plaque to jewish deportees from königsberg and east prussia ( kaliningrad ) memorial to the victims of fascism ( krasnodar ) lyubavichi mass murder site monument '' ravine of death '' memorial stone ( taganrog ) palmnicken massacre monument ( yantarny , kaliningrad ) monument at vostryakovo jewish cemetery ( moscow ) zmievskaya balka ( rostov-on-don ) national memorial of the republic of belarus . serbia . menorah in flames sculpture ( belgrade ) memorial park jajinci ( belgrade ) banjica concentration camp ( belgrade ) jewish historical museum ( belgrade ) museum of genocide victims ( belgrade ) miklós radnóti memorial ( bor ) kladovo transport memorial šumarice memorial park ( kragujevac ) monument to the victims of the novi sad raid bubanj memorial park ( niš ) crveni krst concentration camp ( niš ) . slovakia . memorial at the museum of the slovak national uprising ( banská bystrica ) holocaust memorial ( bratislava ) museum of jewish culture ( bratislava ) holocaust memorial for the jewish inhabitants of huncovce holocaust memorial plaque on the synagogue of košice monument and memorial to the slovak national uprising ( nemecká ) memorial to the victims of the nováky forced labor and concentration camp memorial plaque to the deported jews at poprad railway station holocaust memorial at prešov synagogue holocaust memorial plaque prešov town hall sereď holocaust museum . slovenia . loibl süd concentration camp memorial . south africa . the cape town holocaust centre ( cape town ) the durban holocaust centre ( durban ) the johannesburg holocaust and genocide centre ( johannesburg ) . spain . memorial for the victims of the holocaust ( madrid ) monument to the victims of the mauthausen concentration camp ( almería ) . suriname . paramaribo holocaust memorial paramaribo . sweden . monument to the memory of the holocaust victims at the great synagogue of stockholm ( stockholm ) the living history forum forum för levande historia , www.levandehistoria.se/english . retrieved 25 october 2017 . storsjöteatern theatre ( östersund ) retrieved 2 november 2017 . . taiwan . taiwan holocaust museum . ukraine . '' wailing wall '' for the murdered jews of bakhmut memorial to the murdered jews of chernihiv memorial to the roma murdered in the podusovka forest , near chernihiv ukrainian institute for holocaust studies ( dnepropetrovsk ) babi yar holocaust memorial center ( kiev ) memorial to the murdered jews of kovel at the bakhiv forest mass murder site . memorial to the murdered jews of kysylyn at the mass grave site memorials to the murdered jews of lutsk memorial to the murdered jews of mariupol memorial to the jews of mukachevo holocaust museum in odessa memorial to the murdered jews of ostrozhets memorial to the murdered jews of pryluky memorial to the murdered jews of ratne at the mass graves site memorial site for the murdered jews of ostrozhets memorial to the murdered jews of rava-ruska memorial to the murdered jews of zhytomyr . united kingdom . beth shalom holocaust centre ( national holocaust centre and museum ) ( nottinghamshire , england ) the holocaust exhibition and learning centre , huddersfield the hyde park holocaust memorial ( hyde park , london ) the imperial war museum holocaust exhibition ( london ) the wiener library for the study of the holocaust and genocide ( london ) the memorial at the church of st michael the greater , stamford the proposed uk holocaust memorial ( victoria tower gardens , london ) . united states . uruguay . holocaust memorial , montevideo ( montevideo ) . see also . association of holocaust organizations holocaust museum holocaust victims culture of remembrance . related . list of armenian genocide memorials list of holocaust memorials and museums in the united states list of holodomor memorials and museums . notes . references . further reading . . external links . holocaust memorials — by continents and countries information portal to european sites of remembrance global directory of holocaust museums memorial sites for sinti and roma ( in german ) remembering the holocaust 24 hour museum monuments and memorials — historical overview