Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso

family . he was a member of the gens calpurnia , specifically among the calpurnii pisones . his father and grandfather both shared his name , with his father being gnaeus calpurnius piso ( consul in 23 bc ) , and his grandfather being one of the participants in the catiline conspiracy . he had a brother , lucius calpurnius piso , who was an augur and became consul in 1 bc . piso was married to plancina , a woman of noble rank and wealth . by plancina , piso had two sons , gnaeus calpurnius piso , who after piso 's death had to take the name of lucius calpurnius piso , tacitus , annals 3.16 and marcus calpurnius piso . career . piso held several positions under augustus and tiberius . ronald syme infers that piso was a military tribune in the spanish campaigns of 26-25 bc . this accords with his known tenure as triumvir monetalis in 23 bc . between that office and being appointed quaestor , which enabled him entry into the roman senate , syme infers piso was married . syme fills the gap between those events and his consulate with various activities , such as accompanying his friend claudius nero in his alpine campaign . at some date between 5 bc and ad 2 he was admitted to the college of pontiffs . martha w . hoffman lewis , the official priests of rome under the julio-claudians ( rome : american academy , 1955 ) , p . 30 in 3 bc he was proconsul of the province of africa , and of hispania tarraconensis in ad 9 . according to tacitus , he was cruel to the people of spain , but during his trial in ad 20 such claims were discounted as '' old and irrelevant '' . tacitus , annals 3.13-14 though he was given many appointments throughout his career , piso was known to have a temper . in ad 16 , he argued against tiberius that the senate should be able to conduct business without the emperor if the emperor was away from rome . it was only after a lengthy debate between piso and senators close to tiberius that he lost the debate . . governorship of syria . in ad 17 , heir designate germanicus was given command of the eastern portion of the empire ; piso was appointed as his legate , and made governor of syria so that he could . this appointment came with the command of four legions . though both piso and germanicus were of the same rank , germanicus had greater authority ( imperium maius ) . tacitus suggests that piso was appointed to act as a check on germanicus , and that he was given secret instructions by tiberius to thwart his efforts and control him . tacitus , annals 2.43 in the summer of 19 , germanicus had left to take care of matters in egypt , and when he returned he found that piso had ignored his orders to the cities and the legions . germanicus was furious and ordered piso 's recall to rome . during the feud , germanicus fell ill and , though piso had left the province , germanicus claimed piso had poisoned him . piso received a letter from germanicus renouncing their friendship ( amicitia ) . on 10 october , germanicus died from the illness . upon hearing of germanicus ' death , he returned to resume command of syria . . trial . as the death of germanicus occurred during their feud most people suspected him of having poisoned germanicus , although this was never proven . the armed attempt by piso to regain control of syria immediately after the death of germanicus only aroused more indignation . this , the rumors of him poisoning germanicus , and his conduct going back as far as his governorship of spain were all taken up by the delatores in their accusations against him . it was n't long before the matter was taken to the emperor . tiberius was forced to order an investigation , and after briefly hearing both sides , decided to defer the case to the senate . tiberius made no effort to conceal his sentiments : the pisones were longtime supporters of the claudians , with their support going back to the early days of octavian . a public trial was held , and tiberius made allowances for piso to summon witnesses of all social orders , including slaves , and he was given more time to plea than the prosecution , but it made no difference : before the sentencing , piso had died . he committed suicide , though tacitus supposes that tiberius may have had him murdered , fearing his own implication in germanicus ' death . suetonius , the lives of twelve caesars , life of tiberius 52 tacitus , annals iii.15-16 the accusations brought against piso are numerous , including : senatus consultum de pisone ( the senate 's decree against gnaeus piso senior ) insubordination corruption abandoning and reentering a province summary justice destroying military discipline misusing the fiscus principis ( emperor 's money ) fomenting civil war violating the divinity of divus augustus ( sacrilege ) . although the murder of germanicus was one of the accusations brought against him , he was only actually found guilty of abandoning and reentering syria without authorisation to wage war , and for violating germanicus ' imperium , for , although they were both of proconsular rank , his authority was less than that of germanicus , to whom the senate had given greater authority ( imperium maius ) in the eastern provinces before his departure in ad 17 . in accordance with the lex iulia maiestatis , the senate had his property proscribed , forbade mourning on his account , removed images of his likeness , such as statues and portraits , and his name was erased from the base of one statue in particular as part of his damnatio memoriae . additionally , the senate instructed the curatores locorum publicorum iudicandorum to remove and destroy structures built above porta fontinalis to connect his properties . yet , in a show of clemency not unlike that of the emperor , the senate had piso 's property returned and divided equally between his two sons , on condition that his daughter calpurnia be given 1,000,000 sesterces as dowry and a further 4,000,000 as personal property . his wife plancina was absolved . allegedly munatia plancina was convicted of very serious crimes . but her powerful friend livia fought for her and exerted pressure on tiberius . therefore , her acquittal was foreseeable and she dissociated herself from her husband piso who committed suicide . tacitus , the annals 3.15 compare 3.17 a recently discovered senate resolution also confirms that munatia plancina owed her impunity to the recommendation of tiberius , who had been pressed by livia to act in this way . senatus consultum de cn . pisone patre , lines 109-120 but after the death of livia in 29 ad , plancina no longer had such a powerful protectress . so in 33 ad tiberius renewed the charge . plancina committed suicide before the judgement . tacitus , the annals 6.26 cassius dio , roman history 58.22 his accomplices , a visellius karus and a sempronius bassus , were to be declared outlaws for committing treason . their property was to be sold with profits consigned to the aerarium . it is unclear whether or not their case was handled by a judicial authority , such as a quaestio , or by the senate as well . for his accomplices , the senate advises a magistrate , the praetor , of how to handle them , whereas with piso the senatus consultum de cn . pisone patre handles him directly , only mentioning magistrates as far as carrying out his damnatio memoriae was concerned . . character . piso was a man of violent temper , without an idea of obedience , and a natural arrogance . he saw himself as superior to the children of tiberius . piso 's marriage to plancina , a woman of noble rank and wealth , only inflamed his ambition . one tale seneca tells about a legionnaire who returned from a foraging mission without his partner and unable to explain where his friend was . piso suspecting murder accused the legionnaire and sentenced him to death without offering him time to search for the missing soldier . the centurion at the time was given the order to behead the accused . fortunately for the legionnaire , before the centurion could swing the sword , the missing soldier walked into the camp and the execution was stopped . all three men went to gnaeus piso to show that the legionnaire has returned . to this piso ordered all three men to be beheaded . the first because he lost his friend , the centurion because he failed to obey the order , and the third for getting lost . wrath had found a way to think up three crimes where there was none . the famous phrase comes from this story : fiat justitia ruat caelum ! ( “ let justice be done though the heavens fall ” ) and “ piso ’ s justice ” – which can be understood as issuing a sentence in accordance with the law , but against morality . . piso in fiction . he was played by john phillips in the itv series the caesars , and by stratford johns in the bbc tv serial i , claudius . footnotes . references . bibliography . primary sources . suetonius , lives of the twelve caesars , life of caligula , latin text with english translation suetonius , lives of the twelve caesars , life of tiberius , latin text with english translation tacitus , annals , i–iii , english translation senatus consultum de pisone ( '' the senate 's decree against gnaeus piso senior '' ) seneca the younger , de ira i , xviii , 3 - 4 . secondary sources . . external links . calpurnius piso entry in historical sourcebook by mahlon h . smith senatus consultum de cn . pisone patre - recently discovered decree of the senate summarizing the results of piso 's trial ( in latin )