Regicide

the regicide of mary , queen of scots . before the tudor period , english kings had been murdered while imprisoned ( for example edward ii and edward v ) or killed in battle by their subjects ( for example richard iii ) , but none of these deaths are usually referred to as regicide . the word regicide seems to have come into popular use among continental catholics when pope sixtus v renewed the papal bull of excommunication against the '' crowned regicide '' queen elizabeth i , for—among other things—executing mary , queen of scots , in 1587 . regicide had not been committed as mary was forced to abdicate from the scottish crown some 20 years earlier . elizabeth had originally been excommunicated by pope pius v , in regnans in excelsis , for converting england to protestantism after the reign of mary i of england . the defeat of the spanish armada and the '' protestant wind '' convinced most english people that god approved of elizabeth 's action . the regicide of charles i of england . after the first english civil war , king charles i was a prisoner of the roundheads . they tried to negotiate a compromise with him , but he stuck steadfastly to his view that he was king by divine right and attempted in secret to raise an army to fight against them . it became obvious to the leaders of the parliamentarians that they could not negotiate a settlement with him and they could not trust him to refrain from raising an army against them ; they reluctantly came to the conclusion that he would have to be put to death . on 13 december 1648 , the house of commons broke off negotiations with the king . two days later , the council of officers of the new model army voted that the king be moved from the isle of wight , where he was prisoner , to windsor '' in order to the bringing of him speedily to justice '' . footnote 9 , cites : in the middle of december , the king was moved from windsor to london . the house of commons of the rump parliament passed a bill setting up a high court of justice in order to try charles i for high treason in the name of the people of england . from a royalist and post-restoration perspective this bill was not lawful , since the house of lords refused to pass it and it failed to receive royal assent . however , the parliamentary leaders and the army pressed on with the trial anyway . at his trial in front of the high court of justice on saturday 20 january 1649 in westminster hall , charles asked '' i would know by what power i am called hither . i would know by what authority , i mean lawful '' . footnotes 12 and 17 . '' the record of the trial also appears in cobbett 's complete collection of state trials , vol iv , covering 1640–1649 published in london in 1809 . p . 995 '' . in view of the historic issues involved , both sides based themselves on surprisingly technical legal grounds . charles did not dispute that parliament as a whole did have some judicial powers , but he maintained that the house of commons on its own could not try anybody , and so he refused to plead . at that time under english law if a prisoner refused to plead then this was treated as a plea of guilty ( this has since been changed ; a refusal to plead now is interpreted as a not-guilty plea ) . he was found guilty on saturday 27 january 1649 , and his death warrant was signed by 59 commissioners . to show their agreement with the sentence of death , all of the commissioners who were present rose to their feet . on the day of his execution , 30 january 1649 , charles dressed in two shirts so that he would not shiver from the cold , lest it be said that he was shivering from fear . his execution was delayed by several hours so that the house of commons could pass an emergency bill to make it an offence to proclaim a new king , and to declare the representatives of the people , the house of commons , as the source of all just power . charles was then escorted through the banqueting house in the palace of whitehall to a scaffold where he would be beheaded . he forgave those who had passed sentence on him and gave instructions to his enemies that they should learn to '' know their duty to god , the king – that is , my successors – and the people '' . § '' after the trial '' ¶ 4 he then gave a brief speech outlining his unchanged views of the relationship between the monarchy and the monarch 's subjects , ending with the words '' i am the martyr of the people '' . footnotes 12 and 35 . '' the record of the trial also appears in cobbett 's complete collection of state trials , vol iv , covering 1640–1649 published in london in 1809 . p . 1132 . '' his head was severed from his body with one blow . one week later , the rump , sitting in the house of commons , passed a bill abolishing the monarchy . ardent royalists refused to accept it on the basis that there could never be a vacancy of the crown . others refused because , as the bill had not passed the house of lords and did not have royal assent , it could not become an act of parliament . the declaration of breda 11 years later paved the way for the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 . at the restoration , thirty-one of the fifty-nine commissioners who had signed the death warrant were living . a general pardon was given by charles ii and parliament to his opponents , but the regicides were excluded . a number fled the country . some , such as daniel blagrave , fled to continental europe , while others like john dixwell , edward whalley , and william goffe fled to new haven , connecticut . those who were still available were put on trial . six regicides were found guilty and suffered the fate of being hanged , drawn and quartered : thomas harrison , john jones , adrian scrope , john carew , thomas scot , and gregory clement . the captain of the guard at the trial , daniel axtell who encouraged his men to barrack the king when he tried to speak in his own defence , an influential preacher , hugh peters , and the leading prosecutor at the trial , john cook , were executed in a similar manner . colonel francis hacker , who signed the order to the executioner of the king and commanded the guard around the scaffold and at the trial , was hanged . concern amongst the royal ministers over the negative impact on popular sentiment of these public tortures and executions led to jail sentences being substituted for the remaining regicides . page 19 '' history today '' , february 2014 some regicides , such as richard ingoldsby , were pardoned , while a further nineteen served life imprisonment . the bodies of the regicides cromwell , bradshaw and ireton , which had been buried in westminster abbey , were disinterred and hanged , drawn and quartered in posthumous executions . in 1662 , three more regicides , john okey , john barkstead and miles corbet , were also hanged , drawn and quartered . the officers of the court that tried charles i , those who prosecuted him , and those who signed his death warrant , have been known ever since the restoration as regicides . the parliamentary archives in the palace of westminster , london , holds the original death warrant of charles i . regicides as murders . image : death-of-henry4.jpg thumb upright 0.8 ravaillac murdering henry iv , rue de la ferronnerie in paris , 1610 regicide has particular resonance within the concept of the divine right of kings , whereby monarchs were presumed by decision of god to have a divinely anointed authority to rule . as such , an attack on a king by one of his own subjects was taken to amount to a direct challenge to the monarch , to his divine right to rule , and thus to god 's will . the biblical david refused to harm king saul , because he was the lord 's anointed , even though saul was seeking his life ; and when saul eventually was killed in battle and a person reported to david that he helped kill saul , david put the man to death , even though saul had been his enemy , because he had raised his hands against the lord 's anointed . christian concepts of the inviolability of the person of the monarch have great influence from this story . diarmait mac cerbaill , king of tara ( mentioned above ) , was killed by áed dub mac suibni in 565 . according to adomnan of iona 's life of st columba , áed dub mac suibni received god 's punishment for this crime by being impaled by a treacherous spear many years later and then falling from his ship into a lake and drowning . adomnan of iona . life of st columba . penguin books , 1995 even after the disappearance of the divine right of kings and the appearance of constitutional monarchy , the term continued and continues to be used to describe the murder of a king . in france , the judicial penalty for regicides ( i.e . those who had murdered , or attempted to murder , the king ) was especially hard , even in regard to the harsh judicial practices of pre-revolutionary france . as with many criminals , the regicide was tortured so as to make him tell the names of his accomplices . however , the method of execution itself was a form of torture . here is a description of the death of robert-françois damiens , who attempted to kill louis xv : in discipline and punish , the french philosopher michel foucault cites this case of damiens the regicide as an example of disproportionate punishment in the era preceding the '' age of reason '' . the classical school ( criminology ) asserts that the punishment '' should fit the crime '' , and should thus be proportionate and not extreme . this approach was spoofed by gilbert and sullivan , when the mikado sang , '' my object all sublime , i shall achieve in time , to let the punishment fit the crime '' . in common with earlier executions for regicides : the hand that attempted the murder is burnt the regicide is dismembered alive in both the françois ravaillac and the damiens cases , court papers refer to the offenders as a patricide , rather than as regicide , which lets one deduce that , through divine right , the king was also regarded as '' father of the country '' . see also . list of regicides fifth monarchists saw the overthrow of charles i as a divine sign of the second coming of jesus . society of king charles the martyr tyrannicide ( killing of a tyrant ) patricide ( killing of one 's father ) matricide ( killing one 's mother ) fratricide ( killing one 's brother ) sororicide ( killing one 's sister ) monarchomachs . notes . references . . further reading . david lagomarsino , charles t . wood ( editor ) the trial of charles i : a documentary history pub : dartmouth college , ( 1989 ) , geoffrey robertson the tyrannicide brief , pub : random house , ( 2005 ) ,