Henry Phillpotts

life . early life . henry phillpotts , d.d . , bishop of exeter , was born on 6 may 1778 at bridgwater , somerset , england , the son of john phillpotts , a factory owner , innkeeper , auctioneer and land agent to the dean and chapter of gloucester cathedral . he grew up in gloucestershire , and was educated at gloucester cathedral school . john phillpotts , member of parliament for gloucester city between 1830 and 1847 , was his elder brother . two other brothers , thomas and george , and two sisters , isabella and sibella , reached adulthood ; a number of other siblings died in infancy or childhood . phillpotts , percy ( c . 1910 ) , a phillpotts genealogy , unpublished manuscript in family possession . elected a scholar of corpus christi , oxford , at the age of only thirteen , he took his ba at corpus christi , and his ma at magdalen college in 1795 , aged eighteen . he took holy orders in 1802 , being ordained deacon by bishop randolph and priest by bishop majendie in 1804 . he was selected university preacher in 1804 , in which year he published his sermon on 5 november , delivered before the university of oxford . in september 1804 he was presented to the crown living of kilmersdon , near bath , which he held until 1806 . he does not appear ever to have resided there , duty being taken by a curate named daniel drape , according to the parish registers . diocese of durham . philpotts married in october 1804 and in 1805 became vicar . he was appointed chaplain to bishop middleham , county durham , in the succeeding year . for twenty years he was chaplain to bishop shute barrington , in the diocese of durham . in 1808 he received his next preferment , being collated by the bishop to the large and important parish of gateshead—within a year his rapid advancement continued with the collation to the ninth prebendal stall in durham cathedral . '' that at the age of 31 he should already have held four livings and a prebendal stall testifies to the regard in which he was held by his diocese , and the usefulness of his marriage connection . '' he now resided for a considerable part of the year at durham , and on the chapelry of st margaret in the city becoming vacant , he was presented to it by the dean and chapter on 28 september 1810 . on 30 december 1815 philpotts received yet further preferment , being collated by the bishop to the second canonry in the cathedral , the emoluments of which were considerably higher than those of the ninth . this he held for five years , at the end of which period his literary and controversial abilities brought him into advancing prominence . after holding the rich living of stanhope , durham , from 1820 , and the deanery of chester from 1828 , he was consecrated bishop of exeter in 1831 , holding with the see a residentiary canonry at durham which he secured permission to hold along with his bishopric , one of the last cases of the benefice in commendam by which medieval and later bishops had often profited . philpotts recognised the need to look after his family , extensive as it was & nbsp ; — he had 18 children . when he was offered the bishopric in exeter he realised that the stipend ( £3,000 ) was not enough to support his family , so he asked to retain his parish of stanhope , in durham ( as a non-resident ) , which would be worth an additional £4,000 a year . as a compromise he was instead offered the canonry at durham which was worth a similar amount , and was a post which he continued to hold until his death . he was one of the last of a clerical aristocracy , which , whatever their origin , expected to live on a scale comparable to that of the nobility . diocese of exeter . as bishop he was a strict disciplinarian , and did much to restore order in a diocese whose clergy had become extraordinarily demoralized and over which he wielded considerable power . the diocese at that time extended from the somerset and dorset borders to the isles of scilly in cornwall . his episcopate was characterized by the establishment of many new parishes in cornwall and considerable evangelical efforts . brown , h . m . ( 1976 ) a century for cornwall . truro : blackford ; pp . 4-18 in 1841 he built for himself a palace at torquay , devon . bishopstowe ( now the palace hotel ) served as the bishop 's residence , which he preferred as a home to the bishop 's residence attached to exeter cathedral . the gardens in the of private land stretching to the sea are still a major attraction today together with the bishop 's walk at the local beauty spot of ansteys cove . phillpotts was aware that his appointment to exeter was not popular locally and knowing of his unpopularity he at times took measures to protect himself from it . he admits in a letter to ralph barnes , his secretary , on 14 december 1830 to being '' cautious.in admitting adverse newspapers to my table , yet the caution has not prevented me from hearing of the extreme unpopularity of my appointment to exeter . '' 1831 saw phillpotts as the victim of the guy fawkes night custom of burning effigies of clergymen ; knowing his reputation he took action by requesting protection , thus the 7th yeomanry cavalry filled the palace at exeter , whilst the crowd in the cathedral yard burned phillpotts in effigy ; . hollow turnip as head and candle as nose , clad in mitre and lawn sleeves . ( chadwick i , 1997 , p 29 ) in 1848 he placed an appeal in the guardian of 5 january 1848 , for help for the poor of devonport ; his request was answered by lydia sellon who was just about to travel to italy for her health . philpott 's inspiration of sellon led to the formation of an anglican order which sellon led . . character . phillpotts ' character was of the type that determined never to give up on a fight and he persisted in applying his standards . there were many ways that unscrupulous clergy could abuse the episcopal patronage , but : so long as henry phillpotts was bishop of exeter they avoided the diocese of exeter , for they knew that this doughty fighter would fight them to the end if he smelt something improper , whatever the cost to his pocket , however unfavourable the publicity and whatever the inadequacy of his own legal standing . ( chadwick ii , 1997 , p 212 ) he was : . a genuinely religious man with his religion concealed behind porcupine quills , he constantly quarrelled in the house of commons , exposing opponents ' follies with consummate ability , a tongue and eyes of flame , an ugly tough face and vehement speech . ( chadwick i , 1997 , p 217 ) the bishop 's strong views and lack of inhibitions in promoting them at times gained him many enemies in key places : that devil of a bishop who inspired more terror than ever satan did.of whom , however , it must be said that he is a gentleman . ( lord melbourne , as quoted in newton , 1968 , p173 ) phillpotts at times became unpopular with former friends ; one such was sydney smith , a former tory ally who went on to say : i must believe in the apostolic succession , there being no other way of accounting for the descent of the bishop of exeter from judas iscariot . ( lambert , 1939 , 39 ) the text concerning mary magdalene with a 'very precious ' ointment was chosen by the bishop for his sermon at the consecration on 24 august 1837 of the new cemetery in exeter . the occasion was reported enthusiastically in the local newspaper the flying post ( 31 august 1837 ) : in its language this sermon was most elegant‚ its delivery was a masterpiece of eloquence , and it was one of the most instructive and enlightened discourses that has been heard . in the foreword to davies ' biography of phillpotts , prof . norman sykes summarises the character of the bishop : henry of exeter , like job ’ s war-horse , snuffed the battle from afar ; and scented , moreover , a remarkable number and variety of contests in which to engage , without exhausting his capacity for polemic . like william warburton of an earlier age ( though perhaps he would not have relished the comparison ) he was a born fighter . it was his fortune furthermore to live in an age when occasions of dispute were legion ; and he threw himself with avidity into their several aspects . born into the era of the unreformed parliament and church , he opposed catholic emancipation and parliamentary reform ; and was a pluralist who wished to retain in commendam the golden rectory of stanhope with the see of exeter , and only compromised by the exchange of living for a rich prebendal stall of durham , yet he lived to adjust himself to revolutionary changes in both church and state . in ecclesiastical matters he was a champion of the principles of the tractarian revival ( a position not to his mind in the leastwise incompatible with mordant criticism of details and individuals ) ; he encouraged the wearing of the surplice , and was a pioneer in the restoration of diocesan synods , and became involved in controversy concerning religious sisterhoods in the church of england . he was the protagonist in the famous gorham controversy , and held his ground in defeat when manning seceded to rome in protest against the verdict of the judicial committee of the privy council in gorham 's favour . as a diocesan bishop he was outstanding in administration and pastoral oversight ; and his episcopate left its enduring mark on the diocese of exeter . davies himself explains : no biographer of phillpotts could , i think , complete his task with a feeling of real affection for the subject of his study . his character and gifts must command respect , if not approval ; but he exhibited a curious lack of balance , and a failure to appreciate and adapt himself to the mood of the times which must detract from a firm claim to greatness on behalf of one so impervious to the changes in contemporary thought and opinion . he deserves , however , to be commemorated as an outstanding figure in the anglican church of the nineteenth century , and in particular for his high church sympathies before the days of the oxford movement , at the same time noting that he could never quite come to terms with the tractarians ; and also for his many innovations in diocesan administration , for example , his opposition to non-residence , his advocacy of theological colleges , and his courage in convening a diocesan synod & nbsp ; – perhaps the most important event of his career . this study is therefore both an attempt to do justice to his virtues in fearlessly contending for his convictions , while at the same time not disguising those failings which were such a conspicuous feature of his character . . politics . phillpotts was an energetic supporter of the tory , even when it acted contrary to his views in passing the roman catholic relief act 1829 . in the house of lords , phillpotts opposed the reform act 1832 and most other whig reforms . he was a high-church reformer in his own diocese , aiming to increase the prestige , efficiency and orthodoxy of the church organisation . he was well known for using litigation to achieve his aims and was an earnest administrator , for example , fighting hard to raise the minimum wage for curates in his diocese to £50 , seeking to increase the rights of the poor under the poor laws and to ease the plight of children employed in coal-mines and as chimney-sweeps . restoration of convocation . one of phillpotts ' greatest political battles was over the restoration of convocation , which has developed into the general synod ( as it is now called ) . he was convinced that the church needed to establish its rulings in a legislative body , and in a communication in may 1843 to his friend , the rt hon j.w . croker , he explained : i wish it to sit again , only for the purpose of synodically devising a better synod than itself ; one , more like the synods of the early church & nbsp ; – in one house , with less of power to the presbyters & nbsp ; – but more means of counsel and aid from them to the bishops than their separate house gives . i need not tell you that convocation is not the ancient synod of our own church . we need , & nbsp ; – and must have & nbsp ; – a legislative body , sitting for real business from time to time . it ought to consist of bishops either solely ( in the presence of presyters who should have a right , not to debate with them , but , hearing what they discuss , to represent by writing their opinions , when they think it necessary ) or of bishops and such divines and representatives of the clergy , as shall be found necessary , securing a real preponderance to the bishops . i am confident that it is hardly possible for us to go on long without restoring to the church a real church legislation . there is not perhaps enough needing amendment in the rubrics , of itself , to require a synod . but of the canons this can not be said . they must be altered if the church is to last in england , under the pressure of all that is opposed to it in privileges ( supposed or real ) of dissenters & nbsp ; – and with the little of real power of restraint over its own members , even its clergy , which it at present has . . publications . phillpotts was renowned for his political pamphlets and the fact that he aired his opinions on every matter of current affairs , although he was not the greatest of diplomats : : : the house of lords expected a humane and courtly manner of bishops and was horrified at the fury of his tone , at the incongruity between his violence and his lawn sleeves . ( chadwick i , 1997 , 217 ) his published works include numerous speeches and pamphlets , including those connected with his well-known roman catholic controversy with charles butler ( 1750–1832 ) and with the gorham case , in which he was a principal player . he was a prolific writer of articles on matters of politics , social order and religion , propounding conservative and often controversial views . he was regarded as an opponent of catholic emancipation , and on this theme published letters to charles butler ( 1825 ) , letters to canning ( 1827 ) and a letter to an english layman on the coronation oath ( 1828 ) . however , he eventually approved of peel 's scheme for granting relief to catholics in 1829 . legacy . phillpotts ' position was that of the traditional high churchman , with little sympathy either with the evangelicals or with the tractarians , although he was considered to represent the conservative high church wing of the oxford movement and emphasized liturgical forms of worship , episcopal government , monastic life , and early christian doctrine as normative of orthodoxy . on the one hand , the famous gorham judgment was the outcome of his refusal to give the living of brampford speke to george cornelius gorham ( 1787–1857 ) , who had expressed disbelief in baptismal regeneration ; on the other hand , he denounced the equally famous tract 90 in his episcopal charge of 1843 . phillpotts was generous in his gifts to the church , founding the seminary at exeter and spending large sums on the restoration of the cathedral . exeter cathedral states that henry phillpotts lives of the bishops of exeter exeter cathedral website . retrieved 11 february 2007 phillpotts was able to restore the bishop 's palace in a '' most creditable manner '' . an allegation , subsequently proven to be unfounded , made at the general synod in 2006 claimed that phillpotts was paid almost £13,000 ( £12,729.5s.2d ) in 1833 , under the terms of the slavery abolition act 1833 , as compensation for the loss of slaves when they were emancipated . rev . bessant to general synod of the church of england , february 2006 , church apologises for slave trade bbc.co.uk news , 8 february 2006 . the same claim was repeated in the house of commons by chris bryant , mp for rhondda : the claim stated that '' the bishop of exeter kept 655 slaves until the time of abolition of slavery act 1833 and he received £12,700 in compensation , hansard , 6 march 2006 , column 600 : 21 . however , it has been shown that the compensation of £13089.4s.4d was paid to phillpotts and three others acting as trustees and executors for john ward , 1st earl of dudley for 665 slaves on three plantations in jamaica . it is not likely that any share of such funds , equivalent to more than one million pound sterling in present value , went to phillpotts as he would not have been permitted to be paid for acting as executor nor to benefit under the terms of the will . both the office of the then bishop of exeter , michael langrish , at the time of the allegation , and the devon county library ( which holds diocesan records ) , have stated that they hold no record of any further involvement in the slave trade by phillpotts other than the recording as a trustee/executor of a joint holding of the 665 slaves that were the property of john ward , 1st earl of dudley , his biographer sums up his legacy thus : the champion of lost causes , his attitude , his policy , and even his virtues became increasingly inappropriate . loyal and even tender in family relationships ; staunch in friendships ; violent in controversy ; brilliant in debate , he certainly deserves to be commemorated as one of the outstanding figures on the bench during the nineteenth century . the church tower at st . marychurch was restored in 1873 , at a cost of £3,500 , in the bishop 's memory . the bishop phillpotts library in truro , cornwall , founded by the bishop in 1856 for the benefit of the clergy of cornwall , continues to be an important centre for theological and religious studies , with its more than 10,000 volumes , mainly theological , open to access by clergy and students of all denominations . it was opened in 1871 and almost doubled in size in 1872 by the bequest of the collection of prebendary ford . cornish church guide ( 1925 ) truro : blackford ; p . 328 . marriage . in october 1804 , not long after his ordainment as a priest , henry phillpotts married deborah maria surtees ( 1782-1863 ) . she was a niece of john scott , 1st earl of eldon : thus the marriage marked a rise in social status for the young clergyman whose own family background was undistinguished . davies , g.c.b . , henry phillpotts , bishop of exeter , society for the promotion of christian knowledge , london 1954 . family . henry phillpotts and his wife deborah had a total of eighteen children . of these the eldest son was william phillpotts ( 1807-1888 ) , archdeacon of cornwall and vicar of st gluvias . william phillpotts ' sons included james surtees phillpotts , headmaster of bedford school , and his grandsons included brigadier general louis murray phillpotts and lieutenant colonel brian surtees phillpotts , both of them heroes of the world war i . several of henry phillpotts ' children married into the families of his diocesan clergy , examples being maria phillpotts who in 1833 married the reverend richard stephens , rector of dunsford , richard stephens and maria phillpotts , 4 july 1833 ; all souls , st marylebone , london , england sybella phillpotts who in 1836 married the reverend francis houssemayne du boulay , rector of lawhitton , francis du boulay and sybella phillpotts , 8 jul 1836 , saint marylebone , middlesex , england and charles edward phillpotts , an army officer who in 1860 married jane hole , daughter of the rector of chulmleigh . charles edward phillpotts and jane hole , october 1860 , torquay , devon the west country writer eden phillpotts was a grandson of henry phillpotts ' younger brother thomas phillpotts ( 1785-1862 ) , a west indies merchant and plantation owner and subsequently co-owner ( with samuel baker ) of bakers quay at gloucester quays . death . on 9 september 1869 phillpotts formally executed the resignation of his see , but before its completion he died on 18 september 1869 . he was buried in the churchyard at st marychurch , torquay , near his wife deborah , who had died six years before him . thumb . obituary . extract from the times , 20 september 1869 : fierce , fiery , and intolerant of opposition to a fault , and sincere and earnest in an age which is not remarkable for earnestness in religion , he held to the last to the via media of the anglican church as the strongest safeguard against romish and calvinistic errors , and probably rejoiced to die like ken and laud and scores of high church prelates of the stuart times , expressing his firm faith in the anglo-catholic church as essentially one and the same in doctrine and faith with the undivided church of the first five centuries of the christian era . well , at length he rests from his labours side by side with archbishop sumner and mr gorham . let us write on his tomb one simple word , requiescat . . in literature . in anthony trollope 's 1855 novel , the warden , the fictional archdeacon of barchester cathedral , dr . grantly , keeps in his private study '' the busts of the greatest among the great : chrysostom , st . augustine , thomas à becket , cardinal wolsey , archbishop laud , and dr . philpotts '' ( chap . xii ) . bishop phillpotts appears as a pompous bishop of exeter , in keith miles 's historical novel set in 1857 , the stationmaster 's farewell . this is no.9 of the railway detective series featuring inspector colbeck and sergeant lemming . historical novel society : review of the stationmaster 's farewell by edward marston ( allison & busby , 2012 ) . works . 1849 '' the case of the rev . mr . shore . a letter to his grace the archbishop of canterbury yeovil : h . m . custard , hendford