1906 in sports

american football . college championship college football national championship – princeton tigers and yale bulldogs ( shared ) events 31 march — the intercollegiate athletic association of the united states ( iaaus ) is established to set rules for amateur sports in the united states , including revisions to american football rules that legalise the forward pass . the iaaus later became the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) in 1910 . 5 september — bradbury robinson of st . louis university throws the first legal forward pass to teammate jack schneider in a 22–0 victory over carroll college in waukesha , wisconsin . 25 october — peggy parratt of the massillon tigers throws the first legal forward pass in professional football to teammate dan policowski in a 60–0 victory over a combined benwood-moundsville team in massillon , ohio . 24 november — the canton bulldogs-massillon tigers betting scandal effectively ends the first era of major professional football . all three of the top three teams in the nation will fall by the wayside by 1907 . association football . england the football league – liverpool 51 , preston north end 47 , the wednesday 44 , newcastle united 43 , manchester city 43 , bolton wanderers 41 fa cup final – everton 1–0 newcastle united at crystal palace , london germany national championship – vfb leipzig 2–1 pforzheim at nuremberg italy football club torino , as predecessor of torino f.c . was founded on december 3 . mexico club unión founded ( 8 may ) . portugal sporting clube de portugal founded ( 14 april ) . scotland scottish football league – celtic scottish cup final – hearts 1–0 third lanark at ibrox park spain deportivo de la coruna , officially founded in galicia , on march 2 . australian rules football . vfl premiership carlton wins the 10th vfl premiership – carlton 15.4 ( 94 ) d fitzroy 6.9 ( 45 ) at melbourne cricket ground ( mcg ) events the australasian football council is established in november to serve as the top-level governing body for australian rules football in australia and new zealand . baseball . world series 9–14 october — chicago white sox ( al ) defeats chicago cubs ( nl ) in the 1906 world series by 4 games to 2 . boxing . events 23 february — marvin hart loses his world heavyweight championship to tommy burns over 20 rounds in los angeles . burns holds the title until december 1908 and successfully defends it 11 times until he is defeated by jack johnson . lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – marvin hart → tommy burns world light heavyweight championship – vacant world middleweight championship – tommy ryan → vacant world welterweight championship – barbados joe walcott → billy '' honey '' mellody world lightweight championship – battling nelson → joe gans world featherweight championship – abe attell world bantamweight championship – jimmy walsh . cricket . events george hirst of yorkshire and england creates a unique record as the only player to score 2000 runs and take 200 wickets in the same season : 2385 runs and 208 wickets . the plunket shield competition is introduced in new zealand ahead of the 1906–07 season . the shield is donated by lord plunket , the governor-general of new zealand . in its early years , until 1920–21 when a league system is started , the competition is decided by a series of challenge matches between five provincial cricket association sides , auckland , wellington , canterbury , otago and , briefly , hawke 's bay . england county championship – kent minor counties championship – staffordshire most runs – tom hayward 3518 66.37 ( hs 219 ) most wickets – george hirst 208 16.50 ( bb 7–18 ) wisden cricketers of the year – jack crawford , arthur fielder , ernie hayes , kenneth hutchings , neville knox australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – jim mackay 902 112.75 ( hs 203 ) most wickets – leonard garnsey 36 21.44 ( bb 6–48 ) india bombay presidency – hindus shared with parsees south africa currie cup – not contested west indies inter-colonial tournament – barbados . cycling . tour de france rené pottier ( france ) wins the 4th tour de france . figure skating . events inaugural isu world championships for women is held at davos , switzerland world figure skating championships world men 's champion – gilbert fuchs ( germany ) world women 's champion – madge syers-cave ( great britain ) . golf . events as scoring improves , alex smith becomes the first golfer in us open history to break 300 for 72 holes when he posts 295 major tournaments british open – james braid us open – alex smith other tournaments british amateur – james robb us amateur – eben byers . horse racing . england grand national – ascetic 's silver 1,000 guineas stakes – flair 2,000 guineas stakes – gorgos the derby – spearmint the oaks – keystone ii st . leger stakes – troutbeck australia melbourne cup – poseidon canada queen 's plate – slaughter ireland irish grand national – brown bess irish derby stakes – killeagh usa kentucky derby – sir huon preakness stakes – whimsical belmont stakes – burgomaster . ice hockey . stanley cup february — ottawa hockey club defeats queen 's college of kingston , ontario in a stanley cup challenge march — ottawa defeats smiths falls , ontario two games to none in another stanley cup challenge . march — ottawa and montreal wanderers tie for first place in the ecaha league 's regular season with 9–1 records . the two clubs hold a playoff to determine the ecaha and stanley cup champion . the wanderers win the series for their first stanley cup win , defeating the silver seven in a two-game total-goals series . other events 3 january — the eastern canada amateur hockey association ( ecaha ) begins its inaugural season berlin , ontario defeats the argonaut rowing club to win the ontario hockey association title . motorsport . rowing . the boat race 7 april — cambridge wins the 63rd the boat race 1906 . rugby league . england championship – leigh challenge cup – bradford f.c . 5–0 salford at headingley rugby stadium , leeds rugby league county leagues – not contested rugby league county leagues – not contested lancashire county cup – wigan 8–0 leigh ( replay following 0–0 ) yorkshire county cup – hunslet 13–3 halifax events rules of rugby league are changed so that the number of players in a team is reduced from 15 to 13 , and following tackles the play-the-ball is introduced in place of rucks and mauls . . speed skating . january 27 - new world record in speed skating 500m by rudolf gundersen ( 44.8 ) in davos speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – none declared . rugby union . home nations championship 24th home nations championship series is shared by ireland and wales . tennis . australia australian men 's singles championship – anthony wilding ( nz ) defeats francis fisher ( nz ) 6–0 6–4 6–4 england the championships , wimbledon – laurence doherty ( gb ) defeats frank riseley ( gb ) 6–4 4–6 6–2 6–3 the championships , wimbledon – dorothea douglass lambert chambers defeats may sutton bundy 6–3 9–7 france french men 's singles championship – maurice germot defeats max decugis : details unknown french women 's singles championship – kate gillou defeats mac veagh : details unknown usa us open ( tennis ) – william clothier defeats beals wright 6–3 6–0 6–4 us open ( tennis ) – helen homans defeats maud barger-wallach 6–4 6–3 davis cup 1906 international lawn tennis challenge – 5–0 at warple road ( grass ) london , united kingdom . references .