William Whittingham

early life . born at chester about 1524 , he was son of william whittingham , by his wife , a daughter of haughton of hoghton tower , lancashire . in 1540 , at the age of sixteen , he entered brasenose college , oxford , graduating b.a . and being elected fellow of all souls ' college in 1545 . in 1547 he became senior student of christ church , oxford earning the m.a . on 5 feb 1547–8 . on 17 may 1550 , he was granted leave to travel for three years to study languages and civil law . he went to france , where he spent his time chiefly at the university of orleans , but he also visited lyon and studied at paris , where his services as interpreter were used by the english ambassador , sir john mason or sir william pickering . towards the end of 1552 whittingham visited universities in germany and geneva . he briefly returned to england in may 1553 . whittingham had adopted radical puritan views , but the accession of queen mary , the return of anglo-italian ecclesiastical policies of de haeretico comburendo in the form of cardinal pole 's repatriation to england , and the vulnerabilities and liabilities associated with burnings-to-come ( e.g . william tyndale , 1536 ) , anticipated persecutions , interfered with hopes of usefulness in ministerial labours . late in august , however , he made intercession , which was ultimately successful , for the release of peter martyr ; but after a few weeks he himself left england with difficulty by way of dover to france . at frankfort . in the spring of 1554 frankfort was the ecclesiastical centre for the english marian exiles on the continent , and whittingham was one of the first who reached the city on 27 june 1554 ; he sent out invitations to exiles in other cities to join them . difficulties soon arose , however , between the party led by whittingham and john knox which sought to abolish all english liturgies and adopt the genevan and presbyterian mode of worship ; and those who sought to retain the anglican prayerbooks , in particular edward vi 's second prayer-book . whittingham was one of those appointed to draw up a service-book . he procured a letter from john calvin , dated 18 january 1555 , which prevailed ; but the compromise adopted was disturbed by the arrival and public disruptions of richard cox , an uncompromising champion of the 1552 book of common prayer . in the party with cox was john jewel , the famed later bishop of salisbury , who resolutely opposed whittingham and knox in their program . in the ensuing troubles at frankfurt , whittingham was knox 's chief supporter . however , he failed to prevent knox 's expulsion from frankfort on 26 march ; he gave his support to the form of church government established at frankfort under cox 's influence . he was dissatisfied with the outcome , however . about 22 september 1555 , he followed knox to geneva , a veritable beehive of growing scholarship and , in time , international influence . there he became ordained in the presbyterian manner . there exists a nearly eye-witness narrative of the conflict , published in 1575 , entitled ' a brieff discours off the troubles begonne at franckford in germany , anno domini 1554 . abowte the booke off common prayer and ceremonies , and continued by the englishe men theyre to thende off q . maries raigne , 1575 . ' a brieff discours off the troubles begonne at franckford in germany , anno domini 1554 . abowte the booke off common prayer and ceremonies , and continued by the englishe men theyre to thende off q . maries raigne , ' 1575 . it bears no place or printer 's name , but was printed probably at geneva , and in the same type as thomas cartwright 's tracts ; one copy of the original edition is dated mdlxxiv . it was reprinted at london in 1642 , in vol . ii . of 'the phenix , ' 1708 ; again in 1846 ( ed . m'crie ) , and in vol . iv . of 'knox 's works ' ( bannatyne club ) . recent scholars have argued that whittingham is indeed the author of the narrative . . at geneva . on 16 december 1555 , and again in december 1556 , whittingham was elected a presbyterian elder ; on 16 december 1558 , he was ordained as a deacon , and in 1559 he succeeded knox as presbyterian minister at calvin 's insistence . upon queen mary 's death , most of the exiles at geneva returned to england , but whittingham remained to complete the translation of the geneva bible . he had laboured with other scholars in the review of earlier english editions—tyndale 's , coverdale 's , the thomas matthew 's bible and other versions . he had already produced a version of the new testament , which was issued at geneva by conrad badius on 10 june 1557 . he also took part in the minor revisions of the old testament . the critical and explanatory notes were largely textual and explanatory . it was printed at geneva by rowland hall in 1560 ; after 1611 , its popularity was not lost . more than 150 editions were printed up to 1644 . it was an influential version for at least one hundred years . by the 17th century , as laudian influences would gain ascendancy , all-things-genevan grew to be condemned . besides the translation of the bible , whittingham issued metrical versions some of psalms . seven of these were included among the fifty-one psalms published at geneva in 1556 ; others were revised versions of thomas sternhold 's psalms . a metrical rendering of the ten commandments by whittingham was appended . another edition of 1558 , now lost , is believed to have contained nine fresh psalms of whittingham ; these were reprinted in the edition of 1561 , to which whittingham also contributed a version of the 'song of simeon ' and two of the lord 's prayer . besides these , whittingham translated four psalms in the scottish psalter . these do not appear in any english edition . whittingham revised for press knox 's work on predestination , published at geneva in 1560 . he contributed a dedicatory epistle to christopher goodman 's 'how superior powers ought to be obeyed ' ( geneva , 1558 ) . as well , he was the latin translator of the martyr nicholas ridley 's 'brief declaration of the lord 's supper ( oxford , 1555 ) ; regarding his translation , a recent editor of the declaration said this : '' . the latin version , to a reader who has learnt to love ridley 's noble combination of courage and decision with fairness of thought and restraint of expression , is a painful study . its diffuseness is such as to make it much more a parahprase than a version ; and this diffuseness is largely displayed in the rendering of ridley 's quiet english into an embittered rhetoric , or in quite gratuitous and disputable additions . a few examples may suffice . '' . return to england . whittingham took formal leave of the council at geneva on 30 may 1560 . in january 1561 , he was appointed to attend francis russell , 2nd earl of bedford during his embassy to the french court . in the following year he became a chaplain to ambrose dudley , 3rd earl of warwick , a minister at le havre , then occupied by the english under warwick . he won general praise ; but william cecil complained of his neglect of conformity to the english book of common prayer . owing to the support of warwick and robert dudley , 1st earl of leicester , another puritan sympathizer , whittingham was collated on 19 july 1563 to the deanery of durham . in keeping with his past , whittingham took his duties seriously , holding two services a day , devoting time to his grammar school and song school , and church music . before the outbreak of the rising of the north in 1569 he unsuccessfully urged james pilkington , the bishop of durham , to put the city in a state of defence , but he was more successful at newcastle , which resisted the rebels . in 1572 , when lord burghley became lord treasurer , whittingham was suggested , probably by leicester , as his successor in the office of secretary . in 1577 , leicester also promised whittingham aid in securing the see of york or durham , both being vacant ; but whittingham did not press for preferment . a dean of durham . in 1564 , whittingham wrote a long letter to leicester protesting against the 'old popish apparel ' and the historic associations with massing-vestments and theology . he refused to wear the surplice and cope , and proceedings by church officials were begun against him in 1566 . whittingham eventually yielded , taking calvin 's moderating advice not to leave the ministry for external and minor matters of order . in 1577 , however , he incurred the enmity of edwin sandys , the new archbishop of york , by resisting his claim to visit durham cathedral . according to william hutchinson a commission had been issued in 1576 or 1577 to examine complaints against him . but this proved ineffectual because the earl of huntingdon and matthew hutton sided with the dean against the third commissioner , sandys . a fresh commission was issued on 14 may 1578 . this included the three former commissioners and about a dozen others . the articles against whittingham are printed from the domestic state papers in the 'camden miscellany ' ; the charge that 'he is defamed of ' is entered as 'partly proved ' and that of drunkenness as 'proved ; ' but the real allegation against whittingham was the alleged inadequacy and invalidity of his ordination in geneva . he admitted to not having been ordained according to the rites of the church of england . archbishop sandys further added that whittingham had not even been validly ordained even according to genevan standards , but had been elected preacher without the imposition of hands . huntingdon repudiated the archbishop and suggested a stay of the proceedings against whittingham , arguing that 'it could not but be ill-taken of all the godly learned both at home and in all the reformed churches abroad , that we should allow of the popish massing priests in our ministry , and disallow of the ministers made in a reformed church ' . however archbishop richard bancroft , in 'dangerous positions ' , referred to him as 'afterward unworthily dean of durham ' , and ranks him with goodman , gilby , and other puritans . so does roger l'estrange in his violent philippic , 'the holy cheat . as the proceedings to deprive whittingham of holy orders were proceeding , he was met with death , on 10 june 1579 . he was buried in durham cathedral , where his tomb ( ironically ) was destroyed by the presbyterian scots in 1640 . his will , dated 18 april 1579 , is printed in 'durham wills and inventories ' ( surtees soc . ii . 14–19 ) . family . whittingham 's wife catherine , daughter of louis jaqueman , was probably born not before 1535 and married to whittingham on 15 november 1556 . her eldest son , zachary , was baptised on 17 august 1557 , and her eldest daughter , susanna , on 11 december 1558 ; both died young . whittingham was survived by two sons , sir timothy and daniel , and four daughters . references . . notes . ; attribution