Robert Winchelsey

early life . image : laurentius de voltolina 001.jpg thumb right medieval lecturer from a painting by laurentius de voltolina , second half of the 14th century . robert would have taught much like this . winchelsey studied and taught at the universities of paris and oxford , and became the rector of paris , and chancellor of oxford . while in paris , he read , and possibly met , thomas aquinas , and his own theology was thereafter purely scholastic . denton '' winchelsey , robert '' oxford dictionary of national biography in 1283 , he was appointed canon of st . paul 's in london , but it is unclear exactly when he returned to england . he held the prebend of oxgate in the diocese of london , greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 1 : st . paul 's , london : prebendaries : oxgate and was made archdeacon of essex , also in the london diocese , in about 1288 . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 1 : st . paul 's , london : archdeacons : essex . archbishop . election . john peckham , archbishop of canterbury , died in december 1292 . on 13 february 1293 , winchelsey was elected as his successor . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 233 unusually , neither the pope nor the king had a hand in his election . on 1 april , winchelsey left england for rome to get papal confirmation . he was not consecrated immediately because of a papal vacancy ; celestine v eventually performed the ceremony at aquila on 12 september 1294 . greenway fasti ecclesiae anglicanae 1066–1300 : volume 2 : monastic cathedrals ( northern and southern provinces ) : canterbury : archbishops . disputes with edward i . winchelsey was a fearless opponent of edward i . when he swore his oath of fealty to edward , he offended the king by adding a declaration that he was only swearing fealty for the temporalities , not the spiritualities . all through his term as archbishop he refused to allow edward to tax the clergy beyond certain levels , and withstood severe pressure to change his mind . in august 1295 , he offered the king a tenth of all ecclesiastical revenues , less than edward had hoped to collect from the clergy . winchelsey did concede though that if the war with france , which was what the money was requested to fund , continued into the following year , then the clergy would be amenable to making further contributions . prestwich . edward i p . 405 following the issue of the papal bull clericis laicos in 1296 , forbidding the payment of taxes to a secular power , winchelsey urged his clergy in 1297 to refuse payments to edward . however , the clergy of the province of york paid a tax of a fifth of their revenues . edward then declared clerics who refused to pay outlaws , and ordered their property to be seized . he conceded that the clergy could return to his protection if they paid a fine of a fifth of their revenues , exactly what the northern clergy had offered in the way of taxation . the royal clerks and many other clergy paid the fines , and in march , the southern clergy met again , and after a long debate , winchelsey instructed each clerk to decide for himself whether or not to pay the fine . it appears that most chose to pay , prestwich . edward i pp . 415–17 . but the archbishop still refused to make any contribution , and so edward seized his lands . they were returned to him in july 1297 , when the king and prelate were reconciled at westminster . powell and wallis house of lords pp . 232–35 winchelsey then tried to mediate between edward and the earls , who also objected to edward 's tax demands . prestwich edward i p . 420 winchelsey further irritated edward with his opposition to the bishop of lichfield , walter langton , who was the king 's treasurer . the king was not the only one to be upset by the archbishop ; the abbot of oseney , in 1297 , was so affected by a rebuke from him that he suffered a fatal heart attack . prestwich edward i pp . 412–413 in 1299 , winchelsey and the king briefly reconciled , and the archbishop presided at the king 's second marriage , to margaret of france , at canterbury . prestwich edward i p . 521 winchelsey vigorously asserted his authority over his suffragan , or subordinate bishops , quarrelled with pope boniface viii over a sussex living , and was excommunicated by one of the pope 's clerks in 1301 . he was absolved in 1302 . . exile and return . winchelsey and the barons joined in demanding reforms from the king at the parliament of lincoln in 1301 , but winchelsey 's support of boniface viii 's claim to be the protector of scotland broke the alliance . one of the reasons which led the archbishop to ally with the barons was his hostility to edward 's adviser , walter langton , bishop of lichfield . the king took no action against winchelsey until the gascon and former royal clerk bertrand de got was named pope clement v in 1305 . prestwich edward i pp . 540–41 edward then sent two envoys & nbsp ; – langton and henry lacy & nbsp ; – to the pope , to press his claim that winchelsey was plotting against him . clement suspended the archbishop on 12 february 1306 . winchelsey left england and went to the papal court at bordeaux , where he stayed until edward 's death in july 1307 . only antony bek , bishop of durham supported the archbishop . after the death of edward i , the new king , edward ii , asked that winchelsey be restored , powell and wallis . house of lords , p . 266 which the pope agreed to on 22 january 1308 . soon after his return to england in early 1308 the archbishop joined the king 's enemies . weir . queen isabella p . 42 the archbishop , along with the earl of warwick , were the only people to object to the return of the new king 's favourite piers gaveston to england in 1309 . weir queen isabella p . 49 winchelsey aided the barons in their prosecution of edward ii by sentencing their enemies to excommunication . weir . queen isabella p . 55 he was appointed an ordainer in 1310 , powell and wallis house of lords pp . 275–276 and died at otford on 11 may 1313 . . legacy . winchelsey was a preacher of some note , and when preaching at st . paul 's he attracted large crowds to his sermons and lectures . moorman church life pp . 162–163 winchelsey 's theological writings date primarily from his time at st . paul 's , where he delivered a number of quodlibeta . the quaestiones disputatae from those sessions survive , and illustrate his highly orthodox trinitarian views and his scholastic method . miracles were said to have been worked at his tomb in canterbury cathedral , but efforts to have him declared a saint have been unsuccessful . . citations . references . . further reading .