Our American Cousin

theatrical acclaim and '' lord dundreary '' . among our american cousins cast was british actor edward askew sothern , playing lord dundreary , a caricature of a brainless english nobleman . sothern had already achieved fame on the new york stage in the play camille in 1856 , and had been reluctant to take on the role because he felt that it was too small and unimportant . he mentioned his qualms to his friend joseph jefferson , who had been cast in the lead role , and jefferson supposedly responded with the famous line : '' there are no small parts , only small actors . '' havard , bernard ( 2008 ) , walnut street theatre , charleston , sc : arcadia publishing , p . 40 , . our american cousin premiered in new york on october 15 , 1858 . after several weeks of performances , sothern began portraying the role more broadly , as a lisping , skipping , eccentric , weak-minded fop prone to nonsensical references to sayings of his '' bwother '' sam . pemberton , t . edgar ( 1890 ) , a memoir of edward askew sothern , london : richard bentley and son , p . 319 . his ad-libs were a sensation , earning good notices for his physical comedy and spawning much imitation and mockery in both the united states and england . sothern gradually expanded the role , adding gags and business until it became the central figure of the play . the most famous scene involved dundreary reading a letter from his even sillier brother . the play ran for 150 nights , which was very successful for a new york run at the time . holder , heidi j . ( 2004 ) , '' sothern , edward askew ( 1826–1881 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press . sothern made his london debut in the role when the play ran for 496 performances at the haymarket theatre in 1861 , earning rave reviews . '' edward askew sothern '' , virtual american biographies ( 2001 ) . the athenaeum wrote , '' it is certainly the funniest thing in the world . a vile caricature of a vain nobleman , intensely ignorant , and extremely indolent '' . the athenaeum , 16 november 1861 . sothern successfully revived the play many times , making dundreary by far his most famous role . '' dundrearyisms '' , twisted aphorisms in the style of lord dundreary ( e.g . '' birds of a feather gather no moss '' ) , enjoyed a brief vogue . and the character 's style of beard – long , bushy sideburns – gave the english language the word '' dundrearies '' . in his autobiography , writer george robert sims recalled that '' we went dundreary mad in '61 . the shop windows were filled with dundreary scarves , and brother sam scarves , and there were dundreary collars and dundreary shirts , and dundrearyisms were on every lip . '' it was not long before the success of this play inspired an imitation , charles gayler 's our female american cousin , which opened in new york city in january 1859 . none of the characters from the original play appeared in this comedy . a number of sequel plays to our american cousin were written , all featuring several characters from the original , and focusing on the lord dundreary character . the first was gayler 's our american cousin at home , or , lord dundreary abroad , which premiered in buffalo , new york , in november 1860 , buffalo daily courier , 1 november 1860 , 2 november 1860 , 3 november 1860 . and had its new york city debut the following may . brown , t . allston ( 1903 ) , a history of the new york stage , volume i , new york : dodd , mead and co , p . 450 . later sequels included henry james byron 's dundreary married and done for , and john oxenford 's brother sam ( 1862 ; revived in 1865 ) , a play about dundreary 's brother . principal roles and original cast . asa trenchard ( a rustic american ) – joseph jefferson sir edward trenchard ( a baronet ) – edwin varrey florence trenchard ( his daughter ) – laura keene mary meredith ( a poor cousin ) – sara stevens lord dundreary ( an idiotic english nobleman ) – e . a . sothern mr . coyle ( a businessman ) – j . g . burnett abel murcott ( his clerk ) – c.w . couldock lt . harry vernon ( of the royal navy ) – m . levick mr . binny ( a butler ) – mr . peters mrs . mountchessington – mary wells augusta ( her daughter ) – e . germon georgina ( another daughter ) – mrs . sothern . synopsis . act i . in the drawing room at trenchard manor , the servants remark on their employer 's poor financial circumstances . florence trenchard , an aristocratic young beauty , loves lieutenant harry vernon of the royal navy , but she is unable to marry him until he progresses to a higher rank . she receives a letter from her brother ned , who is currently in the united states . ned has met some rustic cousins from a branch of the family that had immigrated to america two centuries earlier . they relay to ned that great-uncle mark trenchard had , after angrily disinheriting his children and leaving england years ago , found these cousins in brattleboro , vermont . he had moved in with them and eventually made asa , one of the sons , heir to his property in england . asa is now sailing to england to claim the estate . asa is noisy , coarse , and vulgar , but honestly forthright and colourful . the english trenchards are alternately amused and appalled by this vermont cousin . richard coyle , agent of the estate , meets with sir edward trenchard ( florence 's father ) and tells the baronet that the family faces bankruptcy unless they can repay a debt to coyle . coyle is concealing the evidence that the loan had been repaid long ago by sir edward 's late father . coyle suggests that the loan would be satisfied if he may marry florence , who detests him . meanwhile , asa and the butler , binny , try to understand each other 's unfamiliar ways , as asa tries to understand what the purpose of a shower might be , dousing himself while fully clothed . act ii . mrs . mountchessington is staying at trenchard manor . she advises augusta , her daughter , to be attentive to the presumably wealthy vermont '' savage '' . meanwhile , her other daughter georgina is courting an imbecilic nobleman named dundreary by pretending to be ill . florence 's old tutor , the unhappy alcoholic abel murcott , warns her that coyle intends to marry her . asa overhears this and offers florence his help . murcott is coyle 's clerk and has found proof that florence 's late grandfather paid off the loan to coyle . florence and asa visit her cousin , mary meredith . mary is the granddaughter of old mark trenchard , who left his estate to asa . mary is very poor and has been raised as a humble dairy maid . asa does not care about her social status and is attracted to her . florence has not been able to bring herself to tell mary that her grandfather 's fortune had been left to asa . florence tells asa that she loves harry , who needs a good assignment to a ship . asa uses his country wile to persuade dundreary to help harry get a ship . meanwhile , coyle has been up to no good , and the bailiffs arrive at trenchard manor . act iii . at her dairy farm , asa tells mary about her grandfather in america , but he fibs about the end of the tale : he says that old mark trenchard changed his mind about disinheriting his english children and burned his will . asa promptly burns the will himself . florence discovers this and points it out to mary , saying : '' it means that he is a true hero , and he loves you , you little rogue . '' meanwhile , mrs . mountchessington still hopes that asa will propose to augusta . when asa tells them that mark trenchard had left mary his fortune , augusta and mrs . mountchessington are quite rude , but asa stands up for himself . asa proposes to mary and is happily accepted . he then sneaks into coyle 's office with murcott and retrieves the paper that shows that the debt was paid . asa confronts coyle and insists that coyle must pay off sir edward 's other debts , with his doubtless ill-gotten gains , and also apologize to florence for trying to force her into marriage . he also demands coyle 's resignation as the steward of trenchard manor , making murcott steward instead . murcott is so pleased that he vows to stop drinking . coyle has no choice but to do all this . florence marries harry , dundreary marries georgina , and augusta marries an old beau . even the servants marry . lincoln assassination . the play 's most famous performance was at ford 's theatre in washington , d.c . on april 14 , 1865 . the cast modified a line of the play in honor of abraham lincoln : when the heroine asked for a seat protected from the draft , the replyscripted as , '' well , you 're not the only one that wants to escape the draft '' was delivered instead as , '' the draft has already been stopped by order of the president ! '' halfway through act iii , scene 2 , the character of asa trenchard , played that night by harry hawk , utters this line , considered one of the play 's funniest , to mrs . mountchessington : during the ensuing laughter , john wilkes booth , a famous actor and confederate sympathizer who was not a member of the play 's cast , snuck into lincoln 's box , raised his derringer , and fatally shot lincoln in the back of the head . familiar with the play , booth had chosen that moment in the hope that the audience 's laughter would mask the sound of his gunshot . booth then leapt from lincoln 's box onto the stage and made his escape through the back of the theater to a horse he had left waiting in the alley . that night , the remainder of the play was suspended . swanson , james ( 2006 ) . manhunt : the 12-day chase for lincoln 's killer , new york : harper collins , pp . 42–43 . . popular culture . in 1862 charles kingsley wrote a parody , the '' great hippocampus question '' , in the style of lord dundreary , and incorporated parts of this in the water-babies published in 1863 . in the 1950 film all about eve , bill sampson says to margo channing , '' i 've always denied the legend that you were in 'our american cousin ' the night lincoln was shot . '' our american cousin was adapted for the radio anthology program on stage in 1953 . in a move that earned him a rebuke from cbs management , director , producer , and actor elliott lewis aired it in the same hour as his show crime classics episode '' the assassination of abraham lincoln '' . in a brief scene in the 2000 film bedazzled , elliot becomes president lincoln at the theater , recognizes the name of the play , realizes he is about to be murdered , and tries to leave . as an excuse , he says that he has already seen the play , but is informed that is impossible , because it is '' an entirely new play . '' in reality , the play was six and a half years old at the time of the assassination . eric w . sawyer 's 2008 opera our american cousin presents a fictionalized version of the night of lincoln 's assassination from the point of view of the actors in the cast of taylor 's play . in the 2019 film the lego movie 2 : the second part , when lincoln is falling to the black hole he says that he has tickets to the theater referencing his death . references . external links . our american cousin – the script , cast and lincoln assassination the history of our american cousin and the legal issues surrounding its ownership . modern look at the play , written to commemorate the 200th anniversary of abraham lincoln 's birth . audio recording of the play ( from archive.org ) by professional actors at lostplays.com , including a recreation of the assassination moment lincoln 's last play ; or , the continuing fascination with our american cousin from the museum of the city of new york collections blog