Menander

life and work . menander was the son of well-to-do parents ; his father diopeithes is identified by some with the athenian general and governor of the thracian chersonese known from the speech of demosthenes de chersoneso . he presumably derived his taste for comic drama from his uncle alexis . ' a short history of comedy ' , prolegomena de comoedia , 3 he was the friend , associate , and perhaps pupil of theophrastus , and was on intimate terms with the athenian dictator demetrius phalereus . phaedrus : fables , 5.1 he also enjoyed the patronage of ptolemy soter , the son of lagus , who invited him to his court . but menander , preferring the independence of his villa in the piraeus and the company of his mistress glycera , refused . alciphron : letters , 2.3–4 according to the note of a scholiast on the ibis of ovid , he drowned while bathing , scholiast on ibis.591 and his countrymen honored him with a tomb on the road leading to athens , where it was seen by pausanias . pausanias , description of greece , 1.2.2 numerous supposed busts of him survive , including a well-known statue in the vatican , formerly thought to represent gaius marius . his rival in dramatic art ( and supposedly in the affections of glycera ) was philemon , who appears to have been more popular . menander , however , believed himself to be the better dramatist , and , according to aulus gellius , gellius : noctes attica , 17.4 used to ask philemon : '' do n't you feel ashamed whenever you gain a victory over me ? '' according to caecilius of calacte ( porphyry in eusebius , praeparatio evangelica eusebius : praeparatio evangelica , book 10 , chapter 3 ) menander was accused of plagiarism , as his the superstitious man was taken from the augur of antiphanes , but reworkings and variations on a theme of this sort were commonplace and so the charge is a complicated one . how long complete copies of his plays survived is unclear , although 23 of them , with commentary by michael psellus , were said to still have been available in constantinople in the 11th century . he is praised by plutarch ( comparison of menander and aristophanes ) plutarch : moralia , 853–854 and quintilian ( institutio oratoria ) , who accepted the tradition that he was the author of the speeches published under the name of the attic orator charisius . quintilian : institutio oratoria , 10.1.69 an admirer and imitator of euripides , menander resembles him in his keen observation of practical life , his analysis of the emotions , and his fondness for moral maxims , many of which became proverbial : '' the property of friends is common , '' '' whom the gods love die young , '' '' evil communications corrupt good manners '' ( from the thaïs , quoted in 1 corinthians 15:33 ) . these maxims ( chiefly monostichs ) were afterwards collected , and , with additions from other sources , were edited as menander 's one-verse maxims , a kind of moral textbook for the use of schools . the single surviving speech from his early play drunkenness is an attack on the politician callimedon , in the manner of aristophanes , whose bawdy style was adopted in many of his plays . menander found many roman imitators . eunuchus , andria , heauton timorumenos and adelphi of terence ( called by caesar '' dimidiatus menander '' ) were avowedly taken from menander , but some of them appear to be adaptations and combinations of more than one play . thus in the andria were combined menander 's the woman from andros and the woman from perinthos , in the eunuchus , the eunuch and the flatterer , while the adelphi was compiled partly from menander and partly from diphilus . the original of terence 's hecyra ( as of the phormio ) is generally supposed to be , not by menander , but apollodorus of carystus . the bacchides and stichus of plautus were probably based upon menander 's the double deceiver and brotherly-loving men , but the poenulus does not seem to be from the carthaginian , nor the mostellaria from the apparition , in spite of the similarity of titles . caecilius statius , luscius lanuvinus , turpilius and atilius also imitated menander . he was further credited with the authorship of some epigrams of doubtful authenticity ; the letters addressed to ptolemy soter and the discourses in prose on various subjects mentioned by the suda suda , m.589 are probably spurious . . loss of his work . most of menander 's work did not survive the middle ages , except as short fragments . federico da montefeltro 's library at urbino reputedly had '' tutte le opere '' , a complete works , but its existence has been questioned and there are no traces after cesare borgia 's capture of the city and the transfer of the library to the vatican . jacob burckhardt , the civilization of the renaissance in italy , 1860 . paragraph 8 of this subchapter , but see print editions ( such as irene gordon 's ( mentor 1960 ) p . 158 ) for burckhadt 's footnote speculating on future rediscoveries . until the end of the 19th century , all that was known of menander were fragments quoted by other authors and collected by augustus meineke ( 1855 ) and theodor kock , comicorum atticorum fragmenta ( 1888 ) . these consist of some 1650 verses or parts of verses , in addition to a considerable number of words quoted from menander by ancient lexicographers . . 20th-century discoveries . this situation changed abruptly in 1907 , with the discovery of the cairo codex , which contained large parts of the samia ; the perikeiromene ; the epitrepontes ; a section of the heros ; and another fragment from an unidentified play . a fragment of 115 lines of the sikyonioi had been found in the papier mache of a mummy case in 1906 . in 1959 , the bodmer papyrus was published containing dyskolos , more of the samia , and half of the aspis . in the late 1960s , more of the sikyonioi was found as filling for two more mummy cases ; this proved to be drawn from the same manuscript as the discovery in 1906 , which had clearly been thoroughly recycled . menander : plays and fragments , tr . norma miller . penguin 1987 , p.15 other papyrus fragments continue to be discovered and published . image : портрет менандра а 850.jpg thumb menander . roman copy , after original by kephisodotos the younger and timarchos , sons of praxiteles , of 4th century b.c . marble . the hermitage museum , st . petersburg , russia . in 2003 , a palimpsest manuscript , in syriac writing of the 9th century , was found where the reused parchment comes from a very expensive 4th-century greek manuscript of works by menander . the surviving leaves contain parts of the dyskolos and 200 lines of another , so far unidentified , piece by menander . dieter harlfinger , warten auf menander im vatikan . 400 griechische komödienverse in einer syrischen palimpsest-handschrift entdeckt , in : forum classicum , 2004 . see here for an english translation . f . d ’ aiuto : graeca in codici orientali della biblioteca vaticana ( con i resti di un manoscritto tardoantico delle commedie di menandro ) , in : tra oriente e occidente . scritture e libri greci fra le regioni orientali di bisanzio e l ’ italia , a cura di lidia perria , rom 2003 ( testi e studi bizantino-neoellenici xiv ) , s . 227–296 ( esp . 266–283 and plates 13–14 ) . famous quotations . the apostle paul in 1 corinthians 15:33 quotes menander in the text '' bad company corrupts good character '' ( niv ) who probably derived this from euripides ( socrates , ecclesiastical history , 3.16 ) . '' he who labors diligently need never despair , for all things are accomplished by diligence and labor . '' — menander '' ἀνερρίφθω κύβος '' ( anerriphtho kybos ) , best known in english as '' the die is cast '' or '' the die has been cast '' , from the mis-translated latin '' iacta alea est '' ( itself better-known in the order '' alea iacta est '' ) ; a correct translation is '' let the die be cast '' ( meaning '' let the game be ventured '' ) . the greek form was famously quoted by julius caesar upon committing his army to civil war by crossing the river rubicon . alea iacta est the popular form '' the die is cast '' is from the latin iacta alea est , a mistranslation by suetonius , 121 ad . according to plutarch , the actual phrase used by julius caesar at the crossing of the rubicon was a quote in greek from menander 's play arrhephoros , with the different meaning '' let the die be cast ! '' . perseus digital library plut . pomp . 60.2 see discussion at '' the die is cast '' and '' alea iacta est '' . lewis and short , online dictionary : alea , lewis and short at the perseus project . see bottom of section i . citing casaubon and ruhnk , suggest that the text of suetonius should read jacta alea esto , which they translate as '' let the die be cast ! '' , or '' let the game be ventured ! '' . this matches plutarch 's third-person perfect imperative . according to gregory hayes ' translation of '' meditations '' by marcus aurelius , menander is also known for the quote/proverb : '' a rich man owns so many goods he has no place to shit . ” ( meditations , v:12 ) . comedies . more complete plays . aspis ( '' the shield '' ; about half ) dyskolos ( '' the grouch '' or '' old cantankerous '' ; best preserved play ) epitrepontes ( '' men at arbitration '' ; most ) misoumenos ( '' the hated man '' ; about a third ) perikeiromene ( '' girl who has her hair cropped '' ; george bernard shaw suggested rape of the locks , after alexander pope ; about half ) samia ( '' girl from samos '' ; most ) sikyonioi or sikyonios ( '' sicyonian ( s ) '' ; about a third ) . only fragments available . adelphoi ( '' the brothers '' ) anatithemene , or messenia ( '' the woman from messene '' ) andria ( '' the woman from andros '' ) androgynos ( '' hermaphrodite '' ) , or kres ( '' the cretan '' ) anepsioi ( '' cousins '' ) aphrodisia ( '' the erotic arts '' ) , or aphrodisios apistos ( '' unfaithful '' , or '' unbelieving '' ) arrhephoros ( '' arrephoros '' ) , or auletris ( '' the female flute-player '' ) auton penthon ( '' grieving for him '' ) boiotis ( '' the woman from boeotia '' ) chalkeia ( '' the chalceia festival '' ) , or chalkis ( '' the copper pot '' ) chera ( '' the widow '' ) daktylios ( '' the ring '' ) dardanos ( '' dardanus '' ) deisidaimon ( '' the superstitious man '' ) demiourgos ( '' the demiurge '' ) didymai ( '' twin sisters '' ) dis exapaton ( '' double deceiver '' ) empimpramene ( '' woman on fire '' ) encheiridion ( '' the dagger '' ) epangellomenos ( '' the man making promises '' ) ephesios ( '' the man from ephesus '' ) epikleros ( '' the heiress '' ) eunouchos ( '' the eunuch '' ) georgos ( '' the farmer '' ) halieis ( '' the fishermen '' ) heauton timoroumenos ( '' torturing himself '' ) heniochos ( '' the charioteer '' ) heros ( '' the hero '' ) hiereia ( '' the priestess '' ) hippokomos ( '' the horse-groom '' ) homopatrioi ( '' people having the same father '' ) hydria ( '' the water-pot '' ) hymnis ( '' hymnis '' ) hypobolimaios ( '' the changeling '' ) , or agroikos ( '' the country-dweller '' ) imbrioi ( '' people from imbros '' ) kanephoros ( '' kanephoros '' ) karchedonios ( '' the carthage man '' ) karine ( '' the woman from caria '' ) katapseudomenos ( '' the false accuser '' ) kekryphalos ( '' the hair-net '' ) kitharistes ( '' the harp-player '' ) knidia ( '' the woman from cnidos '' ) kolax ( '' the flatterer '' or '' the toady '' ) koneiazomenai ( '' women drinking hemlock '' ) kybernetai ( '' the helmsmen '' ) leukadia ( '' the woman from leukas '' ) lokroi ( '' men from locris '' ) menagyrtes ( '' the beggar-priest of rhea '' ) methe ( '' drunkenness '' ) misogynes ( '' the woman-hater '' ) naukleros ( '' the ship 's captain '' ) nomothetes ( '' the lawgiver '' or '' legislator '' ) olynthia ( '' the woman from olynthos '' ) orge ( '' anger '' ) paidion ( '' little child '' ) pallake ( '' the concubine '' ) parakatatheke ( '' the deposit '' ) perinthia ( '' the woman from perinthos '' ) phanion ( '' phanion '' ) phasma ( '' the phantom , or apparition '' ) philadelphoi ( '' brotherly-loving men '' ) plokion ( '' the necklace '' ) poloumenoi ( '' men being sold '' , or '' men for sale '' ) proenkalon ( '' the pregnancy '' ) progamoi ( '' people about to get married '' ) pseudherakles ( '' the fake hercules '' ) psophodees ( '' frightened by noise '' ) rhapizomene ( '' woman getting her face slapped '' ) storfiappos ( '' the spinner '' ) stratiotai ( '' the soldiers '' ) synaristosai ( '' women who eat together at noon '' ; '' the ladies who lunch '' ) synepheboi ( '' fellow adolescents '' ) synerosa ( '' woman in love '' ) thais ( '' thaïs '' ) theophoroumene ( '' the girl possessed by a god '' ) thesaurus ( '' the treasure '' ) thettale ( '' the woman from thessaly '' ) thrasyleon ( '' thrasyleon '' ) thyroros ( '' the doorkeeper '' ) titthe ( '' the wet-nurse '' ) trophonios ( '' trophonius '' ) xenologos ( '' enlisting foreign mercenaries '' ) . standard editions . the standard edition of the least-well-preserved plays of menander is kassel-austin , poetarum comicorum graecorum vol . vi.2 . for the better-preserved plays , the standard edition is now arnott 's 3-volume loeb . a complete text of these plays for the oxford classical texts series was left unfinished by colin austin at the time of his death ; the guardian obituary of colin austin 6 september 2010 accessed 25 may 2015 the oct edition of harry sandbach , published in 1972 and updated in 1990 , remains in print . oup edition of menander . see also . poseidippus of cassandreia apollodorus of carystus diphilus philemon ( poet ) rhinthon oxyrhynchus theatre of ancient greece . notes . further reading . cox , cheryl anne . ( 2002 ) . '' crossing boundaries through marriage in menander ’ s dyskolos . '' classical quarterly 52 : 391–394 . csapo , e . ( 1999 ) . '' performance and iconographic tradition in the illustrations of menander . '' syllecta classica 6 : 154–188 . frost , k . b . ( 1988 ) . exits and entrances in menander . oxford : clarendon . allison glazebrook . ( 2015 ) . '' a hierarchy of violence ? sex slaves , parthenoi , and rape in menander 's epitrepontes . '' helios , 42 ( 1 ) : 81-101 . goldberg , sander m . ( 1980 ) . the making of menander ’ s comedy . berkeley : univ . of california press . gutzwiller , kathryn , and ömer çelik . ( 2012 ) . “ new menander mosaics from antioch . ” american journal of archaeology 116:573–623 . nervegna , sebastiana . ( 2013 ) . menander in antiquity : the contexts of reception . cambridge ; new york : cambridge university press . papaioannou , sophia and antonis k . petrides eds . , ( 2010 ) . new perspectives on postclassical comedy . pierides , 2 . newcastle upon tyne : cambridge scholars publishing . traill , ariana . ( 2008 ) . women and the comic plot in menander . cambridge , uk : cambridge univ . press . walton , michael , and peter d . arnott . ( 1996 ) . menander and the making of comedy . westport , ct : greenwood . external links . an english translation of the dyskolos . dyskolos , translated by g . theodoridis perikeiromene , translated by f . g . allinson menander : monosticha / sententiae / einzelverse – sentences from menander 's work in the original greek and translated in latin and german sorgll : menander , dyskolos , 711–747 ; read by mark miner