1953 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1953 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . notable films released in 1953 . united states unless stated . . 99 river street , starring john payne and evelyn keyes the 5,000 fingers of dr . t , starring tommy rettig , screenplay by dr . seuss . a . abbott and costello go to mars abbott and costello meet dr . jekyll and mr . hyde act of love ( un acte d'amour ) , starring kirk douglas – ( us/france ) the actress , starring spencer tracy and jean simmons albert r.n . , directed by lewis gilbert , starring anthony steel , jack warner , robert beatty , william sylvester – ( gb ) the all-american , starring tony curtis all i desire , starring barbara stanwyck all the brothers were valiant , starring ann blyth anarkali – ( india ) appointment in honduras , directed by jacques tourneur , starring ann sheridan and glenn ford arrowhead , starring charlton heston and jack palance . b . baaz , directed by and starring guru dutt – ( india ) the band wagon , starring fred astaire , cyd charisse , jack buchanan , nanette fabray , oscar levant the bandit of brazil ( o cangaceiro ) – ( brazil ) barabbas , directed by alf sjöberg – ( sweden ) the beast from 20,000 fathoms , starring paula raymond and cecil kellaway beat the devil , directed by john huston , starring humphrey bogart , jennifer jones , gina lollobrigida – ( italy/gb/us ) the beggar 's opera , starring laurence olivier and dorothy tutin – ( gb ) belinsky – ( u.s.s.r . ) ben and me , featuring the voices of sterling holloway and charles ruggles beneath the 12-mile reef , starring robert wagner welcome mr . marshall ! , directed by luis garcía berlanga , starring fernando rey – ( spain ) the big heat , directed by fritz lang , starring glenn ford , gloria grahame , lee marvin big leaguer , starring edward g . robinson the bigamist , directed by and starring ida lupino , with joan fontaine , edmond o'brien black ermine – ( argentina ) blowing wild , starring gary cooper and barbara stanwyck the blue gardenia , starring anne baxter and raymond burr a blueprint for murder , starring joseph cotten and jean peters bread , love and dreams ( pane , amore e fantasia ) , starring vittorio de sica and gina lollobrigida – ( italy ) bright road , the first feature-film appearance of harry belafonte ( us ) the brute ( el bruto ) , directed by luis buñuel , starring pedro armendáriz and katy jurado – ( mexico ) by the light of the silvery moon , starring doris day and gordon macrae . c . the caddy , starring dean martin and jerry lewis calamity jane , starring doris day call me madam , starring ethel merman the captain 's paradise , starring alec guinness – ( gb ) cease fire the charge at feather river , starring guy madison city beneath the sea , starring robert ryan , anthony quinn , mala powers city that never sleeps , starring gig young , william talman , paula raymond , mala powers the clown , starring red skelton confidentially connie , starring van johnson and janet leigh the conquest of everest – ( documentary ) – ( gb ) the cruel sea , starring jack hawkins and denholm elliott – ( gb ) cry of the hunted , starring vittorio gassman , barry sullivan , polly bergen . d . dangerous crossing , starring jeanne crain and michael rennie dangerous when wet , starring esther williams decameron nights , starring joan fontaine and louis jourdan the desert rats , starring richard burton and james mason desperate moment , starring dirk bogarde and mai zetterling – ( gb ) devdas – ( india ) do bigha zamin ( two acres of land ) , directed by bimal roy – ( india ) donovan 's brain , starring lew ayres and nancy davis down among the sheltering palms , starring mitzi gaynor , gloria dehaven , jane greer dream wife , starring cary grant and deborah kerr . e . él ( him ) , directed by luis buñuel , starring arturo de córdova – ( mexico ) the earrings of madame de . , directed by max ophüls , starring charles boyer – ( france/italy ) east of sumatra , starring anthony quinn and jeff chandler easy to love , starring esther williams easy years ( anni facili ) , directed by luigi zampa – ( italy ) the eddie cantor story , starring keefe brasselle entotsu no mieru basho ( the four chimneys ) – ( japan ) esa pareja feliz ( that happy couple ) , directed by juan antonio bardem and luis garcía berlanga – ( spain ) escape by night , starring bonar colleano and sid james – ( gb ) escape from fort bravo , directed by john sturges , starring william holden , eleanor parker , john forsythe . f . fair wind to java , starring fred macmurray and vera ralston the farmer takes a wife , starring betty grable fast company , starring howard keel and polly bergen fear and desire , directed by stanley kubrick the final test , directed by anthony asquith , starring jack warner ( gb ) folly to be wise , directed by frank launder , starring alastair sim – ( gb ) footpath , starring dilip kumar – ( india ) from here to eternity , directed by fred zinnemann , starring burt lancaster , montgomery clift , deborah kerr , frank sinatra , donna reed – winner of 8 oscars . g . gate of hell ( jigokumon ) – ( japan ) a geisha ( gion bayashi ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi – ( japan ) genevieve , starring dinah sheridan , john gregson , kay kendall – ( gb ) gentlemen prefer blondes , directed by howard hawks , starring jane russell and marilyn monroe the girl next door , starring june haver and dan dailey the girl who had everything , starring elizabeth taylor , william powell , fernando lamas , gig young give a girl a break , directed by stanley donen , starring debbie reynolds , marge champion , gower champion the glass wall , starring vittorio gassman and gloria grahame the golden blade , starring rock hudson and piper laurie the great adventure ( det stora äventyret ) , directed by arne sucksdorff – ( sweden ) the great sioux uprising , starring jeff chandler gun fury , starring rock hudson and donna reed . h . the heart of the matter , starring trevor howard – ( gb ) the hitch-hiker , directed by ida lupino , starring edmond o'brien and william talman hondo , starring john wayne and geraldine page in her film debut houdini , starring ( husband and wife ) tony curtis and janet leigh house of wax , starring vincent price how to marry a millionaire , starring marilyn monroe , betty grable , lauren bacall ( grable , fox 's top star of the 1940s , with monroe , fox 's top star of the 1950s ) . i . i confess , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring montgomery clift and anne baxter the i do n't care girl , starring mitzi gaynor i love lucy , starring lucille ball and desi arnaz i , the jury , starring biff elliot and peggie castle inferno , starring robert ryan interim , directed by stan brakhage , short film ( 25 ½ minutes ) ; music by james tenney ) the intruder , starring jack hawkins – ( gb ) is your honeymoon really necessary ? , starring bonar colleano and diana dors – ( gb ) island in the sky , starring john wayne it came from outer space , directed by jack arnold , starring richard carlson . j . jennifer , starring ida lupino and howard duff jeopardy , starring barbara stanwyck , barry sullivan , ralph meeker julius caesar , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring marlon brando , james mason , john gielgud , louis calhern , greer garson , deborah kerr . k . the kidnappers , starring jon whiteley – ( gb ) king of the khyber rifles , starring tyrone power kiss me kate , starring kathryn grayson , howard keel , ann miller , released in 2-d and 3-d . l . the lady without camelias ( la signora senza camelie ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni – ( italy ) the landowner 's daughter ( sinhá moça ) , starring anselmo duarte – ( brazil ) lagu kenangan , starring titien sumarni and an alcaff ( indonesia ) latin lovers , starring lana turner law and order , a western starring ronald reagan the lawless breed , starring rock hudson lili , starring leslie caron the limping man , starring lloyd bridges – ( gb ) a lion is in the streets , starring james cagney , barbara hale , anne francis little boy lost , starring bing crosby little fugitive the living desert , winner of academy award for best documentary feature love in the city ( l'amore in città ) , an anthology film directed by michelangelo antonioni , dino risi , federico fellini and others – ( italy ) love letter ( koibumi ) – ( japan ) . m . malta story , directed by brian desmond hurst , starring alec guinness , jack hawkins , anthony steel , muriel pavlow – ( gb ) man in the attic , starring jack palance and constance smith the man between , starring james mason and claire bloom – ( gb ) man in the dark , starring edmond o'brien and audrey totter man on a tightrope , starring fredric march and gloria grahame martin luther – ( us/west germany ) the master of ballantrae , directed by william keighley , starring errol flynn , roger livesey , anthony steel , beatrice campbell – ( u.k . ) meet me at the fair , starring dan dailey and diana lynn miss sadie thompson , starring rita hayworth the mississippi gambler , starring tyrone power and piper laurie mogambo , starring clark gable , ava gardner , grace kelly ( remake of 1932 's red dust which starred gable with jean harlow ) money from home , starring dean martin and jerry lewis monsieur hulot 's holiday ( les vacances de monsieur hulot ) , directed by and starring jacques tati – ( france ) la montaña sin ley the moon is blue , first u.s . movie to use the words '' pregnant '' and '' virgin '' , directed by otto preminger , starring william holden , david niven , maggie mcnamara the moonlighter , starring barbara stanwyck and fred macmurray . n . the naked spur , starring james stewart , robert ryan and janet leigh the net , directed by anthony asquith – ( gb ) niagara , starring marilyn monroe and joseph cotten no way back ( weg ohne umkehr ) – ( west germany ) . p . patita , starring dev anand and usha kiran – ( india ) peter pan , a walt disney animation featuring the voice of bobby driscoll the phantom stockman , starring chips rafferty – ( australia ) pickup on south street , directed by sam fuller , starring richard widmark , jean peters , thelma ritter plunder of the sun , starring glenn ford pony express , starring charlton heston ( as buffalo bill ) the president 's lady ( charlton heston 's first turn at andrew jackson before the buccaneer ) . r . remains to be seen , starring june allyson and van johnson report news ( reportaje ) , starring arturo de córdova and dolores del río – ( mexico ) return to paradise , starring gary cooper ride , vaquero ! , starring robert taylor and ava gardner the robe , the first movie filmed in cinemascope , starring richard burton and jean simmons rogue 's march , starring peter lawford , janice rule roman holiday , directed by william wyler , starring gregory peck and audrey hepburn in her oscar-winning first leading role rosanna ( la red ) – ( mexico ) . s . salome , starring rita hayworth sawdust and tinsel ( gycklarnas afton ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) scared stiff , starring dean martin , jerry lewis , lizabeth scott and carmen miranda sea devils , starring rock hudson and yvonne de carlo – ( gb/us ) seminole , starring rock hudson and anthony quinn shane , directed by george stevens , starring alan ladd , jean arthur ( in her final film role ) , brandon de wilde , ben johnson , jack palance siamo donne ( we , the women ) , starring alida valli and ingrid bergman – ( italy ) small town girl , starring jane powell and ann miller so big , directed by robert wise , starring jane wyman , sterling hayden , steve forrest so this is love , starring kathryn grayson and merv griffin south sea woman , starring burt lancaster and virginia mayo split second , starring alexis smith and jan sterling stalag 17 , directed by billy wilder , starring william holden ( in his oscar-winning role ) , don taylor , harvey lembeck , robert strauss , otto preminger , peter graves stars of the russian ballet ( mastera russkogo baleta ) , starring galina ulanova – ( ussr ) the state department store ( állami áruház ) – ( hungary ) the steel lady , starring rod cameron and tab hunter the story of gilbert and sullivan , starring robert morley and maurice evans – ( gb ) the story of little muck ( die geschichte vom kleinen muck ) – ( east germany ) the story of three loves , trilogy starring james mason , leslie caron , kirk douglas summer with monika ( sommaren med monika ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring harriet andersson – ( sweden ) the sun shines bright , directed by john ford , starring charles winninger . t . take me to town , directed by douglas sirk , starring ann sheridan and sterling hayden take the high ground ! , starring richard widmark and karl malden thérèse raquin , directed by marcel carné , starring simone signoret – ( france ) three perfect wives ( las tres perfectas casadas ) , starring arturo de córdova – ( mexico ) thunder over the plains , starring randolph scott titanic , starring barbara stanwyck , clifton webb , thelma ritter , brian aherne , robert wagner the titfield thunderbolt , directed by charles crichton , starring stanley holloway – ( gb ) tokyo story ( tōkyō monogatari ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) toot , whistle , plunk and boom torch song , starring joan crawford treasure of the golden condor , directed by delmer daves , starring cornel wilde trouble along the way , starring john wayne trouble in store , starring norman wisdom – ( gb ) tumbleweed , starring audie murphy twice upon a time , directed by emeric pressburger – ( gb ) . u-v . ugetsu monogatari , directed by kenji mizoguchi – ( japan ) i vinti ( i vinti ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni – ( italy ) i vitelloni , directed by federico fellini – ( france/italy ) . w . the wages of fear ( le salaire de la peur ) , directed by henri-georges clouzot , starring yves montand – winner of golden bear and palme d'or awards – ( france ) walking my baby back home , starring janet leigh and donald o'connor war arrow , starring maureen o'hara and jeff chandler the war of the worlds , starring gene barry white lightning , starring stanley clements and steve brodie white mane ( crin blanc , cheval sauvage ) – ( france ) white witch doctor , starring robert mitchum and susan hayward the wild one , starring marlon brando . y . young bess , starring jean simmons , deborah kerr , charles laughton . serials . canadian mounties vs atomic invaders , starring bill henry the great adventures of captain kidd , starring richard crane jungle drums of africa , starring clayton moore and phyllis coates the lost planet , starring judd holdren . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928 ) - ( 1953 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) donald duck ( 1934 ) - ( 1956 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) goofy ( 1939 ) - ( 1953 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940 ) - ( 1962 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) sylvester the cat ( 1944–1966 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) . births . january 30 : steven zaillian , director february 8 : mary steenburgen , actress february 11 : philip anglim , actor february 19 : massimo troisi , actor ( died 1994 ) march 2 : ezra swerdlow , film producer ( died 2018 ) march 4 : scott hicks , director agustí villaronga , spanish director march 16 : isabelle huppert , french actress april 16 : jay o . sanders , actor april 18 : rick moranis , canadian actor & comedian may 9 : amy hill , american stand-up comedian , actress and voice actress may 16 : pierce brosnan , irish actor may 24 : alfred molina , british-born american actor may 30 : colm meaney , irish actor june 13 : tim allen , actor june 26 : peng xiaolian , director ( died 2019 ) july 11 : mindy sterling , actress august 11 : hulk hogan , wrestler august 14 : james horner , composer ( died 2015 ) august 27 : peter stormare , swedish actor september 10 : amy irving , actress october 9 : tony shalhoub , actor october 15 : larry miller , american comedian , actor , news podcaster and columnist october 26 : maureen teefy , actress october 31 : michael j . anderson , actor november 3 : kate capshaw , actress november 6 : ron underwood , director november 18 : kath soucie , american actress and voice actress november 27 : curtis armstrong , american actor and singer november 28 - pamela hayden , american actress and voice actress december 6 : tom hulce , actor december 8 kim basinger , actress sam kinison , stand-up comedian ( died 1992 ) december 9 : john malkovich , actor december 11 : richard carter , australian actor and voice-over artist december 17 : bill pullman , actor december 31 : james remar , actor . deaths . february 2 : alan curtis , 43 , american actor , high sierra , buck privates february 27 : jessie coles grayson , 66 , african-american contralto and actress , cass timberlane march 5 : herman j . mankiewicz , 55 , american screenwriter , citizen kane , the pride of the yankees , dinner at eight , man of the world march 19 : irene bordoni , 68 , corsican-american actress and singer , paris , louisiana purchase april 26 : rian james , 53 , american screenwriter , 42nd street , the housekeeper 's daughter may 30 : dooley wilson , 67 , american actor , casablanca , stormy weather june 5 : roland young , 65 , british actor , topper , ruggles of red gap , the philadelphia story , and then there were none june 30 : vsevolod pudovkin , soviet film director ( born 1893 ) july 3 : irving reis , 47 , american director , the big street , all my sons august 6 john reinhardt , austrian director , sofia , chicago calling houseley stevenson , american actor , dark passage , kidnapped august 9 : henri étiévant , french actor , director ( born 1870 ) september 12 : lewis stone , american actor ( born 1879 ) , andy hardy , the prisoner of zenda , grand hotel october 6 : porter hall , american actor ( born 1888 ) , double indemnity , mr . smith goes to washington , going my way , miracle on 34th street october 8 : nigel bruce , british actor ( born 1895 ) , sherlock holmes film series , suspicion , rebecca , the rains came , treasure island october 13 : millard mitchell , american character actor ( born 1903 ) , singin ' in the rain , winchester '73 , the gunfighter , the naked spur , twelve o'clock high november 29 : sam de grasse , canadian actor ( born 1875 ) , robin hood , blind husbands december 29 : violet macmillan , american actress ( born 1887 ) , the magic cloak of oz , violet 's dreams . debuts . carroll baker – easy to love harry belafonte – bright road stanley kubrick ( director ) – fear and desire steve mcqueen – girl on the run geraldine page – hondo anthony perkins – the actress harry shearer – abbott and costello go to mars maureen stapleton – main street to broadway . notes .