Chariton

chariton 's date . nothing is securely known of chariton beyond what he states in his novel , which introduces him as '' chariton of aphrodisias , secretary of the rhetor athenagoras '' . the name '' chariton '' , which means '' man of graces '' , has been considered a pseudonym chosen to suit the romantic content of his writing , but both '' chariton '' and '' athenagoras '' occur as names on inscriptions from aphrodisias . the latest possible date at which chariton could have written is attested in papyri that contain fragments of his work , which can be dated by palaeography to about ad 200 . analysis of chariton 's language has produced a range of proposals for dating . in the 19th century , before the discovery of the papyri , a date as late as the 6th century ad was proposed on stylistic grounds , while a . d . papanikolaou argued in 1979 for the second half of the 1st century bc . one recent study of chariton 's vocabulary favours a date in the late 1st century or early 2nd century ad . edmund cueva has argued that chariton also depended on plutarch 's vita of theseus for thematic material , or perhaps directly on one of plutarch 's sources , an obscure mythographer , paion of amathus . if the source is plutarch , then a date after the first quarter of the 2nd century is indicated . there is a dismissive reference , however , to a work called callirhoe in the satires of persius , persius ( aules persius flaccus ) . '' satire 1 . '' horace : satires and epistles ; persius : satires . trans . niall rudd . london : penguin classics , 2005 . print . in satire 1 ( lines 124-134 ) , persius suggests that those having a juvenile sense of humor and unsophisticated taste in art and literature should stick to '' the law reports in the morning , and calliroë after lunch . '' who died in ad 62 ; if this is chariton 's novel , then a relatively early date would be indicated . regardless , chariton probably wrote before the other greek novelists whose works survive , making either his work or petronius ' satyricon the earliest extant european novel . callirhoe . chariton 's novel exists in only one ( somewhat unreliable ) manuscript , from the 13th century . it was not published until the 18th century , and remained dismissed until the twentieth . it nevertheless gives insight into the development of ancient prose fiction . plot outline . the story is set against a historical background of ca 400 bc . in syracuse , chaereas falls madly in love with the supernaturally beautiful callirhoe . she is the daughter of hermocrates , a hero of the peloponnesian war and the most important political figure of syracuse , thus setting the narrative in time and social milieu . her beauty ( kallos ) overawes crowds , like an earthly counterpart of aphrodite 's , as noted by douglas edwards . they are married , but when her many disappointed suitors successfully conspire to trick chaereas into thinking she is unfaithful , he kicks her so hard that she falls over as if dead . the seeming-dead callirhoe seems like ariadne asleep on the shore at naxos , chariton says ( 1.6.2 ) , and her second husband will be named for dionysus . there is a funeral , and she is shut up in a tomb , but then it turns out she was only in a coma , and wakes up in time to scare the pirates who have opened the tomb to rob it ; they recover quickly and take her a parallel is in some versions of the myth of abandoned ariadne . to sell as a slave in miletus , where her new master , dionysius , falls in love with her and marries her , she being afraid to mention that she is already married ( and pregnant by chaereas ) . as a result , dionysius believes callirhoe 's son to be his own . meanwhile , chaereas has heard she is alive , and has gone looking for her , but is himself captured and enslaved , and yet they both come to the attention of artaxerxes , the great king of persia , who must decide who is her rightful husband , but is thinking about acquiring her for himself . when war erupts , chaereas successfully storms the persian stronghold of tyre on behalf of the egyptian rebels , and then wins a naval victory against the persians , after which the lovers are finally reunited . callirhoe writes to dionysius , telling him to bring up her son and send him to syracuse when he grows up . chaereas and callirhoe return in triumph to syracuse , where callirhoe offers prayers to aphrodite , who has guided the events of the narrative . historical basis . several characters from callirhoe can be identified with figures from history , although their portrayal is not always historically accurate . reardon ( 1996 ) , pp . 325–327 . hermocrates was a real syracusan general , and did have a daughter ( her name is unknown ) , who married dionysius i of syracuse . this dionysius was tyrant of syracuse from 405 to 367 bc and not a resident of miletus . however , callirhoe 's expectation that her son will return to syracuse after being brought up as dionysius ' own has been connected to the fact that the historical dionysius i was succeeded in syracuse by his son , dionysius ii . the historical daughter of hermocrates died after a violent attack by soldiers ; that callirhoe merely appears to be dead after being kicked by chaereas has been seen as a deliberate change allowing chariton '' to resurrect her for adventures abroad '' . chariton 's artaxerxes represents artaxerxes ii of persia . since hermocrates died in 407 bc and artaxerxes did not come to the throne until 404 bc , chariton is anachronism in having hermocrates alive during artaxerxes ' reign . the hero chaereas is not a historical figure , although his name recalls chabrias , an athenian general who fought in an egyptian revolt against persia in about 360 bc . his capture of tyre may be based on that by alexander the great in 332 bc . despite the liberties chariton took with historical fact , he clearly aimed to place his story in a period well before his own lifetime . tomas hägg has argued that this choice of setting makes the work an important forerunner of the modern historical novel . reprinted in . style and influences . there are echoes of herodotus , thucydides , xenophon , and other historical and biographical writers from the ancient world . the most frequent intertexts are the homeric epics . the novel is told in a linear manner ; after a brief first person introduction by chariton , the narrator uses the third person . much of the novel is told in direct speech , revealing the importance of oratory and rhetorical display ( as in the presentation before the king of persia ) and perhaps as well the influence of new comedy . dramatic monologues are also used to reveal the conflicted states of the characters ' emotions and fears ( what should callirhoe do , given that she is pregnant and alone ? ) . the novel also has some amusing insights into ancient culture ( for instance , the pirates decide to sell callirhoe in miletus rather than in the equally wealthy athens , because they considered athenians to be litigious busybodies who would ask too many questions ) . the discovery of five separate fragments of chariton 's novel at oxyrhynchus and karanis in egypt attest to the popularity of callirhoe . one fragment , carefully written on expensive parchment , suggests that some , at least , of chariton 's public were members of local elites . edwards ( 1994 ) , p . 700 .