Roger I of Sicily

conquest of calabria and sicily . roger was the youngest son of tancred of hauteville by his second wife fredisenda . roger arrived in southern italy in the summer of 1057 . the benedictine monk , goffredo malaterra , who compares robert guiscard and his brother roger to '' joseph and benjamin of old , '' said of roger : in 1057 he shared the conquest of nearly all of calabria excepting reggio with his brother robert . for a time roger lived like a bandit in his castle of scalea , near cosenza . in a treaty of 1062 , the brothers divided the conquest so that each was to have half of every castle and town in calabria . it was about this same time that roger married judith d'évreux . roger had first thought of conquering sicily when he and his brother conquered calabria . at the time , it was ruled by muslims and the population were mostly byzantine greek christians . the arab princes had become all but independent of the sultan of tunis . in may 1061 the brothers crossed from reggio and captured messina . in june 1063 , roger defeated a muslim army at the battle of cerami and would strike another victory at the battle of misilmeri in 1068 . after they took palermo in january 1072 , robert guiscard , as suzerain , invested roger as count of sicily . robert retained palermo , half of messina , and the north-east portion ( the val demone ) . not till 1085 was roger able to undertake a systematic conquest . in march 1086 syracuse surrendered , and when in february 1091 noto yielded , the conquest of sicily was complete . much of robert 's success had been due to roger 's support . similarly , when the leadership of the hautevilles passed to roger , he supported his nephew duke roger against bohemund i of antioch , lando iv of capua , and other rebels . in return for his uncle 's aid against bohemund and the rebels , the duke roger surrendered his share in the castles of calabria to his uncle in 1085 , and in 1091 his inheritance in palermo . roger 's rule in sicily became more absolute than that of robert guiscard 's in italy . in addition , due to immigration by lombards and normans , latin christianity gradually replaced that of the greek byzantine tradition . at the enfeoffments of 1072 and 1092 , no great undivided fiefs were created . the mixed norman , french and italian vassals all owed their benefices to the count . no feudal revolt of importance arose against roger . conquest of malta . in 1091 roger , in order to avoid an attack from north africa , set sail with a fleet to conquer malta . his ship reached the island before the rest . on landing , the few defenders the normans encountered retreated and the following day roger marched to the capital mdina . terms were discussed with the local qadi . it was agreed that the islands would become tribute of the count himself and that the qadi should continue to administer the islands . with the treaty many greek and other christian prisoners were released , who chanted to roger the kyrie eleison . he left the islands with many who wished to join him and so many were on his ship that it nearly sank , according to geoffrey malaterra . the invasion was romanticized in later centuries , and legends arose that the count gave the maltese their red and white flag by cutting a part of his banner . mass is said once a year in remembrance of the count at the cathedral of mdina , as a recognition for the count 's role in liberating maltese christians from muslim dominance and rule . rule of sicily . politically supreme , the count also became master of the insular church . the papacy , favouring a prince who had recovered sicily from greeks and muslims , in 1098 granted roger and his heirs the nuncio of the island . roger created new latin bishoprics at syracuse , girgenti and elsewhere , nominating the bishops personally , while he turned the archbishopric of palermo into a catholic see . of these bishops and other important clergy positions , a minority were french , and of those even fewer were norman . of the five new sees he founded , one bishop was norman and three others were from other parts of france . he practiced general toleration towards arabs and greeks , even sponsoring the construction of over twelve greek monasteries in the val demone region . in the cities , the muslims , who had generally secured such rights in their terms of surrender , retained their mosques , their qadis , and freedom of trade ; in the country , however , they became serfs . roger drew the mass of his infantry from the muslims ; saint anselm , visiting him at the siege of capua , 1098 , found '' the brown tents of the arabs innumerable '' . nevertheless , the latin element began to prevail , as lombards and other italians flocked to the island in the wake of the conquest , and the conquest of sicily proved decisive in the steady decline of muslim power in the western mediterranean from this time . death and succession . roger i died on 22 of june 1101 in mileto and was buried at the benedictine abbey of the holy trinity . the abbey was destroyed in the earthquake of 1783 . its ruins are currently located in the mileto antica archaeological park . upon roger 's death , his son , simon of sicily , became the count of sicily , with his mother , adelaide del vasto , acting as his regent . on 28 september 1105 , at the age of 12 , simon died , and the title of count passed to his younger brother , roger ii of sicily , with adelaide continuing on as regent , being the mother of roger ii as well . family . roger 's eldest son , jordan , predeceased him . roger 's second son , geoffrey , possibly illegitimate , was a leper with no chance of inheriting . roger 's first marriage took place in 1062 , to judith d'évreux . she died in 1076 , leaving daughters : a daughter , married hugh of jarzé ( died 1075/6 ) , the first count of paternò matilda ( 1062 – before 1094 ) , wife of robert , count of eu and raymond iv of toulouse adelisa ( died 1096 ) , married in 1083 to henry , count of monte sant'angelo emma ( died 1120 ) , briefly engaged to philip i of france ; married firstly william vi of auvergne and secondly rudolf of montescaglioso . in 1077 , roger married a second time , to eremburga of mortain , and their children were : mauger , count of troina matilda , wife of ranulf ii , count of alife muriel ( died 1119 ) , married de lucy constance felicia , wife of coloman , king of hungary violante , married robert , son of robert i of burgundy flandina , married henry del vasto judith ( died 1136 ) , married robert i of bassunvilla roger 's last wife was adelaide del vasto , a sister of aforementioned henry . they married in 1087 . roger and adelaide 's children were : simon of sicily roger ii of sicily maximilla ( matilda ) , wife of conrad ii of italy roger 's other daughter called matilda married guigues iii of albon . ancestry . references . sources . . further reading . pierre aubé . roger ii de sicile . un normand en méditerranée . payot , 2001 . alex metcalfe . the muslims of medieval italy . edinburgh , 2009 . john julius norwich . the normans in the south 1016–1130 . london : longmans , 1967 .