JVC

history . 1920s creation to world war ii . jvc was founded in 1927 as '' the victor talking machine company of japan , limited , '' a subsidiary of the united states ' leading phonograph and record company , the victor talking machine company of camden , new jersey . in 1929 , the radio corporation of america acquired the victor talking machine company , the purchase including victor 's japan operations . in the early 1930s , jvc produced only phonographs and records ; in 1932 , after the rca purchase , jvc began producing radios , and in 1939 , japan 's first locally-made television . in 1943 , amidst the hostilities between japan and the united states during world war ii , jvc seceded from rca victor , retaining the 'victor ' and '' his master 's voice '' trademarks for use in japan only . after the war , jvc resumed distribution of rca victor recordings in japan until rca established its own separate operations in japan during the 1960s . today , the record company in japan is known as victor entertainment . post-war . in 1953 , jvc became majority-owned by the panasonic corporation . panasonic released its ownership in 2007 . in the 1960s , jvc established the nivico ( nippon victor corporation ) brand for delmonico 's line of console televisions and stereos . in 1970 , jvc marketed the videosphere , a portable cathode ray tube ( crt ) television inside a space-helmet-shaped casing with an alarm clock at the base . it was a commercial success . in 1971 , jvc introduced the first discrete system for four channel quadraphonic sound on vinyl records - cd-4 ( compatible discrete four channel ) or quadradisc , as it was called by the rca ( rca ) in the united states . in 1973 , the jvc cutting center opened ( in the usa ) to provide mastering for cd-4 discs . the mark ii 1/2 speed system was used until mid-1975 when it was replaced with the mark iii 1/2 speed system . in 1978 , mobile fidelity began using the jvc cutting center to 1/2 speed master stereo/mono discs . in 1975 , jvc introduced the first combined portable battery-operated radio with inbuilt tv , as the model 3050 . the tv was a black-and-white cathode ray tube . one year later , jvc expanded the model to add a cassette-recorder , as the 3060 , creating the world 's first boombox with radio , cassette and tv . in 1976 , the first vcr to use vhs was the jvc hr-3300 , and was introduced by the president of jvc at the okura hotel on september 9 , 1976 . jvc started selling the hr-3300 in akihabara , tokyo , japan on october 31 , 1976 . region-specific versions of the jvc hr-3300 were also distributed later on , such as the hr-3300u in the united states , and hr-3300ek in the united kingdom . 1970s , 1980s and the vhs/betamax format war . in the late 1970s , jvc developed the vhs format , introducing the first vhs recorders to the consumer market in 1976 for the equivalent of us 1060 . sony , which had introduced the betamax home videocassette tape a year earlier , became the main competitor for jvc 's vhs format into the 1980s , creating the videotape format war . the betamax cassette was smaller , with slightly superior picture quality to the vhs cassette , but this resulted in betamax having less recording time . the two companies competed fiercely to encourage others to adopt their format , but by 1984 forty companies were using jvc 's vhs format , while only 12 used betamax . sony began producing vhs recorders in 1988 and after 1993 stopped making betamax recorders for the us market , and then completely in 2002 . one reason for the market penetration of vhs in the uk were the sales of blank tapes by jvc uk ltd to major hollywood studios . this launched the nascent home video rental market , which was hardly touched by sony at the time . this ability to take the movie home , helped the sale of the vhs hardware immensely . added to this jvc stated in a promotional tape presented by bbc tv legend cliff michelmore , that '' you 'll be able to buy the sort of films the bbc and itv will never show you , for whatever reason '' . this accompanied by a clip from a slightly risqué adult movie . the adult movie industry adopted vhs as their common format and with that level of software available , hardware sales grew . '' video / dvd - a brief history of home video '' ( timeline ) , 2005 , entertainment scene , webpage : es-hvid-hist . . other notable achievements . in 1979 , jvc demonstrated a prototype of its video high density ( vhd ) disc system . this system was capacitance-based , like capacitance electronic disc ( ced ) , but the discs were grooveless with the stylus being guided by servo signals in the disc surface . the vhd discs were initially handled by the operator and played on a machine that looked like an audio lp turntable , but jvc used caddy-housed discs when the system was marketed . development suffered numerous delays , and the product was launched in 1983 in japan , followed by the united kingdom in 1984 , to a limited industrial market . in 1981 , jvc introduced a line of revolutionary direct-drive cassette decks , topped by the dd-9 , that provided previously unattainable levels of speed stability . '' jvc dd-9 cassette deck review '' , hifi classic , webpage : during the 1980s jvc briefly marketed its own portable audio equipment similar to the sony walkman on the market at the time . the jvc cq-f2k was released in 1982 and had a detachable radio that mounted to the headphones for a compact , wire-free listening experience . jvc had difficulty making the products successful , and a few years later stopped making them . in japan , jvc marketed the products under the name '' victor '' . in 1986 , jvc released the hc-95 , a personal computer with a 3.58 & nbsp ; mhz zilog processor , 64 & nbsp ; kb ram , running on msx 2.0 . it included two 3.5 '' floppy disk drives and conformed to the graphics specification of the msx standard . however , like the pioneer px-7 , it also carried a sophisticated hardware interface that handled video superimposition and various interactive video processing features . the jvc hc-95 was first sold in japan , and then europe , but sales were disappointing . jvc video recorders were marketed by the ferguson electronics in the uk , with just cosmetic changes . however , ferguson needed to find another supplier for its camcorders when jvc produced only the vhs-c format , rather than video8 . ferguson was later acquired by thomson sa , which ended the relationship . jvc later invented hard drive camcorders . 21st century . in october 2001 , the national academy of television arts and sciences presented jvc an emmy award for '' outstanding achievement in technological advancement '' for '' pioneering development of consumer camcorders '' . annual sponsorships of the world-renowned jvc tokyo video festival and the jvc jazz festival have helped attract the attention of more customers . jvc has been a worldwide football ( soccer ) supporter since 1982 , having a former kit sponsorship with arsenal and continued its role as an official partner of 2002 fifa world cup korea/japan . jvc made headlines as the first-ever corporate partner of the kennedy space center visitor complex . jvc has recently forged corporate partnerships with espn zone and foxploration . in 2005 , jvc joined hana , the high-definition audio-video network alliance , to help establish standards in consumer-electronics interoperability . in 2005 , jvc announced their development of the first dvd-rw dl media ( the dual layer version of the rewritable dvd-rw format ) . in december 2006 , matsushita entered talks with kenwood and cerberus capital management to sell its stake in jvc . in 2007 , victor company of japan ltd confirmed a strategic capital alliance with kenwood and sparkx investment , resulting in matsushita 's holding being reduced to approximately 37 % . in march 2008 , matsushita ( panasonic ) agreed to spin off the company and merge it with kenwood electronics , creating jvc kenwood holdings on october 1 , 2008 . in april 2008 , jvc announced that it was closing its tv plants in east kilbride ( scotland ) and japan . this left it with one plant in thailand . it stated it would outsource european production to an oem . jvc tvs for north america are now being manufactured by amtran video corporation along with distribution , service , and warranty under license from jvc kenwood . in europe , dixons carphone , owner of currys , has a similar arrangement with jvc kenwood . in europe , jvc sells mainly some audio accessories , like headphones , and until recently din type car audio . also in europe , jvc is present with camcorders , security cameras , audio systems and with their emblematic boom box , projectors . jvc tv sets in europe are manufactured mainly by turkish manufacturer vestel , but are not available in all countries . jvc indonesia manufactures and supplies original audio equipment for datsun , nissan , suzuki , and honda automobiles . sponsorship . jvc is a well-known brand among english football fans due to the firm 's sponsorship of arsenal from 1981 to 1999 , when sega took over as arsenal 's sponsors . jvc 's 18-year association with arsenal is one of the longest club-sponsor associations with any professional club football . jvc also sponsored scottish football club aberdeen in the late-1980s and early-1990s as well as the fifa world cup from 1982 to 2002 . jvc also sponsors the '' away '' shirts of the australian a-league club , sydney fc , and dutch race driver christijan albers . jvc has also been a sponsor of a massively multiplayer online game called rise : the vieneo province since 2003 . . brand name . jvc is generally known within japan by the victor brand , preceded by the his master 's voice ( hmv ) logo featuring the dog nipper . because of a conflict in trademarks between hmv , rca and victor , hmv and rca are not allowed to use nipper in japan . at one time , the company used the nivico name ( for '' nippon victor company '' ) overseas , before rebranding to jvc , which stands for japan 's victor company . therefore , the victor and jvc-victor web sites looked quite different . conversely , the hmv store chain exists in japan ( though no longer owned by hmv group ) , but it can not use the his master 's voice motto or logo ; its logo is a stylized image of a phonograph only . after the radio corporation of america ( rca ) , purchased the victor talking machine company in 1929 and became rca victor in japan , rca also had acquired the use of nipper and his master 's voice logo , but for use in the western hemisphere . in 2011 , jvc decided to phase out the '' victor '' brand for electronics in japan , but retained its use for its premium audio products , recording studios victor studio , and record label jvckenwood victor entertainment . subsidiaries . jvc kenwood marketing india gurgaon , haryana , india jvc america inc . - tuscaloosa , alabama , us jvc americas corp - wayne , new jersey , us jvc canada inc . - mississauga , ontario , canada jvc asia - singapore jvc australia - australia jvc china - china jvc europe - united kingdom jvc middle-east ( and africa ) - dubai , uae jvc latin america , s.a . - panama jvc do brasil ltda . - brazil jvc international - austria victor entertainment . product gallery . vintage jvc fm-am 9-transistor radio , model 9f-220c ( 8333901983 ) . jpg jvc 9f-220c radio television3.jpg jvc television jvc boombox.jpg jvc boombox jvc kd d10e v.jpg jvc kd-d10e tape deck jvc ql-y5f 8535057066crop.jpg jvc ql-y5f direct drive turntable with electronic jvc tonearm vinylengine 2002-2020 , jvc ql-y5f , retrieved 16 may 2020 . jvc compact-sytem.jpg jvc compact system with cd player jvc gr-dx57ek 20080316.jpg jvc camcorder jvc kyd292.jpg ky d29 digital-s camcorder jvc picsio 3.jpg jvc picsio pocket camcorder . slogans . bintang andalan masa depan ( english : the mainstay star of the future , indonesia only , 2000-2004 ) the perfect experience ( 2004–present ) . see also . list of digital camera brands list of home computers mitsubishi electric taiyo yuden ( partner with jvc ) video vhs d-vhs s-vhs w-vhs videotape video tape recorder videotape format war videocassette recorder wondermega xrcd . notes . references . external links .