Social reality

schütz , durkheim , and spencer . the problem of social reality has been treated exhaustively by philosophers in the phenomenological tradition , particularly alfred schütz , who used the term '' social world '' to designate this distinct level of reality . within the social world , schütz distinguished between social reality that could be experienced directly ( umwelt ) and a social reality beyond the immediate horizon , which could yet be experienced if sought out . george walsh , '' introduction '' , alfred schütz , the phenomenology of the social world ( 1997 ) p . xxvii in his wake , ethnomethodology explored further the unarticulated structure of our everyday competence and ability with social reality . john o'neill , sociology as a skin trade ( london 1972 ) p . 217 previously , the subject had been addressed in sociology as well as other disciplines . for example , émile durkheim stressed the distinct nature of '' the social kingdom . here more than anywhere else the idea is the reality '' . quoted in t . van der eyden , public management of society ( 2003 ) p . 487 herbert spencer had coined the term superorganism to distinguish the social level of reality above the biological and psychological . herbert spencer , the principles of sociology , vol . 1 , part 1 . '' the data of sociology '' ( 1876 ) . searle . john searle has used the theory of speech acts to explore the nature of social/institutional reality , so as to describe such aspects of social reality which he instances under the rubrics of '' marriage , property , hiring , firing , war , revolutions , cocktail parties , governments , meetings , unions , parliaments , corporations , laws , restaurants , vacations , lawyers , professors , doctors , medieval knights , and taxes , for example '' . john r . searle , the construction of social reality ( penguin 1996 ) p . 79 searle argued that such institutional realities interact with each other in what he called '' systematic relationships ( e.g . , governments , marriages , corporations , universities , armies , churches ) '' searle , p . 97 to create a multi-layered social reality . for searle , language was the key to the formation of social reality because '' language is precisely designed to be a self-identifying category of institutional facts '' ; i.e . , a system of publicly and widely accepted symbols which '' persist through time independently of the urges and inclinations of the participants . '' searle , p . 73 and p . 78 . objective/subjective . there is a debate in social theory about whether social reality exists independently of people 's involvement with it , or whether ( as in social constructionism ) it is only created by the human process of ongoing interaction . antony giddens , sociology ( 2006 ) p . 152 peter l . berger argued for a new concern with the basic process of the social construction of reality . john o'neill , sociology as a skin trade ( london 1972 ) p . 168 berger stated that the social construction of reality was a process made up of three steps : externalization , objectivation and internalization . in similar fashion , post-sartre like r . d . laing stress that , '' once certain fundamental structures of experience are shared , they come to be experienced as objective entities.they take on the force and character of partial autonomous realities , with their own way of life '' . r . d . laing , the politics of experience ( penguin 1984 ) p . 65 yet at the same time , laing insisted that such a socially real grouping '' can be nothing else than the multiplicity of the points of view and actions of its members.even where , through the interiorization of this multiplicity as synthesized by each , this synthesized multiplicity becomes ubiquitous in space and enduring in time '' . laing , p . 81 the existence of a social reality independent of individuals or the ecology would seem at odds with the views of perceptual psychology , including those of j . j . gibson , and those of most ecological economics theories . scholars such as john searle argue on the one hand that '' a socially constructed reality presupposes a reality independent of all social constructions '' . searle , p . 190 at the same time , he accepts that social realities are humanly created , and that '' the secret to understanding the continued existence of institutional facts is simply that the individuals directly involved and a sufficient number of members of the relevant communities must continue to recognize and accept the existence of such facts '' . searle , p . 190 and p . 117 . socialisation and the capital other . freud saw a child 's induction into social reality as consolidated with the passing of the oedipus complex and the internalisation of the parents : '' the same figures who continue to operate in the super-ego as the agency we know as conscience.also belong to the real external world . it is from there that they were drawn ; their power , behind which lie hidden all the influences of the past and of tradition , was one of the most strongly-felt manifestations of reality '' . sigmund freud , on metapsychology ( pfl 11 ) p . 422 lacan clarified the point by stressing that this was '' a highly significant moment in the transfer of powers from the subject to the other , what i call the capital other.the field of the other – which , strictly speaking , is the oedipus complex '' . jacques lacan , the four fundamental concepts of psycho-analysis ( penguin 1994 ) p . 129 and p . 205 lacan considered that '' the oedipus complex.superimposes the kingdom of culture on that of nature '' , jacques lacan , écrits : a selection ( 1997 ) p . 66 bringing the child into the symbolic . within that order , lacanians consider that '' institutions , as signifying practices , are much more extensive structures than romantic notions allow and they thus implicate us in ways which narrower definitions can not recognize.exceed any intersubjective intention or effect '' . joan copjec , in jacques lacan , television ( london 1990 ) p . 51-2 in similar fashion , searle asserts that '' institutional power – massive , pervasive , and typically invisible – permeates every nook and cranny of our social lives.the invisible structure of social reality '' . searle , p . 94 and p . 4 . measuring trust . if one accepts the validity of the idea of social reality , scientifically , it must be amenable to measurement , something which has been explored particularly in relation to trust . '' trust is.part of a community 's social capital , as francis fukuyama argues , and has deep historical and cultural roots '' . will hutton , the state to come ( london 1997 ) p . 31 theories of the measurement of trust in the sociological community are usually called theories of social capital , to emphasize the connection to economics , and the ability to measure outputs in the same feeling . propaganda . one aspect of social reality is the principle of the '' big lie '' , which states that an outrageous untruth is easier to convince people of than a less outrageous truth . many examples from politics and theology ( e.g . , the claim that the roman emperor was in fact a '' god '' ) demonstrate that this principle was known by effective propaganda from the earliest times .