1903 in sports

american football . college championship college football national championship – princeton tigers professional championships ohio league – massillon tigers '' us pro football title '' – franklin athletic club western pennsylvania championship – latrobe athletic association world series of football ( 1902–1903 ) – syracuse athletic club world series of football ( 1902–1903 ) – franklin athletic club events 1 january – the syracuse athletic club defeated the orange athletic club , 36–0 , to win the 1902–03 world series of football , held at madison square garden . 3 september – the massillon tigers of the '' ohio league '' are established in massillon , ohio . 17 december – the franklin athletic club defeated the watertown red & black , 12–0 , to win the 1903 world series of football , held at madison square garden . association football . argentina racing club , officially founded in avellaneda , suburb of buenos aires on march 25 . brazil gremio of porto alegre , officially founded on september 15 . england the football league – the wednesday 42 points , aston villa 41 , sunderland 41 , sheffield united 39 , liverpool 38 , stoke 37 fa cup final – bury 6–0 derby county at crystal palace , london . this remains the record scoreline in an fa cup final . germany national championship – vfb leipzig 7—2 dfc prag at hamburg-altona ( after extra time ) the 1903 german football championship is the first to be sanctioned by the deutscher fußballbund ( dfb ) . until the formation of the bundesliga in 1963 , the championship format is based on a knockout competition , contested between the winners of each of the country 's top regional leagues . scotland scottish football league – hibernian 1903 scottish cup final – rangers 2–0 hearts at celtic park ( second replay after 1–1 and 0–0 draws previously ) turkey besiktas , officially founded in istanbul on march 19 . athletics . john lorden wins the seventh running of the boston marathon . . australian rules football . vfl premiership collingwood wins the 7th vfl premiership : collingwood 4.7 ( 31 ) d fitzroy 3.11 ( 29 ) at melbourne cricket ground ( mcg ) . baseball . world series 1–13 october — 1903 world series is played between the winners of the national and american leagues . boston red sox ( al ) defeats pittsburgh pirates ( nl ) by 5 games to 3 . events new york yankees founded . northern league championship – winnipeg maroons win a second consecutive minor leagues title . boxing . events having previously held the world middleweight championship and the world heavyweight championship , bob fitzsimmons wins his third world title when he captures the world light heavyweight championship . the inaugural world light heavyweight champion is jack root of bohemia following his ten-round victory over charles '' kid '' mccoy at detroit on 22 april . root 's title is short-lived as he loses on 4 july to george gardiner at fort erie , ontario . gardner wins by a technical knockout after 12 rounds . on 25 november , gardner loses the title to fitzsimmons after 20 rounds at san francisco . fitzsimmons retains the title until 1905 . young corbett ii vacates the world featherweight championship . the vacant title is won by abe attell who defeats johnny reagan at st louis in the 20th round . attell is one of the great champions and holds the title until 1912 . frankie neil defeats harry forbes in san francisco by a second-round knockout to take the world bantamweight championship , which he holds for one year . lineal world champions cyber boxing zone world heavyweight championship – james j . jeffries world light heavyweight championship – new title → jack root → george gardiner → bob fitzsimmons world middleweight championship – tommy ryan world welterweight championship – barbados joe walcott world lightweight championship – joe gans world featherweight championship – young corbett ii → vacant → abe attell world bantamweight championship – harry forbes → frankie neil . cricket . events following the conclusion of the boer war , first-class cricket resumes in south africa . england county championship – middlesex minor counties championship – northamptonshire most runs – c b fry 2683 81.30 ( hs 234 ) most wickets – wilfred rhodes 193 14.57 ( bb 8–61 ) wisden cricketers of the year – colin blythe , john gunn , albert knight , walter mead , plum warner australia sheffield shield – new south wales most runs – reggie duff 786 87.33 ( hs 194 ) most wickets – jack saunders 32 20.81 ( bb 8–106 ) india bombay presidency – europeans shared with parsees south africa currie cup – transvaal west indies inter-colonial tournament – not contested . cycling . tour de france inaugural tour de france is won by maurice garin ( france ) . figure skating . world figure skating championships world men 's champion – ulrich salchow ( sweden ) . golf . major tournaments british open – harry vardon u.s . open – willie anderson other tournaments british amateur – robert maxwell us amateur – walter travis . horse racing . england grand national – drumcree 1,000 guineas stakes – quintessence 2,000 guineas stakes – rock sand the derby – rock sand the oaks – our lassie st . leger stakes – rock sand australia melbourne cup – lord cardigan canada queen 's plate – thessalon ireland irish grand national – kirko irish derby stakes – lord rossmore usa kentucky derby – judge himes preakness stakes – flocarline belmont stakes – africander . ice hockey . stanley cup montreal hc defeats winnipeg victorias three games to one in a cup challenge . montreal hc and ottawa hc tie for first place in the canadian amateur hockey league ( cahl ) regular season with 6–2 records . the teams play off for the cahl championship and stanley cup . ottawa defeats montreal 9–1 in a two-game , total-goals series to win its first stanley cup title . ottawa hc defeats rat portage thistles two games to nil in another cup challenge . events first ice hockey league in europe begins , contested by five teams from princes skating club and hengler 's ice rink , both in london . motor racing . paris-madrid trail the paris-madrid trail is run on 24 may with a scheduled distance of 1014 & nbsp ; km . it is a disastrous event which causes at least eight deaths including those of drivers marcel renault and claude barrow . the race is stopped by the authorities at bordeaux . it is in retrospect sometimes referred to as the viii grand prix de l'acf . 1903 grand prix and paris races . retrieved on 12 september 2009 . fernand gabriel ( france ) is the first to reach bordeaux in his mors . road racing is banned as a result and the legacy of the event is the introduction of circuits , the first being opened at le mans in 1906 for the inaugural french grand prix , organised by the automobile club de france ( acf ) . gordon bennett cup fourth running of the gordon bennett cup takes place in ireland due to road racing being illegal in great britain , the scheduled host . the location is the roads around athy , county kildare , and the winner is camille jenatzy ( belgium ) driving a mercedes it is at the 1903 gordon bennett cup that international racing colours are formally adopted with italy taking red , germany white , france blue and great britain taking its british racing green ( brg ) for the first time . the british choice of green is partly due to the event being held in ireland , which at the time is part of the uk , and to precedent as the winning napier of 1902 had been painted olive green . ardennes circuit second running of the ardennes circuit race around bastogne is won by pierre de crawhez driving a panhard-levassor 70 & nbsp ; hp in a time of 5:52:07 . the total distance is 512.05 & nbsp ; km ( 85.34 & nbsp ; km x 6 laps ) . rowing . the boat race 1 april — cambridge wins the 60th the boat race 1903 . rugby league . england championship – halifax challenge cup – halifax 7–0 salford at headingley rugby stadium , leeds rugby league county leagues – not contested rugby league county leagues – not contested . rugby union . home nations championship 21st home nations championship series is won by scotland . speed skating . speed skating world championships men 's all-round champion – none declared . tennis . england the championships , wimbledon – laurence doherty ( gb ) defeats frank riseley ( gb ) 7–5 6–3 6–0 the championships , wimbledon – dorothea douglass lambert chambers defeats ethel thomson larcombe 4–6 6–4 6–2 france french men 's singles championship – max decugis defeats andré vacherot : details unknown french women 's singles championship – françoise masson defeats kate gillou 6–0 6–8 6–0 usa us open ( tennis ) – laurence doherty ( gb ) defeats william larned 6–0 6–3 10–8 us open ( tennis ) – elisabeth moore defeats marion jones 7–5 8–6 davis cup 1903 international lawn tennis challenge – 4–1 at longwood cricket club ( grass ) boston , united states . yacht racing . america 's cup the new york yacht club retains the america 's cup as reliance defeats british challenger shamrock iii , of the royal ulster yacht club , 3 races to 0 ( shamrock iii abandoned the third race ) the st . louis republic september 04 1903 reliance alone finishes last race for cup . references .