Bacon's Rebellion

prelude . starting in the 1650s , as colonists began squatting on northern neck frontier , then known as chicacoan ( secocowon ) , some doeg , patawomeck and rappahannock began moving into the region as well and joined local tribes in defending their land and resources . in july 1666 , the colonists declared war on them . by 1669 , colonists had patented the land on the west of the potomac as far north as my lord 's island ( now theodore roosevelt island in washington , dc ) . by 1670 , they had driven most of the doeg out of the virginia colony and into maryland—apart from those living beside the nanzatico/portobago in caroline county , virginia . motives . modern historians have suggested that the rebellion was a power play by bacon against berkeley and his favoritism towards certain members of the court . while bacon was on the court , he was not within berkeley 's inner circle of council members and disagreed with him on many issues . bacon 's followers used the rebellion as an effort to gain government recognition of the shared interests among all social classes of the colony in protecting the '' commonality '' and advancing its welfare . peter thompson , '' the thief , the householder , and the commons : languages of class in seventeenth-century virginia , '' william and mary quarterly ( 2006 ) 63 2 pp . 253–280 in jstor however , the primary disagreement between bacon and his followers and berkeley was in how to handle the native indian population . namely , berkeley believed that it would useful to keep some of that population as subjects , stating '' i would have preservd those indians that i knew were hourely at our mercy to have beene our spies and intelligence to find out the more bloudy ennimies , '' whereas bacon found this approach too compassionate , stating : '' our design . to ruin and extirpate all indians in general . '' j . sakai , '' settlers : the mythology of the white proletariat from mayflower to modern , '' ( 2014 ) p . 30 . rebellion . thousands of virginians from all classes ( including those in indentured servitude ) and races rose up in arms against berkeley , chasing him from jamestown and ultimately torching the settlement . the rebellion was first suppressed by a few armed merchant ships from london whose captains sided with berkeley and the loyalists . government forces arrived soon after and spent several years defeating pockets of resistance and reforming the colonial government to be once more under direct crown control . when sir william berkeley refused to retaliate against the native americans , farmers gathered around at the report of a new raiding party . nathaniel bacon arrived with a quantity of brandy ; after it was distributed , he was elected leader . against berkeley 's orders , the group struck south until they came to the occaneechi people . after convincing the occaneechi warriors to leave and attack the susquehannock , bacon and his men followed by killing most of the occaneechi men , women , and children remaining at the village . upon their return , they discovered that berkeley had called for new elections to the burgesses to better address the native american raids . john berry , francis moryson , and herbert jefferys , '' a true narrative of the rise , progress and cessation of the late rebellion in virginia , most humbly an impartially recorded by his majesties commissioners , appointed to inquire into the affairs of the said colony '' , ed . by charles andrews , in narrative of the insurrections 1675 to 1690 , new york : charles scribner 's sons , 1915 , pp . 111–113 . the recomposed house of burgesses enacted a number of sweeping reforms ( known as bacon 's laws ) . ( bacon was not serving his duty in the house ; rather , he was at his plantation miles away . ) it limited the powers of the governor and restored suffrage rights to landless freemen . after passage of these laws , nathaniel bacon arrived with 500 followers in jamestown to demand a commission to lead militia against the native americans . the governor , however , refused to yield to the pressure . when bacon had his men take aim at berkeley , he responded by '' baring his breast '' to bacon and told bacon to shoot him . seeing that the governor would not be moved , bacon then had his men take aim at the assembled burgesses , who quickly granted bacon his commission . bacon had earlier been promised a commission before he retired to his estate if he maintained '' good '' behavior for two weeks . while bacon was at jamestown with his small army , eight colonists were killed on the frontier in henrico county ( from where he marched ) owing to a lack of manpower on the frontier . john berry , francis moryson , and herbert jefferys , '' a true narrative of the rise , progress and cessation of the late rebellion in virginia , most humbly and impartially recorded by his majesties commissioners , appointed to inquire into the affairs of the said colony . '' ed . by charles andrews , in narrative of the insurrections 1675 to 1690 , ( charles scribner 's sons : new york , 1915 ) , 116 . on july 30 , 1676 , bacon and his army issued the '' declaration of the people '' . the declaration criticized berkeley 's administration in detail . it leveled several accusations against berkeley : that '' upon specious pretense of public works he raised great unjust taxes upon the commonality '' ; advancing favorites to high public offices ; monopolizing the beaver trade with the native americans ; being pro-native american . after months of conflict , bacon 's forces , numbering 300-500 men , moved to jamestown , siege the town as it was occupied by berkeley 's forces . bacon 's men captured and burned to the ground the colonial capital on september 19 . outnumbered , berkeley retreated across the river . they encamped at warner hall , home of the speaker of the house of burgesses , augustine warner jr . and caused considerable damage , although the house was left standing . nris for warner hall before an royal navy led by thomas larimore could arrive to aid berkeley and his forces , bacon died from dysentery on october 26 . bragdon kathleen j . , the columbia guide to american indians of the northeast , columbia university press , 2005 , p . 112 . narratives of the insurrections , 1675–1690 , ed . charles mclean andrews , new york : charles scribner 's sons , 1915 , p . 139 . john ingram took over leadership of the rebellion , but many followers drifted away . the rebellion did not last long after that . berkeley launched a series of successful amphibious attacks across the chesapeake bay and defeated the rebels . his forces defeated the small pockets of insurgents spread across the tidewater . thomas grantham , captain of the ship concord cruising the york river , webb , p . 111 used cunning and force to disarm the rebels . he tricked his way into the garrison of the rebellion , and promised to pardon everyone involved once they got back onto the ship . however , once they were safely in the hold , he turned the ship 's guns on them and disarmed the rebellion . through various other tactics , the other rebel garrisons were likewise overcome . . impact . the 71-year-old governor berkeley returned to the burned capital and a looted home at the end of january 1677 . his wife described green spring in a letter to her cousin : it looked like one of those the boys pull down at shrovetide , and was almost as much to repair as if it had been new to build , and no sign that ever there had been a fence around it . waldrup , carole chandler , colonial women : 23 europeans who helped build a nation , mcfarland , 1999 , p . 86 . bacon 's wealthy landowning followers returned their loyalty to the virginia government after bacon 's death . governor berkeley returned to power . he seized the property of several rebels for the colony and executed 23 men by hanging , geiter , mary k . , william arthur speck , colonial america : from jamestown to yorktown , macmillan , 2002 , p . 63 including the former governor of the albemarle sound colony , william drummond , and the collector of customs , giles bland . tyler , lyon g . , encyclopedia of virginia biography , lewis historical publishing company , 1915 , vol . i p . 226 after an investigative committee returned its report to king charles ii , berkeley was relieved of the governorship , and recalled to england . '' the fear of civil war among whites frightened virginia 's ruling elite , who took steps to consolidate power and improve their image : for example , restoration of property qualifications for voting , reducing taxes , and adoption of a more aggressive american indian policy . '' charles ii was reported to have commented , '' that old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than i did here for the murder of my father . '' fiske , john , old virginia and her neighbours , houghton , mifflin and co . , 1902 , p . 110 no record of the king 's comments have been found ; the origin of the story appears to have been colonial myth that arose at least 30 years after the events ; the king prided himself on the clemency he had shown to his father 's enemies . washburn , the governor and the rebel , p . 139 berkeley left his wife , frances berkeley , in virginia and returned to england ; she sent a letter to let him know that the current governor was making a bet that the king would refuse to receive him . however , william berkeley died in july 1677 , shortly after he landed in england . indentured servants both black and white joined the frontier rebellion . seeing them united in a cause alarmed the ruling class . historians believe the rebellion hastened the hardening of racial lines associated with slavery , as a way for planters and the colony to control some of the poor . cooper , william j . , liberty and slavery : southern politics to 1860 , univ of south carolina press , 2001 , p . 9 . . historiography . historians question whether the rebellion by bacon against berkeley in 1676 had any lasting significance for the more-successful revolution a century later . the most idolizing portrait of bacon is found in torchbearer of the revolution ( 1940 ) by thomas jefferson wertenbaker , which one scholar in 2011 called '' one of the worst books on virginia that a reputable scholarly historian ever published . '' tarter , brent . '' bacon 's rebellion , the grievances of the people , and the political culture of seventeenth-century virginia . '' the virginia magazine of history and biography 119 , no . 1 ( 2011 ) : 6 ; rice , james d . tales from a revolution : bacon 's rebellion and the transformation of early america . oxford university press ( oxford : 2012 . ) print . p . 204 . the central area of debate is bacon 's controversial character and complex disposition , as illustrated by wilcomb e . washburn 's the governor and the rebel ( 1957 ) . rather than singing bacon 's praises and chastising berkeley 's tyranny , washburn found the roots of the rebellion in the colonists ' intolerable demand to '' authorize the slaughter and dispossession of the innocent as well as the guilty . '' washburn , the governor and the rebel , p . 163 more nuanced approaches on berkeley 's supposed tyranny or mismanagement entertained specialist historians throughout the middle of the century , leading to a diversification of factors responsible for virginia 's contemporary instability . wesley frank craven in the 1968 publication the colonies in transition argues that berkeley 's greatest failings took place during the revolt , near the end of his life . craven , wesley frank . the colonies in transition : 1669–1713 . harper & row , publishers ( new york : 1968 . ) print . bernard bailyn pushed the novel thesis that it was a question of access to resources , a failure to fully transplant old world society to new . bailyn , bernard , '' politics and social structure in virginia . '' seventeenth-century america , pp . 90–108 . edmund s . morgan 's classic 1975 american slavery , american freedom connected the calamity of bacon 's rebellion , namely the potential for lower-class revolt , with the colony 's transition over to slavery : '' but for those with eyes to see , there was an obvious lesson in the rebellion . resentment of an alien race might be more powerful than resentment of an upper class . virginians did not immediately grasp it . it would sink in as time went on . '' morgan , edmund s . american slavery , american freedom : the ordeal of colonial virginia . w.w . norton & company , inc . ( new york : 1975 . ) 270 . james rice 's 2012 narrative tales from a revolution : bacon 's rebellion and the transformation of early america , whose emphasis on bacon 's flaws echoes the governor and the rebel , integrates the rebellion into a larger story emphasizing the actions of multiple native americans , as well as placing it in the context of politics in europe ; in this telling , the climax of bacon 's rebellion comes with the '' glorious revolution '' of 1688/89 . rice , james d . tales from a revolution : bacon 's rebellion and the transformation of early america . oxford university press ( oxford : 2012 . ) print . . legacy . according to the historic jamestowne national park website , '' for many years , historians considered the virginia rebellion of 1676 to be the first stirring of revolutionary sentiment in north america , which culminated in the american revolution almost exactly one hundred years later . however , in the past few decades , based on findings from a more distant viewpoint , historians have come to understand bacon 's rebellion as a power struggle between two stubborn , selfish leaders rather than a glorious fight against tyranny . '' nonetheless , many in the early united states , including thomas jefferson , saw bacon as a patriot and believed that bacon 's rebellion truly was a prelude to the later american revolution against the control of the crown . this understanding of the conflict was reflected in 20th-century commemorations , including a memorial window in colonial williamsburg , and a prominent tablet in the virginia house of delegates chamber of the state capitol in richmond , which recalls bacon as '' a great patriot leader of the virginia people who died while defending their rights october 26 , 1676 . '' . use of jimsonweed . robert beverley reported , in his 1705 book on the history of virginia , that some soldiers who had been dispatched to jamestown to quell bacon 's rebellion gathered and ate leaves of datura stramonium , and spent eleven days acting in bizarre and foolish ways before recovering . this led to the plant being known as jamestown weed , and later jimsonweed .