Goslar

politics . town council . for the legislature from 1 november 2016 until 31 october 2021 , the seats were allocated as follows : spd : 14 seats ( 37.55 % ) cdu : 10 seats ( 26.10 % ) afd : 3 seats ( 9.28 % ) fdp : 3 seats ( 6.95 % ) greens : 3 seats ( 6.70 % ) goslarer linke : 2 seats ( 5.36 % ) bgl : 2 seats ( 5.02 % ) afg : 1 seat ( 1.69 % ) . lord mayor . dr oliver junk was elected as lord mayor in september 2011 . members of parliament . european ( constituency : southern lower saxony ) , godelieve quisthoudt-rowohl ( cdu ) , erika mann ( spd ) bundestag ( constituency 52 : goslar , northeim , osterode ) , first : wilhelm priesmeier ( spd ) , list : hans georg faust ( cdu ) landtag lower saxony ( constituency 16 : goslar ) , first : petra emmerich-kopatsch ( spd ) , list : dorothee prüssner ( cdu ) . twin towns – sister cities . goslar is twinned with : arcachon , france ( 1965 ) beroun , czech republic ( 1989 ) brzeg , poland ( 2000 ) forres , scotland , uk ( 1984 ) ra'anana , israel ( 2006 ) windsor and maidenhead , england , uk ( 1969 ) . culture and sights . memorial to the fallen riflemen of the 10th hanover rifle battalion in the franco-prussian war 1870/1871 ( now at the kahnteich ) memorial to the fallen riflemen of the 10th hanover rifle battalion in world war i 1914-1918 . theatre . the odeon theatre is the town 's major theatre venue . it has been recently refurbished . it is host to several productions of visiting theatre companies and music groups . the alternative theatre culture power station harz or kulturkraftwerk harz is housed in a disused powerstation . being run by volunteers , it produces contemporary theatre , comedy and hosts mostly alternative cultural events . here the annual goslar fringe culture days are held from the start to mid june . museums . museum and visitor 's mine rammelsberg , an anchor point of erih , the european route of industrial heritage museum in the kaiserpfalz , a 19c reconstruction of the mediaeval imperial palace monks ' house , mönchehaus museum for contemporary and modern arts goslar museum museum in the gothic town hall zwinger ( goslar ) , museum for late mediaeval history . religion . protestant : -lutheran congregation marktkirche , market church ( build 1151 , north tower mountable ) congregation neuwerk , newark church congregation st . stephani , saint stephen congregation zum frankenberge , frankenberg church congregation gustav-adolf-stabkirche , gustav adolf stave church in hahnenklee congregation martin-luther-kirche , martin luther church congregation st.paulus kirche , st . paul 's church , in oker congregation st . georg , st . george congregation st . johannes , st . john parish church st . kilians in hahndorf congregation st . lukas , st . luke parish church st . matthäus , st . matthew 's , in jerstedt congregation st . peter baptist congregation christuskirche , church of christ roman catholic congregation st . jakobi , saint james the greater ( built in 1073 , goslar 's oldest romanesque church still in use ) congregation maria schnee , st . mary in the snow in hahnenklee congregation st . barbara ( part of st . james 's ) congregation st . konrad , st . conrad ( part of st . james ) in oker congregations st . benno & st . george abbey st . george islamic faith mosque of the turkish-german society goslar mosque . sports . situated at the foot of the harz hills , goslar offers a great deal of outdoor pursuit , from swimming to rock climbing ; from motor sports and aviation to sailing and cross-country biking . the oldest and most traditional sports club is the mtv goslar ( founded in 1849 ) . its main facilities , a football pitch and gymnasium are located at the golden meadow ( goldene aue ) site . the football department of goslarer sc 08 earned the right to play in the fourth division regionalliga nord in 2009-10 after winning the oberliga niedersachsen championship . goslar steigt in die regionalliga auf – erlebnisbericht : vfb oldenburg – goslarer sc 08 game report , accessed : 9 july 2009 . celebrations and events . in the year 2006 goslar hosted the salier year to celebrate the foundation of this ancient german imperial dynasty a millennium ago . other events include : annual award ( since 1975 ) of the '' imperial ring '' to a personality who has made an outstanding contribution to society and the arts . its laureates include henry moore , joseph beuys , christo , dani karavan etc . goslar international concerto days , mid to end august the goslar fair , beginning to mid july annual artisans market in the old town , usually beginning of august old town festival , mid-september hanseatic days , spring ( usually during the easter holidays ) . economy and infrastructure . the town centre of goslar serves as a regional shopping centre to the northern harz region . here department stores , several supermarkets , elegant boutiques and restaurants can be found . once weekly , there is also a market , where farmers sell their local produce . there are also several car dealerships in the borough , some of whom specialise in either discount/reimport or custom car sales . the tourism sector is a booming sector in goslar . several hotels and bed and breakfasts are located in or near the town 's centre . in addition , the town has become a popular resort for the elderly and there are many care homes in the town . goslar has become a popular conference venue . the achtermann hotel and the kaiserpfalz are popular conference centres , host to the annual german road & transport tribunal days : the deutscher verkehrsgerichtstag largest employers in goslar are h.c . starck ( chemistry company ) , the tourism sector , and the civil service . many residents of goslar commute to salzgitter , where car production , steel works and white collar jobs are based . the dr.-herbert-nieper-krankenhaus is a privately owned hospital of the asklepios harzkliniken group serving the greater harz region . a new annex for intensitive medicine is under construction . there are several general practitioners , dentists , and specialist practitioners distributed across the town . there is an emergency service in place . transport . goslar has excellent road links , as well as rail links connecting it to the major european population centres . goslar also serves as a major transport hub for the upper harz mountains ( highest peak at 1,141 & nbsp ; m ( 3,744 & nbsp ; ft ) altitude ) . with the a & nbsp ; 7 and the a & nbsp ; 395 there are two main autobahns/highways within 20 & nbsp ; minutes reach of goslar . the a & nbsp ; 7 connects hamburg/hanover in the north to frankfurt/munich in the south . the a & nbsp ; 395 branches off the main east-west autobahn a & nbsp ; 2 at brunswick and ends at vienenburg , some east of goslar . the a & nbsp ; 2 connects berlin – to the east – to the ruhr area and the netherlands in the west . the federal highways b & nbsp ; 6 and b & nbsp ; 82 converge at goslar and are routed via the four-lane by-pass past the town centre . the b & nbsp ; 6 is mostly four-laned and approaches goslar via the scenic hildesheim–salzgitter route . goslar is served by the german railway network ( deutsche bahn ) lines hanover–goslar–halle ( saxony-anhalt ) as well as brunswick–goslar–kreiensen . the central railway station is located in the vicinity of the town centre . there is a park-and-ride system for commuters to brunswick and hanover . at the railway station there is a central bus station with buses travelling routinely to various destinations in the harz mountains . the buses are from db stadtverkehr . media . the regional newspaper is the goslar chronicle goslarsche zeitung , which has an estimated daily readership of 90,000 . the general-anzeiger is a gazette owned by the heinrich bauer publishing group with an editorial office in goslar . aside from this there are two freely distributed gazettes . radio okerwelle goslarradio is the regional private radio station based in brunswick , which broadcasts contemporary music , information and news in the german language to the brunswick region . education . the three tier education system in goslar district falls under lower-saxon legislation . the language of instruction at all schools is german . the nine primary schools are distributed across the entire municipality and the associated hamlets . there are two advanced secondary schools ( 5-12/13 ) , the christian-von-dohm-gymnasium , and the more traditional ratsgymnasium , both of which prepare their students for an academic career . three intermediate level schools ( 5-10 ) , the andre-mouton realschule , the realschule hoher weg , and the realschule goldene aue prepare their pupils for a professional career . furthermore , two vocational schools ( 5-9/10 ) exist : the hauptschule oker , and the hauptschule kaiserpfalz . the sonderschule caters to children with learning difficulties and special needs . the supplementary public waldorf school harz – branch goslar , educates its students along a more spiritual line termed anthroposophy , which is based on the teachings of the austrian pedagogue rudolf steiner . at the 10-12 level there are four job-training colleges located at goslar in crafts , economics , and care for the elderly for students from goslar district and beyond . there are two public vocational schools offering part-time education within the german dual vocational education and full-time education . bbs 1 goslar -am stadtgarten- is focused on education in business administration , economics , health services and information and communications technology ( ict ) . bbs goslar-baßgeige/seesen is concentrated on education in mechanical , electrical and textile engineering ; natural sciences : chemistry , physics , biology ; food services , domestic science and industry and administration . the nearest university from goslar is the old venerable engineering and mining school at clausthal-zellerfeld situated in the upper harz mountains some south of goslar within goslar district . some to the south the highly acclaimed university of göttingen ( founded by king george ii of great britain ) is based . the adult-education program ( volkshochschule ) of the goslar district is dedicated to lifelong learning . notable people . dr . herbert otto wilhelm august nieper ( 1848 – may 23 , 1939 ) , chief surgeon at the hospital in goslar , which was renamed the dr.-herbert-nieper-krankenhaus in his honor . also , he was the paternal grandfather of dr . hans alfred nieper ( 1928–1998 ) . rudolf bindig ( born 1940 ) , politician ( spd ) , member of bundestag 1976–2005 falko feldmann ( born 1959 ) , german biologist and phytomedicologist sigmar gabriel ( born 1959 ) , politician ( spd ) , federal minister for foreign affairs thomas wallner ( born 1961 ) , consultant ( sap ) , ambassador for martinique heinz günther guderian ( 1914–2004 ) , officer in the wehrmacht and later inspector of armoured mechanized artillery in the german defence forces bundeswehr and nato mathias hain ( born 1972 ) , soccer player henry iv , holy roman emperor ( 1050–1106 ) , king of germany and holy roman emperor . aaron hunt ( born 1986 ) , footballer ernst jünger ( 1895–1998 ) , german soldier ( recipient of the pour le mérite decoration in world war i ) and author , lived in goslar from december 1933 to 1936 . this time represented the beginning of his innere emigration ( inner emigration ) , distancing himself from direct political commentary , as he left berlin following the gestapo search of his house in april 1933 maurice , comte de saxe ( 1696–1750 ) , marshal general of france . adversary of the hanoverians . hermann max ( born 1941 ) , church musician and conductor albert niemann ( 1834–1861 ) , chemist and pharmacist . credited with the discovery of cocaine . ernst pistulla ( 1906–1944 ) , german boxer , competed in the 1928 summer olympics wilhelm ripe ( 1818–85 ) , painter and graphic designer regine schumann ( born 1961 ) , artist , painter and light artist siemens family . the ancestral home of the siemens family , who can count toward their more famous offspring , the prussian-british-russian industrial pioneers werner von siemens , sir william siemens and carl von siemens , is in goslar henning von tresckow ( 1901–1944 ) , german military officer and leading anti-hitler conspirator , was a student at the goslar realgymnasium ( now ratsgymnasium goslar ) from 1913 until 1917 , when he left to join the army . he boarded in a private home near the school since his own home was far away . dieter zechlin ( 1926–2012 ) , pianist hans colbitz ( 1899–1972 ) , artist , painter , teacher at albrecht-duerer-oberrealschule in berlin-neukoelln research library for the history of education , german institute for international educational research , berlin . references . external links . mines of rammelsberg , historic town of goslar and upper harz water management system unesco official website official website sound and video of marktplatz clock pictures of goslar ( german website )