National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics

origins . naca was established by the federal government through enabling legislation as an emergency measure during world war i to promote industry , academic , and government coordination on war-related projects . it was modeled on similar national agencies found in europe : the french l'etablissement central de l'aérostation militaire in meudon ( now office national d'etudes et de recherches aerospatiales ) , the german aerodynamic laboratory of the university of göttingen , and the russian aerodynamic institute of koutchino ( replaced in 1918 with the central aerohydrodynamic institute , which is still in existence ) . the most influential agency upon which the naca was based was the british advisory committee for aeronautics . in december 1912 , president william howard taft had appointed a national aerodynamical laboratory commission chaired by robert s . woodward , president of the carnegie institution of washington . legislation was introduced in both houses of congress early in january 1913 to approve the commission , but when it came to a vote , the legislation was defeated . charles d . walcott , secretary of the smithsonian institution from 1907 to 1927 , took up the effort , and in january 1915 , senator benjamin r . tillman , and representative ernest w . roberts introduced identical resolutions recommending the creation of an advisory committee as outlined by walcott . the purpose of the committee was '' to supervise and direct the scientific study of the problems of flight with a view to their practical solution , and to determine the problems which should be experimentally attacked and to discuss their solution and their application to practical questions '' . assistant secretary of the navy franklin d . roosevelt wrote that he '' heartily endorsed the principle '' on which the legislation was based . walcott suggested the tactic of adding the resolution to the naval appropriations bill . according to one source , '' the enabling legislation for the naca slipped through almost unnoticed as a rider attached to the naval appropriation bill , on march 3 , 1915 . '' the committee of 12 people , all unpaid , were allocated a budget of 5,000 per year . president woodrow wilson signed it into law the same day , thus formally creating the advisory committee for aeronautics , as it was called in the legislation , on the last day of the 63rd congress . the act of congress creating naca , approved march 3 , 1915 , reads , '' . it shall be the duty of the advisory committee for aeronautics to supervise and direct the scientific study of the problems of flight with a view to their practical solution . '' . research . on january 29 , 1920 , president wilson appointed pioneering flier and aviation engineer orville wright to naca 's board . by the early 1920s , it had adopted a new and more ambitious mission : to promote military and civilian aviation through applied research that looked beyond current needs . naca researchers pursued this mission through the agency 's impressive collection of in-house wind tunnels , engine test stands , and flight test facilities . commercial and military clients were also permitted to use naca facilities on a contract basis . ; facilities langley memorial aeronautical laboratory ( hampton , virginia ) ames aeronautical laboratory ( moffett field ) aircraft engine research laboratory ( lewis research center ) muroc flight test unit ( edwards air force base ) in 1922 , naca had 100 employees . by 1938 , it had 426 . in addition to formal assignments , staff were encouraged to pursue unauthorized '' bootleg '' research , provided that it was not too exotic . the result was a long string of fundamental breakthroughs , including '' thin airfoil theory '' ( 1920s ) , '' naca cowling '' ( 1930s ) , the '' naca airfoil '' series ( 1940s ) , and the '' area rule '' for supersonic aircraft ( 1950s ) . on the other hand , naca 's 1941 refusal to increase airspeed in their wind tunnels set lockheed back a year in their quest to solve the problem of compressibility encountered in high speed dives made by the lockheed p-38 lightning . bodie , warren m . the lockheed p-38 lightning : the definitive story of lockheed 's p-38 fighter . hayesville , north carolina : widewing publications , 2001 , 1991 , pp . 174–5 . the full-size langley wind tunnel operated at no more than and the then-recent tunnels at moffett could only reach . these were speeds lockheed engineers considered useless for their purposes . general henry h . arnold took up the matter and overruled naca objections to higher air speeds . naca built a handful of new high-speed wind tunnels , and mach 0.75 was reached at moffett 's wind tunnel late in 1942 . bodie , warren m . the lockheed p-38 lightning . pp . 75-6 . . wind tunnels . naca 's first wind tunnel was formally dedicated at langley memorial aeronautical laboratory on june 11 , 1920 . it was the first of many now-famous naca and nasa wind tunnels . although this specific wind tunnel was not unique or advanced , it enabled naca engineers and scientists to develop and test new and advanced concepts in aerodynamics and to improve future wind tunnel design . atmospheric 5-ft wind tunnel ( 1920 ) variable density tunnel ( 1922 ) propeller research tunnel ( 1927 ) high-speed 11-in wind tunnel ( 1928 ) vertical 5-ft wind tunnel ( 1929 ) atmospheric 7- by 10-ft wind tunnel ( 1930 ) full-scale 30- by 60-ft tunnel ( 1931 ) . influence on world war ii technology . in the years immediately preceding world war ii , naca was involved in the development of several designs that served key roles in the war effort . when engineers at a major engine manufacturer were having issues producing superchargers that would allow the boeing b-17 flying fortress to maintain power at high altitude , a team of engineers from naca solved the problems and created the standards and testing methods used to produce effective superchargers in the future . this enabled the b-17 to be used as a key aircraft in the war effort . the designs and information gained from naca research on the b-17 were used in nearly every major u.s . military powerplant of the second world war . nearly every aircraft used some form of forced induction that relied on information developed by naca . because of this , u.s.-produced aircraft had a significant power advantage above 15,000 feet , which was never fully countered by axis forces . after the war had begun , the british government sent a request to north american aviation for a new fighter . the offered p-40 tomahawk fighters were considered too outdated to be a feasible front line fighter by european standards , and so north american began development of a new aircraft . the british government chose a naca-developed airfoil for the fighter , which enabled it to perform dramatically better than previous models . this aircraft became known as the p-51 mustang . . supersonic research . although the bell x-1 was commissioned by the air force and flown by air force test pilot chuck yeager , when it exceeded mach 1 naca was officially in charge of the testing and development of the aircraft . naca ran the experiments and data collection , and the bulk of the research used to develop the aircraft came from naca engineer john stack , the head of naca 's compressibility division . compressibility is a major issue as aircraft approach mach 1 , and research into solving the problem drew heavily on information collected during previous naca wind tunnel testing to assist lockheed with the p-38 lightning . the x-1 program was first envisioned in 1944 when a former naca engineer working for bell aircraft was previously head of the high speed wind tunnel division , which itself had nearly a decade of high speed test data by that time . due to the importance of naca involvement , stack was personally awarded the collier trophy along with the owner of bell aircraft and test pilot chuck yeager . from engineering science to big science : the naca and nasa collier trophy research project winners , 1998 , p.89 in 1951 , naca engineer richard whitcomb determined the area rule that explained transonic flow over an aircraft . the first uses of this theory were on the convair f-102 project and the f11f tiger . the f-102 was meant to be a supersonic interceptor , but it was unable to exceed the speed of sound , despite the best effort of convair engineers . the f-102 had actually already begun production when this was discovered , so naca engineers were sent to quickly solve the problem at hand . the production line had to be modified to allow the modification of f-102s already in production to allow them to use the area rule . ( aircraft so altered were known as '' area ruled '' aircraft . ) the design changes allowed the aircraft to exceed mach 1 , but only by a small margin , as the rest of the convair design was not optimized for this . as the f-11f was the first design to incorporate this during initial design , it was able to break the sound barrier without having to use afterburner . from engineering science to big science : the naca and nasa collier trophy research project winners , 1998 , p . 146 . because the area rule was initially classified , it took several years for whitcomb to be recognized for his accomplishment . in 1955 he was awarded the collier trophy for his work on both the tiger and the f-102 . from engineering science to big science : the naca and nasa collier trophy p.147 the most important design resulting from the area rule was the b-58 hustler , which was already in development at the time . it was redesigned to take the area rule into effect , allowing greatly improved performance . from engineering science to big science : the naca and nasa collier trophy research project winners , 1998 , p.147 this was the first us supersonic bomber , and was capable of mach 2 at a time when soviet fighters had only just attained that speed months earlier . the area rule concept is now used in designing all transonic and supersonic aircraft . naca experience provided a powerful model for world war ii research , the postwar government laboratories , and naca 's successor , the nasa ( nasa ) . naca also participated in development of the first aircraft to fly to the '' edge of space '' , north american 's x-15 . naca airfoils are still used on modern aircraft . chairmen . references . further reading . john henry , et al . orders of magnitude : a history of the naca and nasa , 1915-1990 . alex roland . model research : the national advisory committee for aeronautics , 1915-1958 . james hansen . engineer in charge : a history of the langley aeronautical laboratory , 1917-1958 . michael h . gorn , expanding the envelope – flight research at naca and nasa . external links . u.s . centennial of flight commission : the national advisory committee for aeronautics ( naca ) the nasa technical reports server provides access to a collection of 14,469 naca documents dating from 1917 . aerospaceweb.org : information on naca airfoil series nasa.gov : '' from engineering science to big science '' — the naca and nasa collier trophy research project winners , edited by pamela e . mack .