Sogn og Fjordane

government . a county ( fylke ) is the chief local administrative area in norway . the country is divided into 19 counties . a county is also an election area , with popular votes taking place every 4 years . the sogn og fjordane county municipality was the government that oversaw the county . it was a group of 39 members who were elected to form a county council ( fylkesting ) . heading the fylkesting was the county mayor ( fylkesordførar ) . the last county mayor for the sogn og fjordane county municipality was åshild kjelsnes , the county mayor . she replaced nils r . sandal , who was county mayor from 2003 until 2011 . the county also had a county governor ( fylkesmann ) who was the representative of the king and politics of norway . anne karin hamre was the last county governor of sogn og fjordane . she replaced oddvar flæte , who was county governor from 1994 until 2011 . the municipalities of sogn og fjordane were divided among three district courts ( tingrett ) : sogn , fjordane , and nordhordland . sogn og fjordane was also part of the gulating court of appeal district based in bergen . sogn district court : aurland , balestrand , leikanger , luster , lærdal , sogndal , vik , and årdal fjordane district court : askvoll , bremanger , eid , fjaler , flora , førde , gaular , gloppen , hornindal , hyllestad , høyanger , jølster , naustdal , selje , solund , stryn , and vågsøy nordhordland district court : gulen ( and the rest of the nordhordland district of the county of hordaland ) all of the municipalities of sogn og fjordane except gulen and solund were part of the sogn og fjordane police district . gulen and solund were part of the hordaland police district . . geography . it is mainly a rural area with a scattered population . sogn og fjordane includes the largest glacier in mainland norway , jostedalsbreen , in the breheimen mountain range , and the deepest lake , hornindalsvatnet . there are also many famous waterfalls located in the area . ramnefjellsfossen ( previously called utigardfossen ) is the tallest in norway and third tallest in the world and vettisfossen is one of norway 's highest waterfalls with a vertical drop of . both are located in the jotunheim mountains . cruise ships visit sogn og fjordane all summer because of the unique vistas of high mountains and deep blue fjords . the famous nærøyfjord is located in the south of the county . this is a unesco listed fjord area . there are several archipelagos , including bulandet , bremangerlandet and islands around florø . the westernmost point in norway proper is holmebåen in solund municipality . the island of unst , part of shetland islands is around west of holmebåen . the terrain changes quite rapidly with mostly smaller mountains on the coastline , gradually increasing to mountains reaching more than . because of the steep rise in elevation and fjords cutting through the terrain , the amount of precipitation is very high . low pressure systems come in from the west and meet the mountains ( a phenomenon known as orographic lifting ) and cause rain and snowfall . transport . transport is made more difficult because of the fjords and the mountains . the fjords have to be crossed by ferries or rounded , often a large detour . there are four airports in the county , at florø , førde , sandane and sogndal . there is only one railway station , flåm . the county contracts bus and boat companies for bus and boat routes in the county , under the new ( 2015 ) brand name kringom . districts . the county is conventionally divided into three districts of norway . these are sogn ( in the south ) , sunnfjord ( in the centre ) , and nordfjord ( in the north ) . sogn surrounds sognefjorden from solund on the offshore island of sula in the north sea to the village of skjolden in luster along lustrafjorden , a branch of the sognefjord . the total length is . the middle district of sunnfjord actually has two main fjords : førdefjorden and dalsfjorden . the northern district surrounds nordfjorden . municipalities . in 1837 , the counties were divided into local administrative units , each with their own governments . the number and borders of these municipalities have changed over time , and at present there are 26 municipalities in sogn og fjordane . originally the municipalities were the same as the old church of norway parishes . askvoll aurland årdal balestrand bremanger eid fjaler flora førde gaular gloppen gulen hornindal hyllestad høyanger jølster leikanger luster lærdal naustdal selje sogndal solund stryn vik vågsøy . cities . florø førde måløy . parishes . arnafjord askrova askvoll aurland bakka balestrand ( tjugum ) batalden berle bjordal borgund old borgund breim brekke bremanger bremangerpollen bru ( svanø ) bygstad church bulandet bø dale i fjaler dale i luster davik eid eikefjord ervik farnes feios church fet fjaler ( ytre holmedal ) fjærland church florø flåm folkestad fortun fresvik frøya førde gaular old gaupne gaupne gimmestad old gimmestad gjemmestad gloppen guddal gulen church hafslo hauge heggjabygda helgheim haukedalen hellevik hersvik hestad holmedal holsen hopperstad hornindal hove husøy ( husø ) hyen hyllestad høyanger indre holmedal , see gaular innvik joranger jostedal jølster kaupanger kinn church kirkebø , see kyrkjebø kjølsdalen kvamsøy kyrkjebø lavik leikanger leikanger church ( selje ) ljosheim loen luster ( lyster ) lærdal midtgulen mjømna church mundal ( fjæreland ) naustdal church nedstryn nes nordal norddalsfjord nord-vågsøy nordsida norum nærøy olden old olden oppstryn ortnevik randabygd rinde rugsund sandane sande selje sogndal solund church solvorn stavang stedje stongfjorden stryn ( innvik ) stårheim sulen , see solund svanøy svelgen sæle sør-vågsøysør-vågsøy tjugum church totland tønjum undredal urnes utvik vangen vangsnes vassenden veitastrond vereid vereide vevring church vik vik church viksdalen vilnes værlandet ytre holmedal , see fjaler ølmheim øn ålfoten ålhus årdal . villages . arnafjord askvoll aurlandsvangen austreim bakka balestrand barekstadlandet barmen barmøya berle bjordal borgund brandsøy brekke bremanger bruland svanøya bryggja bygstad byrkjelo byrknes dale dalsøyra davik degnepoll degnepoll dingja eikefjord eimhjellen eivindvik egge ervik espedal feios fimreite fjærland flatraket flekke flo flåm fortun fresvik frønningen gaupne gimmestad grodås grov guddal gudvangen hafslo hardbakke haukedalen heggjabygda helgheim helle hermansverk hersvikbygda hestad holvik holmedal holsen hopland hovden hyen hyllestad håvik høyanger indre offerdal indrevevring innvik instefjord isane jostedal kalvåg kandal kaupanger kjølsdalen kjørnes kolgrov kvalheim kvammen kvamsøy kyrkjebø langenes langhaugane lavik leikanger leikanger leirvik loen losnegard lote luster lærdalsøyri midtgulen mjømna mogrenda myrdal naustdal nedstryn nes nese norane norddalsfjord nordfjordeid nornes nordsida nyttingnes olden oppstryn ornes ortnevik randabygda raudeberg re reed refvik rognaldsvåg roset rugsund rutledal rygg sandane sande seimsdalen selje silda skei skjolden skorpa sogndalsfjøra solvorn stavang steinhovden stongfjorden straume stryn stårheim svanøya svelgen sørbøvågen sørstranda systrond tennebø totland tjugum tønjum undredal urnes utvik vadheim vangsnes vassenden vedvik veitastrond vereide vik vikøyri vågsvåg ytre oppedal øvre årdal ålfoten ålhus årdalstangen . former municipalities . borgund breim brekke bru davik eikefjord florø hafslo innvik jostedal kinn kyrkjebø lavik lavik og brekke nord-vågsøy sør-vågsøy vevring . gallery . file : myklebustdalen-sanddal-fjordane.jpg myklebustdalen valley east of byrkjelo file : stadt hoddevik.jpg the village of hoddevik on the stad peninsula in selje file : laerdalsoyri03.jpg some old houses in lærdalsøyri , lærdal file : norway aurland laerdal.jpg view from aurland . see also . list of villages in sogn og fjordane list of churches in sogn og fjordane . references . external links . county web site nrk county encyclopedia firda – sogn og fjordane 's largest newspaper forum.firda.no – sogn og fjordane 's largest discussion group