1962 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1962 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . may – the golden horse film festival and awards are officially founded by the taiwanese government . june 18 – mca inc . finalize their merger with decca-universal . july 25 – darryl f . zanuck , one of the founders of 20th century fox , becomes president , replacing spyros skouras . skouras becomes chairman of the board . august 5 – hollywood legend marilyn monroe is found dead of a drug overdose . september 7 – filming of sergei bondarchuk 's war and peace begins and will continue for another 5 years . october 5 – dr . no launches the james bond series , the second longest-running film franchise of all time ( next to godzilla ) , still running more than 50 years later ( spectre , 2015 ) . it also launches the career of sean connery . awards . academy awards : : best picture : lawrence of arabia – horizon-spiegel-lean , columbia : best director : david lean – lawrence of arabia : best actor : gregory peck – to kill a mockingbird : best actress : anne bancroft – the miracle worker : best supporting actor : ed begley – sweet bird of youth : best supporting actress : patty duke – the miracle worker : best foreign language film : sundays and cybele ( les dimanches de ville d'avray ) , directed by serge bourguignon , france golden globe awards : : drama : : best picture : lawrence of arabia : best actor : gregory peck – to kill a mockingbird : best actress : geraldine page – sweet bird of youth : comedy or musical : : best picture − comedy : that touch of mink : best picture − musical : the music man : best actor : marcello mastroianni – divorce italian style : best actress : rosalind russell – gypsy : other : best supporting actor : omar sharif – lawrence of arabia : best supporting actress : angela lansbury – the manchurian candidate : best director : david lean – lawrence of arabia palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : keeper of promises ( o pagador de promessas ) , directed by anselmo duarte , brazil golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : family diary ( cronaca familiare , journal intime ) , directed by valerio zurlini , france / italy : my name is ivan ( ivanovo detstvo ) , directed by andrei tarkovsky , ussr golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : a kind of loving , directed by john schlesinger , united kingdom . 1962 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1962 1 january heaven and earth magic 9 january the nun and the sergeant 11 january only two can play 12 january bachelor flat 14 january i thank a fool 17 january the intruder 18 january my geisha 19 january tender is the night a view from the bridge 26 january the three stooges meet hercules february 1962 7 february four horsemen of the apocalypse light in the piazza 10 february sergeants 3 12 february the bellboy and the playgirls 15 february pontius pilate 21 february the couch walk on the wild side 28 february too late blues march 1962 1 march posse from hell 5 march rome adventure 7 march the premature burial 9 march state fair 14 march the road to hong kong 21 march hitler sweet bird of youth 23 march satan in high heels satan never sleeps 28 march hand of death journey to the seventh planet the manster ( u.s./japan ) six black horses . april–june . april 1962 2 april the broken land 5 april moon pilot 6 april ivan 's childhood ( u.s.s.r ) 11 april all fall down follow that dream house of women the magic sword 12 april cape fear 13 april experiment in terror 17 april the counterfeit traitor 18 april the horizontal lieutenant 19 april five finger exercise 22 april hands of a stranger the man who shot liberty valance 23 april escape from zahrain may 1962 3 may the brain that would n't die invasion of the star creatures 9 may jessica war hunt 17 may bon voyage ! 24 may the inspector lonely are the brave 25 may the cabinet of caligari when the girls take over june 1962 6 june 13 west street big red lad , a dog 13 june it happened in athens lolita merrill 's marauders 15 june mr . hobbs takes a vacation 19 june hatari ! the music man that touch of mink 20 june confessions of an opium eater the pigeon that took rome ride the high country 21 june boys ' night out 26 june hell is for heroes 27 june safe at home ! 29 june beauty and the beast . july–september . july 1962 3 july birdman of alcatraz the creation of the humanoids tarzan goes to india 4 july tales of terror the three stooges in orbit 5 july panic in year zero ! 7 july advise & consent 16 july jack the giant killer 17 july air patrol 21 july black gold 25 july hemingway 's adventures of a young man 26 july the lion the notorious landlady 28 july the miracle worker august 1962 1 august kid galahad 2 august the underwater city 3 august the spiral road 7 august the wonderful world of the brothers grimm 8 august the interns 17 august two weeks in another town 22 august five weeks in a balloon 29 august the 300 spartans september 1962 15 september convicts 4 16 september harakiri ( japan ) 25 september the longest day 26 september carnival of souls 27 september gigot . october–december . october 1962 3 october zotz ! 4 october sodom and gomorrah 5 october the chapman report dr . no – ( u.k . ) 10 october if a man answers long day 's journey into night 16 october requiem for a heavyweight 18 october phaedra 22 october escape from east berlin 24 october the manchurian candidate tower of london 25 october tonight for sure the war lover 31 october period of adjustment what ever happened to baby jane ? november 1962 1 november how the west was won 2 november the reluctant saint 8 november mutiny on the bounty 14 november in search of the castaways 21 november it 's only money two for the seesaw 27 november the main attraction december 1962 2 december pressure point 6 december billy rose 's jumbo 10 december lawrence of arabia 12 december five miles to midnight freud : the secret passion 17 december gay purr-ee 19 december taras bulba 22 december the trial 25 december to kill a mockingbird who 's got the action ? 26 december david and lisa days of wine and roses 31 december 40 pounds of trouble . notable films released in 1962 . united states unless stated . . the 300 spartans , starring ralph richardson , richard egan , diane baker 40 pounds of trouble , starring tony curtis , suzanne pleshette , and larry storch . a . abhijan ( the expedition ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) advise & consent , directed by otto preminger , starring henry fonda , charles laughton , walter pidgeon , don murray , peter lawford alaverdoba , directed by giorgi shengelaia – ( georgia ) all fall down , directed by john frankenheimer , starring eva marie saint and warren beatty all night long , starring patrick mcgoohan and richard attenborough – ( u.k . ) all souls ' day ( zaduszki ) – ( poland ) la belle américaine ( la belle américaine ) , directed by robert dhéry – ( france ) the amphibian man ( chelovek-amfibiya ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) asli-naqli ( real and fake ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) atraco a las tres ( robbery at 3 o'clock ) – ( spain ) attack of the normans ( i normanni ) , directed by giuseppe vari – ( italy ) an autumn afternoon ( sanma no aji ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) the awful dr . orloff ( gritos en la noche ) , directed by jesús franco – ( spain ) . b . baat ek raat ki ( a tale of one night ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) bachelor flat , starring terry-thomas , tuesday weld , celeste holm bees saal baad – ( india ) the bellboy and the playgirls , directed by francis ford coppola and fritz umgelter big and little wong tin bar , starring jackie chan and sammo hung – ( hong kong ) billy budd , directed by and starring peter ustinov , with robert ryan and terence stamp – ( u.k . ) billy rose 's jumbo , starring doris day and jimmy durante birdman of alcatraz , directed by john frankenheimer , starring burt lancaster , karl malden , telly savalas boccaccio '70 , directed by federico fellini , mario monicelli , vittorio de sica and luchino visconti , starring anita ekberg and sophia loren – ( italy ) bon voyage ! , starring fred macmurray and jane wyman the boys , directed by sidney j . furie , starring richard todd – ( u.k . ) boys ' night out , starring kim novak and james garner the brain that would n't die , starring virginia leith the brainiac ( el baron del terror ) , directed by chano urueta – ( mexico ) the bread of those early years ( das brot der frühen jahre ) – ( west germany ) the broken land , starring kent taylor , diana darrin and jack nicholson . c . cape fear , directed by j . lee thompson , starring gregory peck , robert mitchum , polly bergen , telly savalas captain clegg ( released as night creatures in the u.s . ) , directed by peter graham scott – ( u.k . ) carnival of souls , directed by herk harvey carry on cruising , starring sid james and kenneth williams – ( u.k . ) carry on jack , starring kenneth williams , bernard cribbins and juliet mills – ( u.k . ) cartouche , starring jean-paul belmondo and claudia cardinale – ( france/italy ) the chapman report , directed by george cukor , starring jane fonda , shelley winters , claire bloom , efrem zimbalist , jr . chased by the dogs ( el less wal kilab ) – ( egypt ) cléo from 5 to 7 , directed by agnès varda – ( france ) the condemned of altona ( i sequestrati di altona ) , directed by vittorio de sica , starring sophia loren and maximilian schell – ( italy ) convicts 4 , starring ben gazzara , stuart whitman , vincent price , ray walston , sammy davis , jr . the counterfeit traitor , directed by george seaton , starring william holden crazy paradise ( det tossede paradis ) , directed by gabriel axel and starring dirch passer – ( denmark ) crooks anonymous , starring leslie phillips and julie christie . d . damon and pythias ( il tiranno di siracusa ) , directed by curtis bernhardt – ( u.s./italy ) david and lisa , starring keir dullea and janet margolin the day of the triffids , starring howard keel – ( u.k . ) days of wine and roses , directed by blake edwards , starring jack lemmon , lee remick , charles bickford , jack klugman dead man 's evidence , directed by francis searle – ( u.k . ) the devil 's agent ( im namen des teufels ) , directed by john paddy carstairs – ( u.k./west germany/ireland ) le doulos ( the finger man ) , directed by jean-pierre melville , starring jean-paul belmondo – ( france ) dr . no , first james bond film , directed by terence young , starring sean connery , joseph wiseman , jack lord , ursula andress – ( u.k . ) pat boyette , directed by pat boyette . e . the easy life ( il sorpasso ) , directed by dino risi , starring vittorio gassman and jean-louis trintignant – ( italy ) eclipse ( l'eclisse ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni , starring alain delon and monica vitti – ( italy/france ) eighteen in the sun ( diciottenni al sole ) , directed by camillo mastrocinque – ( italy ) electra , directed by michael cacoyannis , starring irene papas – ( greece ) escape from east berlin , directed by robert siodmak , starring don murray escape from zahrain , starring yul brynner , sal mineo and jack warden eva ( released in the u.k . as eve ) , starring jeanne moreau , stanley baker and virna lisi – ( italy/france ) experiment in terror , directed by blake edwards , starring glenn ford , lee remick , stefanie powers , ross martin the exterminating angel ( el ángel exterminador ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) . f . the fabulous baron munchausen ( baron prášil ) , directed by karel zeman – ( czechoslovakia ) family diary ( cronaca familiare ) , starring marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) the female : seventy times seven ( setenta veces siete ) , starring isabel sarli – ( argentina ) fire monsters against the son of hercules five finger exercise , starring rosalind russell five miles to midnight , starring sophia loren five weeks in a balloon follow that dream , starring elvis presley , arthur o'connell , joanna moore the four days of naples ( le quattro giornate di napoli ) – ( italy ) four horsemen of the apocalypse , directed by vincente minnelli , starring glenn ford , ingrid thulin , yvette mimieux freud : the secret passion , directed by john huston , starring montgomery clift , susannah york , larry parks the fury of hercules ( la furia di ercole ) , written and directed by gianfranco parolini – ( italy ) . g . gay purr-ee , an animated musical with the voices of judy garland and mel blanc geronimo , starring chuck connors gigot , starring jackie gleason girls ! girls ! girls ! , starring elvis presley go to blazes , directed by michael truman – ( u.k . ) the golden arrow ( l'arciere delle mille e una notte ) , directed by antonio margheriti – ( italy ) gorath , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the grim reaper ( la commare secca ) , directed by bernardo bertolucci – ( italy ) gundamma katha , starring n . t . rama rao – ( india ) guns of darkness , directed by anthony asquith , starring david niven and james robertson justice – ( u.k . ) gypsy , directed by mervyn leroy , starring rosalind russell , karl malden , natalie wood . h . h.m.s . defiant , starring alec guinness and dirk bogarde – ( u.k . ) half ticket , starring kishore kumar and madhubala – ( india ) hand of death , starring john agar hands of a stranger , directed by newt arnold harakiri ( seppuku ) , directed by masaki kobayashi – ( japan ) hatari ! , directed by howard hawks , starring john wayne , red buttons , hardy krüger , elsa martinelli hell is for heroes , starring steve mcqueen and bobby darin hemingway 's adventures of a young man , directed by martin ritt , starring richard beymer , diane baker , corinne calvet , paul newman hero 's island , starring james mason and rip torn hombre de la esquina rosada ( man on pink corner ) – ( argentina ) the horizontal lieutenant , starring jim hutton and paula prentiss the horrible dr . hichcock ( l'orribile segreto del dr . hichcock ) , directed by riccardo freda – ( italy ) house of women , starring shirley knight and constance ford how the west was won , starring james stewart , henry fonda , eli wallach , john wayne , debbie reynolds , gregory peck , carroll baker , george peppard and more hussar ballad ( gusarskaya ballada ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) hussar of the dead ( el húsar de la muerte ) , ( restored , originally released in 1925 ) – ( chile ) . i . if a man answers , starring bobby darin and sandra dee in search of the castaways , starring hayley mills and maurice chevalier in the affirmative ( l'amour avec des si ) , directed by claude lelouch – ( france ) in the french style , starring jean seberg the inn on the river ( das gasthaus an der themse ) , directed by alfred vohrer – ( west germany ) the inspector , aka lisa , directed by mark robson , starring dolores hart dr . mabuse ( die unsichtbaren krallen des dr . mabuse ) , starring wolfgang preiss – ( west germany ) the intruder , directed by roger corman , starring william shatner the iron maiden , starring anne helm and jeff donnell it happened in athens , starring jayne mansfield – ( greece/united states ) it 's only money , directed by frank tashlin . starring jerry lewis and joan o'brien ivan 's childhood ( ivanovo detstvo ) , directed by andrei tarkovsky – ( u.s.s.r . ) . j . jack the giant killer , starring kerwin mathews jessica , starring angie dickinson la jetée , directed by chris marker – ( france ) jigsaw , starring jack warner – ( u.k . ) journey to the seventh planet , directed by sid pink – ( denmark ) jules and jim , directed by françois truffaut , starring jeanne moreau and oskar werner – ( france ) . k . kanchanjangha , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) kid galahad , starring elvis presley , gig young , lola albright , charles bronson a kind of loving , directed by john schlesinger , starring alan bates – ( u.k . ) king kong vs . godzilla , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) knife in the water ( nóż w wodzie ) , directed by roman polanski – ( poland ) . l . the l-shaped room , directed by bryan forbes , starring leslie caron and tom bell – ( u.k . ) lawrence of arabia , directed by david lean , starring peter o'toole , omar sharif , anthony quinn , alec guinness , josé ferrer – ( uk/us ) the legend of lobo , a walt disney production light in the piazza , starring olivia de havilland , yvette mimieux , george hamilton lisa ( aka the inspector ) , starring stephen boyd – ( u.s./u.k . ) life for ruth , starring patrick mcgoohan and michael craig – ( u.k . ) light in the piazza , starring olivia de havilland and rossano brazzi the lion , starring william holden and trevor howard lolita , directed by stanley kubrick , starring james mason , shelley winters , peter sellers , sue lyon the loneliness of the long distance runner , directed by tony richardson , starring tom courtenay – ( u.k . ) lonely are the brave , starring kirk douglas , walter matthau , gena rowlands , george kennedy , carroll o'connor lonely boy , a documentary about paul anka – ( canada ) long day 's journey into night , directed by sidney lumet , starring katharine hepburn the longest day , starring john wayne , henry fonda , richard burton , sean connery , robert mitchum , rod steiger and more love , thy name be sorrow ( koiya koi nasuna koi ) , directed by tomu uchida – ( japan ) love at twenty , a film in 5 segments directed by françois truffaut , shintaro ishihara , andrzej wajda , renzo rossellini and marcel ophüls – ( international ) love on a pillow , starring brigitte bardot – ( france ) lulu , directed by rolf thiele , starring nadja tiller – ( austria ) . m . madison avenue , starring dana andrews , jeanne crain , eleanor parker mafioso , starring alberto sordi – ( italy ) the magic sword , directed by bert i . gordon the magnificent concubine ( yang kwei fei ) – ( hong kong ) the main attraction , starring pat boone mamma roma , directed by pier paolo pasolini , starring anna magnani – ( italy ) the man of gold ( az aranyember ) – ( hungary ) the man who shot liberty valance , directed by john ford , starring john wayne , james stewart , lee marvin , vera miles , edmond o'brien , woody strode the manchurian candidate , directed by john frankenheimer , starring frank sinatra , laurence harvey , janet leigh , leslie parrish , angela lansbury march on rome ( la marcia su roma ) , starring ugo tognazzi and vittorio gassman – ( italy ) merrill 's marauders , directed by samuel fuller , starring jeff chandler and ty hardin mediterranean holiday ( traumreise unter weissen segeln ) , a documentary directed by hermann leitner and rudolf nussgruber – ( west germany ) the memorial gate for virtuous women ( 열녀문 – yeolnyeomun ) , directed by shin sang-ok – ( south korea ) the miracle worker , directed by arthur penn , starring anne bancroft and patty duke mister magoo 's christmas carol , ( on nbc-tv ) mix me a person , directed by leslie norman , starring anne baxter , donald sinden and adam faith – ( u.k . ) mondo cane , directed by paolo cavara , franco prosperi and gualtiero jacopetti – ( italy ) a monkey in winter ( un singe en hiver ) , directed by henri verneuil – ( france ) mr . hobbs takes a vacation , starring james stewart and maureen o'hara moon pilot , starring tom tryon the music man , starring robert preston , shirley jones , buddy hackett , paul ford , ron howard mutiny on the bounty , starring marlon brando and trevor howard my geisha , starring shirley maclaine my life to live ( vivre sa vie ) , directed by jean-luc godard , starring anna karina – ( france ) . n . night of the eagle ( retitled burn , witch , burn ! in the u.s . ) , starring janet blair nine days in one year ( 9 dney odnogo goda ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) the notorious landlady , starring kim novak , jack lemmon and fred astaire . o . on the beat , starring norman wisdom – ( u.k . ) only two can play , starring peter sellers operation snatch , directed by robert day and starring terry-thomas and george sanders – ( u.k . ) . p . o pagador de promessas ( the keeper of promises ) , directed by anselmo duarte – ( brazil ) panic in year zero ! , starring ray milland and frankie avalon period of adjustment , starring jane fonda , jim hutton , anthony franciosa , lois nettleton phaedra , directed by jules dassin , starring melina mercouri and anthony perkins – ( greece ) the phantom of the opera , starring herbert lom – ( u.k . ) the pigeon that took rome , starring charlton heston the pirates of blood river , directed by john gilling – ( u.k . ) pitfall ( otoshiana ) – ( japan ) play it cool , starring billy fury – ( u.k . ) pontius pilate , starring jean marais , jeanne crain , basil rathbone premature burial , directed by roger corman , starring ray milland , hazel court , heather angel pressure point , starring sidney poitier and bobby darin pretty foe by esmail koushan ( iran ) professor , starring shammi kapoor – ( india ) the puzzle of the red orchid ( das rätsel der roten orchidee ) , directed by helmut ashley – ( west germany ) . r . redhead ( die rote or la rossa ) – ( west germany/italy ) requiem for a heavyweight , starring anthony quinn , jackie gleason , mickey rooney , julie harris revenge of the snakes ( yılanların öcü ) – ( turkey ) ride the high country ( a.k.a . guns in the afternoon ) , directed by sam peckinpah , starring joel mccrea and randolph scott the road to hong kong , directed by norman panama , starring bing crosby , bob hope and joan collins roaring years ( anni ruggenti ) , starring nino manfredi – ( italy ) rome adventure , starring angie dickinson and suzanne pleshette der rote rausch ( the red intoxication ) , starring klaus kinski – ( austria ) . s . safe at home ! , starring mickey mantle and roger maris sahib bibi aur ghulam ( king , queen and slave ) , starring meena kumari and guru dutt – ( india ) salvatore giuliano , directed by francesco rosi – ( italy ) samar , directed by and starring george montgomery sanjuru ( tsubaki sanjûrô ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) satan in high heels , starring meg myles and grayson hall sergeants 3 , starring frank sinatra , dean martin , sammy davis , jr . , peter lawford , joey bishop seven seas to calais ( il dominatore dei sette mari ) , directed by rudolph maté – ( italy ) shaheed , starring musarrat nazir , talish , allauddin , ejaz , saqi ( pakistani film on the palestinian-israeli conflict ) she 'll have to go ( released in the united states as maid for murder ) , directed by robert asher – ( u.k . ) she knows y'know , directed by montgomery tully – ( u.k . ) slaughter of the vampires ( la strage dei vampiri ) , directed by roberto mauri – ( italy ) solo for sparrow , directed by gordon flemyng – ( u.k . ) some people , starring kenneth more – ( u.k . ) something 's got to give , starring marilyn monroe and dean martin ( unfinished ) the spiral road , starring rock hudson and gena rowlands state fair , starring pat boone , tom ewell , ann-margret , pamela tiffin , bobby darin the suitor ( le soupirant ) – ( france ) sundays and cybele ( les dimanches de ville d'avray ) , starring hardy krüger and nicole courcel – ( france ) sweet bird of youth , starring paul newman , geraldine page , shirley knight , ed begley , rip torn swordsman of siena ( la congiura dei dieci/le mercenaire ) , starring stewart granger – ( italy/france ) a symposium on popular songs , a disney animation . t . the tale of zatoichi ( zatōichi monogatari ) , directed by kenji misumi – ( japan ) the tale of zatoichi continues ( zoku zatōichi monogatari ) , starring shintaro katsu – ( japan ) tales of terror , starring vincent price , peter lorre and basil rathbone taras bulba , starring yul brynner and tony curtis tarzan goes to india , jock mahoney 's first film as tarzan tender is the night , starring jennifer jones term of trial , starring laurence olivier and simone signoret – ( u.k . ) the testament of dr . mabuse ( das testament des dr . mabuse ) , starring wolfgang preiss – ( west germany ) that touch of mink , starring cary grant and doris day thérèse desqueyroux , starring emmanuelle riva and philippe noiret – ( france ) the three stooges in orbit , starring the three stooges time to remember , directed by charles jarrott – ( u.k . ) to kill a mockingbird , directed by robert mulligan , starring gregory peck tobacco ( tyutyun ) – ( bulgaria ) tonny , directed by nils r . müller and per gjersøe – ( norway ) too late blues , directed by john cassavetes , starring bobby darin and stella stevens tower of london , starring vincent price treasure of the silver lake , directed by harald reinl – ( west germany ) the trial ( le procès ) , directed by and starring orson welles with anthony perkins and jeanne moreau – ( france/italy/west germany ) the trial of joan of arc ( procès de jeanne d'arc ) , directed by robert bresson – ( france ) tudor – ( romania ) the twelve chairs ( las doce sillas ) , directed by tomás gutiérrez alea – ( cuba ) two for the seesaw , starring shirley maclaine and robert mitchum two half times in hell ( két félidő a pokolban ) , directed by zoltán fábri – ( hungary ) two weeks in another town , directed by vincente minnelli , starring kirk douglas , edward g . robinson , george hamilton , cyd charisse . u . os cafajestes ( os cafajestes ) , directed by ruy guerra – ( brazil ) . v . the vanishing corporal ( le caporal épinglé ) , directed by jean renoir , starring jean-pierre cassel and claude brasseur – ( france ) a very private affair , starring brigitte bardot – ( france ) a view from the bridge ( vu du pont ) , directed by sidney lumet , starring raf vallone – ( france/italy ) violent life ( una vita violenta ) , directed by paolo heusch and brunello rondi – ( italy ) vive le tour , documentary by louis malle . w . walk on the wild side , starring laurence harvey , capucine , jane fonda waltz of the toreadors ( a.k.a . the amorous general ) , directed by john guillermin , starring peter sellers – ( u.k . ) war of the buttons ( la guerre des boutons ) – ( france ) we joined the navy , starring kenneth more – ( u.k . ) what ever happened to baby jane ? , directed by robert aldrich , starring bette davis and joan crawford who 's got the action ? starring dean martin and lana turner the witch 's curse ( maciste all'inferno ) , directed by riccardo freda – ( italy ) the wonderful world of the brothers grimm , starring laurence harvey and claire bloom . xyz . zorro the avenger zotz ! , directed by william castle , starring tom poston . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1964 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) the alvin show ( 1961-1962 ) . births . january 4 – michael france , american screenwriter ( d . 2013 ) january 5 – suzy amis cameron , american actress january 7 – kiiri tamm , estonian actress january 17 – c . martin croker , american animator and voice actor ( d . 2016 ) january 17 – jim carrey , canadian actor and comedian february 5 – jennifer jason leigh , american actress february 7 - eddie izzard , english stand-up comedian , actor , writer and political activist february 13 – michele greene , american actress february 17 – lou diamond phillips , american actor february 22 – steve irwin , australian zookeeper , television personality , conservationist , actor ( d . 2006 ) february 27 – adam baldwin , american actor march 10 – jasmine guy , american actress , singer , dancer and director march 12 – chris sanders , american actor , animator , director and voice actor march 18 – thomas ian griffith , american actor march 20 – stephen sommers , american director , screenwriter and producer march 21 matthew broderick , american actor rosie o'donnell , american actress and comedian april 15 – tom kane , american actor and voice actor april 27 – james legros , american actor may 12 – emilio estevez , american actor may 17 - craig ferguson , scottish-american television host , comedian , author and actor may 18 – karel roden , czech actor may 26 – bobcat goldthwait , american actor , comedian and director june 5 - jeff garlin , american comedian and actor june 13 – ally sheedy , american actress june 19 – paula abdul , american singer june 27 – tony leung chiu-wai , hong kong actor july 3 – tom cruise , american actor july 4 - neil morrissey , english actor , voice actor , comedian , singer and businessman july 13 – tom kenny , american actor , voice actor , singer and comedian july 19 – anthony edwards , american actor july 20 – carlos alazraqui , voice actor july 31 – wesley snipes , american actor august 6 – michelle yeoh , malaysian actress august 13 – john slattery , american actor august 16 – steve carell , american actor , comedian , voice artist , producer , writer , director august 24 – david koechner , american actor and comedian august 27 – vic mignogna , american voice actor august 29 – ian james corlett , canadian-american voice actor august 31 – dee bradley baker , american voice actor september 8 – thomas kretschmann , german actor september 11 – kristy mcnichol , american actress september 15 – scott mcneil , australian-canadian voice actor september 17 – baz luhrmann , australian director september 19 - cheri oteri , american actress and comedian september 21 - mark holden , canadian actor , writer and producer september 24 – nia vardalos , canadian-american actress and producer september 26 – melissa sue anderson , american actress october 1 – esai morales , american actor october 2 – jeff bennett , american actor and voice actor october 11 – joan cusack , american actress october 12 – deborah foreman , american actress october 13 – kelly preston , american actress october 22 - bob odenkirk , american actor , comedian , writer , director and producer october 26 – cary elwes , english actor october 28 – daphne zuniga , american actress november 11 – demi moore , american actress november 14 – harland williams , canadian-american actor and comedian november 19 – jodie foster , american actress and director november 29 – andrew mccarthy , american actor december 9 – felicity huffman , american actress december 19 – jill talley , american actress december 22 – ralph fiennes , english actor . deaths . january 13 – ernie kovacs , 42 , american comedian , actor , north to alaska , bell , book and candle january 28 – hermann wlach , 77 , austrian actor , the pearl maker of madrid february 1 – carey wilson , american screenwriter , mutiny on the bounty february 19 – james barton , american actor , here comes the groom , yellow sky february 20 – halliwell hobbes , 84 , british actor , gaslight , that hamilton woman february 28 – chic johnson , 70 , american comedian , actor , hellzapoppin' march 17 – frank orth , 82 , american actor , nancy drew . detective , here come the girls april 10 – michael curtiz , 75 , hungarian-born director , casablanca , the adventures of robin hood april 15 – clara blandick , 85 , american actress , the wizard of oz , tom sawyer april 17 – louise fazenda , 66 , american actress , tillie 's punctured romance , alice in wonderland april 22 angus macphail , 59 , british screenwriter , spellbound , the wrong man vera reynolds , 62 , american actress , the night club , feet of clay may 14 – florence auer , 82 , american actress , the bishop 's wife , state of the union june 2 – aeneas mackenzie , 72 , scottish screenwriter , the ten commandments , ivanhoe june 19 – frank borzage , 69 , american director , actor , a farewell to arms , 7th heaven june 24 – lucile watson , 83 , canadian actress , waterloo bridge , made for each other july 2 – valeska suratt , 80 , american stage and screen actress , the immigrant july 4 – rex bell , 58 , american actor , broadway to cheyenne , law and lead july 13 – jerry wald , 50 , american screenwriter and producer , mildred pierce , peyton place july 23 – victor moore , 86 , american actor , it happened on fifth avenue , louisiana purchase july 30 – myron mccormick , 54 , american actor , the hustler , no time for sergeants august 5 – marilyn monroe , 36 , american actress , hollywood icon , gentlemen prefer blondes , some like it hot august 23 – hoot gibson , 70 , american actor , action , the horse soldiers september 7 – louis king , 64 , american director , typhoon , green grass of wyoming october 2 – frank lovejoy , 50 , american actor , the hitch-hiker , goodbye , my fancy october 6 – tod browning , 82 , american director , dracula , freaks october 26 – louise beavers , 60 , american actress , holiday inn , the jackie robinson story november 15 – irene , american costume designer , shall we dance , midnight lace december 15 – charles laughton , 63 , british actor , spartacus , witness for the prosecution december 17 – thomas mitchell , 70 , american actor , it 's a wonderful life , gone with the wind december 23 – luis alberni , 76 , spanish actor , svengali , the count of monte cristo december 28 – kathleen clifford , 75 , american actress , when the clouds roll by , richard the lion-hearted december 29 – hugh sinclair , 59 , british actor , the saint 's vacation , judgment deferred . film debuts . bernardo bertolucci ( director ) – the grim reaper jackie chan – big and little wong tin bar julie christie – crooks anonymous tom courtenay – private potter robert duvall – to kill a mockingbird samantha eggar – dr . crippen sally field – moon pilot john hurt – the wild and the willing ian mcshane – the wild and the willing sarah miles – term of trial sydney pollack ( actor ) – war hunt george a . romero ( director ) – expostulations tom skerritt – war hunt terence stamp – term of trial david warner – we joined the navy