Phillips curve

history . william phillips , a new zealand born economist , wrote a paper in 1958 titled the relation between unemployment and the rate of change of money wage rates in the united kingdom , 1861-1957 , which was published in the quarterly journal economica . in the paper phillips describes how he observed an inverse relationship between money wage changes and unemployment in the british economy over the period examined . similar patterns were found in other countries and in 1960 paul samuelson and robert solow took phillips ' work and made explicit the link between inflation and unemployment : when inflation was high , unemployment was low , and vice versa . in the 1920s , an american economist irving fisher had noted this kind of phillips curve relationship . however , phillips ' original curve described the behavior of money wages . reprinted from 1926 edition of international labour review . in the years following phillips ' 1958 paper , many economists in the advanced industrial countries believed that his results showed that there was a permanently stable relationship between inflation and unemployment . one implication of this for government policy was that governments could control unemployment and inflation with a keynesian policy . they could tolerate a reasonably high rate of inflation as this would lead to lower unemployment – there would be a trade-off between inflation and unemployment . for example , monetary policy and/or fiscal policy could be used to stimulate the economy , raising gross domestic product and lowering the unemployment rate . moving along the phillips curve , this would lead to a higher inflation rate , the cost of enjoying lower unemployment rates . economist james forder argues that this view is historically false and that neither economists nor governments took that view and that the 'phillips curve myth ' was an invention of the 1970s . since 1974 , seven nobel prizes have been given to economists for , among other things , work critical of some variations of the phillips curve . some of this criticism is based on the united states ' experience during the 1970s , which had periods of high unemployment and high inflation at the same time . the authors receiving those prizes include thomas sargent , christopher sims , edmund phelps , edward prescott , robert a . mundell , robert e . lucas , milton friedman , and f.a . hayek . . stagflation . in the 1970s , many countries experienced high levels of both inflation and unemployment also known as stagflation . theories based on the phillips curve suggested that this could not happen , and the curve came under a concerted attack from a group of economists headed by milton friedman . friedman argued that the phillips curve relationship was only a short-run phenomenon . in this he followed eight years after samuelson and solow 1960 who wrote '' all of our discussion has been phrased in short-run terms , dealing with what might happen in the next few years . it would be wrong , though , to think that our figure 2 menu that related obtainable price and unemployment behavior will maintain its same shape in the longer run . what we do in a policy way during the next few years might cause it to shift in a definite way . '' as samuelson and solow had argued 8 years earlier , he argued that in the long run , workers and employers will take inflation into account , resulting in employment contracts that increase pay at rates near anticipated inflation . unemployment would then begin to rise back to its previous level , but now with higher inflation rates . this result implies that over the longer-run there is no trade-off between inflation and unemployment . this implication is significant for practical reasons because it implies that central banks should not set unemployment targets below the natural rate . more recent research suggests that there is a moderate trade-off between low-levels of inflation and unemployment . work by george akerlof , william dickens , and george perry , implies that if inflation is reduced from two to zero percent , unemployment will be permanently increased by 1.5 percent . this is because workers generally have a higher tolerance for real wage cuts than nominal ones . for example , a worker will more likely accept a wage increase of two percent when inflation is three percent , than a wage cut of one percent when the inflation rate is zero . today . most economists no longer use the phillips curve in its original form because it was shown to be too simplistic . oliver hossfeld ( 2010 ) '' us money demand , monetary overhang , and inflation prediction '' international network for economic research working paper no . 2010.4 this can be seen in a cursory analysis of us inflation and unemployment data from 1953–92 . there is no single curve that will fit the data , but there are three rough aggregations—1955–71 , 1974–84 , and 1985–92—each of which shows a general , downwards slope , but at three very different levels with the shifts occurring abruptly . the data for 1953–54 and 1972–73 do not group easily , and a more formal analysis posits up to five groups/curves over the period . but still today , modified forms of the phillips curve that take inflationary expectations into account remain influential . the theory goes under several names , with some variation in its details , but all modern versions distinguish between short-run and long-run effects on unemployment . modern phillips curve models include both a short-run phillips curve and a long-run phillips curve . this is because in the short run , there is generally an inverse relationship between inflation and the unemployment rate ; as illustrated in the downward sloping short-run phillips curve . in the long run , that relationship breaks down and the economy eventually returns to the natural rate of unemployment regardless of the inflation rate . the '' short-run phillips curve '' is also called the '' expectations-augmented phillips curve '' , since it shifts up when inflationary expectations rise , edmund phelps and milton friedman argued . in the long run , this implies that monetary policy can not affect unemployment , which adjusts back to its '' natural rate '' , also called the '' nairu '' or '' long-run phillips curve '' . however , this long-run '' neutrality '' of monetary policy does allow for short run fluctuations and the ability of the monetary authority to temporarily decrease unemployment by increasing permanent inflation , and vice versa . the popular textbook of blanchard gives a textbook presentation of the expectations-augmented phillips curve . an equation like the expectations-augmented phillips curve also appears in many recent new keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models . as keynes mentioned : '' a government has to remember , however , that even if a tax is not prohibited it may be unprofitable , and that a medium , rather than an extreme , imposition will yield the greatest gain '' . in these macroeconomic models with sticky prices , there is a positive relation between the rate of inflation and the level of demand , and therefore a negative relation between the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment . this relationship is often called the '' new keynesian phillips curve '' . like the expectations-augmented phillips curve , the new keynesian phillips curve implies that increased inflation can lower unemployment temporarily , but can not lower it permanently . two influential papers that incorporate a new keynesian phillips curve are clarida , galí , and gertler ( 1999 ) , and blanchard and galí ( 2007 ) . . mathematics . there are at least two different mathematical derivations of the phillips curve . first , there is the traditional or keynesian version . then , there is the new classical version associated with robert e . lucas jr . the traditional phillips curve . the original phillips curve literature was not based on the unaided application of economic theory . instead , it was based on empirical generalizations . after that , economists tried to develop theories that fit the data . money wage determination . the traditional phillips curve story starts with a wage phillips curve , of the sort described by phillips himself . this describes the rate of growth of money wages ( gw ) . here and below , the operator g is the equivalent of '' the percentage rate of growth of '' the variable that follows . : gw gw^t - f ( u ) the '' money wage rate '' ( w ) is shorthand for total money wage costs per production employee , including benefits and payroll taxes . the focus is on only production workers ' money wages , because ( as discussed below ) these costs are crucial to pricing decisions by the firms . this equation tells us that the growth of money wages rises with the trend rate of growth of money wages ( indicated by the superscript t ) and falls with the unemployment rate ( u ) . the function f is assumed to be monotonically increasing with u so that the dampening of money-wage increases by unemployment is shown by the negative sign in the equation above . there are several possible stories behind this equation . a major one is that money wages are set by bilateral negotiations under partial bilateral monopoly : as the unemployment rate rises , all else constant worker bargaining power falls , so that workers are less able to increase their wages in the face of employer resistance . during the 1970s , this story had to be modified , because ( as the late abba lerner had suggested in the 1940s ) workers try to keep up with inflation . since the 1970s , the equation has been changed to introduce the role of inflationary expectations ( or the expected inflation rate , gp ex ) . this produces the expectations-augmented wage phillips curve : : gw gw^t - f ( u ) + \lambda.gp^\text . nairu and rational expectations . in the 1970s , new theories , such as rational expectations and the nairu ( non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment ) arose to explain how stagflation could occur . the latter theory , also known as the '' natural rate of unemployment '' , distinguished between the '' short-term '' phillips curve and the '' long-term '' one . the short-term phillips curve looked like a normal phillips curve but shifted in the long run as expectations changed . in the long run , only a single rate of unemployment ( the nairu or '' natural '' rate ) was consistent with a stable inflation rate . the long-run phillips curve was thus vertical , so there was no trade-off between inflation and unemployment . edmund phelps won the nobel prize in economics in 2006 in part for this work . however , the expectations argument was in fact very widely understood ( albeit not formally ) before phelps ' work on it . in the diagram , the long-run phillips curve is the vertical red line . the nairu theory says that when unemployment is at the rate defined by this line , inflation will be stable . however , in the short-run policymakers will face an inflation-unemployment rate trade-off marked by the '' initial short-run phillips curve '' in the graph . policymakers can , therefore , reduce the unemployment rate temporarily , moving from point a to point b through expansionary policy . however , according to the nairu , exploiting this short-run trade-off will raise inflation expectations , shifting the short-run curve rightward to the '' new short-run phillips curve '' and moving the point of equilibrium from b to c . thus the reduction in unemployment below the '' natural rate '' will be temporary , and lead only to higher inflation in the long run . since the short-run curve shifts outward due to the attempt to reduce unemployment , the expansionary policy ultimately worsens the exploitable trade-off between unemployment and inflation . that is , it results in more inflation at each short-run unemployment rate . the name '' nairu '' arises because with actual unemployment below it , inflation accelerates , while with unemployment above it , inflation decelerates . with the actual rate equal to it , inflation is stable , neither accelerating nor decelerating . one practical use of this model was to explain stagflation , which confounded the traditional phillips curve . the rational expectations theory said that expectations of inflation were equal to what actually happened , with some minor and temporary errors . this , in turn , suggested that the short-run period was so short that it was non-existent : any effort to reduce unemployment below the nairu , for example , would immediately cause inflationary expectations to rise and thus imply that the policy would fail . unemployment would never deviate from the nairu except due to random and transitory mistakes in developing expectations about future inflation rates . in this perspective , any deviation of the actual unemployment rate from the nairu was an illusion . however , in the 1990s in the u.s . , it became increasingly clear that the nairu did not have a unique equilibrium and could change in unpredictable ways . in the late 1990s , the actual unemployment rate fell below 4 % of the labor force , much lower than almost all estimates of the nairu . but inflation stayed very moderate rather than accelerating . so , just as the phillips curve had become a subject of debate , so did the nairu . furthermore , the concept of rational expectations had become subject to much doubt when it became clear that the main assumption of models based on it was that there exists a single ( unique ) equilibrium in the economy that is set ahead of time , determined independently of demand conditions . the experience of the 1990s suggests that this assumption can not be sustained . theoretical questions . the phillips curve started as an empirical observation in search of a theoretical explanation . specifically , the phillips curve tried to determine whether the inflation-unemployment link was causal or simply correlational . there are several major explanations of the short-term phillips curve regularity . to milton friedman there is a short-term correlation between inflation shocks and employment . when an inflationary surprise occurs , workers are fooled into accepting lower pay because they do not see the fall in real wages right away . firms hire them because they see the inflation as allowing higher profits for given nominal wages . this is a movement along the phillips curve as with change a . eventually , workers discover that real wages have fallen , so they push for higher money wages . this causes the phillips curve to shift upward and to the right , as with b . some research underlines that some implicit and serious assumptions are actually in the background of the friedmanian phillips curve . this information asymmetry and a special pattern of flexibility of prices and wages are both necessary if one wants to maintain the mechanism told by friedman . however , as it is argued , these presumptions remain completely unrevealed and theoretically ungrounded by friedman . economists such as edmund phelps reject this theory because it implies that workers suffer from money illusion . according to them , rational workers would only react to real wages , that is , inflation adjusted wages . however , one of the characteristics of a modern industrial economy is that workers do not encounter their employers in an atomized and perfect market . they operate in a complex combination of imperfect markets , monopoly , monopsony , labor unions , and other institutions . in many cases , they may lack the bargaining power to act on their expectations , no matter how rational they are , or their perceptions , no matter how free of money illusion they are . it is not that high inflation causes low unemployment ( as in milton friedman 's theory ) as much as vice versa : low unemployment raises worker bargaining power , allowing them to successfully push for higher nominal wages . to protect profits , employers raise prices . similarly , built-in inflation is not simply a matter of subjective '' inflationary expectations '' but also reflects the fact that high inflation can gather momentum and continue beyond the time when it was started , due to the objective price/wage spiral . however , other economists , like jeffrey herbener , argue that price is market-determined and competitive firms can not simply raise prices . they reject the phillips curve entirely , concluding that unemployment 's influence is only a small portion of a much larger inflation picture that includes prices of raw materials , intermediate goods , cost of raising capital , worker productivity , land , and other factors . gordon 's triangle model . robert j . gordon of northwestern university has analyzed the phillips curve to produce what he calls the triangle model , in which the actual inflation rate is determined by the sum of demand pull inflation , cost push inflation , and built-in inflation . the last reflects inflationary expectations and the price/wage spiral . supply shocks and changes in built-in inflation are the main factors shifting the short-run phillips curve and changing the trade-off . in this theory , it is not only inflationary expectations that can cause stagflation . for example , the steep climb of oil prices during the 1970s could have this result . changes in built-in inflation follow the partial-adjustment logic behind most theories of the nairu : low unemployment encourages high inflation , as with the simple phillips curve . but if unemployment stays low and inflation stays high for a long time , as in the late 1960s in the u.s . , both inflationary expectations and the price/wage spiral accelerate . this shifts the short-run phillips curve upward and rightward , so that more inflation is seen at any given unemployment rate . ( this is with shift b in the diagram . ) high unemployment encourages low inflation , again as with a simple phillips curve . but if unemployment stays high and inflation stays low for a long time , as in the early 1980s in the u.s . , both inflationary expectations and the price/wage spiral slow . this shifts the short-run phillips curve downward and leftward , so that less inflation is seen at each unemployment rate . in between these two lies the nairu , where the phillips curve does not have any inherent tendency to shift , so that the inflation rate is stable . however , there seems to be a range in the middle between '' high '' and '' low '' where built-in inflation stays stable . the ends of this '' non-accelerating inflation range of unemployment rates '' change over time . see also . goodhart 's law moniac computer new keynesian economics wage curve shapiro–stiglitz theory . notes . references . federal reserve bank of boston , '' understanding inflation and the implications for monetary policy : a phillips curve retrospective '' , frbb conference series 53 , june 9–11 , 2008 , chatham , massachusetts . m friedman , ‘ the role of monetary policy ’ ( 1968 ) 58 ( 1 ) american economic review 1 e mcgaughey , 'will robots automate your job away ? full employment , basic income , and economic democracy ' ( 2018 ) ssrn , part 2 ( 1 ) a . w . phillips , ‘ the relation between unemployment and the rate of change of money wage rates in the united kingdom 1861–1957 ’ ( 1958 ) 25 economica 283 . external links . left critique of phillips curve from dollars & sense magazine a critique of the phillips curve by charles oliver , ludwig von mises institute , february 9 , 1999 ( includes the article '' who 's afraid of a red-hot economy ? '' , investor 's business daily , february 9 , 1999 ) audio speech by jeffery herbener at the ludwig von mises institute . '' of hume , thornton , the quantity theory , and the phillips curve . '' by thomas m . humphrey . federal reserve bank of richmond economic review , 1982 .