Private finance initiative

waste . a bbc radio 4 investigation into pfi noted the case of balmoral high school in northern ireland which cost £17m to build in 2002 . in 2007 the decision was made to close the school because of lack of pupils . but the pfi contract is due to run for another 20 years , so the taxpayer will be paying millions of pounds for an unused facility . with regard to hospitals , prof . nick bosanquet of imperial college london has argued that the government commissioned some pfi hospitals without a proper understanding of their costs , resulting in a number of hospitals which are too expensive to be used . he said : in 2012 , it was reported that dozens of nhs trusts labouring under pfi-related debts were at risk of closure . according to stella creasy , a self-acknowledged pfi '' nerd '' , the fundamental problem was the rate of interest charged because of a lack of competition between providers . '' barts was a £1bn project . they ’ ll pay back £7bn . that is not good value for money '' . she wants to see a windfall tax on the pfi companies . . relationship with government . treasury . in july 1997 a pfi taskforce was established within the treasury to provide central co-ordination for the roll-out of pfi . known as the treasury taskforce ( ttf ) , its main responsibilities are to standardise the procurement process and train staff throughout government in the ways of pfi , especially in the private finance units of other government departments . the ttf initially consisted of a policy arm staffed by five civil servants , and a projects section employing eight private sector executives led by adrian montague , formally co-head of global project finance at investment bank dresdner kleinwort benson . in 1999 the policy arm was moved to the office of government commerce ( ogc ) , but it was subsequently moved back to the treasury . the projects section was part-privatised and became partnerships uk ( puk ) . the treasury retained a 49 % 'golden share ' , while the majority stake in puk was owned by private sector investors . puk was then staffed almost entirely by private sector procurement specialists such as corporate lawyers , investment banking , consultants and so forth . it took the lead role in evangelising pfi and its variants within government , and was in control of the policy 's day-to-day implementation . in march 2009 , in the face of funding difficulties caused by the global financial crisis , the treasury established an infrastructure finance unit with a mandate to ensure the continuation of pfi projects . in april 2009 , the unit stumped up £120m of public money to ensure that a new waste disposal project in manchester would go ahead . andy rose , the unit head , said : '' this is what we were set up to do , to get involved where private sector capital is not available . '' in may 2009 the unit proposed to provide £30m to bail out a second pfi project , a £700m waste treatment plant in wakefield . in response , tony travers , director of the greater london group at the london school of economics described the use of public money to finance pfi as '' alice in wonderland economics '' . the house of commons public accounts committee has criticised the treasury for failing to negotiate better pfi funding deals with banks in 2009 . the committee revealed that british taxpayers are liable for an extra £1bn because the treasury failed to find alternative ways to fund infrastructure projects during the financial crisis . the committee '' suggests that the government should have temporarily abandoned pfi to directly fund some projects , instead of allowing the banks – many of which were being bailed out with billions of pounds of public money at the time – to increase their charges . by up to 33 % '' . . scrutiny . the house of commons liaison committee has said that claims of commercial confidentiality are making it difficult for mps to scrutinise the growing number of pfi contracts in the uk . the national audit office ( nao ) is responsible for scrutinising public spending throughout the uk on behalf of the british parliament and is independent of government . it provides reports on the value for money of many pfi transactions and makes recommendations . the public accounts committee also provides reports on these issues at a uk-wide level . the devolved governments of scotland , wales and northern ireland have their own equivalents of the nao such as the wales audit office and the northern ireland audit office which review pfi projects in their respective localities . in recent years the finance committees of the scottish parliament and the national assembly for wales have held enquiries into whether pfi represents good value for money . local government . pfi is used in both central and local government . in the case of local government projects , the capital element of the funding which enables the local authority to pay the private sector for these projects is given by central government in the form of what are known as pfi '' credits '' . the local authority then selects a private company to perform the work , and transfers detailed control of the project , and in theory the risk , to the company . appraisal process . jeremy colman , former deputy general of the national audit office and auditor general for wales is quoted in the financial times saying that many pfi appraisals suffer from '' spurious precision '' and others are based on '' pseudo-scientific mumbo-jumbo '' . some , he says , are simply '' utter rubbish '' . he noted government pressures on contracting authorities to weight their appraisals in favour of taking their projects down the pfi route : '' if the answer comes out wrong you do n't get your project . so the answer does n't come out wrong very often . '' in a paper published in the british medical journal , a team consisting of two public health specialists and an economist concluded that many pfi appraisals do not correctly calculate the true risks involved . they argued that the appraisal system is highly subjective in its evaluation of risk transferral to the private sector . an example was an nhs project where the risk that clinical cost savings might not be achieved was theoretically transferred to the private sector . in the appraisal this risk was valued at £5m but in practice the private contractor had no responsibility for ensuring clinical cost-savings and faced no penalty if there were none . therefore , the supposed risk transfer was in fact spurious . . references . external links . house of commons library ( 2001 ) , the private finance initiative ( pfi ) , research paper 01/117 northern ireland audit office report ( 2004 ) into pfi in the health sector jane broadbent , 2004 . private finance initiative in the national health service : the nature , emergence and the role of management accounting in decision making and post-decision project evaluation . chartered institute of management accountants