Corporate propaganda

components . corporate branding . a corporate brand is the perception of a company that unites a group of products or services for the public under a single name , and a common set of symbols . the process of corporate branding comprises creating favourable associations and positive reputation with both internal and external stakeholders . the purpose of a corporate branding initiative is generally either to disguise corporate motives , or to improve business opportunities . in more general terms , research suggests that corporate branding is an appropriate strategy for companies to implement when : there is significant '' information asymmetry '' between a company and its clients ; nayyar , p.r . ( 1990 ) '' information asymmetries : a source of competitive advantage for diversified service firms '' , strategic management journal , 11 : 513-519 . that is to say customers are much less informed about a company 's products than the company itself is ; customers perceive a high degree of risk in purchasing the products or services of the company ; aaker , d.a . and myers , j.g . ( 1991 ) advertising management , new york : prentice-hall . features of the company behind the brand would be relevant to the product or service a customer is considering purchasing . brown , t.j . and dacin , p.a . ( 1997 ) '' the company and the product : corporate associations and consumer product responses '' , journal of marketing , 61 ( 1 ) : 68-84 . . sex in advertising . image : schraderap1921.jpg thumbnail images of pretty women often appear in ads even without connection to the product being sold . this provocatively clad woman lends '' sex appeal '' to a 1921 ad for valve stem . sex in advertising is the use of sex appeal in advertising to help sell a particular product or service . sexually appealing imagery may or may not pertain to the product or service in question . examples of sexually appealing imagery include nudity , pin-up girls , and beefcake . the use of sex in advertising can be highly overt or extremely subtle . it ranges from relatively explicit displays of sexual acts , to the use of basic cosmetics to enhance attractive features , often supplemented by photo manipulation . direct marketing . buzzwords and jargon . another component of corporate propaganda is the use of corporate buzzword , a form of loaded language that exploits complex or meaningless words in order to woo customers , and corporate jargon , words that are intentionally designed to either confuse the public or to impress them . some examples of corporate buzz words would be : synergy innovation outside the box globalisation economic development and others some examples of corporate jargon would be : operational excellence paradigm shift public relations tax avoidance and others . crisis communications . crisis communication is sometimes considered a sub-specialty of the corporate propagandist profession that is designed to protect and defend an individual , company , or organisation facing consequences for objectionable actions and corruption or nepotism . these challenges may come in the form of an investigation from a government agency , a criminal allegation , a media inquiry , a shareholders lawsuit , a violation of environmental regulations , or any of a number of other scenarios involving the legal , ethical , or financial standing of the entity . the crisis for organisations can be defined as follows : argenti , p.a . ( 2009 ) corporate communication , new york : mcgraw-hill/irwin . : a crisis is a major catastrophe that may occur either naturally or as a result of human error , intervention , or even malicious intent . it can include tangible devastation , such as the destruction of lives or assets , or intangible devastation , such as the loss of an organisation 's credibility . internal/employee communications . as the extent of communication grows , many companies disseminate propaganda amongst the proletariat employees of the organisation . internal communication in the 21st century is more than the memos , publications , and broadcasts that comprise it ; it 's about building a corporate culture where employees remain staunchly loyal to their employers : krone , k . , jablin , f.m . , and putnam , l.l . ( 1987 ) '' communication theory and organisational communication : multiple perspectives '' , in f.m . jablin et al ( eds ) , handbook of organizational communication , pp . 18-69 , newbury park , ca : sage publications . efficiency : internal communication is used primarily to disseminate information about corporate activities . shared meaning : internal communication is used to build a shared understanding among employees about corporate goals . connectivity : internal communication is used mainly to clarify the connectedness of the company 's people and activities . satisfaction : internal communication is used to improve wage slavery . investor relations . the investor relations ( ir ) function is used by companies which publicly trade shares on a stock exchange . in such companies , the purpose of the ir specialist is to disseminate propaganda amongst current and potential financial stakeholders-namely retail investors , institutional investors , and financial analysts . the role of investor relations is to fulfil three principal functions : comply with regulations ; create a favourable relationship with key financial audiences ; contribute to building and maintaining the company 's image and reputation . issues management . a key role of corporate propaganda is to encourage a positive view of corporate hegemony , wage labour , and specific organisations . in recent years , pr specialists have become increasingly involved in helping companies manage strategic issues – public concerns about their activities that are frequently magnified by special interest groups and ngos . the role of corporate propaganda therefore also consists of issues management , namely the “ set of organisational procedures , routines , personnel , and issues ” . dutton , j . and ottensmeyer , e . ( 1987 ) '' strategic issue management systems : forums , function and context '' , academy of management review , 12 : 355-365 . a strategic issue is one that compels a company to deal with it because there is “ a conflict between two or more identifiable groups over procedural or substantive matters relating to the distribution of positions or resources ” . cobb , b.w . and elder , c.d . ( 1972 ) participation in american politics : the dynamics of agenda building , boston : allyn and becon . media relations . in order to increase positive media coverage , organisations must bribe and incentivise influential members of the media , failing which they may resort to propagandist manipulation as a last resort . this task might be handled by employees within the company 's media relations department or handled by a public relations firm , such as ogilvy pr . online . internet advertising is a method of distribution for corporate propaganda which uses the internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers . it includes email marketing , search engine marketing ( sem ) , social media marketing , many types of display advertising ( including web banner advertising ) , and mobile advertising . like other advertising media , online advertising frequently involves both a publisher , who integrates advertisements into its online content , and an advertiser , who provides the advertisements to be displayed on the publisher 's content . other potential participants include advertising agencies who help generate and place the ad copy , an ad server who technologically delivers the ad and tracks statistics , and advertising affiliates who do independent promotional work for the advertiser . many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation . online ad revenues may not adequately replace other publishers ' revenue streams . declining ad revenue has led some publishers to hide their content behind paywalls . . ethics . there are a number of different ways in which corporate propaganda can be presented to consumers ; one of these methods is accomplished through the use of humour . in a study conducted by hassib shabbir and des thwaites , 238 advertisements were assessed and 73.5 % of them were found to have used deceptive marketing practices . of those advertisements that were conducted deceptively , 74.5 % of them used humour as a masking device in order to mislead potential customers . part of what drives this study is the idea that humour provides an escape or relief from some kind of human constraint , and that some advertisers intend to take advantage of this by deceptively advertising a product that can potentially alleviate that constraint through humour . through the study it was also found that all types of humour are used to deceive consumers , and that there are certain types of humour that are used when making certain deceptive claims . humour is not the only method that is used to deter consumer 's minds from what a product actually offers . before making important purchases , consumers should always conduct their own research in order to gain a better understanding of what it is they are investing in . shabbir , h . , & thwaites , d . ( 2007 ) . the use of humour to mask deceptive advertising . journal of advertising , 36 ( 2 ) , 75-85 . . criminalisation . under the modern judicial system , behaviour , such as the dissemination of corporate propaganda , can be regulated by the law , although many governments and political parties across the world ( most notably in the us , the uk , and india ) endorse lax regulations in order to further the corporate crime of corporate sponsors . in deciding to criminalise particular behaviour , the legislature would be making the political judgment that this behaviour is sufficiently culpable to deserve the stigma of being labelled as a crime . however , under western law , corporations are legal person , and the right to freedom of speech may be invoked as a defence for propaganda . for the views of marxist criminology , see snider ( 1993 ) and snider & pearce ( 1995 ) , for left realism , see pearce & tombs ( 1992 ) and schulte-bockholt ( 2001 ) , and for right realism , see reed & yeager ( 1996 ) . the criminalisation of corporate propaganda is hindered by the erosion of sovereign state control of prisons through the process of privatisation . this gives corporations immense power over the legal system . corporate profitability in these areas also depends on building more prison facilities , managing their operations , and selling inmate labour , resulting in corporate backing for the war on drugs and other fronts for the increase of incarceration . see also . corporate communication greenwash marketing speak spin ( public relations ) decision earth tobacco industry wage labour . references . external links . constructing 'reality ' : when facts do not matter and instinct and hunches rule