Geel

history . origins and middle ages . archaeological finds in the area point to iron age settlements , but the name of geel ( until mid-20th century spelled as gheel ) hails from a germanic root meaning “ yellow ” and dates from the early middle ages . a hamlet already existed in the mid-13th century , at which time a certain petrus cameracencis , canon of cambrai , wrote the vita sanctae dimpnae ( i.e . , life of saint dymphna , an irish woman ) set in geel according to oral tradition . the cult of the saint attracted numerous pilgrims to the area , leading to a substantial population growth : 2,136 inhabitants in 1374 . in the 12th century , the extended territory around geel was given to the grimbergen abbey . it then became property of one noble family after another throughout medieval times . the noble lords or dames were masters of their community , but pledged feudal allegiance to the dukes of brabant . some form of municipal government was granted to geel as early as the first half of the 13th century . throughout the middle ages to the end of the 18th century , the history of geel follows that of the duchy of brabant . during all this time , the economy of the city depended on the breeding of sheep for the cloth industry , complemented by the cultivation of flax for the manufacture and trade of linen . a cloth hall was built at the beginning of the 15th century , which was later transformed into the city hall . the eighty years ' war greatly damaged the geel economy as well as its buildings and churches . the textile industry recovered to last until the early 19th century , but the economy was now mostly supported by agriculture , specifically rye , oat , barley , and buckwheat . geel was also known at that time for its latin school , which attracted students from far away to prepare them for entry at the catholic university of leuven . from the french revolution until today . in 1795 , the duchy of brabant was dissolved and geel made part of the french department of deux-nèthes , the precursor of the present province of antwerp . the nobles and clerics of the ancien régime gave way to a mayor , who was now answerable to the town ’ s people . geel actively participated in the belgian revolution of 1830 , resulting in the award of an honorary flag from king leopold ii . the 19th century also saw the building of several new churches at the demand of the various parishes . a major occurrence in the history of geel is the battle of geel ( also referred to as the '' gheel bridgehead '' ) in september 1944 , one of the heaviest and bloodiest fights during the liberation of belgium . eventually the territory of geel , and the smaller villages around it , were finally liberated on september 23 , but it had claimed numerous military and civilian casualties . a model of psychiatric care . geel is well known for the early adoption of de-institutionalization in psychiatric care . roosens , eugeen . mental patients in town life : geel , europe 's first therapeutic community . beverly hills , sage publications , 1979 . - this practice is based on the positive effects that placement in a host family gives the patient , most importantly access to family life that would otherwise have been denied . the legendary 7th-century saint dymphna , who had fled to the geel area from ireland , is usually credited with this type of care . the earliest geel infirmary and the model where patients go into town , interact with the community during the day , and return to the hospital at night to sleep , date from the 13th century . originally , this practice was religiously motivated and organized by a chapter of canons , attached to the church of saint dymphna . by the 18th century , however , the placement of patients was mostly done directly , without the intervention of the canons . the number of patients grew in proportion to the growing city ’ s reputation abroad and the economic benefits flowing to the city provided further motivation to the inhabitants . attracted by the gentle care of patients , vincent van gogh 's father considered sending his famous son to geel in 1880 . the high point came in 1938 , with a total of 3,736 placed patients , compared with only 700 a hundred years earlier . this novel type of psychiatric care was evaluated by various other institutions around the world ( see for instance eastern state hospital in virginia ) , but often seen as too revolutionary to implement . it is only in the early 20th century that the idea of deinstitutionalization was adopted more widely elsewhere . today , a modern psychiatric centre stands on the place of the old infirmary , and close to 500 patients are still placed with inhabitants . the fact that people with mental illness are living with relatively non-judgmental ( formerly ) strangers and not with family members has been cited as a partial explanation of the success of this model , because it creates an environment that avoids emotional over-involvement , critical comments , and hostility ( measured collectively in psychiatry as '' expressed emotion '' ) . the problem with the solution ( transcript ) - invisibilia podcast , 1 july 2016 another aspect cited as helpful is that people with mental illness are allowed to live their lives relatively freely , without being labeled as '' broken '' or '' in recovery '' . . sights . the market square , facing the sint-amands church and bordered by attractive café terraces , is the focal point of the city . the oldest part of the city hall dates from the 17th century . not far away , the sint-dimpna church marks the place where the saint was buried . geel is located along the river nete , in the campine region noted for varied landscape of forests and dunes . nature reserve de zegge , belonging to the society which owns the antwerp zoo . among the city 's attractions one counts a field of orchids , a centenary tilia , three wind mills , a military cemetery , and a handful a museums including a clock museum , a lamp museum , and an old bakery . the saint-alexis college is emblazoned with art nouveau sgraffito by gabriel van dievoet . education . geel is a regional educational centre with several basic schools , high schools and the katholieke hogeschool kempen as an institute for higher education . the european school , mol is in mol , near geel . '' deutscher bundestag 4 . wahlperiode drucksache iv/3672 '' ( . bundestag ( west germany ) . 23 june 1965 . retrieved on 12 march 2016 . p . 10/51 . '' europäische schule mol — deutsche abteilung — geel europawijk 2 '' . economic activity . geel is a regional agricultural , industrial , and commercial center offering medical and educational services to the neighboring communities . the city is the location of a janssen pharmaceutica chemical factory and a production site for the biotech company genzyme . it also hosts the institute for reference materials and measurements , which is one of the seven scientific institutes of the european commission 's joint research centre . innotek a technology centre and cipal are located in geel . the town is also the home of the influential brandweerinformatiecentrum voor gevaarlijke stoffen . sports and cultural events . geel is home to the former football club k.f.c . verbroedering geel . due to bankruptcy , verbroedering geel merged with the local football club of the neighbouring village of meerhout . the newly created football club was named verbroedering geel-meerhout . the reggae geel festival , one of the larger reggae festivals in europe , takes place usually early in august just outside the city centre . notable inhabitants . patrik vankrunkelsven , physician and politician ( b . 1957 ) ludo dierckxsens , racing cyclist ( b . 1964 ) marc goossens , race car driver ( b . 1969 ) jan heylen , racecar driver ( b . 1980 ) sepp de roover , soccer player ( b . 1984 ) kirsten flipkens , tennis player ( b . 1986 ) alois verwaest , physician , poet , playwright and doctor ( jan 28th , 1900 - june 6 , 1981 ) kevin strijbos , motocross racer ( b . 1985 ) eddy voordeckers , soccer player ( b . 1960 ) . international relations . twin towns — sister cities . geel is twinned with : : tydavnet , county monaghan : xanten . references . notes . . further reading . . external links . geel official website – in dutch language geel online - popular website among the youth of geel , in dutch language