1948 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1948 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . notable films released in 1948 . united states unless stated . . 3 godfathers , starring john wayne . a . abbott and costello meet frankenstein , starring bud abbott and lou costello act of violence , starring van heflin , robert ryan , janet leigh adventures of don juan , starring errol flynn albuquerque , starring randolph scott and barbara britton the amazing mr . x , starring turhan bey and lynn bari l'amore , directed by roberto rossellini , starring anna magnani – ( italy ) anna karenina , starring vivien leigh and ralph richardson – ( gb ) another part of the forest , starring fredric march april showers , starring ann sothern and jack carson arch of triumph , starring ingrid bergman , charles boyer , charles laughton , ruth warrick . b . b.f . 's daughter , starring barbara stanwyck berlin express , starring merle oberon and robert ryan the berliner ( berlin balade ) , starring gert fröbe – ( germany ) bicycle thieves ( ladri di biciclette ) , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) the big clock , starring ray milland , charles laughton , elsa lanchester , maureen o'sullivan blanche fury , starring valerie hobson and stewart granger – ( gb ) blonde ice , starring leslie brooks blood on the moon , starring robert mitchum bodyguard , starring lawrence tierney and priscilla lane the boy with green hair , directed by joseph losey , starring dean stockwell and robert ryan the bride goes wild , directed by norman taurog , starring june allyson and van johnson . c . call northside 777 , starring james stewart la calle sin sol ( the sunless street ) – ( spain ) campus honeymoon , starring lee and lyn wilde canon city , starring scott brady command decision , starring clark gable counterblast , directed by paul l . stein , starring mervyn johns – ( gb ) cry of the city , starring victor mature and richard conte . d . the dark past , starring william holden , lee j . cobb , nina foch a date with judy , starring wallace beery , jane powell , elizabeth taylor and carmen miranda dédée d'anvers , starring simone signoret – ( france ) drunken angel ( yoidore tenshi ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring takashi shimura and toshiro mifune – ( japan ) . e . the eagle with two heads ( l'aigle à deux têtes ) , directed by jean cocteau – ( france ) easter parade , starring judy garland , fred astaire and peter lawford the emperor waltz , starring bing crosby escape , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring rex harrison – ( gb/u.s . ) eva – ( sweden ) every girl should be married , starring cary grant . f . the fallen idol , written by graham greene and directed by carol reed , starring ralph richardson – ( gb ) fighter squadron , directed by raoul walsh , starring edmond o'brien and robert stack force of evil , starring john garfield a foreign affair , directed by billy wilder , starring jean arthur and marlene dietrich fort apache , directed by john ford and starring john wayne , henry fonda , shirley temple four faces west , starring joel mccrea and frances dee . g . germany year zero ( germania anno zero ) , directed by roberto rossellini – ( italy ) god reward you ( dios se lo pague ) , starring arturo de córdova – ( argentina ) good sam , directed by leo mccarey , starring gary cooper good-time girl , starring jean kent and dennis price – ( gb ) green grass of wyoming , starring peggy cummins and charles coburn the green promise , starring marguerite chapman and walter brennan the guinea pig , a boulting brothers film starring richard attenborough – ( gb ) . h . half past midnight , starring kent taylor and peggy knudsen hamlet , directed by and starring laurence olivier , with basil sydney and jean simmons – ( gb ) he walked by night , starring richard basehart and jack webb a hen in the wind ( kaze no naka no mendori ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) hollow triumph , starring paul henreid and joan bennett homecoming , starring clark gable , lana turner , anne baxter , john hodiak . i . i remember mama , directed by george stevens , starring irene dunne i walk alone , starring burt lancaster and kirk douglas the iron curtain , directed by william wellman , starring gene tierney , dana andrews , june havoc is n't it romantic ? , starring veronica lake . j . joan of arc , starring ingrid bergman johnny belinda , starring jane wyman and lew ayres julia misbehaves starring greer garson , walter pidgeon , peter lawford and elizabeth taylor june bride , starring bette davis . k . key largo , directed by john huston , starring humphrey bogart , edward g . robinson , lauren bacall , lionel barrymore , claire trevor kiss the blood off my hands , starring joan fontaine and burt lancaster the kissing bandit , starring kathryn grayson and frank sinatra . l . ladies of the chorus , starring marilyn monroe lal dupatta , starring madhubala ( india ) the lame devil ( le diable boiteux ) , directed by and starring sacha guitry – ( france ) letter from an unknown woman , directed by max ophüls , starring joan fontaine and louis jourdan london belongs to me , starring richard attenborough and alastair sim – ( gb ) louisiana story , documentary by robert j . flaherty the loves of carmen , starring rita hayworth the luck of the irish , starring tyrone power and anne baxter luxury liner , starring jane powell and george brent . m . macbeth , directed by and starring orson welles the mating of millie , starring evelyn keyes and glenn ford mela , starring dilip kumar – ( india ) melody time , starring roy rogers & trigger and the andrews sisters mexican hayride , starring bud abbott and lou costello michurin , directed by alexander dovzhenko – ( u.s.s.r . ) miranda , directed by ken annakin , starring glynis johns – ( gb ) miss tatlock 's millions , starring wanda hendrix , barry fitzgerald , john lund the monkey 's paw , starring milton rosmer – ( gb ) moonrise , directed by frank borzage , starring gail russell and dane clark morituri – ( germany ) mr . blandings builds his dream house , starring cary grant and myrna loy my dear secretary , starring kirk douglas , laraine day myriad of lights ( wanjia denghuo ) – ( china ) the mysterious apartment ( den hemmelighetsfulle leiligheten ) – ( norway ) . n . the naked city , directed by jules dassin , starring barry fitzgerald night has a thousand eyes , starring edward g . robinson no orchids for miss blandish – ( gb ) no room at the inn , starring freda jackson and hermione baddeley – ( gb ) noose , starring carole landis the noose hangs high , starring bud abbott and lou costello nosotros los pobres ( we the poor ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) . o . on an island with you starring esther williams , peter lawford , ricardo montalbán , cyd charisse , and jimmy durante one sunday afternoon , starring dennis morgan one touch of venus , starring robert walker and ava gardner oliver twist , directed by david lean , starring alec guinness and robert newton – ( gb ) na svoji zemlji ( na svoji zemlji ) – ( yugoslavia ) . p . the paleface , starring bob hope and jane russell les parents terribles , directed by jean cocteau , starring jean marais – ( france ) the pirate , starring gene kelly and judy garland pitfall , starring dick powell , lizabeth scott , jane wyatt , raymond burr port of call ( hamnstad ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) portrait of jennie , starring jennifer jones . q . quartet , starring mai zetterling – ( gb ) . r . race street , starring george raft and william bendix rachel and the stranger , starring loretta young , william holden , robert mitchum raw deal , directed by anthony mann , starring dennis o'keefe , claire trevor , marsha hunt , raymond burr red river , directed by howard hawks , starring john wayne , montgomery clift , walter brennan , joanne dru , john ireland the red shoes , directed by michael powell and emeric pressburger , starring moira shearer and anton walbrook – ( gb ) relentless , starring robert young the return of october , starring glenn ford road house , starring ida lupino rogues ' regiment , directed by robert florey and starring dick powell , märta torén , vincent price romance on the high seas , starring jack carson , janis paige , doris day ( film debut ) rope , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring james stewart ruthless , starring zachary scott and diana lynn . s . saigon , the final of 4 films starring alan ladd and veronica lake the sainted sisters , starring veronica lake and joan caulfield saraband for dead lovers , starring stewart granger and joan greenwood – ( gb ) scott of the antarctic , starring john mills – ( gb ) sealed verdict , starring ray milland the search , directed by fred zinnemann , starring montgomery clift – ( us/switzerland ) secret beyond the door , directed by fritz lang , starring joan bennett and michael redgrave senza pietà ( without pity ) – ( italy ) shaheed , starring dilip kumar – ( india ) silver river , starring errol flynn and ann sheridan sitting pretty , starring robert young and maureen o'hara sleep , my love , starring claudette colbert sleeping car to trieste , starring jean kent – ( gb ) smart girls do n't talk , starring virginia mayo the snake pit , starring olivia de havilland so evil my love , starring ray milland , ann todd , geraldine fitzgerald – ( gb ) a song is born , starring danny kaye sorry , wrong number , starring barbara stanwyck and burt lancaster spring in a small town ( xiǎochéng zhī chūn ) , directed by fei mu – ( china ) spring in park lane , starring anna neagle and michael wilding – ( gb ) state of the union , starring spencer tracy and katharine hepburn station west , starring dick powell and jane greer the street with no name , starring richard widmark . t . tap roots , starring van heflin and susan hayward la terra trema ( the earth will tremble ) , directed by luchino visconti – ( italy ) they live by night , directed by nicholas ray , starring farley granger and cathy o'donnell the three muskteers , starring lana turner and gene kelly the time of your life , starring james cagney tragic hunt ( caccia tragica ) – ( italy ) the treasure of the sierra madre , directed by john huston ( oscars for best director and best screenplay ) , starring humphrey bogart and walter huston ( best supporting actor ) treasured earth ( talpalatnyi föld ) – ( hungary ) los tres huastecos , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) . u . under the sun of rome ( sotto il sole di roma ) , directed by renato castellani – ( italy ) unfaithfully yours , starring linda darnell and rex harrison up in central park , directed by william a . seiter , starring deanna durbin and vincent price ustedes los ricos ( you the rich ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) . v . vidya , starring dev anand – ( india ) . w . waverley steps : a visit to edinburgh – ( gb ) documentary western heritage , starring tim holt when my baby smiles at me , starring betty grable and dan dailey when you come home whiplash , starring alexis smith and dane clark whispering smith , starring alan ladd and robert preston the winslow boy , directed by anthony asquith , starring robert donat and margaret leighton – ( gb ) . y . yellow sky , starring gregory peck , anne baxter , richard widmark you got ta stay happy , starring joan fontaine and james stewart the young guard ( molodaya gvardiya ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) . serials . g-men never forget , starring clayton moore dangers of the canadian mounted adventures of frank and jesse james , starring clayton moore superman , starring kirk alyn and noel neill tex granger congo bill . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1952 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) donald duck ( 1936–1956 ) goofy ( 1939–1953 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1964 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–1949 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1964 ) george and junior ( 1946—1948 ) blackie the sheep ( 1947–1949 ) . births . january 10 – william sanderson , american actor january 14 – carl weathers , american actor and football player january 16 – john carpenter , american director , producer and screenwriter january 29 – marc singer , canadian actor february 5 barbara hershey , american actress tom wilkinson , english actor february 15 – tino insana , american actor , producer , writer , voice artist and comedian ( d . 2017 ) february 20 – jennifer o'neill , american actress february 22 – john ashton , american actor february 28 mike figgis , english director and screenwriter bernadette peters , american actress and singer mercedes ruehl , american actress march 4 - brian cummings , american voice actor march 11 – dominique sanda , french actress march 14 – billy crystal , american actor and comedian march 20 – helene vannari , estonian actress march 25 – bonnie bedelia , american actress march 28 matthew corbett , english television personality , actor , writer , puppeteer and comedian march 29 – bud cort , american actor march 31 - rhea perlman , american actress and writer april 9 – jaya bachchan , indian actress april 25 – freda foh shen , american film , television and theatre actress may 3 – chris mulkey , american actor may 12 lindsay crouse , american actress richard riehle , american actor may 21 – jonathan hyde , australian-born english actor june 28 – kathy bates , american actress july 12 – ben burtt , american sound designer july 13 – catherine breillat , french director july 28 - georgia engel , american actress ( d . 2019 ) july 30 – jean reno , french actor august 14 - lou wagner , american actor august 30 – lewis black , american actor and comedian september 7 – susan blakely , american actress september 19 – jeremy irons , english actor october 2 – persis khambatta , indian actress and model ( d . 1998 ) october 16 – hema malini , indian actress and politician october 17 – margot kidder , canadian actress ( d . 2018 ) october 29 – kate jackson , american actress november 11 – vincent schiavelli , american actor ( d . 2005 ) november 13 – adelle lutz , american model , actress , and costume designer november 14 – robert ginty , american actor and producer ( d . 2009 ) november 18 – dom irrera , american actor and stand-up comedian november 28 – agnieszka holland , polish director and screenwriter december 6 – jobeth williams , american actress and director december 15 – dee wallace , american actress december 21 – samuel l . jackson , american actor and producer december 27 – gérard depardieu , french actor and filmmaker . deaths . february 11 – sergei eisenstein , 50 , russian film director , battleship potemkin , alexander nevsky , ivan the terrible , part one , ivan the terrible , part two february 14 – james baskett , 44 , american actor , song of the south may 3 – gideon wahlberg , 58 , swedish actor , writer and film director may 12 – dante cappelli , 82 , italian actor , macbeth , love everlasting , the mysterious mirror may 26 – torsten bergström , 51 , swedish actor and director , the pilgrimage to kevlaar , trollebokungen , ungdom july 5 – carole landis , 29 , american actress , topper returns , i wake up screaming , one million b.c . , four jills in a jeep july 15 – william selig , 84 , american pioneer studio builder july 23 – david wark griffith , 73 , american film director , the birth of a nation , intolerance , broken blossoms , orphans of the storm august 13 – elaine hammerstein , 51 , american actress , paint and powder , the midnight express august 13 – edwin maxwell , 62 , american actor , duck soup , cleopatra , his girl friday september 24 – warren william , 53 , american actor , gold diggers of 1933 , the wolf man , lady for a day , imitation of life september 28 – gregg toland , 44 , american cinematographer , citizen kane , the best years of our lives , the long voyage home , december 7th : the movie , wuthering heights , the grapes of wrath , song of the south , the little foxes october 10 – mary eaton , 47 , american actress , glorifying the american girl , the cocoanuts october 13 – samuel s . hinds , 73 , american actor , it 's a wonderful life , buck privates october 16 – nora lane , 43 , american actress , the cisco kid , six-gun trail december 20 – c . aubrey smith , 85 , english actor , a bill of divorcement , madame curie . film debuts . beau bridges – no minor vices pat buttram – the strawberry roan montgomery clift – the search doris day – romance on the high seas josé ferrer – joan of arc laurence harvey – house of darkness audrey hepburn – dutch in seven lessons rock hudson – fighter squadron howard keel – the small voice klaus kinski – morituri christopher lee – corridor of mirrors margaret leighton – bonnie prince charlie audie murphy – texas , brooklyn & heaven irene papas – fallen angels debbie reynolds – june bride . references .