Mircea Eliade

controversy : antisemitism and links with the iron guard . early statements . the early years in eliade 's public career show him to have been highly tolerant of jews in general , and of the jewish minority in romania in particular . his early condemnation of nazi antisemitic policies was accompanied by his caution and moderation in regard to nae ionescu 's various anti-jewish attacks . ornea , pp . & nbsp ; 408–409 , 412 . late in the 1930s , mihail sebastian was marginalized by romania 's antisemitic policies , and came to reflect on his romanian friend 's association with the far right . the subsequent ideological break between him and eliade has been compared by writer gabriela adameşteanu with that between jean-paul sartre and albert camus . in his journal , published long after his 1945 death , sebastian claimed that eliade 's actions during the 1930s show him to be an antisemite . according to sebastian , eliade had been friendly to him until the start of his political commitments , after which he severed all ties . sebastian , passim before their friendship came apart , however , sebastian claimed that he took notes on their conversations ( which he later published ) during which eliade was supposed to have expressed antisemitic views . according to sebastian , eliade said in 1939 : the poles ' resistance in warsaw is a jewish resistance . only yids are capable of the blackmail of putting women and children in the front line , to take advantage of the germans ' sense of scruple . the germans have no interest in the destruction of romania . only a pro-german government can save us . what is happening on the frontier with bukovina is a scandal , because new waves of jews are flooding into the country . rather than a romania again invaded by kikes , it would be better to have a german protectorate . sebastian , p . & nbsp ; 238 . the friendship between eliade and sebastian drastically declined during the war : the latter writer , fearing for his security during the pro-nazi ion antonescu regime ( see romania during world war ii ) , hoped that eliade , by then a diplomat , could intervene in his favor ; however , upon his brief return to romania , eliade did not see or approach sebastian . later , mircea eliade expressed his regret at not having had the chance to redeem his friendship with sebastian before the latter was killed in a car accident . paul cernat notes that eliade 's statement includes an admission that he '' counted on sebastian 's support , in order to get back into romanian life and culture '' , and proposes that eliade may have expected his friend to vouch for him in front of hostile authorities . some of sebastian 's late recordings in his diary show that their author was reflecting with nostalgia on his relationship with eliade , and that he deplored the outcome . eliade provided two distinct explanations for not having met with sebastian : one was related to his claim of being followed around by the gestapo , and the other , expressed in his diaries , was that the shame of representing a regime that humiliated jews had made him avoid facing his former friend . another take on the matter was advanced in 1972 by the israeli magazine toladot , which claimed that , as an official representative , eliade was aware of antonescu 's agreement to implement the final solution in romania and of how this could affect sebastian ( see holocaust in romania ) . in addition , rumors were sparked that sebastian and nina mareş had a physical relationship , one which could have contributed to the clash between the two literary figures . beyond his involvement with a movement known for its antisemitism , eliade did not usually comment on jewish issues . however , an article titled piloţii orbi ( '' the blind pilots '' ) , contributed to the journal vremea in 1936 , showed that he supported at least some iron guard accusations against the jewish community : since the war that is , world war i , jews have occupied the villages of maramureş and bukovina , and gained the absolute majority in the towns and cities in bessarabia . it would be absurd to expect jews to resign themselves in order to become a minority with certain rights and very many duties—after they have tasted the honey of power and conquered as many command positions as they have . jews are currently fighting with all forces to maintain their positions , expecting a future offensive—and , as far as i am concerned , i understand their fight and admire their vitality , tenacity , genius . eliade , 1936 , in ornea , pp . & nbsp ; . 412–413 ; partially in the final report , p . & nbsp ; 49 . one year later , a text , accompanied by his picture , was featured as answer to an inquiry by the iron guard 's buna vestire about the reasons he had for supporting the movement . a short section of it summarizes an anti-jewish attitude : can the romanian nation end its life in the saddest decay witnessed by history , undermined by misery and syphilis , conquered by jews and torn to pieces by foreigners , demoralized , betrayed , sold for a few million lei ? eliade , 1937 , in ornea , p.413 ; in the final report , p.49 according to the literary critic z . ornea , in the 1980s eliade denied authorship of the text . he explained the use of his signature , his picture , and the picture 's caption , as having been applied by the magazine 's editor , mihail polihroniade , to a piece the latter had written after having failed to obtain eliade 's contribution ; he also claimed that , given his respect for polihroniade , he had not wished to publicize this matter previously . ornea , p.206 ; ornea is skeptical of these explanations , given the long period of time spent before eliade gave them , and especially the fact that the article itself , despite the haste in which it must have been written , has remarkably detailed references to many articles written by eliade in various papers over a period of time . . polemics and exile . dumitru g . danielopol , a fellow diplomat present in london during eliade 's stay in the city , later stated that the latter had identified himself as '' a guiding light of the iron guard movement '' and victim of carol ii 's repression . in october 1940 , as the national legionary state came into existence , the british foreign office blacklisted mircea eliade , alongside five other romanians , due to his iron guard connections and suspicions that he was prepared to spy in favor of nazi germany . according to various sources , while in portugal , the diplomat was also preparing to disseminate propaganda in favor of the iron guard . in jurnal portughez , eliade defines himself as '' a legionary '' , and speaks of his own '' legionary climax '' as a stage he had gone through during the early 1940s . the depolitisation of eliade after the start of his diplomatic career was also mistrusted by his former close friend eugène ionesco , who indicated that , upon the close of world war ii , eliade 's personal beliefs as communicated to his friends amounted to '' all is over now that communism has won '' . ionesco , 1945 , in ornea , p.184 this forms part of ionesco 's severe and succinct review of the careers of legionary-inspired intellectuals , many of them his friends and former friends , in a letter he sent to tudor vianu . ornea , p.184–185 in 1946 , ionesco indicated to petru comarnescu that he did not want to see either eliade or cioran , and that he considered the two of them '' legionaries for ever '' —adding '' we are hyenas to one another '' . ionesco , 1946 , in ornea , p.211 eliade 's former friend , the communist belu zilber , who was attending the paris conference in 1946 , refused to see eliade , arguing that , as an iron guard affiliate , the latter had '' denounced left-wingers '' , and contrasting him with cioran ( '' they are both legionaries , but cioran is honest '' ) . stelian tănase , '' belu zilber '' ( iii ) , in 22 , nr.702 , august 2003 ; retrieved october 4 , 2007 three years later , eliade 's political activities were brought into discussion as he was getting ready to publish a translation of his techniques du yoga with the left-leaning italy company giulio einaudi editore—the denunciation was probably orchestrated by romanian officials . ornea , p.210 in august 1954 , when horia sima , who led the iron guard during its exile , was rejected by a faction inside the movement , mircea eliade 's name was included on a list of persons who supported the latter—although this may have happened without his consent . according to exiled dissident and novelist dumitru ţepeneag , around that date , eliade expressed his sympathy for iron guard members in general , whom he viewed as '' courageous '' . constantin coroiu , '' un român la paris '' , in evenimentul , august 31 , 2006 ; retrieved october 4 , 2007 however , according to robert ellwood , the eliade he met in the 1960s was entirely apolitical , remained aloof from '' the passionate politics of that era in the united states '' , and '' reportedly . never read newspapers '' ellwood , p.83 ( an assessment shared by sorin alexandrescu ) . eliade 's student ioan petru culianu noted that journalists had come to refer to the romanian scholar as '' the great recluse '' . despite eliade 's withdrawal from radical politics , ellwood indicates , he still remained concerned with romania 's welfare . he saw himself and other exiled romanian intellectuals as members of a circle who worked to '' maintain the culture of a free romania and , above all , to publish texts that had become unpublishable in romania itself '' . eliade , ordeal by labyrinth , in ellwood , p.115 beginning in 1969 , eliade 's past became the subject of public debate in israel . at the time , historian gershom scholem asked eliade to explain his attitudes , which the latter did using vague terms . oişteanu , '' angajamentul . '' as a result of this exchange , scholem declared his dissatisfaction , and argued that israel could not extend a welcome to the romanian academic . during the final years of eliade 's life , his disciple culianu exposed and publicly criticized his 1930s pro-iron guard activities ; relations between the two soured as a result . sorin antohi , '' exploring the legacy of ioan petru culianu '' , in the institut für die wissenschaften vom menschen post , newsletter 72 , spring 2001 ; retrieved july 16 , 2007 ; ted anton , '' the killing of professor culianu '' , in lingua franca , volume 2 , no . 6 , september/october 1992 ; retrieved july 29 , 2007 ; oişteanu , '' angajamentul . '' eliade 's other romanian disciple , andrei oişteanu , noted that , in the years following eliade 's death , conversations with various people who had known the scholar had made culianu less certain of his earlier stances , and had led him to declare : '' mr . eliade was never antisemitic , a member of the iron guard , or pro-nazi . but , in any case , i am led to believe that he was closer to the iron guard than i would have liked to believe . '' culianu , in oişteanu , '' angajamentul . '' at an early stage of his polemic with culianu , eliade complained in writing that '' it is not possible to write an objective history '' of the iron guard and its leader corneliu zelea codreanu . arguing that people '' would only accept apologetics . or executions '' , he contended : '' after buchenwald and auschwitz , even honest people can not afford being objective '' . eliade , in ellwood , p.91 ; in oişteanu , '' angajamentul . '' . posterity . alongside the arguments introduced by daniel dubuisson , criticism of mircea eliade 's political involvement with antisemitism and fascism came from adriana berger , leon volovici , alexandra lagniel-lavastine , florin țurcanu and others , who have attempted to trace eliade 's antisemitism throughout his work and through his associations with contemporary antisemites , such as the italian fascist occultist julius evola . volovici , for example , is critical of eliade not only because of his support for the iron guard , but also for spreading antisemitism and anti-masonry in 1930s romania . leon volovici , nationalist ideology and antisemitism : the case of romanian intellectuals in the 1930s , pergamon press , oxford , 1991 , p.104–105 , 110–111 , 120–126 , 134 in 1991 , exiled novelist norman manea published an essay firmly condemning eliade 's attachment to the iron guard . other scholars , like bryan s . rennie , have claimed that there is , to date , no evidence of eliade 's membership , active services rendered , or of any real involvement with any fascist or totalitarian movements or membership organizations , nor that there is any evidence of his continued support for nationalist ideals after their inherently violent nature was revealed . they further assert that there is no imprint of overt political beliefs in eliade 's scholarship , and also claim that eliade 's critics are following political agendas . bryan s . rennie , reconstructing eliade : making sense of religion , state university of new york press , albany , 1996 , p.149–177 . romanian scholar mircea handoca , editor of eliade 's writings , argues that the controversy surrounding eliade was encouraged by a group of exiled writers , of whom manea was a main representative , and believes that eliade 's association with the guard was a conjectural one , determined by the young author 's christian values and conservatism stance , as well as by his belief that a legionary romania could mirror portugal 's estado novo . handoca opined that eliade changed his stance after discovering that the legionaries had turned violent , and argued that there was no evidence of eliade 's actual affiliation with the iron guard as a political movement . additionally , joaquín garrigós , who translated eliade 's works into spanish , claimed that none of eliade 's texts he ever encountered show him to be an antisemite . mircea eliade 's nephew and commentator sorin alexandrescu himself proposed that eliade 's politics were essentially conservative and patriotic , in part motivated by a fear of the soviet union which he shared with many other young intellectuals . based on mircea eliade 's admiration for gandhi , various other authors assess that eliade remained committed to nonviolence . robert ellwood also places eliade 's involvement with the iron guard in relation to scholar 's conservatism , and connects this aspect of eliade 's life with both his nostalgia and his study of primal societies . according to ellwood , the part of eliade that felt attracted to the '' freedom of new beginnings suggested by primal myths '' is the same part that felt attracted to the guard , with its almost mythological notion of a new beginning through a '' national resurrection '' . ellwood , p.100–101 on a more basic level , ellwood describes eliade as an '' instinctively spiritual '' person who saw the iron guard as a spiritual movement . ellwood , p.86 in ellwood 's view , eliade was aware that the '' golden age '' of antiquity was no longer accessible to secular man , that it could be recalled but not re-established . thus , a '' more accessible '' object for nostalgia was a '' secondary silver age within the last few hundred years '' —the kingdom of romania 's 19th century cultural renaissance . ellwood , p.xiv to the young eliade , the iron guard seemed like a path for returning to the silver age of romania 's glory , being a movement '' dedicated to the cultural and national renewal of the romanian people by appeal to their spiritual roots '' . ellwood describes the young eliade as someone '' capable of being fired up by mythological archetypes and with no awareness of the evil that was to be unleashed '' . ellwood , p.91 because of eliade 's withdrawal from politics , and also because the later eliade 's religiosity was very personal and idiosyncratic , ellwood believes the later eliade probably would have rejected the '' corporate sacred '' of the iron guard . according to ellwood , the later eliade had the same desire for a romanian '' resurrection '' that had motivated the early eliade to support the iron guard , but he now channeled it apolitically through his efforts to '' maintain the culture of a free romania '' abroad . ellwood , p.115 in one of his writings , eliade says , '' against the terror of history there are only two possibilities of defense : action or contemplation . '' eliade , the forbidden forest , in ellwood , p.101 according to ellwood , the young eliade took the former option , trying to reform the world through action , whereas the older eliade tried to resist the terror of history intellectually . eliade 's own version of events , presenting his involvement in far right politics as marginal , was judged to contain several inaccuracies and unverifiable claims . ornea , p.202 , 208–211 , 239–240 for instance , eliade depicted his arrest as having been solely caused by his friendship with nae ionescu . ornea , p.202 , 209 on another occasion , answering gershom scholem 's query , he is known to have explicitly denied ever having contributed to buna vestire . according to sorin antohi , '' eliade died without ever clearly expressing regret for his iron guard sympathies '' . antohi , preface to liiceanu , p.xxiii z . ornea noted that , in a short section of his autobiography where he discusses the einaudi incident , eliade speaks of '' my imprudent acts and errors committed in youth '' , as '' a series of malentendus that would follow me all my life . '' eliade , in ornea , p.210 ornea commented that this was the only instance where the romanian academic spoke of his political involvement with a dose of self-criticism , and contrasted the statement with eliade 's usual refusal to discuss his stances '' pertinently '' . reviewing the arguments brought in support of eliade , sergio vila-sanjuán concluded : '' nevertheless , eliade 's pro-legionary columns endure in the newspaper libraries , he never showed his regret for this connection with the iron guard and always , right up to his final writings , he invoked the figure of his teacher nae ionescu . '' in his felix culpa , manea directly accused eliade of having embellished his memoirs in order to minimize an embarrassing past . a secondary debate surrounding eliade 's alleged unwillingness to dissociate with the guard took place after jurnalul portughez saw print . sorin alexandrescu expressed a belief that notes in the diary show eliade 's '' break with his far right past '' . cătălin avramescu defined this conclusion as '' whitewashing '' , and , answering to alexandrescu 's claim that his uncle 's support for the guard was always superficial , argued that jurnal portughez and other writings of the time showed eliade 's disenchantment with the legionaries ' christian stance in tandem with his growing sympathy for nazism and its nazi occultism . paul cernat , who stressed that it was the only one of eliade 's autobiographical works not to have been reworked by its author , concluded that the book documented eliade 's own efforts to '' camouflage '' his political sympathies without rejecting them altogether . oișteanu argued that , in old age , eliade moved away from his earlier stances and even came to sympathize with the non-marxism left and the hippie youth movement . he noted that eliade initially felt apprehensive about the consequences of hippie activism , but that the interests they shared , as well as their advocacy of communalism and free love had made him argue that hippies were '' a quasi-religious movement '' that was '' rediscovering the sacrality of life '' . eliade , in oişteanu , '' mircea eliade şi mişcarea hippie '' andrei oișteanu , who proposed that eliade 's critics were divided into a '' maximalist '' and a '' minimalist '' camp ( trying to , respectively , enhance or shadow the impact legionary ideas had on eliade ) , argued in favor of moderation , and indicated that eliade 's fascism needed to be correlated to the political choices of his generation . . political symbolism in eliade 's fiction . various critics have traced links between eliade 's fiction works and his political views , or romanian politics in general . early on , george călinescu argued that the totalitarian model outlined in huliganii was : '' an allusion to certain bygone political movements . , sublimated in the ever so abstruse philosophy of death as a path to knowledge . '' by contrast , întoarcerea din rai partly focuses on a failed communism rebellion , which enlists the participation of its main characters . iphigenia‍ 's story of self-sacrifice , turned voluntary in eliade 's version , was taken by various commentators , beginning with mihail sebastian , as a favorable allusion to the iron guard 's beliefs on commitment and death , as well as to the bloody outcome of the 1941 legionary rebellion . ten years after its premiere , the play was reprinted by legionary refugees in argentina : on the occasion , the text was reviewed for publishing by eliade himself . reading iphigenia was what partly sparked culianu 's investigation of his mentor 's early political affiliations . a special debate was sparked by un om mare . culianu viewed it as a direct reference to corneliu zelea codreanu and his rise in popularity , an interpretation partly based on the similarity between , on one hand , two monikers ascribed to the legionary leader ( by , respectively , his adversaries and his followers ) , and , on the other , the main character 's name ( cucoanes ) . matei călinescu did not reject culianu 's version , but argued that , on its own , the piece was beyond political interpretations . commenting on this dialog , literary historian and essayist mircea iorgulescu objected to the original verdict , indicating his belief that there was no historical evidence to substantiate culianu 's point of view . alongside eliade 's main works , his attempted novel of youth , minunata călătorie a celor cinci cărăbuși in țara furnicilor roșii , which depicts a population of red ants living in a totalitarian society and forming bands to harass the beetles , was seen as a potential allusion to the soviet union and to communism . despite eliade 's ultimate reception in communist romania , this writing could not be published during the period , after censors singled out fragments which they saw as especially problematic . . cultural legacy . tributes . image : stamp of moldova 038.jpg thumb 230px eliade 's portrait on a moldovan stamp an endowed chair in the history of religions at the university of chicago divinity school was named after eliade in recognition of his wide contribution to the research on this subject ; the current ( and first incumbent ) holder of this chair is wendy doniger . to evaluate the legacy of eliade and joachim wach within the discipline of the history of religions , the university of chicago chose 2006 ( the intermediate year between the 50th anniversary of wach 's death and the 100th anniversary of eliade 's birth ) , to hold a two-day conference in order to reflect upon their academic contributions and their political lives in their social and historical contexts , as well as the relationship between their works and their lives . in 1990 , after the romanian revolution , eliade was elected posthumously to the romanian academy . in romania , mircea eliade 's legacy in the field of the history of religions is mirrored by the journal archaeus ( founded 1997 , and affiliated with the university of bucharest faculty of history ) . the 6th european association for the study of religion and international association for the history of religions special conference on religious history of europe and asia took place from september 20 to september 23 , 2006 , in bucharest . an important section of the congress was dedicated to the memory of mircea eliade , whose legacy in the field of history of religions was scrutinized by various scholars , some of whom were his direct students at the university of chicago . ; retrieved july 29 , 2007 as antohi noted , eliade , emil cioran and constantin noica '' represent in romanian culture ultimate expressions of excellence , eliade and cioran being regarded as proof that romania 's interwar culture ( and , by extension , romanian culture as a whole ) was able to reach the ultimate levels of depth , sophistication and creativity . '' a tvr 1 poll carried out in 2006 nominated mircea eliade as the 7th greatest romanian in history ; his case was argued by the journalist dragoş bucurenci ( see 100 greatest romanians ) . his name was given to a boulevard in the northern bucharest area of primăverii , to a street in cluj-napoca , and to high schools in bucharest , sighişoara , and reşiţa . the eliades ' house on melodiei street was torn down during the communist regime , and an apartment block was raised in its place ; his second residence , on dacia boulevard , features a memorial plaque in his honor . eliade 's image in contemporary culture also has political implications . historian irina livezeanu proposed that the respect he enjoys in romania is matched by that of other '' nationalist thinkers and politicians '' who '' have reentered the contemporary scene largely as heroes of a pre- and anticommunist past '' , including nae ionescu and cioran , but also ion antonescu and nichifor crainic . irina livezeanu , cultural politics in greater romania : regionalism , nation building and ethnic struggle , 1918–1930 , cornell university press , new york city , 1995 , p.x . in parallel , according to oişteanu ( who relied his assessment on eliade 's own personal notes ) , eliade 's interest in the american hippie community was reciprocated by members of the latter , some of whom reportedly viewed eliade as '' a guru '' . eliade has also been hailed as an inspiration by german representatives of the neue rechte , claiming legacy from the conservative revolutionary movement ( among them is the controversial magazine junge freiheit and the essayist karlheinz weißmann ) . '' biografia lui mircea eliade la o editură germană radicală de dreapta '' ( '' mircea eliade 's biography at a right-wing radical german publishing house '' ) , in altitudini , nr . 17 , july 2007 ; retrieved november 8 , 2007 in 2007 , florin ţurcanu 's biographical volume on eliade was issued in a german translation by the antaios publishing house , which is mouthpiece for the neue rechte . the edition was not reviewed by the mainstream german press . other sections of the european far right also claim eliade as an inspiration , and consider his contacts with the iron guard to be a merit—among their representatives are the italy neofascist claudio mutti and romanian groups who trace their origin to the legionary movement . . portrayals , filmography and dramatizations . early on , mircea eliade 's novels were the subject of satire : before the two of them became friends , nicolae steinhardt , using the pen name antisthius , authored and published parody of them . maitreyi devi , who strongly objected to eliade 's account of their encounter and relationship , wrote her own novel as a reply to his maitreyi ; written in bengali , it was titled na hanyate ( 'it does not die ' ) . several authors , including ioan petru culianu , have drawn a parallel between eugène ionesco 's absurdist play of 1959 , rhinoceros , which depicts the population of a small town falling victim to a mass metamorphosis , and the impact fascism had on ionesco 's closest friends ( eliade included ) . oişteanu , '' angajamentul . '' ; ornea , p.19 , 181 in 2000 , saul bellow published his controversial ravelstein novel . having for its setting the university of chicago , it had among its characters radu grielescu , who was identified by several critics as eliade . the latter 's portrayal , accomplished through statements made by the eponymous character , is polemical : grielescu , who is identified as a disciple of nae ionescu , took part in the bucharest pogrom , and is in chicago as a refugee scholar , searching for the friendship of a jewish colleague as a means to rehabilitate himself . mircea iorgulescu , '' portretul artistului ca delincvent politic '' ( '' the portrait of the artist as a political offender '' ) , part i , in 22 , nr.637 , may 2002 ; retrieved july 16 , 2007 in 2005 , the romanian literary critic and translator antoaneta ralian , who was an acquaintance of bellow 's , argued that much of the negative portrayal was owed to a personal choice bellow made ( after having divorced from alexandra bellow , his romanian wife and eliade disciple ) . antoaneta ralian , interviewed on the occasion of saul bellow 's death , bbc , april 7 , 2005 ( hosted by hotnews.ro ) ; retrieved july 16 , 2007 she also mentioned that , during a 1979 interview , bellow had expressed admiration for eliade . the film mircea eliade et la redécouverte du sacré ( 1987 ) , and part of the television series architecture et géographie sacrées by paul barbă neagră , discuss eliade 's works . film adaptations . the bengali night ( 1988 ) , directed by nicolas klotz domnişoara christina ( 'miss christina ' , 1992 ) , directed by viorel sergovici șarpele ( 'the snake ' , 1996 ) eu sunt adam ( 1996 ) , directed by dan pița youth without youth ( 2007 ) , directed by francis ford coppola domnişoara christina ( 2013 ) the bengali night , a 1988 film directed by nicolas klotz and based upon the french translation of maitreyi , stars british actor hugh grant as allan , the european character based on eliade , while supriya pathak is gayatri , a character based on maitreyi devi ( who had refused to be mentioned by name ) . the film , considered '' pornography '' by hindu activists , was only shown once in india . . live adaptations . domnișoara christina ( 1981 ) , opera at the romanian radio săptămâna internaţională a muzicii noi . ediţia a 14-a – 23–30 mai 2004 . detalii festival ( '' the international new music week . 14th edition – may 23–30 , 2004 . festival details '' ) , at the institute for cultural memory ; retrieved february 18 , 2008 iphigenia ( 1982 ) , play at the national theater bucharest la señorita cristina ( 2000 ) , opera at the teatro real , madrid cazul gavrilescu ( 'the gavrilescu case ' , 2001 ) , play at the nottara theater irina margareta nistor , '' un cuplu creator de teatru – gelu şi roxana colceag '' ( '' a theater producing couple – gelu and roxana colceag '' ) , september 2001 , at the liternet publishing house ; retrieved january 18 , 2008 la țigănci ( 2003 ) , play at the odeon theater '' la ţigănci . & nbsp ; cu popescu '' ( to the gypsy girls . & nbsp ; with popescu '' ) , in adevărul , may 31 , 2003 ; retrieved december 4 , 2007 apocalipsa după mircea eliade ( 'the apocalypse according to mircea eliade ' , 2007 ) '' scrieri de eliade şi vişniec , în cadrul festivalului enescu '' ( '' texts by eliade and vişniec , as part of the enescu festival '' ) , in gândul , september 12 , 2007 ; retrieved december 4 , 2007 eliade 's iphigenia was again included in theater programs during the late years of the nicolae ceauşescu regime : in january 1982 , a new version , directed by ion cojar , premiered at the national theater bucharest , starring mircea albulescu , tania filip and adrian pintea in some of the main roles . has been the basis for two theater adaptations : cazul gavrilescu ( 'the gavrilescu case ' ) , directed by gelu colceag and hosted by the nottara theater ; and an eponymous play by director alexandru hausvater , first staged by the odeon theater in 2003 , starring , among others , adriana trandafir , florin zamfirescu , and carmen tănase . in march 2007 , on eliade 's 100th birthday , the romanian radio broadcasting company hosted the mircea eliade week , during which radio drama adaptations of several works were broadcast . '' săptămâna mircea eliade la radio românia '' ( '' the mircea eliade week on radio romania '' ) ( 2007 press communique ) , at the liternet publishing house ; retrieved december 4 , 2007 in september of that year , director and dramatist cezarina udrescu staged a multimedia performance based on a number of works mircea eliade wrote during his stay in portugal ; titled apocalipsa după mircea eliade ( 'the apocalypse according to mircea eliade ' ) , and shown as part of a romanian radio cultural campaign , it starred ion caramitru , oana pellea and răzvan vasilescu . domnișoara christina has been the subject of two operas : the first , carrying the same romanian title , was authored by romanian composer șerban nichifor and premiered in 1981 at the romanian radio ; the second , titled la señorita cristina , was written by spain composer luis de pablo and premiered in 2000 at the teatro real in madrid . . selected bibliography . a history of religious ideas . vol . 1 : from the stone age to the eleusinian mysteries . trans . willard r . trask . chicago : u of chicago p , 1978 . ( histoire des croyances et des idées religieuses . 3 vols . 1976-83 . ) images and symbols : studies in religious symbolism ( trans . philip mairet ) , princeton university press , princeton , 1991 myth and reality ( trans . willard r . trask ) , harper & row , new york , 1963 myths , dreams and mysteries ( trans . philip mairet ) , harper & row , new york , 1967 myths , rites , symbols : a mircea eliade reader , vol . 2 , ed . wendell c . beane and william g . doty , harper colophon , new york , 1976 patterns in comparative religion , sheed & ward , new york , 1958 shamanism : archaic techniques of ecstasy , princeton university press , princeton , 2004 the myth of the eternal return : cosmos and history ( trans . willard r . trask ) , princeton university press , princeton , 1971 '' the quest for the 'origins ' of religion '' , in history of religions 4.1 ( 1964 ) , p . & nbsp ; 154–169 the sacred and the profane : the nature of religion ( trans . willard r . trask ) , harper torchbooks , new york , 1961 yoga : immortality and freedom ( trans . willard r . trask ) , princeton university press , princeton , 2009 isabela vasiliu-scraba , harismele duhului sfânt si fotografia „ de 14 ani ” ( mircea eliade ) , în rev . „ acolada ” , satu mare , anul xiv , nr . 12 ( 157 ) , decembrie 2020 , pp . 12-13 . notes .