Winter of Discontent

effect on general election . the strikes appeared to have a profound effect on voting intention . according to gallup , labour had a lead of 5 percentage points over the conservatives in november 1978 , which turned to a conservative lead of 7.5 percentage points in january 1979 , and of 20 percentage points in february . on 1 march , referendums on devolution to scotland and wales were held . that in wales went strongly against devolution ; that in scotland produced a small majority in favour which did not reach the threshold set by parliament of 40 per cent of that electorate . the government 's decision not to press ahead with devolution immediately led the scottish national party to withdraw support from the government and on 28 march in a 1979 vote of no confidence in the callaghan ministry , precipitating a general election . conservative party leader margaret thatcher had already outlined her proposals for restricting trade union power in a party political broadcast on 17 january in the middle of the lorry drivers ' strike . during the election campaign the conservative party made extensive use of the disruption caused during the strike . lópez , 179–81 one broadcast on 23 april began with the sun 's headline '' crisis ? what crisis ? '' being shown and read out by an increasingly desperate voiceover interspersed with film footage of piles of rubbish , closed factories , picketed hospitals and locked graveyards . the scale of the conservatives ' victory in the general election has often been ascribed to the effect of the strikes , as well as their '' labour is n't working '' campaign , and the party used film of the events of the winter in election campaigns for years to come . legacy . following thatcher 's election win , she brought the post-war consensus to a halt and made drastic changes to trade union laws ( most notably the regulation that unions had to hold a ballot among members before calling strikes ) and as a result strikes were at their lowest level for 30 years by the time of the 1983 general election , which the conservatives won by a landslide . american historian tara martin lópez has noted how many later memories of the winter of discontent exaggerate what occurred and confuse events of that time with other industrial disputes and their consequences during the 1970s . in the filth and the fury , a 2000 documentary about punk rock band the sex pistols , surviving members steve jones and john lydon recall 1975 , around the time of the band 's founding , for '' a garbage strike that went on for years and years and there was trash piled ten-foot high '' . one of lópez 's own students in her classes at the university of manchester identified the winter of discontent with the three-day week , which had actually been implemented during the 1974 miner 's strike . '' the embeddedness of a memory infused with a mix of errors , political fact and evocative images is particularly interesting in understanding the winter of discontent because it intimates the broader historical significance of this series of events '' , she wrote lópez , 9–10 . within labour party . the winter of discontent also had effects within the labour party . callaghan was succeeded as leader by the more left-wing michael foot , who did not succeed in unifying the party . in 1981 , still believing the party to have been too firmly controlled by the unions , william rodgers , the former transport minister who had tried to mitigate the effect of the hauliers ' strike , limehouse declaration to form the more centrist social democratic party ( sdp ) , a decision he recalls reaching with some difficulty . similarly disillusioned , especially after a gmwu official assured him '' we 'll call the shots '' after the winter ended , tom mcnally , callaghan 's advisor who had recommended the news conference that produced the suns '' crisis ? what crisis ? '' headline , left labour for the sdp . lópez , 194–195 some of the union officials involved , on the other hand , never changed their positions on the strikes . '' i would have to say if we had to do it all over again today , i would do it all over again , '' rodney bickerstaffe , later general secretary of nupe and its successor unison , said in 2006 . ian lowes , leader of the liverpool gravediggers , concurred : '' we had no choice '' . after the strikes , feeling betrayed by government denunciations of the strikers , he , too , moved away from the labour party—but further left . he found himself agreeing with the trotskyist positions of the militant newspaper distributed to strikers , and soon formally joined the local branch of the militant tendency , leaving them six years later when the militant in liverpool , followed local governments across britain in contracting out work normally done by government workers . lópez , 192–193 during the 1997 general election , with the tories the besieged incumbent party , conservative campaign operatives began claiming that labour , once back in power , would again take its direction from the tuc and repeal all the laws thatcher had passed to curb the tactics unions had used in 1979 . labour leader tony blair wrote an opinion piece for the times denying all those charges and explaining that labour had no plans to allow unballoted strikes , secondary pickets or closed shops , among other things , again . '' i have staked my political reputation and credibility on making it clear that there will be no return to the 1970s '' , he wrote . '' indeed there is little appetite among trade unions for such a thing . '' . reprinted at . response by british left . after labour 's steep losses , including many seats the party had held for decades , in the 2019 election , during which conservatives had again linked left-wing party leader jeremy corbyn to the 1970s and the winter of discontent , matt myers wrote in jacobin that the british left had , by ceding to the right its narrative of that era , failed to confront '' neoliberalism 's founding myth , which continues to place a fundamental obstacle in the way of socialist advance in britain . the defeats of the 1970s have been internalized—even by those that had once been the most powerful counterforces to neoliberalism . '' this in his opinion came despite labour 's hold on the youth vote , much more in its favour than it had been in 1983 , when voters aged 18–24 preferred thatcher . the corresponding overwhelming lead of the tories among older voters , whom he described as '' passive beneficiaries of socialist transformation '' , in labour 's view , rather than '' active subjects '' made it easy for the right to appeal to their desire to protect the much greater wealth they had accumulated compared to the country 's youth by evoking the 1970s . some leftists have joined the criticism of labour actions during the winter of discontent . paul foot , a lifelong socialist , described the strikes as '' bloody-minded expressions of revenge and self-interest '' . john kelly , another left-leaning academic , wrote that they were '' an example of an almost purely economism and defensive militancy . '' recognising the era 's endurance as an albatross around labour 's neck , some leftists have attempted to rehabilitate the winter of discontent as the inevitable result of the callaghan government 's incomes policy . '' it hardly fell out of a clear blue sky ; rather , it was the culmination of a long series of strikes and struggles against drastic attacks on workers ' standards of living '' sheila cohen wrote for the commune in 2010 . red pepper , in a page on its website devoted to refuting the tory narrative of the 1970s , echoes this and further blames the bank of england 's loosening of credit restrictions during and after the heath government as driving inflation so high , rather than union pay demands ; it also attributes the economic rebound under thatcher to the revenues from north sea oil instead of her labour law reforms . cohen also saw the winter as having offended the ruling class through its demonstration of working-class power . '' these prosaic struggles of tanker drivers , gravediggers and dustmen also displayed the only power that workers can have ; they withdrew their labour , with a force and to an extent that seriously challenged the organisation and structure of society . '' two years later , in the wake of the great recession and the austerity measures introduced by conservative prime minister david cameron , who had succeeded brown at the 2010 election , nick cohen was not so sure that the strikes of 1979 , which he agreed were the last time the working class was able to inconvenience the wealthy , should be remembered so badly : '' with organised labour now emasculated , managers and owners can reward themselves without restraint and governments can stagger from blunder to blunder without a thought for those who must suffer the consequences . '' . as 21st-century conservative talking point . in 2008 , another times piece raised the spectre of the winter of discontent in warning labour , then in government with gordon brown as prime minister , not to allow the tuc to set the party 's agenda again . militant union rhetoric at the party 's 2008 conference , rachel sylvester wrote , made it '' a quaint but rather pointless vision of the past : jurassic park with an abba soundtrack , a t-rex dressed in flares . '' five years later , at the first margaret thatcher annual lecture given after her death , boris johnson lamented that british youth were getting an overwhelmingly negative impression of the late prime minister from '' russell brand and the bbc '' that those old enough to remember what came before her election did not . '' in 1979 red robbo paralyzed what was left of our car industry and the country went into an ecstasy of uselessness called the winter of discontent : women were forced to give birth by candle-light , prime minister 's questions was lit by paraffin lamp and blue peter was all about how to put newspaper in blankets for extra insulation . '' two years later , with another election looming , johnson again claimed that ed miliband , labour 's then-leader , would take britain back to the 1970s if he became prime minister . after losing that election , miliband was succeeded as labour leader by jeremy corbyn , a surprise winner of the leadership election identified with the left wing of the party , who had been a nupe activist before his election to parliament in 1983 , popular among younger voters . in 2017 , the first election contested with him as leader , the party did better than expected , gaining 30 seats , its first seat gains in 20 years . daily telegraph columnist philip johnston attributed this to conservatives ' failure to use the winter of discontent against corbyn as an example for his youthful base of what his policies would likely lead to a repeat of . '' it appears that the economic arguments we had as a nation in the eighties will have to be joined all over again . '' two years later , in the independent , sean o'grady recalled his experience of that winter , as a child . while conceding that some memories of it exaggerated its severity , '' there was a mood in the country that we could n't carry on like this '' and thus thatcher was elected . o'grady warned readers that if reforms to labour laws that her government had enacted in the wake of the winter of discontent were repealed , in addition with the enactment of legislation desired by unions to make it easier to organize , britain could see a repeat of 1979 . '' we learned hard lessons about this sort of thing in that exceptionally cold and harsh winter of 1978-79 '' , he wrote . '' don ’ t let britain have to learn those painful lessons again , the hard way . '' . '' when deployed by the right against the left 'the 1970s ' is a malleable field to which all the worst elements of the nation 's past are consigned '' , myers observed in jacobin . yet , '' the more the specter of 'the 1970s ' is raised in british political discourse , the less the reality of the past is actually discussed . for modern british conservatism , the 1970s can thus serve as an empty signifier , its power dependent on eternal repetition of a memory from which even those who lived it are excluded . '' . see also . strike wave of 1945–46 , in u.s . , followed by election of conservative republican majorities in congress who also passed laws restricting union activities 1981 air traffic controllers strike , ended when president ronald reagan fired thousands of striking controllers , and seen as setting the tone for more aggressive posture with unions by u.s . corporations arizona copper mine strike of 1983 , resulted in the company hiring permanent replacements and breaking the union , first of many setbacks for major american unions that decade uk miners ' strike ( 1984–85 ) , largely seen as a victory for thatcher 's government over union militancy winter of 1946–47 in the united kingdom 1979 chicago blizzard , where the city 's inability to clear streets and ensure functioning public transit for weeks afterwards cost the incumbent mayor the primary election . february 1969 nor'easter , winter storm where dysfunctional snow removal afterwards cost new york city mayor john lindsay his party 's nomination , although he ultimately won re-election later that year . notes and references . notes . . references . . bibliography . beckett , andy . when the lights went out : britain in the seventies ( 2009 ) 576pp excerpt and textsearch butler , david and dennis kavanagh the british general election of 1979 ( macmillan , london , 1979 ) hay , colin . '' the winter of discontent thirty years on . '' the political quarterly 80.4 ( 2009 ) : 545–52 . harrison , brian . finding a role ? : the united kingdom 1970–1990 ( new oxford history of england ) ( 2011 ) excerpt and text search ; online major scholarly survey moore , charles ( 2014 ) . margaret thatcher : the authorized biography : volume 1 . london : penguin . rodgers , william . '' government under stress : britain 's winter of discontent 1979 . '' the political quarterly 55 2 ( 1984 ) : 171–79 . seldon , anthony ed . new labour , old labour : the wilson and callaghan governments 1974–79 anthony seldon ( routledge , london , 2004 ) thomas , james . '' 'bound in by history ' : the winter of discontent in british politics , 1979–2004 . '' media , culture & society 29 2 ( 2007 ) : 263–83 . turner , alwyn w . crisis ? what crisis ? : britain in the 1970s ( 2009 ) 336pp excerpt and text search secret history : winter of discontent ( mentorn productions for channel four , 1998 ) . external links . labour faces vote of confidence ( bbc on this day , 14 december 1978 ) 'no chaos here ' declares callaghan ( bbc on this day , 10 january 1979 ) public sector strike paralyses country ( bbc on this day , 22 january 1979 )