The Name of the Rose

plot summary . in 1327 , franciscan william of baskerville and adso of melk , a benedictine novice travelling under his protection , arrive at a benedictine monastery in northern italy to attend a disputation . this abbey is being used as neutral ground in a dispute between pope john xxii and the franciscans , who are suspected of heresy . the monastery is disturbed by the death of adelmo of otranto , an illuminator revered for his illustrations . adelmo was skilled at comical artwork , especially concerning religious matters . william is asked by the monastery 's abbot , abo of fossanova , to investigate the death : during his enquiry he has a debate with one of the oldest monks in the abbey , jorge of burgos , about the theological meaning of laughter , which jorge despises . the next day , a scholar of aristotle and translator of greek and arabic , venantius of salvemec , is found dead in a vat of pig 's blood . severinus of sankt wendel , the herbalist , tells william that venantius 's body had black stains on the tongue and fingers , which suggests poison . benno of uppsala , a rhetoric scholar , reveals to william that the librarian , malachi of hildesheim , and his assistant berengar of arundel , had a homosexual relationship , until berengar seduced adelmo , who committed suicide out of conflicting religious shame . the only other monks who knew about the indiscretions were jorge and venantius . in spite of malachi prohibiting william and adso from entering the labyrinthine library , they penetrate the labyrinth , discovering that there must be a hidden room , entitled the finis africae after the presumed geographical edge of the world . they find a book on venantius ' desk along with some cryptic notes . someone snatches the book , and they pursue to no avail . by the day after , berengar has gone missing , which puts pressure on william . william learns of how salvatore of montferrat , and remigio of varagine , two cellarer monks , had a history with the dulcinian . adso returns to the library alone in the evening . when leaving the library through the kitchen , adso is seduced by a peasant girl , with whom he has his first sexual experience . after confessing to william , adso is absolved , although he still feels guilty . on the fourth day , berengar is found drowned in a bath , although his body bears stains similar to venantius ' . bernard gui , a member of the inquisition , arrives to search for the murderer via papal decree . gui arrests the peasant girl adso loved , as well as salvatore , accusing them both of heresy and witchcraft . during the theological disputation the next day , severinus , after obtaining a '' strange '' book , is found dead in his laboratory , prompting william and adso to search unsuccessfully for it . remigio is interrogated by gui , who scares him into revealing his fra dolcino , as well as falsely confessing to the crimes of the abbey under threat of torture . in response to the recent tragedies in the abbey , jorge leads a sermon about the coming of the antichrist . malachi , near death , returns to the early sermon on the sixth day , and his final words concern scorpions . nicholas of morimondo , the glazier , tells william that whoever is the librarian would then become the abbot , and with new light , william goes to the library to search for evidence . the abbot is distraught that william has not solved the crime , and that the inquisition is undermining him , so he dismisses william . that night , william and adso penetrate the library once more and enters the finis africae by solving its etymology riddle by chance . william and adso discover jorge waiting for them in the forbidden room . he confesses that he has been masterminding the abbey for decades , and his last victim is the abbot himself , who has been trapped to suffocate inside a second passage to the chamber . william asks jorge for the second book of poetics ( aristotle ) , which jorge gladly offers . while flipping through the pages , which speak of the virtues of laughter , william deduces that jorge - unable to destroy this last copy of the book - laced the pages with arsenic , assuming correctly that a reader would have to lick his fingers to turn them . furthermore , william concludes that venantius was translating the book as he succumbed to the poison . berengar found him and , fearing exposure , disposed of the body in pig 's blood before claiming the book and dying in the baths . malachi was coaxed by jorge to retrieve it from severinus ' storage , where berengar had displaced it , so he killed severinus , retrieved the book and died after investigating its contents . jorge confirms william 's deductions and justifies this unlikely course of actions as divine mandate . the deaths correspond in order and symbolism with the seven trumpets , which call for objects falling from the sky ( adelmo 's jump from a tower ) , pools of blood ( venantius ) , poison from water ( berengar ) , bashing of the stars ( severinus ' head was crushed with a celestial orb ) , scorpions ( which a delirious malachi referred to ) , locusts and fire . this sequence , interpreted throughout the plot ( to the verge of being accepted by william himself ) as the deliberate work of a serial killer , was in fact the random result of jorge 's scheme . he consumes the book 's poisoned pages and uses adso 's lantern to start a fire , which kills him and burns down the library . adso summons the monks in a futile attempt to extinguish the fire . as the fire spreads to the rest of the abbey , william laments his failure . confused and defeated , william and adso escape the abbey . years later , adso , now aged , returns to the ruins of the abbey and salvages any remaining book scraps and fragments from the fire , eventually creating a lesser library . characters . ; primary characters william of baskerville – main protagonist , a franciscan friar adso of melk – narrator , benedictine novice accompanying william ; at the monastery abo of fossanova – the abbot of the benedictine monastery severinus of sankt wendel – herbalist who helps william malachi of hildesheim – librarian berengar of arundel – assistant librarian adelmo of otranto – limner , novice venantius of salvemec – translator of manuscripts benno of uppsala – student of rhetoric alinardo of grottaferrata – eldest monk jorge of burgos – elderly blind monk remigio of varazze – cellarer salvatore of montferrat – monk , associate of remigio nicholas of morimondo – glazier aymaro of alessandria – gossipy , sneering monk pacificus of tivoli peter of sant ’ albano waldo of hereford magnus of iona patrick of clonmacnois rabano of toledo ; outsiders ubertino of casale – franciscan friar in exile , friend of william michael of cesena – minister general of the franciscans bernard gui – inquisitor bertrand du pouget – cardinal and leader of the papal legation jerome of kaffa ( jerome of catalonia aka hieronymus catalani ) – bishop of kaffa peasant girl from the village below the monastery . major themes . eco was a professor of semiotics , and employed techniques of metanarrative , partial fictionalization , and linguistic ambiguity to create a world enriched by layers of meaning . the solution to the central murder mystery hinges on the contents of aristotle 's book on comedy , which has been lost . in spite of this , eco speculates on the content and has the characters react to it . through the motif of this lost and possibly suppressed book which might have aestheticized the farcical , the unheroic and the skeptical , eco also makes an ironically slanted plea for tolerance and against dogmatic or self-sufficient metaphysical truths — an angle which reaches the surface in the final chapters . lars gustafsson , postscript to swedish edition the name of the rose in this regard , the conclusion mimics a novel of ideas , with william representing rationality , investigation , logical deduction , empiricism and also the beauty of the human minds , against jorge 's dogmatism , censoriousness , and pursuit of keeping , no matter the cost , the secrets of the library closed and hidden to the outside world , including the other monks of the abbey . the name of the rose has been described as a work of postmodernism . christopher butler . postmodernism : a very short introduction . oup , 2002 . — see pages 32 and 126 for discussion of the novel . the quote in the novel , '' books always speak of other books , and every story tells a story that has already been told '' , refers to a postmodern idea that all texts perpetually refer to other texts , rather than external reality , while also harkening back to the medieval notion that citation and quotation of books was inherently necessary to write new stories . the novel ends with irony : as eco explains in his postscript to the name of the rose , '' very little is discovered and the detective is defeated . '' '' postscript to the name of the rose '' , printed in the name of the rose ( harcourt , inc . , 1984 ) , p . 506 . after unraveling the central mystery in part through coincidence and error , william of baskerville concludes in fatigue that there '' was no pattern . '' thus eco turns the modernist quest for finality , certainty and meaning on its head , leaving the nominal plot , that of a detective story broken , the series of deaths following a chaotic pattern of multiple causes , accident , and arguably without inherent meaning . . the aedificiums labyrinth . the mystery revolves around the abbey library , situated in a fortified tower—the aedificium . this structure has three floors—the ground floor contains the kitchen and refectory , the first floor a scriptorium , and the top floor is occupied by the library . first day , terce , paragraph 37 the two lower floors are open to all , while only the librarian may enter the last . a catalogue of books is kept in the scriptorium , where manuscripts are read and copied . a monk who wishes to read a book would send a request to the librarian , who , if he thought the request justified , would bring it to the scriptorium . finally , the library is in the form of a labyrinth , whose secret only the librarian and the assistant librarian know . first day , terce , paragraph 67 the aedificium has four towers at the four cardinal points , and the top floor of each has seven rooms on the outside , surrounding a central room . there are another eight rooms on the outer walls , and sixteen rooms in the centre of the maze . thus , the library has a total of fifty-six rooms . third day , vespers , paragraphs 50-56 each room has a scroll containing a verse from the book of revelation . the first letter of the verse is the letter corresponding to that room . third day , vespers , paragraphs 64-68 the letters of adjacent rooms , read together , give the name of a region ( e.g . hibernia in the west tower ) , and those rooms contain books from that region . the geographical regions are : fons adae , 'the earthly paradise ' contains bibles and commentaries , east tower acaia , greece , northeast iudaia , judea , east aegyptus , egypt , southeast leones , 'south ' contains books from africa , south tower yspania , spain , southwest outer roma , italy , southwest inner hibernia , ireland , west tower gallia , france , northwest germania , germany , north anglia , england , north tower two rooms have no lettering - the easternmost room , which has an altar , and the central room on the south tower , the so-called finis africae , which contains the most heavily guarded books , and can only be entered through a secret door . the entrance to the library is in the central room of the east tower , which is connected to the scriptorium by a staircase . fourth day , after compline . title . much attention has been paid to the mystery the book 's title refers to . in fact , eco has stated that his intention was to find a '' totally neutral title '' . in one version of the story , when he had finished writing the novel , eco hurriedly suggested some ten names for it and asked a few of his friends to choose one . they chose the name of the rose . umberto eco . on literature . secker & warburg , 2005 , p . 129-130 . in another version of the story , eco had wanted the neutral title adso of melk , but that was vetoed by his publisher , and then the title the name of the rose '' came to me virtually by chance . '' in the postscript to the name of the rose , eco claims to have chosen the title '' because the rose is a symbolic figure so rich in meanings that by now it hardly has any meaning left '' . the book 's last line , translates as : '' the rose of old remains only in its name ; we possess naked names . '' the general sense , as eco pointed out , was that from the beauty of the past , now disappeared , we hold only the name . in this novel , the lost '' rose '' could be seen as aristotle 's book on comedy ( now forever lost ) , the exquisite library now destroyed , or the beautiful peasant girl now dead . this text has also been translated as '' yesterday 's rose stands only in name , we hold only empty names . '' this line is a verse by twelfth century monk bernard of cluny ( also known as bernard of morlaix ) . medieval manuscripts of this line are not in agreement : eco quotes one medieval variant verbatim , eco would have found this reading in , for example , the standard text edited by h.c . hoskier ( london 1929 ) ; only the hiersemann manuscript preserves '' roma '' . for the verse quoted in this form before eco , see e.g . alexander cooke , an essay on the origin , progress , and decline of rhyming latin verse ( 1828 ) , p . 59 , and hermann adalbert daniel , thesaurus hymnologicus sive hymnorum canticorum sequentiarum ( 1855 ) , p . 290 . see further pepin , ronald e . '' adso 's closing line in the name of the rose . '' american notes and queries ( may–june 1986 ) : 151–152 . but eco was not aware at the time of the text more commonly printed in modern editions , in which the reference is to rome ( roma ) , not to a rose ( rosa ) . as eco wrote in '' the author and his interpreters '' '' thus the title of my novel , had i come across another version of morlay 's poem , could have been the name of rome ( thus acquiring fascist overtones ) '' . the alternative text , with its context , runs : nunc ubi regulus aut ubi romulus aut ubi remus ? / stat roma pristina nomine , nomina nuda tenemus . this translates as '' where now is regulus , or romulus , or remus ? / primordial rome abides only in its name ; we hold only naked names . '' see the source edition of 2009 : bernard of cluny , de contemptu mundi : une vision du monde vers 1144 , ed . and trans . a . cresson , témoins de notre histoire ( turnhout , 2009 ) , p . & nbsp ; 126 ( bk . 1 , 952 ) , and note thereto p . & nbsp ; 257 . the title may also an allusion to the nominalist position in the problem of universals , taken by william of ockham . according to nominalism , universals are bare names : there is not a universal rose , only the name rose . a further possible inspiration for the title may be a poem by the mexican poet and mystic nun juana inés de la cruz ( 1651–1695 ) : rosa que al prado , encarnada , te ostentas presuntuosa de grana y carmín bañada : campa lozana y gustosa ; pero no , que siendo hermosa también serás desdichada . this poem appears in eco 's postscript to the name of the rose , and is translated into english in '' note 1 '' of that book as : red rose growing in the meadow , you vaunt yourself bravely bathed in crimson and carmine : a rich and fragrant show . but no : being fair , you will be unhappy soon . . allusions . to other works . the name of the central character , william of baskerville , alludes both to the fictional detective sherlock holmes ( compare the hound of the baskervilles & nbsp ; – also , adso 's description of william in the beginning of the book resembles , almost word for word , dr . watson 's description of sherlock holmes when he first makes his acquaintance in a study in scarlet ) and to william of ockham ( see the next section ) . the name of the narrator , his apprentice adso of melk is among other things a pun on simplicio from galileo galilei 's dialogue ; adso deriving from '' ad simplicio '' ( '' to simplicio '' ) . adso 's putative place of origin , melk , is the site of a famous medieval library , at melk abbey . and his name echoes the narrator of the sherlock holmes stories , watson ( omitting the first and last letters , with '' t '' and '' d '' being phonetically similar ) . the blind librarian jorge of burgos is a nod to argentina writer jorge luis borges , a major influence on eco . borges was blind during his later years and was also director of argentina 's national library ; his short story '' the library of babel '' is an inspiration for the secret library in eco 's book . another of borges 's stories , '' the secret miracle '' , features a blind librarian . in addition , a number of other themes drawn from various of borges 's works are used throughout the name of the rose : labyrinths , mirrors , sects and obscure manuscripts and books . the ending also owes a debt to borges ' short story '' death and the compass '' , in which a detective proposes a theory for the behaviour of a murderer . the murderer learns of the theory and uses it to trap the detective . in the name of the rose , the librarian jorge uses william 's belief that the murders are based on the revelation to john to misdirect william , though in eco 's tale , the detective succeeds in solving the crime . the '' poisoned page '' motif may have been inspired by alexandre dumas ' novel la reine margot ( 1845 ) . it was also used in the film il giovedì ( 1963 ) by italian director dino risi . notes to a similar story is associated with the chinese erotic novel jin ping mei , translated as the golden lotus or the plum in the golden vase . eco seems also to have been aware of rudyard kipling 's short story '' the eye of allah '' , which touches on many of the same themes , like optics , manuscript illumination , music , medicine , priestly authority and the church 's attitude to scientific discovery and independent thought , and which also includes a character named john of burgos . eco was also inspired by the 19th century italian novelist alessandro manzoni , citing the betrothed as an example of the specific type of historical novel he purposed to create , in which some of the characters may be made up , but their motivations and actions remain authentic to the period and render history more comprehensible . throughout the book , there are latin quotes , authentic and apocryphal . there are also discussions of the philosophy of aristotle and of a variety of millenarism heresies , especially those associated with the fraticelli . numerous other philosophers are referenced throughout the book , often anachronistically , including wittgenstein . to actual history and geography . william of ockham , who lived during the time at which the novel is set , first put forward the principle known as ockham 's razor , often summarized as the dictum that one should always accept as most likely the simplest explanation that accounts for all the facts ( a method used by william of baskerville in the novel ) . the book describes monastic life in the 14th century . the action takes place at a benedictine abbey during the controversy surrounding the doctrines about absolute poverty of christ and apostolic poverty between branches of franciscans and dominicans ; ( see renewed controversy on the question of poverty ) . the setting was inspired by monumental sacra di san michele in susa valley , piedmont and visited by umberto eco . the spirituals abhor wealth , bordering on the apostolics or dulcinian heresy . the book highlights this tension that existed within christianity during the medieval era : the spirituals , one faction within the franciscan order , demanded that the church should abandon all wealth , and some heretical sects began killing the well-to-do , while the majority of the franciscans and the clergy took to a broader interpretation of the gospel . also in the background is the conflict between louis iv and pope john xxii , with the emperor supporting the spirituals and the pope condemning them . a number of the characters , such as bernard gui , ubertino of casale and the minorite michael of cesena , are historical figures , though eco 's characterization of them is not always historically accurate . his portrayal of gui in particular has been widely criticized by historians as an exaggerated caricature ; edward peters has stated that the character is '' rather more sinister and notorious & nbsp ; . than gui ever was historically '' , and he and others have argued that the character is actually based on the grotesque portrayals of inquisitors and catholic prelates more broadly in eighteenth and nineteenth-century gothic fiction , such as matthew gregory lewis ' the monk ( 1796 ) . additionally , part of the novel 's dialogue is derived from gui 's inquisitor 's manual , the practica inquisitionis heretice pravitatis . in the inquisition scene , the character of gui asks the cellarer remigius , '' what do you believe ? '' , to which remigius replies , '' what do you believe , my lord ? '' gui responds , '' i believe in all that the creed teaches , '' and remigius tells him , '' so i believe , my lord . '' bernard then points out that remigius is not claiming to believe in the creed , but to believe that he , gui , believes in the creed ; this is a paraphrased example from gui 's inquisitor 's manual , used to warn inquisitors of the manipulative tendencies of heretics . adso 's description of the portal of the monastery is recognizably that of the portal of the church at moissac . dante alighieri and his comedy are mentioned once in passing . there is also a quick reference to a famous '' umberto of bologna '' —umberto eco himself . adaptations . dramatic works . a play adaptation by grigore gonţa premiered at national theatre bucharest in 1998 , starring radu beligan , gheorghe dinică , and ion cojar . a two-part radio drama based on the novel and adapted by chris dolan was broadcast on bbc radio 4 on june 16 and 23 , 2006 . a post-postmodernist spoof the awful truth about the name of the rose by marco ocram ( 2019 ) loosely follows the plot of the original , but is set in a modern-day a-list retreat run as a medieval monastery . umberto eco has a cameo as 'brother umbert of eco ' , a confused would-be author who seeks ocram 's advice upon the writing of bestsellers . films . a film adaptation , eponymously titled the name of the rose ( 1986 ) , was directed by jean-jacques annaud , and stars sean connery as william of baskerville and christian slater as adso . . games . a spain video game adaptation was released in 1987 under the title la abadía del crimen ( the abbey of crime ) . nomen rosae ( 1988 ) , a spanish zx spectrum maze video game developed by cocasoft and published by microhobby . it only depicts the abbey 's library of the novel . il noma della rosa sic ( 1993 ) is a slovak zx spectrum adventure video game developed by orion software and published by perpetum . mystery of the abbey is a board game inspired by the novel , designed by bruno faidutti and serge laget . ravensburger published an eponymous board game in 2008 , designed by stefan feld , based on the events of the book . murder in the abbey ( 2008 ) , an adventure video game loosely based upon the novel , was developed by alcachofa soft and published by dreamcatcher interactive . la abadía del crimen extensum ( the abbey of crime extensum ) , a free remake of la abadía del crimen written in java , was released on steam in 2016 with english- , french- , italian- , and spanish-language versions . this remake greatly enhances the gameplay of the original , while also expanding the story and the cast of characters , borrowing elements from the movie and book . the game is dedicated to umberto eco , who died in 2016 , and paco menéndez , the programmer of the original game . the novel and original film provided inspiration for aspects of thief : the dark project , and a full mission in its expansion thief gold , specifically , monastic orders and the design of the aedificium . additionally , in the games ' level editor dromed , the intentionally ugly default texture was given the name '' jorge '' . music . dutch multi-instrumentalist ayreon released the song '' the abbey of synn '' on his album actual fantasy ( 1996 ) . lyrics are direct references to the story . the swedish metal band falconer released the song '' heresy in disguise '' in 2001 , part of their falconer album . the song is based on the novel . the british metal band iron maiden released the song '' sign of the cross '' in 1995 , part of their x factor album . the song refers to the novel . the british rock band ten released the album the name of the rose ( 1996 ) , whose eponymous track is loosely based around some of the philosophical concepts of the novel . romanian composer serban nichifor released the poem il nome della rosa for cello and piano 4 hands ( 1989 ) . the poem is based on the novel . . television . an eight-part miniseries adaptation , the name of the rose , commenced production in italy in january 2018 and premiered on rai 1 on march 4 , 2019 . the series was directed by giacomo battiato , and stars john turturro as william of baskerville , rupert everett as gui , and newcomer damian hardung as adso . the series premiered in the uk on bbc 2 on october 11 , 2019 .