Star Trek: Insurrection

reception . release . the world premiere of insurrection launched the 1998 cinevegas film festival . it went on general release in the u.s . and canada on december 11 , 1998 . the film grossed 22.4 million over the opening weekend ; the most of any film during that period . it averaged a total of 8,417 per location across 2,620 theaters , but fell short of the opening weekend takings of both first contact and generations , which were 30.7 million and 23.1 million respectively . insurrection was the highest-grossing film during the first week of its release in the united states , and stayed in the top ten for a further three weeks . during its first week of release in the uk , it was the highest-grossing film , exceeding the takings of the will smith film enemy of the state . insurrection enjoyed a two-week spell at the top of the uk box office and eventually earned £7,429,398 , roughly the same as generations . it went on to gross 70,187,658 in the us and 47,612,342 in other countries for a total of 117,800,000 worldwide against a 70 million budget . it was the first star trek film to be promoted through the official website , which was called the '' star trek continuum '' at the time . following the success of the film , rick berman said that he wanted to release the next film in the series three years after insurrection . referencing stanley kubrick 's 2001 : a space odyssey , he said , '' the notion of releasing a science fiction film in the year 2001 is very seductive . '' . critical response . the critical response to insurrection was mixed . review aggregation website rotten tomatoes gave the film a score of 55 % based on 67 reviews , with critic consensus being that , '' although not terrible , the sluggishly paced insurrection plays like an extended episode of the tv series . '' on metacritic the film has a score of 64 out of 100 , based on reviews from 19 critics , indicating '' generally favorable reviews '' . audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film a grade b+ . the los angeles daily news said that the film had the '' bare bones of one of those pseudo-philosophical political allegories trek has always done so entertainingly . but the movie blows it . '' it praised the directing of jonathan frakes and the computer generated special effects and gave the film two and a half stars overall . the daily herald also gave the film two and a half stars , describing it as a '' slickly made '' movie with a plot '' scaled down to its tv roots '' , and criticized the '' frivolous '' romance between riker and troi . the washington times gave the film one and a half stars , saying that it was '' consistently flat-footed and slow on the uptake '' , and that there was '' ramshackle confusion during the climactic scenes '' . the scottish daily record praised f . murray abraham and described anthony zerbe as '' ever-dependable '' . it said the plot was good , but that it was simply an extended episode of the next generation , and gave it a score of six out of ten . the british newspaper the people also said it was an extended television episode . the independent said that insurrection '' never stops being familiarly jolly and antiquated '' , and called the entire star trek film franchise '' old-fashioned '' . the washington post also called the film old fashioned , but '' in the best sense of the word '' , and said that the film did what the '' doctor – make that leonard mccoy – ordered '' . british journalist simon rose , writing for the daily mirror was more critical of the film , saying that it failed to break the odd-numbered star trek film curse , and that it was '' feeble '' , '' moribund '' and '' tedious '' . however , josh spiegel writing for the buffalo news said that insurrection broke the odd-numbered film rule . further criticism came from the birmingham evening mail , which said that it was '' an adult form of entertainment equivalent to teletubbies for babies '' , and that there were '' lots of repetition , rubbery faces , gibberish dialogue , characters leaping up and down in funny suits and some very basic effects '' . the reviewer gave the film two stars for fans , and none for non-fans . in folklore/cinema : popular film as vernacular culture , the actions of data and the ba'ku child artim in insurrection are seen as '' a metamorphosis motif where a child becomes computerlike and a computer/android becomes more childlike '' . shermankoven : p . 4 data specifically '' is a metaphor for a child who seeks to understand what being human means and then , like the velveteen rabbit , wishes to become . from confronting his father and evil brother to finding his mother , data also represents the potential within all of us to quest for a fuller humanity '' . shermankoven : p . 87 . accolades . the film was nominated for the saturn award for best science fiction film at the 25th saturn awards ; the prize was shared by armageddon and dark city . in 1999 , it was nominated for the hugo award for best dramatic presentation , which went to the truman show . it was nominated for best family feature film : drama at the 20th youth in film awards and won the individual award for best performance in a feature film : supporting young actor for michael welch . . home media . the first home media release of the film was made simultaneously on vhs , laserdisc and dvd on may 11 , 1999 , in the united states , and outside the us on vhs later that year . the film was released on june 5 , 2000 , in the united kingdom , and was one of the first titles to be released on dvd by paramount home entertainment international in europe and japan . a video game which followed up on the events of insurrection was released in 2000 . entitled star trek : hidden evil , it was set nine months after the events depicted in the film . in its narrative , a son ' a colony has been created on ba'ku , and an archaeological discovery which shares similarities with the next generation episode '' the chase '' is made . the game was developed by presto studios and published by activision . an insurrection '' special collector 's edition '' two-disc set was released in 2005 at the same time as three other next generation films and star trek : enterprises fourth season , marking the first time that every film and episode of the franchise was available on home video . the film was presented with the same technical specifications as the previous release and a new dts soundtrack , but it shipped without an audio commentary . the dvd includes a text track by michael and denise okuda that provides production trivia and relevant facts about the star trek universe . the second disc contains six '' making-of '' videos , including one about the construction of the ba'ku village and one about michael westmore 's make-up designs for the film . as part of a collection of star trek : the next generation films , insurrection was released on blu-ray and dvd on september 22 , 2009 . the blu-ray transfer is presented in 1080p high definition enhanced for widescreen television and features 5.1 dolby truehd audio in english , french and spanish . the release also contains '' creating the illusion '' featurettes and new commentary by jonathan frakes and marina sirtis . . see also . star trek film series list of films featuring extraterrestrials . references . bibliography . . external links .