Ø

language usage . in modern danish , faroese , and norwegian , the letter is a monophthongal close-mid front rounded vowel , the ipa symbol for which is also ( unicode u+00f8 ) . as with so many vowels , it has slight variations of '' light '' quality ( in danish , ( '' sister '' ) is pronounced as , like the '' eu '' in the french word and '' dark '' quality ( in danish , ( '' bean '' ) is pronounced as , like the '' œu '' in the french word . faqs.org . //upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/57/danish_alphabet.ogg listen to a danish speaker reciting the danish alphabet . in the suðuroy-dialect of faroese , the short ø is pronounced , e.g . ( '' children '' ) . the letter was used in both antiqua and fraktur from at least as early as the christian iii bible . under german influence , the letter ö appeared in older texts ( particularly those using fraktur ) and was preferred for use on maps ( e.g . , for helsingør or læsø ) until 1957 . den store danske . '' ø , ø '' . the southern sami language uses the letter ø in norway . it is used in the diphthongs yø and øø . in sweden , the letter ö is preferred . ø is used in the orthographies of several languages of africa , such as lendu , spoken in the democratic republic of the congo , and koonzime , spoken in cameroon . in danish , is also a word , meaning '' island '' . the corresponding word is spelled in swedish and in norwegian . ø is used as the party letter for the left-wing danish political party red–green alliance ( denmark ) . ( ø with an acute accent , unicode u+01fe ) may ( very seldom ) be used in danish to distinguish its usage from a similar word with ø . example : , '' the dog barks '' against , '' the dog does ( it ) '' . this distinction is not mandatory and the first example can be written or , the first variant ( with ǿ ) would only be used to avoid confusion . the second example can not be spelled . in danish , , '' the dog barks '' , may sometimes be replaced by the non-authorised spelling . this is , however , usually based on a misunderstanding of the grammatic rules of conjugation of verbs ending in the letters ø and å . these idiosyncratic spellings are not officially sanctioned . on danish keyboards and typewriters , the acute accent may be typed above any vowel , by pressing the acute key before pressing the letter , but ǿ is not implemented in the microsoft windows keyboard layout for danish . ø is used in old icelandic texts , when written with the standardized orthography , denoting , among other things the umlauts o > ø and ǫ > ø . in old polish texts , the letter ø represented a nasal vowel ( after all nasal vowels had merged ) . outside europe , ø is used in latin transliteration of the seneca language as the equivalent of the ampersand ; it abbreviates the seneca word . similar letters . the turkish , azerbaijani , turkmen , tatar , swedish , icelandic , rotuman , german , finnish , estonian , and hungarian alphabets use the letter ö instead of ø . hungarian orthography uses ő for the same sound lengthened . ø/ø is not related to , and should not be confused with similar-looking greek φ/φ or cyrillic ф/ф . the cyrillic letter ө has the same sound as ø , which is used in the cyrillic alphabets for kazakh , mongolian , azerbaijani , and other languages that have this sound . this is not to be confused with the early cyrillic letter fita . the letter ø-with-umlaut ( ø̈ , ø̈ ) was used by the oresund bridge company , as part of their logotype , to symbolize its union between sweden and denmark . since ø-with-umlaut did not exist in computer fonts , it was not used in the text . the logotype now uses the spelling øresundsbron , with øresunds- being danish and -bron being swedish . the letter ø-with-umlaut sometimes appears on packaging meant for the scandinavian market so as to prevent printing the same word twice . for example , liquorice brand snøre/snöre 's logo on the packaging is snø̈re . the letter is rarely used on maps ( e.g . : grø̈nland ) . die erde : haack kleiner atlas ; veb hermann haack geographisch-kartographische anstalt , gotha , 1982 ; p . 78 . similar symbols . the letter '' ø '' is sometimes used in mathematics as a replacement for the symbol '' ∅ '' ( unicode character u+2205 ) , referring to the empty set as established by bourbaki , and sometimes in linguistics as a replacement for same symbol used to represent a zero . the '' ∅ '' symbol is always drawn as a slashed circle , whereas in most typefaces the letter '' ø '' is a slashed ellipse . the diameter symbol ( ⌀ ) ( unicode character u+2300 ) is similar to the lowercase letter ø , and in some typefaces it even uses the same glyph , although in many others the glyphs are subtly distinguishable ( normally , the diameter symbol uses an exact circle and the letter o is somewhat stylized ) . the diameter symbol is used extensively in engineering drawings , and it is also seen in situations where abbreviating '' diameter '' is useful , such as on camera lenses . for example , a lens with a diameter of 82 & nbsp ; mm would be labeled ⌀ & nbsp ; 82 & nbsp ; mm . ø or ⌀ is sometimes also used as a symbol for average value , particularly in german-speaking countries . ( '' average '' in german is durchschnitt , directly translated as cut-through . ) slashed zero is an alternate glyph for the zero character . its slash does not extend outside the ellipse ( except in handwriting ) . it is often used to distinguish '' zero '' ( '' 0 '' ) from the latin script letter '' o '' anywhere that people wish to preempt confounding of the two , particularly in code , scientific and engineering applications , computer programming ( such as software development ) , and telecommunications . it is also used in amateur radio call signs , such as xxøxx , xøxxx , and so on in the united states and in other countries . see , also , for information on international amateur radio call signs . the letter '' ø '' is often used in trapped-key interlock sequence drawings to denote a key trapped in a lock . a lock without a key is shown as an '' o '' . the letter '' ø '' is also used in written music , especially jazz , to type an ad‐hoc chord letter for a half‐diminished chord , as in '' cø '' . the typography correct chord symbol is spelled with the root name , followed by a slashed degree symbol , as in '' c𝆩 '' . the slashed degree symbol is found in the musical symbols block of unicode but is unsupported by some fonts . history . the letter arose to represent an sound resulting primarily from i-mutation of . there are at least two theories about the origin of the letter ø : it possibly arose as a version of the ligature , œ , of the digraph '' oe '' , with the horizontal line of the '' e '' written across the '' o '' . it possibly arose in anglo-saxon england as an o and an i written in the same place : compare bede 's northumbrian anglo-saxon period spelling coinualch for standard cenwealh ( a man 's name ) ( in a text in latin ) . later the letter ø disappeared from anglo-saxon as the anglo-saxon sound changed to , but by then use of the letter ø had spread from england to scandinavia . computers . in unicode , ǿ and ǿ have the code points u+01fe and u+01ff . on microsoft windows , using the '' united states-international '' keyboard setting , it can be typed by holding down the alt-gr key and pressing '' l '' . it can also be typed under any keyboard setting by pressing numlock , holding down the key while typing ( for uppercase ) or ( for lowercase ) on the numeric keypad , provided the system uses code page 1252 as system default . ( code page 1252 is a superset of iso 8859-1 , and 216 and 248 are the decimal equivalents of hexadecimal d8 and f8 . ) in macos , it can be typed by holding o , or o , and then typing 6 . in macos and earlier systems , using a us english-language keyboard , the letter can be typed by holding the option key option key while typing o , or o , to yield ø , or ø . in the x window system environment , one can produce these characters by pressing alt-gr and o or o , or by pressing the multi key followed with a slash and then o or o . in some systems , such as older versions of ms-dos , the letter ø is not part of the widely used code page 437 . in scandinavian codepages , ø replaces the ¥ at 165 , and ø replaces the ¢ sign at 162 . on an amiga operating system using any keyboard map , the letter can be typed by holding the alt key alt key while typing o , or o , to yield ø , or ø . using microsoft word , ø and ø may be typed by pressing ctrl-/ followed by either minuscule or majuscule o . encoding . in unicode : not to be confused with the mathematical signs : . in popular culture . as with the metal umlaut , the symbol ø is used stylistically in place of the letter o in many contexts , although they typically do not change the actual spelling or pronunciation . in music , it is used by artists such as leathermouth in their logo and on tour posters . underoath based their album art for both ø ( disambiguation ) and the rebirth tour double vinyl on the symbol and customarily stylises their band name by featuring the character in place of the '' o '' . nick jonas also uses a reverse of the symbol in his logo . this letter is also used in a stylised manner by the australian microphone brand røde , and was also used in a similar manner by the now defunct american software company broderbund . defunct american furniture chain stør ( later acquired by ikea ) used the letter to cultivate a more european image . the letter is also used by alternative band twenty one pilots in most stylized versions of their group name . writings with this letter are usually on their official art stylized in all caps as twenty øne piløts . otherwise , officially adopted all lowercase writing is used . the band started using this letter with the launch of the blurryface album promotion , in early 2015 . see also . æ ä œ ö slashed zero . notes . . references . robert bringhurst ( 2002 ) . the elements of typographic style , pp . & nbsp ; 270 , 284 . for typographic reference to '' slashed o '' .