F. W. Woolworth Company

history . origin . the f.w . woolworth co . had the first five and dime , which sold discounted general merchandise and fixed price , usually five or ten cents , undercutting the prices of other local merchants . woolworth , as the stores popularly became known , was one of the first american retailers to put merchandise out for the shopping public to handle and select without the assistance of a sales . earlier retailers had kept all merchandise behind a counter and customers presented the clerk with a list of items they wished to buy . after working in augsbury and moore dry goods store in watertown , new york , frank winfield woolworth obtained credit from his former boss , william moore , along with some savings , to buy merchandise and open the '' woolworth 's great five cent store '' in utica , new york , on february 22 , 1879 . the store failed and closed in may 1879 , after frank earned enough money to pay back william moore . frank soon made a second attempt , and opened his '' woolworth 's great five cent store '' , using the same sign , on june 21 , 1879 , in lancaster , pennsylvania . lancaster proved a success , and frank never forgot the city for the rest of his life . frank wanted to open a second store in harrisburg , pennsylvania , and so he asked his brother charles sumner '' sum '' woolworth to join him by managing it . the harrisburg store opened as , '' 5¢ woolworth bro 's store '' on july 19 , 1879 . after a falling-out with the landlord , that store moved to york , pennsylvania , opening in march 1880 . that store did not last long either , closing three months later . frank searched for a larger , low-rent building . he found an ideal location in scranton , pennsylvania , at 125 penn avenue , and opened their '' 5¢ & 10¢ woolworth bro 's store '' on november 6 , 1880 , with sum as manager . the scranton store is where sum fully developed the brothers ' '' 5¢ & 10¢ '' merchandising model . sum spent a lot of time working the sales floor , talking with customers and employees . he often personally served customers . sales grew steadily . by 1881 , at frank 's suggestion , sum bought out his brother 's share of the scranton store in two installments , in january 1881 and 1882 . this made sum the first woolworth bro 's franchisee . in 1884 , confident enough to open another store , sum partnered with his longtime friend fred morgan kirby to open a store in wilkes barre , pennsylvania , a neighboring town to the west of scranton . fred had been working as the head of wholesale operations at augsbury and moore of watertown , new york . each man put up 600 to launch the wilkes-barre store called '' woolworth and kirby '' . fred managed the new store and , while sales were initially poor , the store soon caught on . by 1887 he used his profits to buy out sum and expand the store under his name ; sum and fred remained the best of friends . during this time , frank was expanding with more stores . sum 's approach was different ; he worked to perfect the look and feel of his scranton store . it had mahogany counters with glass dividers and glass-fronted showcases . the store was brightly lit , new , and the wooden floor was polished to a lustrous shine . the layout was soon adopted by frank for his f . w . woolworth stores and became the standard as the two brothers persuaded family members and former co-workers from moore 's to join them in forming a '' friendly rival syndicate '' of five-and-ten-cent stores . each of the syndicate chain 's stores looked similar inside and out , but operated under its founder 's name . frank woolworth provided much of the merchandise , encouraging the rivals to club together to maximize their inventory and purchasing power . at the same time , using his preference to have someone he could trust , frank brought in their cousin , seymour h . knox i , to open a store in reading , pennsylvania , under the name '' woolworth and knox '' . seymour had been managing a general store in michigan . . rise and expansion . by 1904 , there were six chains of affiliated stores operating in the united states and canada . between 1905 and 1908 , members of the woolworth syndicate followed frank 's lead to incorporate their businesses ; sum maintained that he did not need to incorporate his stores . in 1912 the syndicate agreed to a scheme crafted by frank woolworth : to join forces and incorporate as one corporate entity under the name '' f . w . woolworth company '' in a merger of all 596 stores . the stock flotation raised over 30 million for the five founders of the merged chains . they all swallowed their pride and accepted frank 's name above the door , with frank as president of the new corporation . sum woolworth , fred kirby , seymour knox , earle charlton , and william moore each became a director and vice-president . one of the '' friendly rival '' predecessor chains included several stores initially opened as woolworth & knox stores starting as early as september 20 , 1884 as well as s . h . knox & co . 5 & 10 cent stores opened after an 1889 buyout by his cousin , seymour h . knox i . knox 's chain grew to 98 u.s . and 13 canadian stores by the time of the corporate consolidation . fred m . kirby added 96 stores , earle charlton added 35 , charles sumner woolworth added 15 , and william moore added two . sum woolworth continued to maintain his home base in scranton . he was not the type to get embroiled in the politics , as executives of the different chains sought to establish themselves in the merger . as he did from the beginning , sum concentrated on improving stores , particularly in his native pennsylvania , and training up-and-coming managers . those managers eventually dispersed across the entire company , setting the style and tone of woolworth stores worldwide . in 1900 , frank launched his first development plan in the city of his first success , lancaster , pennsylvania . rather than just enlarging his store on north queen street , he bought up properties along the street in an area which was not considered a '' good '' side of town . by keeping his plans quiet , frank saw to it that real estate prices would not be inflated in that area . when he finished the real estate purchases , he announced his plan to build a building with five floors of offices above a large store . the roof had a garden and an open-air theater . the theater was a huge hit in town , and soon became the city 's social center . this project was something of a dress rehearsal for his next venture . in 1910 , frank woolworth commissioned the design and construction of the woolworth building in new york city . a pioneering early skyscraper , it was designed by american architect cass gilbert , a graduate of the mit architecture school . the building was paid for entirely in cash . it was completed in 1913 and was the tallest building in the world until 1930 . it also served as the company ’ s headquarters until the f.w . woolworth company ’ s successor , the foot locker ( now foot locker ) , sold it in 1998 . frank woolworth , president of f . w . woolworth , corporation , died in 1919 , in glen cove , new york . sum 's demeanor made him the perfect candidate to head the f . w . woolworth corporation after the death of his brother . he was non-confrontational , as everyone else positioned themselves in the company . the board of directors unanimously asked sum to take on the presidency . with his infamous modesty he declined . he did , however , agree to take the new role of chairman . company treasurer , hubert parson , took the presidency . over the following twenty-five years , sum saw four presidents come and go . he gave each one quiet-spoken advice and good counsel . as chairman , he facilitated debate and ensured issues were properly confronted and argued out by the board . for many years the company did a strictly '' five-and-ten cent '' business , but in the spring of 1932 it added a 20-cent line of merchandise . on november 13 , 1935 , the company 's directors decided to discontinue selling-price limits altogether . the stores eventually incorporated lunch counters after the success of the counters in the first store in the uk in liverpool that served as general gathering places , a precursor to the modern shopping mall food court . a woolworth ’ s lunch counter in greensboro , north carolina became the setting for the 1960 greensboro sit-ins during the civil rights movement . the woolworth 's concept was widely copied , and five-and-ten-cent stores ( also known as five-and-dime stores or dimestores ) became a 20th-century fixture in american downtowns . they would serve as anchors for suburban shopping plazas and shopping malls in the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s . criticisms that five-and-dime stores drove local merchants out of business would repeat themselves in the early 21st century , when big-box discount stores became popular . diversification . in the 1960s , the five-and-dime concept evolved into the larger discount department store format . in 1962 , woolworth 's founded a chain of large , single-floor discount stores called woolco . some of these stores were branded as winfields , after the founder 's middle name . in that same year , woolworth 's competitors opened similar retail chains that sold merchandise at a discount : the s.s . kresge opened kmart , dayton 's opened target , and sam walton opened his first wal-mart store . the following year , in 1963 , woolworth expanded into the shoe store business with the purchase of kinney shoes , which eventually created the store that woolworth would become — foot locker . by woolworth ’ s 100th anniversary in 1979 , it had become the largest department store chain in the world , according to the guinness world records . during the 1980s , the company began expansion into many different specialty store formats , including afterthoughts ( which sold jewelry and other accessories for women ) , northern reflections ( which sold cold-weather outerwear ) , rx place ( later sold to phar-mor ) , and champs sports . by 1989 , the company was pursuing an aggressive strategy of multiple specialty store formats targeted at enclosed shopping malls . the idea was that if a particular concept failed at a given mall , the company could quickly replace it with a different concept . the company aimed for ten stores in each of the country 's major shopping malls , but this never came to pass as woolworth never developed that many successful specialty store formats . also attempted was a revision of the classic woolworth store model into woolworth express , a small , mall-oriented variant which was dubbed '' a specialty variety store , stocked with everyday convenience items such as health and beauty aids , greeting cards , snack foods , cleaning supplies and school supplies ( somewhat like the non-pharmacy , mall-based locations of cvs pharmacy and other drug store chains ) . . decline . the growth and expansion of the company contributed to its downfall . the woolworth company moved away from its variety store roots and placed less emphasis on its department store chain as it focused on its specialty stores . still , the company was unable to compete with other chains that had eroded its market share . while it was a success in canada , the woolco chain closed in the united states in 1983 . europe 's largest f . w . woolworth store , in manchester , england , one of two in manchester city centre ; experienced a fire in may 1979 . despite the store being rebuilt even larger and up to the latest fire codes ; the negative stories in the press , coupled with the loss of lives , sealed its fate ; it finally closed in 1986 . during the rebuild and partly as a result of the bad press , the british operation was isolated from the parent company as woolworths plc . this proved fortuitous as the brand subsequently lasted a full twelve years longer in the united kingdom than it did in the united states . on october 15 , 1993 , woolworth 's embarked on a restructuring plan that included closing half of its 800-plus product ( business ) stores in the united states and converting its canadian stores to a closeout division named the bargain ! shop . woolco and woolworth survived in canada until 1994 , when the company sold the majority of the woolco stores to wal-mart . the woolco stores that wal-mart did not purchase were either converted to the bargain ! shop , sold to zellers or closed permanently . approximately 100 woolworth stores in canada were rebranded as the bargain ! shop , and the remainder closed . transition . amid the decline of the signature stores , woolworth began focusing on the sale of athletic goods . on january 30 , 1997 , the company acquired the mail order catalog athletic retailer eastbay . on march 17 , 1997 , wal-mart replaced woolworth 's as a component of the dow jones industrial average . analysts at the time cited the lower prices of the large discount stores and the expansion of supermarket grocery stores – which had begun to stock merchandise also sold by five-and-dime stores – as contributors to woolworth 's decline in the late 20th century . venator . on july 17 , 1997 , woolworth 's closed its remaining department stores in the u.s . and changed its corporate name to venator . in 1999 , venator moved from the woolworth building in new york city to offices on 34th street . foot locker . on october 20 , 2001 , the company changed names again ; taking the name of its top retail performer and became foot locker , inc . , which woolworth started in 1974 . the corporate history of woolworth is legally included in the history of foot locker , inc . , which is the legal continuation of woolworth . as part of celebrating f . w . woolworth 's centennial on the new york stock exchange on june 26 , 2012 , a news release featured 1912 woolworth 's store and a 2012 foot locker store . . influence on popular culture . woolworth was the pioneer of '' five-and-dime '' -style retailing . in 1880 , woolworth first sold manufactured christmas tree ornaments , which proved extremely popular . in 1929 , in atlantic city , new jersey , sam foster ( founder of foster grant eyewear ) sold sunglasses from his counter in woolworth ’ s on the city 's famous boardwalk , which became a great hit with the sunbathing public . on february 1 , 1960 , four african-american students from north carolina agricultural and technical state university ( nc a & t ) started the greensboro sit-ins at a '' whites only '' lunch counter in the greensboro , north carolina store . ( the store is now a museum . ) on may 28 , 1963 , 14 activists - including tougaloo college chaplain , reverend ed king and professors john salter jr . and lois chaffee ( who were white ) , and students pearlena lewis , anne moody ( who later published coming of age in mississippi ) , and memphis norman ( who were black ) , and joan trumpauer ( who was white ) - protested jim crow segregation via a sit-in at woolworth 's '' whites only '' lunch counter in jackson , mississippi . bill minor , then the mississippi correspondent covering civil rights events for the new orleans times-picayune and who was there that day , says the jackson woolworth 's sit-in was '' the signature event of the protest movement in jackson . the first one there was with real violence . '' the following year , the civil rights act of 1964 was passed into law . in 1976 , david bowie memorably called his look , '' a cross between nijinsky and woolworth ’ s . '' a memorable scene in the coen brothers ' 2000 film o brother , where art thou ? , set in rural mississippi in 1937 , entails george clooney 's character being physically thrown out of an f.w . woolworth co . store and admonished by the manager , '' and stay out o ' the woolsworth sic ! '' a woolworth 's building still remains ( albeit as an antique store ) in bakersfield , california , and includes a still-functioning diner . . greensboro sit-in . on february 1 , 1960 , four black students sat down at a segregated lunch counter in a greensboro , north carolina , woolworth 's store . they were refused service , touching off six months of sit-ins and boycott that became a landmark event in the civil rights movement . in 1993 , an eight-foot section of the lunch counter was moved to the smithsonian institution and the store site now contains a civil rights museum , which had its grand opening on monday , february 1 , 2010 , the 50th anniversary of the beginning of the sit-ins . imitation sit-ins also occurred in other cities where there were segregated lunch counters at woolworth 's . in roanoke , virginia on august 27 , 1960 , two women and a boy '' . sat at the lunch counter and ordered a slice of pie , a soda and a sundae , all under the watchful eyes of the biracial committee which had organized the event . '' the names of the three blacks were not reported at the time , and are now unknown . while the incident was uneventful , other sit-ins were completed , also without incident , at 17 other segregated lunch counters in roanoke . . presidents . frank winfield woolworth ( 1852–1919 ) from founding to 1919 hubert templeton parson 1919 to 1932 byron d . miller 1932 to 1935 this and subsequent presidents through the present from funding universe charles deyo 1935 to 1946 alfred cornwell 1946 to 1954 james t . leftwich 1954 to 1958 robert c . kirkwood 1958 to 1965 lester a . burcham 1965 to 1970 john s . roberts 1970 to 1975 edward f . gibbons 1975 to 1978 w . robert harris 1978 to ? robert l . jennings 1984 to 1987 frederick e . hennig 1987 to 1995 jack adams 1993-1994 ( interim ceo for restructuring ) roger n . farah 1994 to 2000 . oversaw company 's name change to venator in 1997 . matthew d . serra 2001 to 2009 . oversaw company 's name change to foot locker in 2001 . kenneth c . hicks , 2009 to 2014 . richard a . johnson , 2014–present . in later years the chairman rather than the president was frequently the chief executive officer . gibbons ( 1919-1982 ) succeeded burcham ( 1913-1987 ) as chairman-ceo in 1978 and died in office , succeeded by vice chairman john w . lynn ( 1921-2013 ) who was succeeded in 1986 by president ( since 1983 , replacing richard l . anderson ( d . 2015 ) ) harold sells . farah joined the company as chairman and ceo in december 1994 and hennig was replaced by dale w . hilpert as president in may 1995 . non-american retail users of the woolworth name . former f.w . woolworth subsidiaries . . currently in business . deutsche woolworth gmbh & company ohg ( founded in 1927 ) , the german unit of f.w . woolworth has operated independently since 1998 ; it owns the rights of the woolworth trademark in continental europe . woolworth mexicana operates a chain of small variety stores in mexico , sold in december 1997 to control dinamico s.a . by foot locker inc and is now a subsidiary of grupo comercial control , s.a . de c.v . . defunct . woolworth canada was the canadian unit of f.w . woolworth founded in the 1920s and based in north york , ontario . in addition to the woolworth stores , other banners of woolworth canada included woolco , the bargain ! shop , kinney , foot locker , northern reflections , northern getaway , northern traditions , silk & satin and randy river . the division continued to be called woolworth canada even after the last stores under the woolworth nameplate disappeared from canada in 1994 . woolworth canada was eventually renamed venator group canada in 1998 and finally foot locker canada in 2001 . woolworths group plc originally was the british unit of f.w . woolworth 's , but operated independently as a separate company from 1982 , running stores in the uk , isle of man , jersey and guernsey . on november 26 , 2008 , woolworth 's group plc announced that they were in too much debt to maintain their outgoing payments . the remaining british woolworth 's stores closed by january 6 , 2009 , with the loss of almost 30,000 jobs . shop direct group purchased the uk woolworths and operated it as an online entity until 2015 . . others . woolworths group is the largest retail corporation in australia , operating a variety of supermarket and other retail chains in australia and new zealand . the name '' woolworths '' was legally taken to capitalize on the f.w . woolworth name since they did not do business in australia , and had not registered the trademark there , but is in no other way connected to the u.s . or u.k . woolworths . woolworths is an upmarket retail chain in south africa selling goods of a comparable nature to marks & spencer stores in the united kingdom . the south african company also operates stores in bahrain , botswana , ghana , kenya , lesotho , mauritius , mozambique , namibia , nigeria , oman , qatar , swaziland , tanzania , uganda , united arab emirates , zambia , and zimbabwe . woolworth 's on prince william-henry street in bridgetown , barbados operates independently , having split from the british branch in 1982 . it was established in the 1950s , stocking goods shipped from britain .