Electric blues

early regional styles . the blues , like jazz , probably began to be amplified in the late 1930s . v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to rock : the definitive guide to rock , pop , and soul ( backbeat books , 3rd ed . , 2002 ) , pp . 1351-2 . the first star of the electric blues is generally recognized as being t-bone walker ; born in texas but moving to los angeles in the mid-1930s , he combined blues with elements of swing music and jazz in a long and prolific career . after world war ii , amplified blues music became popular in american cities that had seen widespread african american migration , such as chicago , e . m . komara , encyclopedia of the blues ( routledge , 2006 ) , p . 118 . memphis , m . a . humphry , '' holy blues : the gospel tradition , '' in l . cohn , m . k . aldin and b . bastin , eds , nothing but the blues : the music and the musicians ( abbeville press , 1993 ) , p . 179 . detroit , g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 53 . st . louis , and the west coast . the initial impulse was to be heard above the noise of lively rent party . v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat books , 3rd ed . , 2003 ) , pp . 694-95 . playing in small venues , electric blues bands tended to remain modest in size compared with larger jazz bands . in its early stages electric blues typically used amplified electric guitars , double bass ( which was progressively replaced by bass guitar ) , and harmonica played through a microphone and a power amp or a guitar amplifier . by the late 1940s several chicago-based blues artists had begun to use amplification , including john lee williamson and johnny shines . early recordings in the new style were made in 1947 and 1948 by musicians such as johnny young , floyd jones , and snooky pryor . the format was perfected by muddy waters , who utilized various small groups that provided a strong rhythm section and powerful harmonica . his '' i ca n't be satisfied '' ( 1948 ) was followed by a series of ground-breaking recordings . m . a . humphry , '' holy blues : the gospel tradition , '' in l . cohn , m . k . aldin and b . bastin , eds , nothing but the blues : the music and the musicians ( abbeville press , 1993 ) , p . 180 . chicago blues is influenced to a large extent by the delta blues style , because many performers had migrated from the mississippi region . howlin ' wolf , muddy waters , willie dixon and jimmy reed were all born in mississippi and moved to chicago during the great migration . in addition to electric guitar , harmonica , and a rhythm section of bass and drums , some performers such as j . t . brown who played in elmore james 's bands or j . b . lenoir 's also used saxophones , largely as a supporting instrument . little walter , sonny boy williamson ii and big walter horton were among the best known harmonica ( called '' blues harp '' by blues musicians ) players of the early chicago blues scene and the sound of electric instruments and harmonica is often seen as characteristic of electric chicago blues . r . unterberger , music usa : a coast-to-coast tour of american music : the artists , the venues , the stories , and the essential recordings ( rough guides , 1999 ) , p . 250 . muddy waters and elmore james were known for their innovative use of slide electric guitar . g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 95 . howlin ' wolf and muddy waters were for their deep , '' gravelly '' voices . g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 185 . bassist and composer willie dixon played a major role on the chicago blues scene . he composed and wrote many blues standard songs of the period , such as '' hoochie coochie man '' , '' i just want to make love to you '' ( both penned for muddy waters ) and , '' wang dang doodle '' , '' spoonful '' and '' back door man '' for howlin ' wolf . g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 56 . most artists of the chicago blues style recorded for the chicago-based chess records and checker records labels , there were also smaller blues labels in this era including vee-jay records and j.o.b . records . victor coelho , cambridge companions to music ( cambridge : cambridge university press , 2003 ) , p . 98 . in the late 1950s , the west side style blues emerged in chicago with major figures including magic sam , jimmy dawkins , magic slim and otis rush . e . m . komara , encyclopedia of the blues ( routledge , 2006 ) , p . 49 . west side clubs were more accessible to white audiences , but performers were mainly black , or part of mixed combos . r . unterberger , music usa : a coast-to-coast tour of american music : the artists , the venues , the stories , and the essential recordings ( rough guides , 1999 ) , p . 256 . west side blues incorporated elements of blues rock but with a greater emphasis on standards and traditional blues song forms . c . rotella , good with their hands : boxers , bluesmen , and other characters from the rust belt ( chicago : university of california press , 2004 ) , pp . 68-70 . albert king , buddy guy , and luther allison had a west side style that was dominated by amplified electric lead guitar . memphis , with its flourishing acoustic blues scene based in beale street , also developed an electric blues sound during the early 1950s . sam phillips ' sun records company recorded musicians such as howlin ' wolf ( before he moved to chicago ) , willie nix , ike turner , and b.b.king . j . broven , record makers and breakers : voices of the independent rock สนnสน roll pioneers music in american life ( university of illinois press , 2009 ) , pp . 149-54 . other memphis blues musicians involved with sun records included joe hill louis , willie johnson and pat hare who introduced electric guitar techniques such as distorted and power chords , anticipating elements of heavy metal music . robert palmer , '' church of the sonic guitar '' , pp . 13-38 in anthony decurtis , present tense , duke university press , 1992 , pp . 24-27 . these players had an influence on early rock & rollers and rockabilly , many of whom also recorded for sun records . after phillips discovered elvis presley in 1954 , the sun label turned to the rapidly expanding white audience and started recording mostly rock ' n ' roll . v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat books , 3rd ed . , 2003 ) , pp . 690-91 . booker t . & the m.g . 's carried the electric blues style into the 1960s . detroit blues john lee hooker pursued a unique brand of electric blues based on his deep rough voice accompanied by a single electric guitar . though not directly influenced by boogie woogie , his '' groovy '' style is sometimes called '' guitar boogie '' . his first hit , '' boogie chillen '' , reached 1 on the r & b charts in 1949 . l . bjorn , before motown ( university of michigan press , 2001 ) , p . 175 . he continued to play and record until his death in 2001 . p . buckley , the rough guide to rock ( rough guides , 3rd ed . , 2003 ) , p . 505 . the new orleans blues musician guitar slim recorded '' the things that i used to do '' ( 1953 ) , which featured an electric guitar solo with distorted overtones and became a major r & b hit in 1954 . it is regarded as one of the rock and roll hall of fame 's 500 songs that shaped rock and roll , and contributed to the development of soul music . r . unterberger , '' louisiana blues '' , in v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , eds , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( milwaukee , wi : backbeat books , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , , pp . 687-8 . in the 1950s , blues had a huge influence on mainstream american popular music . while popular musicians like bo diddley and chuck berry , g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 11 . both recording for chess , were influenced by the chicago blues , their enthusiastic playing styles departed from the melancholy aspects of blues and played a major role in the development of rock and roll . m . campbell , ed . , popular music in america : and the beat goes on ( cengage learning , 3rd ed . , 2008 ) , p . 168 . chicago blues also influenced louisiana 's zydeco music , g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 236 . with clifton chenier g . herzhaft , encyclopedia of the blues ( university of arkansas press , 1997 ) , p . 35 . using blues accents . zydeco musicians used electric solo guitar and cajun arrangements of blues standards . british electric styles . british blues emerged from the skiffle and folk club scene of the late 1950s , particularly in london , which included the playing of american acoustic blues . critical was the visit of muddy waters in 1958 , who initially shocked british audiences by playing amplified electric blues , but who was soon performing to ecstatic crowds and rave reviews . v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , eds , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , pp . 700-2 . this inspired guitarist and blues harpist cyril davies and guitarist alexis korner to plug in and they began to play a high-powered electric blues that became the model for the subgenre , forming the band blues incorporated . blues incorporated was something of a clearing house for british blues musicians in the later 1950s and early 1960s , with many joining , or sitting in on sessions . these included future rolling stones , mick jagger , charlie watts and brian jones ; cream founders jack bruce and ginger baker ; and graham bond and long john baldry . blues incorporated were given a residency at the marquee club and it was from there that in 1962 they took the name of the first british blues album , r & b from the marquee for decca , but split before its release . the model of british rhythm and blues was emulated by a number of bands including the rolling stones , the animals , and the yardbirds . the other key focus for british blues was around john mayall who moved to london in the early 1960s , eventually forming the bluesbreakers , whose members at various times included , jack bruce , aynsley dunbar , eric clapton , peter green and mick taylor . the blues breakers with eric clapton ( beano ) album ( 1966 ) is considered one of the seminal british blues recordings . t . rawlings , a . neill , c . charlesworth and c . white , then , now and rare british beat 1960-1969 ( omnibus press , 2002 ) , p . 130 . it was notable for its driving rhythms and clapton 's rapid blues licks with a full distorted sound derived from a gibson les paul and a marshall amp , which became something of a classic combination for british blues ( and later rock ) guitarists . m . roberty and c . charlesworth , the complete guide to the music of eric clapton ( omnibus press , 1995 ) , p . 11 . it also made clear the primacy of the guitar , seen as a distinctive characteristic of the subgenre . clapton left to form cream with baker and bruce and his replacement was peter green , who in turn ( with the then bluesbreaker 's rhythm section mick fleetwood and john mcvie ) left in 1967 to form peter green 's fleetwood mac . r . brunning , the fleetwood mac story : rumours and lies ( omnibus press , 2004 ) , pp . 1-15 . incorporating elements of rock led these bands to a hybrid form known as blues rock . blues rock . blues rock combines blues with rock . with some notable exceptions , blues rock has largely been played by white musicians , bringing a rock sensitivity to blues standards and forms and it played a major role in widening the appeal of the blues to white american audiences . in 1963 , american guitarist lonnie mack had developed a blues rock guitar style , releasing several guitar instrumentals , the best-known of which are the hit singles '' memphis '' ( billboard 5 ) and '' wham ! '' ( billboard 24 ) . p . prown , h . p . newquist , j . f . eiche , legends of rock guitar : the essential reference of rock 's greatest guitarists ( hal leonard corporation , 1997 ) , p . 25 . the paul butterfield blues band and canned heat were among the earliest exponents and '' attempted to play long , involved improvisations which were commonplace on jazz records '' . in the uk , blues rock was popularized by bands as fleetwood mac , free , savoy brown and the groups formed around the three major guitarists that emerged from the yardbirds , eric clapton , jeff beck and jimmy page . after leaving the yardbirds and his work with john mayall and the bluesbreakers , eric clapton formed supergroups cream , blind faith and derek and the dominos , followed by a solo career . in the late 1960s jeff beck added elements heavy rock with his band , the jeff beck group . jimmy page formed the new yardbirds , which became led zeppelin . many of the songs on their first two albums and occasionally later in their careers , were expansions on traditional blues songs . image : johnny winter.jpg thumb 200px right johnny winter in 2007 . janis joplin , johnny winter , and the j . geils band later popularized the style in the us . the revolutionary electric guitar playing of jimi hendrix with the experience and band of gypsys , influenced blues rock guitarists . blues rock bands like allman brothers band , lynyrd skynyrd , and eventually zz top from the american south , incorporated country elements into their style to produce southern rock . v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to rock : the definitive guide to rock , pop , and soul ( backbeat books , 3rd edn . , 2002 ) , p . 1333 . by the 1970s , blues rock had become heavier and more riff-based , exemplified by the work of led zeppelin and deep purple , and the lines between blues rock and hard rock '' were barely visible '' , as bands began recording rock-style albums . the genre was continued in the 1970s by figures such as george thorogood and pat travers . except perhaps for groups such as status quo and foghat in the uk , who moved towards a form of high energy and repetitive boogie rock , bands moved towards heavy metal and blues rock began to slip out of the mainstream . p . prown , h . p . newquist and jon f . eiche , legends of rock guitar : the essential reference of rock 's greatest guitarists ( hal leonard corporation , 1997 ) , p . 113 . more recently , the white stripes , v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat books , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , p . 600 . the black crowes , p . buckley , the rough guide to rock ( rough guides , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , p . 99 . the black keys , a . petrusicht , still moves : lost songs , lost highways , and the search for the next american music ( macmillan , 2008 ) , p . 87 . clutch , the jon spencer blues explosion , s . taylor , a to x of alternative music ( continuum , 2006 ) , p . 242 . and joe bonamassa have explored a more roots oriented , but edgier style . . electric texas blues . texas had had a long history of major acoustic blues performers like blind lemon jefferson and lightnin ' hopkins , but by the 1940s many texas blues artists had moved elsewhere to further their careers , including t-bone walker who relocated to los angeles to record his most influential records in the 1940s . his r & b influenced backing and saxophone imitating lead guitar sound would become an influential part of the electric blues sound . goree carter 's '' rock awhile '' ( 1949 ) featured an over-driven electric guitar style and has been cited as a strong contender for the '' first rock and roll record '' title . robert palmer , '' church of the sonic guitar '' , pp . 13-38 in anthony decurtis , present tense , duke university press , 1992 , p . 19 . the state r & b recording industry was based in houston with labels like duke/peacock , which in the 1950s provided a base for artists who would later pursue the electric texas blues sound , including johnny copeland and albert collins . freddie king , a major influence on electric blues , was born in texas , but moved to chicago as a teenager . his instrumental number '' hide away '' ( 1961 ) , was emulated by british blues artists including eric clapton . m . roberty and c . charlesworth , the complete guide to the music of eric clapton ( omnibus press , 1995 ) , p . 11 . in the late 1960s and early 1970s the texas electric blues scene began to flourish , influenced by country music and blues rock , particularly in the clubs of austin . the diverse style often featured instruments like keyboards and horns , but placed particular emphasis on powerful lead guitar breaks . the most prominent artists to emerge in this era were the brothers johnny and edgar winter , who combined traditional and southern styles . in the 1970s jimmie formed the fabulous thunderbirds and in the 1980s his brother stevie ray vaughan broke through to mainstream success with his virtuoso guitar playing , as did zz top with their brand of southern rock . e . m . komara , encyclopedia of the blues ( routledge , 2006 ) , p . 50 . . contemporary electric blues . since the end of the 1960s electric blues has declined in mainstream popularity , but retained a strong following in the us , britain and elsewhere , with many musicians that began their careers as early as the 1950s continuing to record and perform , occasionally producing breakthrough stars . in the 1970s and 80s it absorbed a number of different influences , including particularly rock and soul music . stevie ray vaughan was the biggest star influenced by blues rock and opened the way for guitarists like kenny wayne shepherd and jonny lang . r . weissman , blues : the basics ( routledge , 2005 ) , p . 140 . practitioners of soul-influenced electric blues in the 1970s and 80s included joe louis walker and most successfully robert cray , whose strong persuader album ( 1986 ) , with its fluid guitar sound and an intimate vocal style , produced a major crossover hit . v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , eds , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , pp . 703-4 . veteran linsey alexander is known for his original chicago blues influenced by soul , r & b , and funk . since her breakthrough commercial success nick of time in 1989 bonnie raitt has been one of the leading artists in acoustic and electric blues , doing much to promote the profile of older blues artists . r . weissman , blues : the basics ( routledge , 2005 ) , pp . 131-2 . after the renewed success of john lee hooker with his collaborative album the healer ( 1989 ) , v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat books , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , p . 245 . several artists began to return to electric blues , including gary moore , beginning with still got the blues ( 1990 ) v . bogdanov , c . woodstra , s . t . erlewine , all music guide to the blues : the definitive guide to the blues ( backbeat books , 3rd edn . , 2003 ) , pp . 410-12 . and eric clapton with from the cradle ( 1994 ) . d . dicaire , more blues singers : biographies of 50 artists from the later 20th century ( mcfarland , 2001 ) , p . 203 . . see also . list of electric blues musicians . notes .