Fasting

health effects . medical application . fasting is always practised prior to surgery or other procedures that require general anesthesia because of the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents after induction of anesthesia ( i.e . , vomiting and inhaling the vomit , causing life-threatening aspiration pneumonia ) . additionally , certain medical tests , such as cholesterol testing ( lipid panel ) or certain blood glucose measurements require fasting for several hours so that a baseline can be established . in the case of a lipid panel , failure to fast for a full 12 hours ( including vitamins ) will guarantee an elevated triglyceride measurement . . mental health . in one review , fasting improved alertness , mood , and subjective feelings of well-being , possibly improving overall symptoms of depression . . weight loss . fasting for periods shorter than 24 hours ( intermittent fasting ) has been shown to be effective for weight loss in obese and healthy adults and to maintain lean body mass . . complications . in rare occurrences , fasting can lead to the potentially fatal refeeding syndrome upon reinstatement of food intake due to electrolyte imbalance . . historical medical studies . fasting was historically studied on population under famine and hunger strikes , which led to the alternative name of '' starvation diet '' , as a diet with 0 calories intake per day . . other effects . it has been argued that fasting makes one more appreciative of food . . political application . fasting is often used as a tool to make a political statement , to protest , or to bring awareness to a cause . a hunger strike is a method of non-violent resistance in which participants fast as an act of political protest , or to provoke feelings of guilt , or to achieve a goal such as a policy change . a spiritual fast incorporates personal spiritual beliefs with the desire to express personal principles , sometimes in the context of a social injustice . garcia , m . ( 2007 ) the gospel of cesar chavez : my faith in action sheed & ward publishing p . 103 the political leader gandhi undertook several long fasts as political and social protests . gandhi 's fasts had a significant impact on the british raj and the indian population generally . in northern ireland in 1981 , a prisoner , bobby sands , was part of the 1981 irish hunger strike , protesting for better rights in prison . on this day 1981 : violence erupts at irish hunger strike protest , bbc news sands had just been elected to the british parliament and died after 66 days of not eating . his funeral was attended by 100,000 people and the strike ended only after nine other men died . in all , ten men survived without food for 46 to 73 days . césar chávez undertook a number of spiritual fasts , including a 25-day fast in 1968 promoting the principle of nonviolence , and a fast of 'thanksgiving and hope ' to prepare for pre-arranged civil disobedience by farm workers . shaw , r . ( 2008 ) beyond the fields : cesar chavez , the ufw , and the struggle for justice in the 21st century university of california press , p.92 chávez regarded a spiritual fast as '' a personal spiritual transformation '' . espinosa , g . garcia , m mexican american religions : spirituality activism and culture ( 2008 ) duke university press , p 108 other progressive campaigns have adopted the tactic . shaw , r . ( 2008 ) beyond the fields : cesar chavez , the ufw , and the struggle for justice in the 21st century university of california press , p.93 according to an anonymous uyghur local government employee quoted in a radio free asia article , during ramadan 2020 ( april 23 to may 23 ) , residents of makit county ( maigaiti ) , kashgar prefecture , xinjiang , china were told they could face punishment for fasting including being sent to a re-education camp . . religious views . fasting is practiced in various religions . examples include lent in christianity ; yom kippur , tisha b'av , fast of esther , tzom gedalia , the seventeenth of tamuz , and the tenth of tevet in judaism . muslims refrain from eating during the hours of daytime for one month , ramadan , every year . details of fasting practices differ . eastern orthodox christians fast during specified fasting seasons of the year , which include not only the better-known great lent , but also fasts on every wednesday and friday ( except on special holidays ) , together with extended fasting periods before christmas ( the nativity fast ) , after easter ( the apostles fast ) and in early august ( the dormition fast ) . members of latter day saint movement ( mormons ) generally fast for 24 hours on the first sunday of each month . like muslims , they refrain from all drinking and eating unless they are children or are physically unable to fast . fasting is also a feature of ascetic traditions in religions such as hinduism and buddhism . mahayana traditions that follow the brahma 's net sutra may recommend that the laity fast '' during the six days of fasting each month and the three months of fasting each year '' brahma 's net sutra , minor precept 30 . members of the baháʼí faith observe a nineteen day fast from sunrise to sunset during march each year . baháʼí faith . in the baháʼí faith , fasting is observed from sunrise to sunset during the baháʼí month of 'ala ' ( 1 or 2 march – 19 or 20 march ) . bahá ' u'lláh established the guidelines in the kitáb-i-aqdas . it is the complete abstaining from both food and drink during daylight hours ( including abstaining from smoking ) . consumption of prescribed medications is not restricted . observing the fast is an individual obligation and is binding on baháʼís between 15 years ( considered the age of maturity ) and 70 years old . exceptions to fasting include individuals younger than 15 or older than 70 ; those suffering illness ; women who are pregnant , nursing , or menstruating ; travellers who meet specific criteria ; individuals whose profession involves heavy labor and those who are very sick , where fasting would be considered dangerous . for those involved in heavy labor , they are advised to eat in private and generally to have simpler or smaller meals than are normal . along with obligatory prayer , it is one of the greatest obligations of a baháʼí . in the first half of the 20th century , shoghi effendi , explains : '' it is essentially a period of meditation and prayer , of spiritual recuperation , during which the believer must strive to make the necessary readjustments in his inner life , and to refresh and reinvigorate the spiritual forces latent in his soul . its significance and purpose are , therefore , fundamentally spiritual in character . fasting is symbolic , and a reminder of abstinence from selfish and carnal desires . '' . buddhism . buddhism monks and nuns following the vinaya rules commonly do not eat each day after the noon meal . this is not considered a fast but rather a disciplined regimen aiding in meditation and good health . purple-red sweet potatoes , amaranth seeds , nuts and shama millet are allowed . popular fasting dishes in western part of india include farari chevdo , sabudana khichadi or peanut soup . in shri vidya , one is forbidden to fast because the devi is within them , and starving would in return starve the god . the only exception in srividya for fasting is on the anniversary of the day one 's parents died . mahabharata : anushasana parva ( book 13 ) yudhishthira asks bhishma , '' what constitutes the highest penances ? '' bheeshma states ( in section 103 ) '' . there is no penance that is superior to abstention from food ! in this connection is recited the ancient narrative of the discourse between bhagiratha and the illustrious brahman ( the grandsire of the creation ) . bhagiratha says , the vow of fast was known to indra . he kept it a secret but usanas first made it known to the universe . bhagiratha says , '' in my opinion , there is no penance higher than fast . '' bhagiratha did many sacrifices and gave gifts and says '' the present that flowed from me were as copious as the stream of the ganga herself . ( but . ) it is not through the merits of these acts that i have attained this region . '' bhagiratha observed the vow of fasting and reached '' the region of brahman '' bheeshma advises yudhishthira , '' do thou practice this vow ( of fasting ) of very superior merit that is not known to all . '' in section 109 , of the same book , yudhishthira asks bheesma '' what is the highest , most beneficial '' and fruitful '' of all kinds of fasts in the world '' . bheeshma says '' fasting on the 12th day of the lunar month '' and worship krishna , for the whole year . krishna is worshipped in twelve forms as kesava , narayana , madhava , govinda , vishnu , the slayer of madhu , who covered the universe in three steps , the dwarf ( who beguiled mahabali ) , sridhara , hrishikesha , padmanabha , damodara , pundhariksha . and upendra . after fasting , one must feed a number of brahmans . bheeshma says '' the illustrious vishnu , that ancient being , has himself said that there is no fast that possesses merit superior to what attach to fast of this kind . '' in section 106 , of the same book , yudhishthira says , '' the disposition ( of observing fasts ) is seen in all orders of men including the very mlechchhas . what is the fruit that is earned in this world by the man that observes fasts ? '' bheeshma replies that he had asked angiras '' the very same question that thou has asked me today . '' the illustrious angiras says brahmans and kshatriya should fast for three nights at a stretch is the maximum . a person who fasts on the eight and fourteenth day of the dark fortnight '' becomes freed from maladies of all kinds and possessed of great energy . '' fasting for one meal every day during a lunar month gets various boons according to the month in which he fasts . for example , fasting for one meal every day during margashirsha , '' acquires great wealth and corn '' . vaishnavism . in some specific periods of time ( like chaturmas or ekadashi fasting ) it is said that one who fasts on these days and properly doing spiritual practice on these days like associating with devotees -sangha , chanting holy names of hari ( vishnu , narayana , rama , krishna ) and similar ( shravanam , kirtanam vishno ) may be delivered from sins . islam . in islam , fasting requires abstinence from food , drink , drugs ( including nicotine ) and sexual activity . however , there is also a broader sense of fasting which includes abstaining from any falsehood in speech and action , abstaining from any ignorant and indecent speech , and from arguing and fighting . therefore , fasting strengthens control of impulses and helps develop good behavior . during the sacred month of ramadan , believers strive to purify body and soul and increase their taqwa ( good deeds and god-consciousness ) . this purification of body and soul harmonizes the inner and outer spheres of an individual . muslims aim to improve their body by reducing food intake and maintaining a healthier lifestyle . overindulgence in food is discouraged and eating only enough to silence the pain of hunger is encouraged . muslims believe they should be active , tending to all their commitments and never falling short of any duty . on a moral level , believers strive to attain the most virtuous characteristics and apply them to their daily situations . they try to show compassion , generosity and mercy to others , exercise patience , and control their anger . in essence , muslims are trying to improve what they believe to be good moral character and habits . ramadan . fasting is obligatory for every muslim one month in the year , during ramadan . each day , the fast begins at dawn and ends at sunset . during this time muslims are asked to remember those who are less fortunate than themselves as well as bringing them closer to god . non obligatory fasts are two days a week as well as the middle of the month , as recommended by the prophet muhammad . although fasting at ramadan is fard ( obligatory ) , exceptions are made for persons in particular circumstances . . optional fasts . muslims are encouraged to fast optionally outside of ramadan as well , as a way of asking forgiveness from or showing gratitude to god and especially during the following days : ashura , the islamic counterpart to the jewish fast of yom kippur , to thank god for saving moses and the jewish people from egypt . it is also encouraged to fast the day before , or the day after , or all three days . six fasts of shawwal , any six days in the month following ramadan . during the first nine days of the month of dhu al-hijjah , i.e . the nine days before eid al-adha , and from these especially on the day of arafah , the day before eid al-adha . outside of ramadan and the above recommended dates , muslims can fast anytime , except for the forbidden days . styles of fasting mentioned in the sunnah include : ayyam al-bīḍ or '' the white days '' , the three days of the full moon . these fall on the 13th , 14th , and 15th of each islamic month . fasting in this style results in 32 optional fasts in a lunar year , as fasting in ramadan is mandatory and it is forbidden to fast on the 13th of dhu al-hijjah . fasting on monday and thursday every week . fasting in this style results in around 90 optional fasts in a lunar year . fast of david : fasting alternate days the whole year round . this style of fasting is attributed to the prophet david . the discouragement of fasting on friday alone without also fasting on either thursday or saturday is lifted for those fasting consistently in this style . it results in around 140 optional fasts in a lunar year , which is around 355 days long . forbidden days . islam forbids fasting on certain days . ismail kamus ( 1993 ) . hidup bertaqwa ( 2nd ed . ) . kuala lumpur : at tafkir enterprise . . jainism . prior to undertaking a jain fast , a person must make a vow , or a formal statement of intent . . judaism . fasting for jews means completely abstaining from food and drink , including water . traditionally observant jews fast six days of the year . with the exception of yom kippur , fasting is never permitted on shabbat , for the commandment of keeping shabbat is biblically ordained and overrides the later rabbinically instituted fast days . ( the optional minor fast of the tenth of tevet could also override the shabbat , but the current calendar system prevents this from ever occurring . ) yom kippur is considered to be the most important day of the jewish year-cycle and fasting as a means of repentance is expected of every jewish man or woman above the age of bar mitzvah and bat mitzvah respectively . this is the only fast day mentioned in the torah ( leviticus 23:26-32 ) . it is so important to fast on this day , that only those who would be put in mortal danger by fasting are exempt , such as the ill or frail ( endangering a life is against a core principle of judaism . those that do eat on this day are encouraged to eat as little as possible at a time and to avoid a full meal . for some , fasting on yom kippur is considered more important than the prayers of this holy day . if one fasts , even if one is at home in bed , one is considered as having participated in the full religious service . the second major day of fasting is tisha b'av , the day approximately 2500 years ago on which the siege of jerusalem ( 587 bc ) , as well as on which the siege of jerusalem ( 70 ) about 2000 years ago , and later after the bar kokhba revolt when the jews were banished from jerusalem , the day of tisha b'av was the one allowed exception . tisha b'av ends a the three weeks beginning with the fast of the 17th of tammuz . this is also the day when observant jews remember the many tragedies which have befallen the jewish people , including the holocaust . tisha b'av and yom kippur are the major fasts and are observed from sunset to the following day 's dusk . the remaining four fasts are considered minor . fasting is only observed from sunrise to dusk , and there is more leniency if the fast represents too much of a hardship to a sick or weak person , or pregnant or nursing woman . the four public but minor fast days are : the fast of gedaliah on the day after rosh hashanah the fast of the 10th of tevet the fast of the 17th of tammuz the fast of esther , which takes place immediately before purim there are other minor customary fast days , but these are not universally observed , and they include : '' bahab , '' ( literally an acronym for '' monday , thursday , monday '' ) the first two mondays and first thursday of the months cheshvan and iyar ( postponed by a week if monday is the first of the month . ) '' yom kippur katan , '' ( literally '' little yom kippur '' ) the day before every rosh chodesh , moved back to thursday if that day is saturday the fast of the firstborn , on the day before passover , which applies only to first-born sons ; this obligation is usually avoided by participating in a siyum and ritual meal that takes precedence over fasting . it is an ashkenazic tradition for a bride and groom to fast on their wedding day before the ceremony as the day represents a personal yom kippur . in some congregations , repentance prayers that are said on yom kippur service are included by the bride and groom in their private prayers before the wedding ceremony . aside from these official days of fasting , jews may take upon themselves personal or communal fasts , often to seek repentance in the face of tragedy or some impending calamity . for example , a fast is sometimes observed if a sefer torah is dropped . the length of the fast varies , and some jews will reduce the length of the fast through tzedakah , or charitable acts . mondays and thursdays are considered especially auspicious days for fasting . traditionally , one also fasted upon awakening from an unexpected bad dream although this tradition is rarely kept nowadays . in the time of the talmud , drought seems to have been a particularly frequent inspiration for fasts . in modern times as well the israeli chief rabbinate has occasionally declared fasts in periods of drought . sikhism . sikhism does not promote fasting except for medical reasons . the sikh gurus discourage the devotee from engaging in this ritual as it '' brings no spiritual benefit to the person '' . the sikh holy scripture , sri guru granth sahib tell us : '' fasting , daily rituals , and austere self-discipline – those who keep the practice of these , are rewarded with less than a shell . '' ( guru granth sahib ang 216 ) . if you keep fast , then do it a way so that you adopt the compassion , well being and ask for good will of everyone . '' let your mind be content , and be kind to all beings . in this way , your fast will be successful . '' ( guru granth sahib ji , ang 299 ) serve god who alone is your savior instead indulge into ritual , he is only one who will save you every where : '' i do not keep fasts , nor do i observe the month of ramadaan . i serve only the one , who will protect me in the end . 1 '' ( guru granth sahib ji , ang 1136 ) if you keep fast , to count everyday pledge yourself you will act honest , sincere , controls your desires , mediate . this is a way how you make yourself free of five thieves : '' on the ninth day ( naomi ) of the month , make a vow to speak the truth , and your sexual desire , anger and desire shall be eaten up . on the tenth day , regulate your ten doors ; on the eleventh day , know that the lord is one . on the twelfth day , the five thieves are subdued , and then , o nanak , the mind is pleased and appeased . observe such a fast as this , o pandit , o religious scholar ; of what use are all the other teachings ? 2 '' ( guru granth sahib ji , ang 1245 ) goal of human is to meet the lord-groom , so guru sahib ji says : '' one who discards this grain , is practicing hypocrisy . she is neither a happy soul-bride , nor a widow . those who claim in this world that they live on milk alone , secretly eat whole loads of food . 3 without this grain , time does not pass in peace . forsaking this grain , one does not meet the lord of the world . '' ( guru granth sahib ji , ang 873 ) '' fasting on ekadashi , adoration of thakurs ( stones ) one remains away from hari engaged in the maya and omens . without the guru 's word in the company of saints one does not get refuge no matter how good one looks . '' ( bhai gurdas ji , vaar 7 ) . taoism . the bigu ( 辟谷 '' avoiding grains '' ) fasting practice originated as a daoist technique for becoming a xian ( 仙 '' transcendent ; immortal '' ) , and later became a traditional chinese medicine cure for the sanshi ( 三尸 '' three corpses ; the malevolent , life-shortening spirits that supposedly reside in the human body '' ) . chinese interpretations of avoiding gu '' grains ; cereals '' have varied historically ; meanings range from not eating particular foodstuffs such as food grain , five cereals ( china ) , or staple food to not eating anything such as inedia , breatharianism , or aerophagia . yoga . in yoga principle , it is recommended that one maintains a spiritual fast on a particular day each week ( monday or thursday ) . a fast should also be maintained on the full moon day of each month . it is essential on the spiritual fasting day not only to abstain from meals , but also to spend the whole day with a positive , spiritual attitude . on the fasting day , intake of solid food is avoided , with water taken as needed . japanese history . japan has used fasting as punishment for meat consumption . consumption of domesticated animals was banned by emperor tenmu in 675 a.d . from april to september due to buddhist influences ; however , wild game was exempt . nevertheless , these laws were regularly flouted . according to the engishiki , in the heian period , fasts began to be used as punishment for the buddhist sin of meat consumption , initially for 3 days . eating meat other than seafood ( defined here simply as '' meat '' ) was seen by buddhist elite as a kind of spiritually corrupted practice . by the kamakura period , much stricter enforcement and punishments began , with an order from ise shrine for a fast for 100 days for eating wild or domestic animals as defined above , while anyone who ate with someone who ate '' meat '' was required to fast for 21 days , and anyone who ate with someone who ate with someone who consumed '' meat '' was required to fast for 7 days . . in alternative medicine . although practitioners of alternative medicine promote '' cleansing the body '' through fasting , the concept is quackery with no scientific basis for its rationale or efficacy . during the early 20th century , fasting was promoted by alternative health writers such as hereward carrington , edward h . dewey , bernarr macfadden , frank mccoy , edward earle purinton , upton sinclair and wallace wattles . griffith , r . marie . ( 2000 ) . apostles of abstinence : fasting and masculinity during the progressive era . american quarterly 52 ( 4 ) : 599-638 . all of these writers were either involved in the orthopathy or new thought movement . arnold ehret 's pseudoscientific mucusless diet healing system espoused fasting . kuske , terrence t . ( 1983 ) . quackery and fad diets . in elaine b . feldman . nutrition in the middle and later years . john wright & sons . pp . 291-303 . linda hazzard , a notable quack doctor , put her patients on such strict fasts that some of them died of starvation . she was responsible for the death of more than 40 patients under her care . hall , harriett . ( 2016 ) . '' natural medicine , starvation , and murder : the story of linda hazzard '' . science-based medicine . retrieved 1 may 2019 . '' linda hazzard : the “ starvation doctor ” '' . retrieved 1 may 2019 . in 1911 , upton sinclair authored the fasting cure , which made sensational claims of fasting curing practically all diseases , including cancer , syphilis , and tuberculosis . nash , jay r . ( 1982 ) . zanies : the world 's greatest eccentrics . new century publishers . p . 339 . gratzer , walter . ( 2005 ) . terrors of the table : the curious history of nutrition . oxford university press . p . 201 . sinclair has been described as '' the most credulous of faddists '' and his book is considered an example of quackery . kang , lydia ; pedersen , nate . ( 2017 ) . quackery : a brief history of the worst ways to cure everything . workman publishing . p . 265 . in 1932 , physician morris fishbein listed fasting as a fad diet and commented that '' prolonged fasting is never necessary and invariably does harm '' . fishbein , morris . ( 1932 ) . fads and quackery in healing : an analysis of the foibles of the healing cults . new york : covici friede . p . 253 there is no scientific evidence that prolonged fasting provides any significant health benefits . negative health complications from long term fasting include arthritis , abdominal cramp and orthostatic hypotension . pepper , claude . ( 1984 ) . quackery : a 10 billion dollar scandal . u.s . government printing office . p . 94