End time

cyclic cosmology . indian religions . . buddhism . there is no classic account of beginning or end quoted in : in buddhism ; masao abe attributes this to the absence of god . history is embedded in the continuing process of saṃsāra or the '' beginningless and endless cycles of birth-death-rebirth '' . buddhists believe there is an end to things but it is not final because they are bound to be born again . however , the writers of mahayana buddhist scriptures establish a specific end-time account in buddhist tradition : this describes the return of maitreya buddha , who would bring about an end to the world . this constitutes one of the two major branches of buddhist eschatology , with the other being the sermon of the seven suns . end time in buddhism could also involve a cultural eschatology covering '' final things '' , which include the idea that gautama buddha 's dharma will also come to an end . . maitreya . the buddha described his teachings disappearing five thousand years from when he preached them , corresponding approximately to the year 4300 , since he was born in 623bce . at this time , knowledge of dharma will be lost as well . the last of his relics will be gathered in bodh gaya and cremated . there will be a new era in which the next buddha maitreya will appear , but it will be preceded by the degeneration of human society . this will be a period of greed , lust , poverty , ill will , violence , murder , impiety , physical weakness , sexual depravity and societal collapse , and even the buddha himself will be forgotten . this will be followed by the coming of maitreya when the teachings of dharma are forgotten . maitreya was the first bodhisattva around whom a cult developed , in approximately the 3rd century ce . the earliest known mention of maitreya occurs in the cakavatti , or sihanada sutta in digha nikaya 26 of the pali canon . in it , gautama buddha predicted his teachings of dharma would be forgotten after 5,000 years . the text then foretells the birth of maitreya buddha in the city of ketumatī in present-day benares , whose king will be the cakkavattī sankha . sankha will live in the former palace of king mahāpanadā , and will become a renunciate who follows maitreya . vipassana.info , pali proper names dictionary : metteyya in mahayana buddhism , maitreya will attain bodhi in seven days , the minimum period , by virtue of his many lifetimes of preparation . once buddha , he will rule over the ketumati pure land , an earthly paradise sometimes associated with the indian city of varanasi or benares in present-day uttar pradesh . in mahayana buddhism , the buddha presides over a land of purity . for example , amitabha presides over sukhavati , more popularly known as the '' western paradise '' . a notable teaching he will rediscover is that of the ten non-virtuous deeds—killing , stealing , sexual misconduct , lying , divisive speech , abusive speech , idle speech , covetousness , harmful intent and wrong views . the ten virtuous deeds will replace them with the abandonment of each of these practices . edward conze in his buddhist scriptures ( 1959 ) gives an account of maitreya : in the book of revelation , the '' great tribulation '' ( rev . 7:14b ) refers to a time of affliction upon god 's people . catholicism and orthodoxy . the profession of faith addresses catholic beliefs concerning the last days . an explanation of these beliefs appears on the holy see 's website catholicism adheres to the amillennial school of thought , promoted by augustine of hippo in his work the city of god . protestantism . contemporary use of the term end times has evolved from literal belief in christian millennialism . in this tradition , biblical apocalypse is believed to be imminent , with various current events as omens of impending armageddon . these beliefs have been put forward by the adventist movement ( millerites ) , jehovah 's witnesses , and dispensationalism . in 1918 a group of eight , well-known preachers produced the london manifesto , warning of an imminent second coming of christ shortly after the 1917 liberation of jerusalem by the british . millennialists and amillennialists . protestants are divided between millennialists and amillennialists . millennialism concentrate on the issue of whether the true believers will see the tribulation or be removed from it by what is referred to as a pre-tribulation rapture . amillennialism believe the end times encompass the time from christ 's ascension to the last day , and maintain that the mention of the '' thousand years '' in the book of revelation is meant to be taken metaphorically ( i.e . , not literally , or 'spiritually ' ) , a view which continues to cause divisions within evangelical christianity . there is a range of eschatological belief in protestant christianity . christian premillennialism who believe the end times are occurring now , are usually specific about timelines that climax in the end of the world . for some , israel , the european union , or the united nations are seen as major players whose roles were foretold in scripture . within dispensationalism writing , there is the belief that christians will be summoned to heaven by christ at the rapture , occurring before a '' great tribulation '' prophesied in matthew 24–25 ; mark 13 and luke 21 . the tribulation is described in the book of revelation . '' end times '' may also refer to the passing of an age or long period in the relationship between man and god . adherents to this view cite the second epistle to timothy and draw analogies to the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries . post-exilic hebrew books of prophecy such as daniel and ezekiel are given new interpretations in this christian tradition , while apocalyptic forecasts appear in the judeo-christian sibylline oracles which include the book of revelation ascribed to john , the apocryphal apocalypse of peter , and the 2 esdras . fundamentalists . most fundamentalist christians anticipate biblical prophecy to be literally fulfilled . they see current wars , natural disaster and famine as the birth pangs which jesus described in matthew and mark . they believe mankind began in the garden of eden , and point to the valley of megiddo as the place where the current world-system will terminate , after which the messiah will rule for 1,000 years . adventists and millerites . rightreligious movements which expect that the parousia will be a cataclysmic event are generally called adventism . these have arisen throughout the christian era , but were particularly common after the protestant reformation . emanuel swedenborg considered the second coming to be symbolic , and to have occurred in 1757 . along with others , he developed a religious system around the second coming of christ , disclosed by new prophecy or special revelation not described in the bible . the millerites are diverse religious groups which similarly rely upon a special gift of interpretation for predicting the second coming . the difference between the 19th-century millerite and adventism movements and contemporary prophecy is that william miller and his followers , based on biblical interpretation , predicted the time of the second coming to have occurred in 1844 . contemporary writing of end time has suggested the timetable will be triggered by future wars and moral panic , and that this time of tribulation is close at hand . seventh-day adventists believe biblical prophecy to foretell an end time scenario in which the united states works in conjunction with the catholic church to mandate worship on a day other than the true sabbath , saturday , as prescribed in the ten commandments ( exodus 20:8–11 ) . this will bring about a situation where one must choose for or against the bible as the will of god . – main statements of belief from the official adventist church website . . preterists . another view of the end times is preterism . it distinguishes the time of the end from the end of time . preterists believe the term last days ( or time of the end ) refers to , neither the last days of the earth , nor the last days of humankind , but the end of the old covenant between god and israel ; which , according to preterism , took place when the temple in jerusalem was destroyed in 70 ce . preterists believe that prophecies—such as the second coming , the desecration of the jewish temple , the destruction of jerusalem , the rise of the antichrist , the great tribulation , the advent of the day of the lord , and a last judgment—had been fulfilled when the romans sacked jerusalem and completely destroyed its temple . proponents of full preterism do not believe in a coming resurrection of the dead . they place this event ( as well as the second coming ) in the year 70 . advocates of partial preterism do believe in a coming resurrection . full preterists contend that partial preterists are merely futurists , since they believe the second coming , the resurrection , the rapture , and the judgment are yet to come . many preterists believe first-century christians experienced the rapture to rejoin the christ . according with preterism 's interpretation of end times , many '' time passages '' in the new testament foretell a second coming of christ , with last days to take place within the lifetimes of his disciples : matt . 10:23 , matt . 16:28 , matt . 24:34 , matt . 26:64 , rom . 13:11–12 , 1 cor . 7:29–31 , 1 cor . 10:11 , phil . 4:5 , james 5:8–9 , 1 pet . 4:7 , 1 jn . 2:18 . dispensationalists . dispensationalism is an evangelical futurist biblical interpretation that foresees a series of dispensations , or periods , in which god relates to human beings under different biblical covenants . the belief system is primarily rooted in the writings of john nelson darby and is premillennial in content . the reestablishment of israel in 1948 provided a major impetus to the dispensationalist belief system . the wars of israel after 1948 with its arab neighbors provided further support , according to john f . walvoord . after the six-day war in 1967 , and the yom kippur war in 1973 , it seemed plausible to many fundamentalist christians in the 1970s that middle east turmoil may well be leading up to the fulfillment of various bible prophecies and to the battle of armageddon . members of the dispensationalist movement such as hal lindsey , j . dwight pentecost , john walvoord , all of whom have dallas theological seminary backgrounds , and some other writers , claimed further that the european economic community , which preceded the european union , would become a united states of europe , which would in turn become a revived roman empire ruled by the antichrist . the revived roman empire also figured into the new testament writers ' vision of the future . the fact that in the early 1970s , there were ( erroneously thought to be ) seven nations in the european economic community was held to be significant ; this aligned the community with a seven-headed beast mentioned in revelation . this specific prophecy has required revision , but the idea of a revived roman empire remains . dispensationalism , in contrast to the millerite adventist movement , had its beginning in the 19th century , when john nelson darby , founder of the plymouth brethren religious denomination , incorporated into his system of biblical interpretation a system of organizing biblical time into a number of discrete dispensations , each of which marks a separate covenant with god . darby 's beliefs were widely publicized in cyrus i . scofield 's scofield reference bible , an annotated bible that became popular in the united states . since the majority of the biblical prophets were writing at a time when the temple in jerusalem was still functioning , they wrote as if it would still be standing during the prophesied events . according to preterism , this was a fulfillment of the prophecies . however , according to futurists , their destruction in ad 70 put the prophetic timetable on hold . many such believers therefore anticipated the return of jews to israel and the third temple christian views before the second coming could occur . . post-tribulation pre-millennialism . a view of the second coming of christ as held by post-tribulational pre-millennialists holds that the church of christ will have to undergo great persecution by being present during the great tribulation . specific prophetic movements . members of the baháʼí faith believe miller 's interpretation of signs and dates of the coming of jesus were , for the most part , correct . they believe the fulfillment of biblical prophecies of the coming of christ came through a forerunner of their own religion , the báb . according to the báb 's words , 4 april 1844 was '' the first day that the spirit descended '' into his heart . his subsequent declaration to mullá husayn that he was the '' promised one '' —an event now commemorated by baháʼís as a major holy day—took place on 23 may 1844 . it was in october of that year that the báb embarked on a hajj , where he openly declared his claims to the sharif of mecca . the first news coverage of these events in the west was in 1845 by the times , followed by others in 1850 in the united states . the first baháʼí to come to america was in 1892 . several baháʼí books and pamphlets make mention of the millerites , the prophecies used by miller and the great disappointment , most notably william sears 's thief in the night . . restorationism ( christian primitivism ) . end times theology is also significant to restorationist christian religions , which consider themselves distinct from both catholicism and protestantism . jehovah 's witnesses . the eschatology of jehovah 's witnesses is central to their religious beliefs . they believe jesus christ has been ruling in heaven as king since 1914 ( a date they believe was prophesied in the bible ) and that after that time a period of cleansing occurred , resulting in god 's selection of the bible students associated with charles taze russell as his people in 1919 . they also believe that the destruction of those who reject the bible 's message and thus willfully refuse to obey god you can live forever in paradise on earth , watch tower bible & tract society , 1989 , p . 155 . revelation—its grand climax at hand ! , watch tower bible & tract society , 1988 , p . 6 . will shortly take place at armageddon , ensuring that the beginning of the new earthly society will be composed of willing subjects of that kingdom . the religion 's doctrines surrounding 1914 are the legacy of a series of emphatic claims regarding the years 1799 , the watchtower , 1 march 1922 , page 73 , '' the indisputable facts , therefore , show that the 'time of the end ' began in 1799 ; that the lord 's second presence began in 1874 . '' 1874 , 1878 , 1914 , the watchtower , july 15 , 1894 , p . 1677 : '' we see no reason for changing the figures—nor could we change them if we would . they are , we believe , god 's dates , not ours . but bear in mind that the end of 1914 is not the date for the beginning , but for the end of the time of trouble . '' 1918 1 september 1916 the watchtower , pages 264–265 and 1925 millions now living will never die , 1920 , page 97 , '' based upon the argument heretofore set forth , then , that the old order of things , the old world , is ending and is therefore passing away , and that the new order is coming in , and that 1925 shall mark the resurrection of the faithful worthies of old and the beginning of reconstruction , it is reasonable to conclude that millions of people now on the earth will be still on the earth in 1925 . then , based upon the promises set forth in the divine word , we must reach the positive and indisputable conclusion that millions now living will never die . '' made in the watch tower society 's publications between 1879 and 1924 . claims about the significance of those years , including the presence of jesus christ , the beginning of the '' last days '' , the destruction of worldly governments and the earthly resurrection of jewish patriarchs , were successively abandoned . in 1922 the society 's principal magazine , the watchtower , described its chronology as '' no stronger than its weakest link '' , but also claimed the chronological relationships to be '' of divine origin and divinely corroborated . in a class by itself , absolutely and unqualifiedly correct '' '' the strong cable of chronology '' , watch tower , 15 july 1922 , page 217 , '' the chronology of present truth is , to begin with , a string of dates . thus far it is a chain , and no stronger than its weakest link . there exist , however , well established relationships among the dates of present-truth chronology . these internal connections of the dates impart a much greater strength than can be found in other secular , archeological chronologies . some of them are of so remarkable a character as clearly to indicate this chronology is not of man , but of god . being of divine origin and divinely corroborated , present-truth chronology stands in a class by itself , absolutely and unqualifiedly correct . '' and '' indisputable facts '' , and repudiation of russell 's teachings was described as '' equivalent to a repudiation of the lord '' . the watchtower , 1 may 1922 , page 132 , '' to abandon or repudiate the lord 's chosen instrument means to abandon or repudiate the lord himself , upon the principle that he who rejects the servant sent by the master thereby rejects the master . brother russell was the lord 's servant . then to repudiate him and his work is equivalent to a repudiation of the lord , upon the principle heretofore announced . '' the watch tower society has acknowledged its early leaders promoted '' incomplete , even inaccurate concepts '' . jehovah 's witnesses—proclaimers of god 's kingdom ( watch tower society , 1993 ) , chapter 10 . the governing body of jehovah 's witnesses says that , unlike old testament prophets , its interpretations of the bible are not inspired or infallible . revelation – its grand climax , watch tower bible & tract society , 1988 , page 9 . it says that bible prophecies can be fully understood only after their fulfillment , citing examples of biblical figures who did not understand the meaning of prophecies they received . watch tower society literature often cites proverbs 4:18 , '' the path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established '' ( nwt ) to support their view that there would be an increase in knowledge during '' the time of the end '' , and that this increase in knowledge needs adjustments . watch tower society publications also say that unfulfilled expectations are partly due to eagerness for god 's kingdom and that they do not call their core beliefs into question . why have there been changes over the years in the teachings of jehovah 's witnesses ? , '' jehovah 's witnesses '' , reasoning from the scriptures , 1989 , watchtower bible and tract society , page 205 '' allow no place for the devil ! '' , the watchtower , 15 march 1986 , page 19 '' keep in step with jehovah 's organization '' , watchtower , 15 january 2001 , page 18 . . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( mormon ) . members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints believe there will be a second coming of jesus to the earth at some time in the future . the lds church and its leaders do not make any predictions of the actual date of the second coming . according to church doctrine , the true gospel will be taught in all parts of the world prior to the second coming . matthew 24:14 kjv they also believe there will be increasing war , earthquakes , hurricanes , and man-made disasters prior to the second coming . disasters of all kind will happen before christ comes . upon the return of jesus christ , all people will be resurrected , the righteous in a first resurrection and the unrighteous in a second , later resurrection . christ shall reign for a period of 1000 years , after which the final judgement will occur . islam . muslims believe there are three periods before the yawmuddin with some debate as to whether the periods could overlap . according to adnan oktar , the first period is said to have begun with the death of muhammad . the second began with the passing of all his companions , and ended a thousand years later . another event of the second period was the tartar invasion , occurring 650 years after muhammad . the mongols , led by hulagu khan , grandson of genghis khan , attacked baghdad in 1258 ad and brought the abbasid caliphate to an end . they massacred millions of muslims , and the water of the river tigris turned red with blood . a traditional hadith also predicted a fire at madinah in the hijaz near busra in syria , which islamic scholars believe occurred in 654 ah . following the second , the third and final period will be heralded by the appearance of the mahdi . . sunni . sunnis believe the dead will then stand in a grand assembly , awaiting a scroll detailing their righteous deeds , sinful acts and ultimate judgment . muhammad will be the first to be resurrected . esposito , john ( 2003 ) . the oxford dictionary of islam . oxford university press . , p.264 punishments will include adhab , or severe pain and embarrassment , and khizy or shame . '' reward and punishment '' , encyclopedia of the qur'an ( 2005 ) there will also be a punishment of the grave between death and the resurrection . leor halevi , several sunni scholars explain some of the signs metaphorically . the signs of the coming end time are divided into major and minor signs : following the second period , the third is said to be marked by the ten major signs known as alamatu's-sa'ah al- kubra ( the major signs of the end ) . sahih muslim , book 41 , hadith 6931 they are as follows : a huge black cloud of smoke ( dukhan ) will cover the earth . sahih muslim three sinkings of the earth , one in the east . sahih muslim one sinking of the earth in the west . sahih muslim one sinking of the earth in arabia . sahih muslim the false messiah—anti-christ , masih ad-dajjal—shall appear with great powers as a one-eyed man with his right eye blind and deformed like a grape . although believers will not be deceived , he will claim to be god , to hold the keys to heaven and hell , and will lead many astray . in reality , his heaven is hell , and his hell is heaven . the dajjal will be followed by seventy thousand jews of isfahan wearing persian shawls . muslim , book 41 , hadith 7034 the return of isa ( jesus ) , from the fourth sky , to kill dajjal . gog and magog ( gog and magog ) , a japhetic tribe of vicious beings who had been imprisoned by dhul-qarnayn , will break out . they will ravage the earth , drink all the water of lake tiberias , and kill all believers in their way . isa , imam al-mahdi , and the believers with them will go to the top of a mountain and pray for the destruction of gog and magog . god eventually will send disease and worms to wipe them out . the sun will rise from the west . the dabbat al-ard , or beast of the earth , will come out of the ground to talk to people . the second blow of the trumpet will be sounded , the dead will return to life , and a fire will come out of yemen that shall gather all to mahshar al qiy'amah ( the gathering for judgment ) . . shia . many of the signs shown above are shared by both sunni and shia beliefs , with some exceptions , e.g . imam al-mahdi defeating al-masih ad-dajjal . concepts and terminology in shia eschatology include mi'ad , the occultation , al-yamani , and sufyani . in twelver hadith about the last days , the literature largely revolves around muhammad al-mahdi , who is considered by many beliefs to be the true twelfth appointed successor to muhammad . muhammad al-mahdi will help mankind against the deception by the dajjal who will try to get people in to a new world religion which is called '' the great deception '' . the wrath of yeshua – page xxxv , leo paul giampietro – 2008 . ahmadiyya . ahmadiyya is considered distinct from mainstream islam . in its writing , the present age has been witness to the evil of man and wrath of god , with war and natural disaster . ghulam ahmad is seen as the second coming and the mahdi , fulfilling islamic and biblical prophecies , as well as scriptures of other religions such as hinduism . his teaching will establish spiritual reform and establish an age of peace . this will continue for a thousand years , and will unify mankind under one faith . the review of religions , january 2009 , vol.104 , issue 1 . pp . 18–22 ahmadis believe that despite harsh and strong opposition and discrimination they will eventually be triumphant and their message vindicated both by muslims and non-muslims alike . ahmadis also incorporate the eschatological views from other religions into their doctrine and believe mirza ghulam ahmed falls into this sequence . hfaith and philosophy of islam – page 180 , shamim akhter – 2009 . judaism . thumb in rabbinic literature , rabbis elaborated and explained the prophecies that were found in the hebrew bible , along with oral law and rabbinic traditions about its significance . the main tenets of jewish eschatology , in no particular order , include : god will redeem israel from the captivity that began during the babylonian exile in a new exodus . god will return the jewish people to the land of israel . god will restore the davidic line and the the third temple . god will raise up a regent from the house of david , the jewish messiah , to lead the jewish people and the world and to usher in an messianic age . nations will recognize that the god of israel is the only true god . god will resurrect the dead . god will create a new heaven and earth . the idea of a messianic age , an era of global peace and knowledge of the creator , has a prominent place in jewish thought , and is incorporated as part of the end of days . a well-known passage from the book of isaiah describes this future condition of the world : '' they shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks ; nation will not lift sword against nation and they will no longer study warfare '' ( 2:4 ) . maimonides ( 1135–1204 ) further describes the messianic era in the mishneh torah : '' and at that time there will be no hunger or war , no jealousy or rivalry . for the good will be plentiful , and all delicacies available as dust . the entire occupation of the world will be only to know god ; . the people israel will be of great wisdom ; they will perceive the esoteric truths and comprehend their creator 's wisdom as is the capacity of man . as it is written ( isaiah 11:9 ) : 'for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of god , as the waters cover the sea . ' '' mishneh torah , laws of kings 12:5 the zohar zohar , vayera 119a maintains that the seven days of the week , based on the seven days of creation , correspond to the seven millennia of creation . the seventh day of the week , the shabbat day of rest , corresponds to the seventh millennium , the age of universal rest , or the messianic era . the seventh millennium begins with the year 6000 am , and is the latest time the messiah can come . a number of early and late jewish scholars have written in support of this , including the ramban , ramban on genesis ( 2:3 ) isaac abrabanel , abarbanel on genesis 2 abraham ibn ezra , ramban quoting ibn ezra at leviticus ( 25:2 ) rabbeinu bachya , bachya on genesis 2:3 the vilna gaon , safra d'tzniusa , ch . 5 the lubavitcher rebbe , sefer hasichos 5750:254 the ramchal , derech hashem 4:7:2 aryeh kaplan page 318 , the real messiah and rebbetzin esther jungreis . . rastafarianism . rastafarians have a unique interpretation of end times , based on the old testament and the book of revelation . they believe ethiopian emperor haile selassie i to be god incarnate , the king of kings and lord of lords mentioned in revelation 5:5 . they saw the crowning of selassie as the second coming , and the second italo-ethiopian war as fulfillment of revelation . there is also the expectation that selassie will return for a day of judgment and bring home the '' lost children of israel '' , which in rastafarianism refers to those taken from africa through the slave trade . there will then be an era of peace and harmony at mount zion in africa . . zoroastrianism . zoroastrian eschatology is considered one of the oldest in recorded history . the birth of its founder , zoroaster , is unknown , with scholarly dates ranging from 6th century bce to 5,500 years earlier . pliny the elder even suggests there were two zoroasters . however , with beliefs paralleling and possibly predating the framework of the major abrahamic faiths , a fully developed concept of the end of the world was not established in zoroastrianism until 500 bce . the bahman yasht describes : at the end of thy tenth hundredth winter , the sun is more unseen and more spotted ; the year , month , and day are shorter ; and the earth is more barren ; and the crop will not yield the seed . and men become more deceitful and more given to vile practices . they will have no gratitude . honorable wealth will proceed to those of perverted faith . and a dark cloud makes the whole sky night , and it will rain more noxious creatures than water . a manichaean battle between the righteous and wicked will be followed by the frashokereti . on earth , the saoshyant will arrive as the final savior of mankind , and bring about the resurrection of the dead . the yazatas airyaman and atar will melt the metal in the hills and mountains , which will flow as lava across the earth and all mankind , both the living and resurrected , will be required to wade through it . ashavan will pass through the molten river as if it were warm milk , but the sinful will burn . it will then flow down to hell , where it will annihilate angra mainyu and the last vestiges of wickedness . the righteous will partake of the parahaoma , which will confer immortality upon them . humanity will become like the amesha spentas , living without food , hunger , thirst , weapons or injury . bodies will become so light as to cast no shadow . all humanity will speak a single language , and belong to a single nation with no borders . all will share a single purpose and goal , joining with ahura mazda for a perpetual and divine exaltation . . . . see also . apocalypticism christian eschatology end of the world ( disambiguation ) endtime ministries future of the earth global catastrophic risk katechon list of conspiracy theories mysticism number of the beast prophecy of seventy weeks two witnesses ultimate fate of the universe unfulfilled religious prophecies whore of babylon . notes . references . external links . library of date setters of the end of the world : '' over 200 predictions and counting '' religious tolerance : a list of different groups claiming to predict the end of the world prior to 2000 .