1978 in music

specific locations . 1978 in british music 1978 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1978 in country music 1978 in heavy metal music 1978 in jazz . events . january–april . january 14 – the sex pistols play their final show ( until a 1996 reunion ) at san francisco 's winterland ballroom . january 16 – elton john appears on this week 's people ( magazine ) without his trademark glasses . john will still wear glasses occasionally for the next ten years until wearing them permanently again . january 21 – as saturday night fever becomes a cultural phenomenon , the soundtrack hits 1 on the billboard 100 , where it will stay until july . january 23 – terry kath , guitarist and founding member of rock band chicago , dies from an accidental gunshot wound to the head from a gun he thought was unloaded , in woodland hills , los angeles ; he is 32 years old . january 25 electric light orchestra kick off their '' out of the blue '' world tour in honolulu , hawaii . bob dylan makes his directorial debut in the surrealist film renaldo and clara , shot during his rolling thunder revue tour . january 26 – workers at emi 's record processing plant in england refuse to press copies of the buzzcocks 's second single '' what do i get ? '' because of its flipside , '' oh shit ! '' . the single is eventually pressed and goes on to become the band 's first hit . january 28 – by request , ted nugent autographs his name into a fan 's arm with a bowie knife in philadelphia . february 4 – elton john appears as the guest star on the muppet show . february 10 – van halen debuts with a van halen ( album ) ; eddie van halen introduces a powerful new sound and technique to world , while david lee roth is ushered in as the front man . february 23 – the 20th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by john denver . fleetwood mac 's rumours wins album of the year , the eagles ' '' hotel california '' wins record of the year and , in a rare tie , barbra streisand 's '' evergreen ( love theme from a star is born ) '' and debby boone 's '' you light up my life '' both collectively win song of the year . boone also wins best new artist . march 18 – california jam ii is held at the ontario motor speedway in california . over 300,000 fans come to see ted nugent , aerosmith , santana , dave mason , foreigner , heart and more . april 7 - prince debuts with album for you . it was released by warner bros . records . all tracks were produced , arranged , composed , and performed by prince . april 22 in the eurovision song contest in paris , france , victory goes to israel 's entry '' a-ba-ni-bi '' , performed by izhar cohen & alphabeta . the '' one love peace concert '' is held in kingston , jamaica , headlined by bob marley , making his first concert appearance since december 1976 . steve martin performs the original '' king tut '' on saturday night live ; also this night , the blues brothers make their first appearance on the show . may–july . may 6 – the knack is formed ( first album released in 1979 ) . may 13 – barry gibb becomes the only songwriter in history to have written 4 consecutive 1 singles on billboard 's hot 100 chart . may 18 – the buddy holly story , starring gary busey , is released . it would win the academy award for academy award for original music score , and earn a nomination for academy award for best actor ( busey ) and best sound . may 25 – in a performance used for the kids are alright , the who play their last show with keith moon . june 7 - prince´s debut single soft and wet is released by warner bros . records . june 10 – the rolling stones begin their 25-date us summer tour in lakeland , florida . june 13 – the cramps play a free concert for patients at the napa state mental hospital . june 16 – the film adaptation of the musical grease , opens in theaters and is a box office hit . june 20 – grace slick splits with jefferson starship the day after a disastrous concert in hamburg , germany , in which a heavily intoxicated slick verbally abused the crowd and groped various fans and bandmates . june 29 – peter frampton is nearly killed in a car accident in the bahamas , suffering multiple broken bones , a concussion , and muscle damage . july 1 – the first texxas jam is held over the july 4 long weekend at the cotton bowl in dallas . the first day features ted nugent , aerosmith , frank marino and mahogany rush , heart , journey , head east , atlanta rhythm section , eddie money , van halen and walter egan . sunday consists of willie nelson headlining his sixth annual fourth of july picnic . july 19 – dead kennedys play their first concert , at the mabuhay gardens in san francisco , california . july 21 – sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band , a much-hyped musical film starring peter frampton and the bee gees performing the music of the beatles , opens in theaters . the film is savaged by critics and proves a box office disappointment . july 29 – glenn goins , one of the lead vocalists for the band parliament-funkadelic dies of hodgkin 's lymphoma at age of 24 . july 30 – thin lizzy officially announces that gary moore has replaced brian robertson on guitar . august–december . august 26 – 80,000 concertgoers attend mosport speedway in ontario for the '' canada jam '' , featuring sets by the doobie brothers , commodores , kansas , village people , dave mason , the atlanta rhythm section and triumph . august 26 – 67,000 funk fans assembled at soldier field in chicago , illinois to attend the first annual funk festival , billed as '' one nation under a groove '' , featuring a taste of honey ( band ) , parlet , con funk shun , the bar-kays , and parliament-funkadelic . september 7 – the who drummer keith moon dies in a central london flat after a prescription drug overdose at the age of 32 . september 14–16 – the grateful dead perform three shows in giza , egypt , very close to the sphinx and great pyramid . october 12 – nancy spungen , the american girlfriend of sex pistols bassist sid vicious , is found dead in a new york hotel room of a stab wound . sid is arrested and charged with her murder . october 24 – rolling stones guitarist keith richards pleads guilty to a reduced charge of possessing heroin in toronto in 1977 . the more serious charge of drug trafficking is dropped and richards is given a one-year suspended sentence as well as ordered to play a charity concert for the blind . october 29 – michael schenker plays his final show with ufo in stanford , california before leaving the group to rejoin scorpions . november 21 – french pop star dalida performed a concert at new york 's carnegie hall . november 25 a now sober alice cooper releases the album from the inside , which tells of his stay in rehab for alcoholism . aerosmith cuts a concert short after steven tyler suffers cuts to his face from a bottle that shatters upon hitting a stage monitor . donna summer becomes the first female artist of the modern rock era to have the number one single ( mac arthur park ) and album ( live and more ) on billboard charts simultaneously . november 27 – def leppard 's permanent drummer rick allen joins the band at the age of 15 . december 2 oti festival 1978 , the latin american spin-off of the eurovision song contest takes place in santiago , chile . the winning country is brazil , represented by denisse de kalafe with her song '' el amor.cosa tan rara '' ( love.such a strange thing ) december 31 matthias jabs joins scorpions , replacing uli jon roth . the seventh annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with performances by barry manilow , village people , chuck mangione , tanya tucker and rick james . cbs airs new year 's eve with guy lombardo for the final time , nearly two years after the band leader 's death and ending a 22-year run that began in 1956 . the winterland ballroom venue in san francisco closes with a new year 's eve performance by the grateful dead , new riders of the purple sage and the blues brothers . iron maiden records a demo , consisting of four songs , at spaceward studios in cambridge which would eventually become the soundhouse tapes . also in 1978 . kenny rogers continues his highly successful solo career with the single ( and album ) '' the gambler '' and will go on to star in no less than five movies based around the song . in the uk , singles sales are at their all-time high this year , boosted by the simultaneous peak of the disco and punk phenomena and the success of singles from the movie grease . mozambique holds its first national dance festival , involving half a million people . november – iron maiden hires lead singer paul di'anno . new edition formed in 1978 in massachusetts , usa . bands disbanded . see : category : musical groups disestablished in 1978 . albums released . january . . chronological table of us and uk number one hit singles . us number one singles and artist ( weeks at number one ) how deep is your love – bee gees ( 2 weeks in 1977 + 1 week in 1978 ) '' baby come back '' – player ( 3 ) stayin ' alive – bee gees ( 4 ) '' ( love is ) thicker than water '' – andy gibb ( 2 ) '' night fever '' – bee gees ( 8 ) , best selling single of the year '' if i ca n't have you '' – yvonne elliman ( 1 ) '' with a little luck '' – paul mccartney & wings ( 2 ) '' too much , too little , too late '' – johnny mathis & deniece williams ( 1 ) you 're the one that i want – john travolta & olivia newton-john ( 1 ) '' shadow dancing '' – andy gibb ( 7 ) miss you – the rolling stones ( 1 ) '' three times a lady '' – commodores ( 2 ) grease – frankie valli ( 2 ) '' boogie oogie oogie '' – a taste of honey ( 3 ) '' kiss you all over '' – exile ( 4 ) '' hot child in the city '' – nick gilder ( 1 ) '' you needed me '' – anne murray ( 1 ) '' macarthur park '' – donna summer ( 3 ) '' you do n't bring me flowers '' – barbra streisand & neil diamond ( 2 ) '' le freak '' – chic ( 3 weeks in 1978 + 3 weeks in 1979 ) uk number one singles and artist ( weeks at number one ) '' mull of kintyre '' / '' girls ' school '' – wings ( band ) ( 5 weeks in 1977 + 4 weeks in 1978 ) '' uptown top ranking '' – althea & donna ( 1 ) '' figaro '' – brotherhood of man ( 1 ) '' take a chance on me '' – abba ( 3 ) '' wuthering heights '' – kate bush ( 4 ) '' matchstalk men and matchstalk cats and dogs '' – brian and michael ( 3 ) '' night fever '' – bee gees ( 2 ) '' rivers of babylon '' – boney m ( 5 ) best selling single of the year '' you 're the one that i want '' – john travolta & olivia newton-john ( 9 ) '' three times a lady '' – commodores ( 5 ) '' dreadlock holiday '' – 10cc ( 1 ) '' summer nights '' – john travolta & olivia newton-john ( 7 ) '' rat trap '' – the boomtown rats ( 2 ) '' do ya think i 'm sexy ? '' – rod stewart ( 1 ) '' mary 's boy child '' / '' oh my lord '' – boney m ( 4 ) . other significant singles . published popular music . '' another suitcase in another hall '' w . tim rice m . andrew lloyd webber from the musical evita '' dallas theme song '' m . jerrold immel '' do n't cry for me argentina '' w . tim rice m . andrew lloyd webber from the musical evita '' grease '' w.m . barry gibb from the film grease '' honesty '' w.m . billy joel '' hopelessly devoted to you '' w.m . john farrar introduced by olivia newton-john in the film grease '' my life '' w.m . billy joel '' only the good die young '' w.m . billy joel '' sultans of swing '' w.m . mark knopfler '' thank you for being a friend '' w.m . andrew gold '' three times a lady '' w.m . lionel richie '' you do n't bring me flowers '' w . alan bergman , marilyn bergman & neil diamond m . neil diamond '' you 're the one that i want '' w.m . john farrar introduced by olivia newton-john and john travolta in the film grease . classical music . john adams ( composer ) – shaker loops , for string septet malcolm arnold – symphony no . 8 peter maxwell davies – salome , ballet in two acts jacob druckman – viola concerto henri dutilleux – timbres , espace , mouvement arvo pärt – spiegel im spiegel alexandre rabinovitch-barakovsky – requiem pour une marée noire steve reich – music for a large ensemble iannis xenakis – mycènes alpha . opera . robert ashley – perfect lives lorenzo ferrero – rimbaud , ou le fils du soleil vivian fine – the women in the garden györgy ligeti – le grand macabre krzysztof penderecki – paradise lost ( libretto by christopher fry ) aulis sallinen – the red line ( punainen viiva ) . ballet . lorenzo ferrero – invito a nozze . jazz . musical theater . ai n't misbehavin ' broadway revue opened at the longacre theatre on may 9 and ran for 1604 performances the best little whorehouse in texas opened at the entermedia theatre on april 17 and ran for 85 performances . the show moved to broadway in june 1978 , and ran for 1584 performances . eubie broadway revue opened at the ambassador theatre on september 20 and ran for 439 performances evita ( andrew lloyd webber and tim rice ) – london production opened at the prince edward theatre on june 21 hello , dolly ! ( jerry herman ) – broadway revival opened at the lunt-fontanne theatre on march 5 and ran for 152 performances i 'm getting my act together and taking it on the road off-broadway production opened at the anspacher theater on june 14 and ran for 1165 performances on the 20th century book and lyrics by betty comden and adolph green and music by cy coleman opens at st . james theatre nyc for 460 performances timbuktu broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre on march 1 and ran for 243 performances on the twentieth century broadway production opened at the st . james theatre on february 19 and ran for 460 performances . musical films . american hot wax the buddy holly story don fm grease heeralaal pannalaal rockers sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band thank god it 's friday the wiz . births . january 3 – kimberley locke , american singer january 4 – mai meneses , spanish singer-songwriter and guitarist january 5 – karnail pitts , american rapper ( d . 1999 ) january 9 – a . j . mclean , american singer ( backstreet boys ) january 12 kris roe , american rock guitarist and singer ( the ataris ) jeremy camp , american christian guitarist and singer january 17 – ricky williams , english singer january 20 – sid wilson , american rock turntablist ( slipknot , dj starscream ) january 21 nokio the n-tity , american singer-songwriter and producer ( dru hill ) phil stacey , american singer january 23 – e . kidd bogart , american music executive , television producer , music publisher and songwriter january 31 – ibolya oláh , hungarian singer february 1 – jeff conrad ( phantom planet ) february 12 – brian chase ( yeah yeah yeahs ) february 14 – ryan griffiths , guitarist ( the vines ) february 19 – immortal technique underground rapper february 22 – jenny frost , british singer ( atomic kitten ) february 24 – john nolan , american rock lead singer ( straylight run ) february 28 – jeanne cherhal , french singer-songwriter march 10 – benjamin burnley , american musician march 12 – claudio sanchez , american singer/songwriter ( coheed & cambria ) march 19 – lenka , australian singer and actress march 21 – kevin federline , american ( britney spears , shar jackson ) march 30 – simon webbe , english singer ( blue ) march 31 – tony yayo , american rapper april 6 – myleene klass , english singer ( hear'say ) , pianist , media personality and model april 7 – duncan james , english singer ( blue ) april 9 – rachel stevens , english singer , songwriter , actress , television presenter , model and businesswoman ( s club 7 ) april 11 – thomas thacker , canadian singer april 12 – guy berryman , scottish rock bass player ( coldplay ) april 15 – chris stapleton , american country musician april 16 – jody marie gnant , american singer-songwriter and pianist april 21 jukka nevalainen , finnish drummer ( nightwish ) branden steineckert ( the used , rancid ) april 22 – jason stollsteimer , american lead singer and guitarist ( the von bondies ) may 3 – paul banks , american rock vocalist ( interpol ) may 12 – wilfred le bouthillier , canadian singer may 21 – adam gontier , canadian-born rock musician ( three days grace ) may 22 – katie price , english media personality , model , singer , author , and businesswoman . may 23 – scott raynor , american rock musician ( blink-182 ) may 25 – adam gontier , canadian singer , songwriter and musician ( former member of three days grace and member of saints asonia ) may 29 – adam rickitt , british actor , singer and model may 30 – kianna alarid , american indie rock singer and bass guitarist ( tilly and the wall ) june 6 carl barât , english rock singer and guitarist ( the libertines , dirty pretty things ) joy enriquez , american singer and actress june 7 – tony ahn , south korean singer june 9 – matthew bellamy , english musician , singer and songwriter ( muse ) june 10 – shane west , american actor , punk rock musician and songwriter june 13 – jason michael carroll , american country musician june 19 – mía maestro , argentine actress and singer-songwriter june 24 ariel pink , american singer-songwriter , musician , producer ( atheif ) emppu vuorinen , finnish guitarist and songwriter ( nightwish , brother firetribe , altaria and barilari ) june 27 – lolly , english singer june 29 sam farrar ( phantom planet ) nicole scherzinger , american recording artist , television personality and performer ( the pussycat dolls ) july 10 jesse lacey , singer/musician , member of brand new and taking back sunday ray kay , norwegian director , music video director and photographer july 16 – t . j . jackson ( singer ) , american singer and member 3t july 17 panda bear , american singer-songwriter and keyboard player ( animal collective and jane ) trevor mcnevan , canadian singer-songwriter ( thousand foot krutch and fm static ) émilie simon , french singer-songwriter july 18 – annie mac , irish-born dj and broadcast presenter august 1 – dhani harrison , english musician and son of george harrison of the beatles august 7 jamey jasta , american rock singer ( hatebreed ) justin young ( singer , born 1978 ) , american hawaiian singer-songwriter , musician and significant other of colbie caillat august 15 – tim foreman , american rock bassist ( switchfoot ) august 18 – andy samberg , american actor , comedian , filmmaker and musician , member of the lonely island and spouse of joanna newsome august 22 – james corden , english actor , writer , producer , comedian , television host and singer august 23 – julian casablancas , american indie rock singer-songwriter and record producer ( the strokes ) august 28 max collins ( eve 6 ) jess margera , american drummer ( cky ) august 30 – maino , rapper september 6 – cisco adler , american musician foxy brown ( rapper ) american-trinidadian rapper september 9 – johnny shentall , english singer september 11 – ben lee , australian singer september 20 patrizio buanne , italian singer sarit hadad , israeli pop singer dj white shadow , american music producer and dj ( lady gaga ) september 30 – steve klein ( new found glory ) october 2 – ayumi hamasaki , japanese singer october 3 – jake shears , american singer october 7 – alison balsom , english classical trumpeter october 9 – nicky byrne , irish singer ( westlife ) october 14 – usher , american singer , dancer and actor october 20 – kira , german singer october 27 – vanessa-mae , british violinist november 6 – taryn manning , american actress , singer-songwriter and fashion designer ( boomkat ) november 9 – sisqó , american singer november 10 – eve , american rapper november 11 – aaron bruno , american singer , songwriter , musician and multi-instrumentalist ( awolnation , under the influence of giants , home town hero ) november 13 – nikolai fraiture , american rock bassist ( the strokes ) november 16 – carolina parra ( css ( band ) ) november 18 – andris nelsons , latvian conductor november 22 – karen o , south korean-born american singer , songwriter , musician and record producer ( yeah yeah yeahs ) november 23 – alison mosshart , american singer , songwriter and artist , lead vocalist of the kills and the dead weather november 25 – shiina ringo , japanese singer and musician november 30 clay aiken , american singer gael garcía bernal , mexican film actor , director , singer , musician , model and producer december 1 – brad delson , american alternative rock guitarist ( linkin park ) december 2 nelly furtado , canadian/portuguese singer , songwriter , record producer , instrumentalist chris wolstenholme , english alternative rock bass guitarist ( ( muse ) ) december 9 , – jesse metcalfe , american singer and actor december 13 – laza morgan , jamaican-american singer and rapper december 15 ned brower , american rock drummer ( rooney ) mark jansen , dutch guitarist , vocalist and songwriter ( after forever , epica , mayan ) december 21 maya jupiter , mexican/turkish australian rapper , songwriter , mc and radio personality shaun morgan , south african singer , songwriter , musician , guitarist ( seether ) december 23 – esthero , canadian singer-songwriter december 24 – tonedeff , american rapper december 28 john legend , american singer-songwriter , actor , musician and actor phonte , american rapper december 29 steve kemp , british musician ( hard-fi ) latoya london , american r & b and soul singer . deaths . january 3 – jack oakie , 74 , actor in many musical films of the 1940s january 23 terry kath , 31 , chicago guitarist and vocalist ( unintentional self-inflicted gunshot ) vic ames , 52 , pop singer ( ames brothers ) january 31 – gregory herbert , blood , sweat & tears saxophonist february 7 – dimitrie cuclin , 82 , composer and musicologist february 24 – mrs mills , 59 , honky-tonk pianist march 4 – joe marsala , 71 , clarinetist and songwriter march 11 – claude françois , 39 , singer-songwriter ( electrocuted ) march 17 – malvina reynolds , 77 , us folk/blues singer-songwriter march 18 – peggy wood , 86 , actress and singer march 21 – louis cottrell , jr . , 67 , saxophonist and clarinet player ( b . 1911 ) april 3 – ray noble , 74 , composer and bandleader april 21 – sandy denny , 31 , folk singer ( fairport convention ) ( cerebral haemorrhage ) may 1 – aram khachaturian , 74 , composer may 5 – ján móry , 85 , slovak composer may 26 – tamara karsavina , 93 , ballerina july 14 – maria grinberg , 69 , pianist july 29 – glenn goins , 24 , parliament funkadelic guitarist and singer ( hodgkin 's lymphoma ) august 1 – rudolf kolisch , 82 , viennese and american violinist and quartet leader august 14 – joe venuti , 74 , us jazz violinist august 24 – louis prima , 67 , jazz musician september 6 – tom wilson , 47 , producer september 7 – keith moon , 32 , drummer of the who ( drug overdose ) september 24 – ruth etting , 80 , us '' torch '' singer october 6 – johnny o'keefe , 43 , australian singer october 9 – jacques brel , 49 , singer-songwriter october 12 – nancy spungen , 20 , girlfriend of sid vicious october 23 – maybelle carter née addington , 69 , us country singer and musician , member of the carter family november 12 – howard swanson , 71 , composer november 18 – lennie tristano , 59 , jazz pianist december 3 – william grant still , 83 , composer december 27 – chris bell , 27 , singer-songwriter ( auto accident ) . references . external links . pop culture madness 1978 pop music chart