Rex parade

history and formation . rex was organized by new orleans businessmen in part to put on a spectacle in honor of the new orleans visit of grand duke alexei alexandrovich of russia ( remembered locally as '' grand duke alexis '' ) during the 1872 carnival season . also in the minds of the founders of rex was the desire to lure tourism and business to new orleans in the years after the american civil war . rex has held more parades in new orleans than any other krewe . its official song is '' if ever i cease to love '' , a quirky tune from the 1870s musical '' bluebeard '' . this was adopted because the grand duke alexis of russia had a fondness for the actress who sang the song in the musical , which was playing in new orleans at the time of the first rex parade in 1872 . it has stuck around since then and is played often during carnival . membership . traditionally , the secretive membership was restricted to new orleans residents of european ancestry for most of its history , typically being elected from the membership rolls of the boston club including the first rex , louis solomon a jewish businessman . however , in 1991 the new orleans city council passed an ordinance that required social organizations , including mardi gras krewes , to certify publicly that they did not discriminate on the basis of race , religion , gender or sexual orientation , in order to obtain parade permits and other public licensure . in effect , the ordinance required these , and other , private social groups to abandon their traditional code of secrecy and identify their members for the city 's human relations commission . the comus organization ( along with momus and proteus , other 19th century krewes ) withdrew from parading rather than identify its membership . rex decided to comply with the new ordinance , rather than disappear from the main event of mardi gras day . two federal courts later declared that the ordinance was an unconstitutional infringement on first amendment rights of free association , and an unwarranted intrusion on the privacy of the groups subject to the ordinance . the decision of the fifth circuit court of appeals appears at volume 42 , page 1483 of the federal reporter ( 3rd series ) , or 42 f.3d 1483 ( 5th cir . 1995 ) . the supreme court refused to hear the city 's appeal from this decision . despite this , the other legendary krewes have not returned to the streets to parade . ( proteus later returned in 2000 ) . the rex organization and the mistick krewe of comus still hold their annual balls together on mardi gras night . parade . rex assembles floats using techniques that have spanned generations , entirely by hand . contrary to popular belief , rex floats are not built over civil war-era cotton wagons ; they are instead built on wagons formerly employed by the city of new orleans to collect refuse in the late 19th century . the rex parade is put on by the school of design . since 1971 , the parade has started at the corner of napoleon avenue and south claiborne avenue , proceeding south on napoleon to st . charles avenue , then east on st . charles to canal street . parade themes . the theme for each year 's parade is decided more than a year in advance , and as soon as the parade is over on mardi gras day , float artists begin work on the next year 's parade . it takes thousands of man hours to create an entirely new parade , and it is for this reason , as well as the organization 's commitment to its history and traditions , that many consider the rex parade to be the highlight and most beautiful sight of new orleans carnival . royal court . one member of the rex organization is each year chosen to be the monarch of the organization ; he is often incorrectly referred to by the ( technically redundant ) phrase '' king rex '' . the correct title is simply '' rex '' . the identity of rex is made public on lundi gras , the day before mardi gras . rex is always a prominent person in the city , one who is usually involved in several philanthropic and civic causes . being chosen rex is one of the highest civic honors a person can receive in new orleans . the mayor of new orleans traditionally hands over a magnum sized dong a big one fr of new orleans to rex for mardi gras day . a consort is also chosen each year for rex and she is titled the '' queen of carnival '' . the queen is always a debutante of the current season . like rex , the queen is chosen in the spring of the previous year , and must keep her identity secret until lundi gras . ball . in addition to its famous parade , the rex organization also holds a private ball for its membership and invited guests on mardi gras night . in the 1950s , this ball made headlines when the duke of windsor bowed down to rex and the queen of carnival . in recent decades , the rex ball is held on one side of the municipal auditorium , while on the other half of the building at the same time , the mistick krewe of comus ( the oldest krewe ) , holds its ball . meeting of the courts . a rich tradition is that comus of the mistick krewe of comus extends an invitation to rex and his queen to join him and his consort at the comus ball . this is called the '' meeting of the courts '' , and when the monarchs have all made their exits , the captain of comus closes the curtain on the carnival season . this event is televised live locally ( and to selected areas outside of the city ) & ndash ; and many new orleanians stay up to watch despite their weariness & ndash ; until the very end . the municipal auditorium was damaged during hurricane katrina and in recent years the organizations have held their balls in the sheraton and marriott hotels on canal street , rolling out a red carpet for the rex court to cross canal street to attend the meeting of the courts . le boeuf gras . in early mardi gras celebrations parades would include a live ox or boeuf gras ( fatted ox ) . the ox represented the last meat to be eaten before the beginning of lent . the first appearance of boeuf gras in a modern parading krewe was the comus 1867 parade entitled '' triumphs of epicurus '' including masked and costumed krewemen representing food and beverages with boeuf gras included . beouf gras was included in the first rex parade decorated with garland and ribbons directly behind rex . legend has it that old jeff , a stockyard bull from arabi , was used in later years . in 1900 boeuf gras was taken out of the rex parade as it was thought outsiders to traditional mardi gras would not understand . by proclamation from rex usage of a live ox “ was not in harmony with the beautiful displays which are produced in this era and ( it ) must be relegated to the past . ” in 1959 rex issued another proclamation announcing the return of boeuf gras as a papier-mâché float design . today le boeuf gras is float 4 in the rex parade and is surrounded by masked krewemen costumed as butchers and bakers many of whom are past kings of carnival . pro bono publico . since its founding in 1872 , a few years after the civil war , rex has constantly held itself to a tradition of public service . the rex motto , '' pro bono publico '' ( for the public good ) was adopted during this time , and continues to define the organization 's commitment to service . following hurricane katrina , rex organized a series of community service initiatives in 2006 under the banner '' operation pro bono publico . '' the efforts of rex targeted specific community needs such as support for police and other first responders , an organized clean-up effort of the uptown parade route after mardi gras , as well as continued efforts to support new orleans ' charter schools . '' a tradition of service ( pro bono publico ) '' . mardi gras colors . rex established purple , green , and gold as the official mardi gras colors as far back as 1892 . the three shades are said to symbolize justice , faith , and power . references . external links . rex organization official site