Honour

social context . honour as a code of behaviour defines the duties of an individual within a social group . margaret visser observes that in an honour-based society '' a person is what he or she is in the eyes of other people '' . a code of honour differs from a legal code , also socially defined and concerned with justice , in that honour remains implicit rather than explicit and objectified . one can distinguish honour from dignity , which wordsworth assessed as measured against an individual 's conscience '' . dignity abides with him alone / who , in the silent hour of inward thought , / can still suspect , and still revere himself . '' william wordsworth , '' yew tree '' rather than against the judgement of a community . compare also the sociological concept of '' face '' . in the early medieval period , a lord 's or lady 's honour was the group of manors or lands he or she held . '' the word was first used indicating an estate which gave its holder dignity and status . '' a dictionary of medieval terms and phrases , christopher corédon , 2004 , d.s . brewer , cambridge , for a person to say '' on my honour '' was not just an affirmation of his or her integrity and rank , but the veracity behind that phrase meant he or she was willing to offer up estates as pledge and guarantee . the concept of honour appears to have declined in importance in the modern west ; conscience has replaced it in the individual context , and the rule of law ( with the rights and duties defined therein ) has taken over in a social context . popular stereotypes would have it surviving more definitively in more tradition-bound cultures ( e.g . pashtun , southern italy , poles , persian , turkey , arab , iberian , '' old south '' or dixie ) in a perception akin to orientalism . feudal or other agrarian societies , which focus upon land use and land ownership , may tend to '' honour '' more than do contemporary industrial societies . note that saint anselm of canterbury ( c . 1033 – 1109 ) in cur deus homo extended the concept of honour from his own feudal society to postulate god 's honour . an emphasis on the importance of honour exists in such traditional institutions as the military ( serving officers may conduct a court of honour ) and in organisations with a military ethos , such as scouting organisations ( which also feature '' courts of honour '' ) . honour in the case of sexuality frequently relates , historically , to fidelity : preservation of '' honour '' equates primarily to maintenance of the virginity of singles and to the exclusive monogamy of the remainder of the population . further conceptions of this type of honour vary widely between cultures ; some cultures regard honour killings of ( mostly female ) members of one 's own family as justified if the individuals have '' defiled the family 's honour '' by marrying against the family 's wishes , or even by becoming the victims of rape . western observers generally see these honour killings as a way of men using the culture of honour to control female sexuality . skinners , executioners , gravedigger , shepherds , barber surgeon , millers , linen-weavers , sow-gelders , latrine-cleaners , and bailiffs and their families were among the '' dishonourable people '' ( unehrliche leute ) in early modern german society . defiled trades and social outcasts – honor and ritual pollution in early modern germany , cambridge university press , 2000 . cultures of honour and cultures of law . various sociologists and anthropologists have contrasted cultures of honour with cultures of law . a culture of law has a body of laws which all members of society must obey , with punishments for transgressors . this requires a society with the structures required to enact and enforce laws . a culture of law incorporates a social contract : members of society give up some aspects of their freedom to defend themselves and retaliate for injuries , on the understanding that society will apprehend and punish transgressors . an alternative to government enforcement of laws is community or individual enforcement of social norms . one way that honour functions is as a major factor of reputation . in a system where there is no court that will authorise the use of force to guarantee the execution of contracts , an honourable reputation is very valuable to promote trust among transaction partners . to dishonour an agreement could be economically ruinous , because all future potential transaction partners might stop trusting the party not to lie , steal their money or goods , not repay debts , mistreat the children they marry off , have children with other people , abandon their children , or fail to provide aid when needed . a dishonourable person might be shunned by the community as a way to punish bad behaviour and create an incentive for others to maintain their honour . if one 's honour is questioned , it can thus be important to disprove any false accusations or slander . in some cultures , the practice of dueling has arisen as a means to settle such disputes firmly , though by physical dominance in force or skill rather than by objective consideration of evidence and facts . honour can also imply duty to perform certain actions , such as providing for and disciplining one 's children , serving in the military during war , contributing to local collective projects like building infrastructure , or exacting revenge in retaliation for acts one is directly harmed by . the concept of personal honour can be extended to family honour , which strengthens the incentives to follow social norms in two ways . first , the consequences of dishonourable actions ( such as suicide or attempted robbery that results in death ) outlive the perpetrator , and negatively affect family members they presumably care about . second , when one member of the family misbehaves , other members of the family are in the position to and are incentivised to strongly enforce the community norms . in strong honour cultures , those who do not conform may be forced or pressured into conformance and transgressors punished physically or psychologically . the use of violence may be collective in its character , where many relatives act together . adding & nbsp ; to & nbsp ; it . a 2016 study suggests that honour culture increases the risk of war . the study found that international conflicts under u.s . presidents who were raised in the american south '' are shown to be twice as likely to involve uses of force , last on average twice as long , and are three times more likely to end in victory for the united states than disputes under non-southern presidents . other characteristics of southern presidencies do not seem able to account for this pattern of results . '' . related concepts . in contemporary international relations , the concept of '' credibility '' resembles that of honour , as when the credibility of a state or of an alliance appears to be at stake , and honour-bound politicians call for drastic measures . compare the concepts of integrity and face in stereotyped east asian cultures , or of mana in polynesian society . the ancient greek concepts of honour ( timē ) included not only the exaltation of the one receiving honour , but also the shaming of the one overcome by the act of hubris . this concept of honour resembles a zero-sum game . in ancient china during the warring states period , honour in battle was one of the many forms of virtue practised by the nobility . in one oft-cited example , duke xiang of the song state chose not to take the enemy by surprise ; instead , he and his forces waited for the enemy to go across the river . this marked conduct worthy of the accolade descriptor ren ( 仁 ) , worthy of the name of '' gentleman '' . in response to this textbook example , mao zedong is quoted : '' we are not duke xiang of song and have no use for his idiotic virtue and morality . '' pre-modern korean thought and society was largely dominated by the preservation of honour and was especially concerned with the ruling yangban elite in the joseon dynasty . in particular , one of the most profound influences from the joseon dynasty is the figure of the seonbi , or '' virtuous scholar '' . the seonbi were ideal , exemplary noblemen of confucian teachings who exhibited high competency in both academics and martial arts . despite their obvious qualifications for important government posts , the seonbi eschewed titles and extravagance for the sake of personal development , often living in humble homes . they were expected to be fiercely loyal to the king of joseon and lay down their lives in battle or in defence of their king , rather than choose treason . inspired by the righteous nature of the seonbi , the modern korean term of the '' seonbi spirit '' calls for maintaining personal honour and conduct , even in the face of certain death . according to bushido , honour was always seen as a duty by samurai . when one lost their honour or the situation made them lose it , the only way to save their dignity was by death . seppuku ( vulgarly called '' harakiri '' , or '' belly-cutting '' ) was the most honourable death in that situation . the only way for a samurai to die more honourably was to be killed in a battle by a sword . honour belief is in the popular adage ‘ true patience means bearing the unbearable . ’