Lignin

history . lignin was first mentioned in 1813 by the swiss botanist a . p . de candolle , who described it as a fibrous , tasteless material , insoluble in water and alcohol but soluble in weak alkaline solutions , and which can be precipitated from solution using acid . see p . 417 . he named the substance “ lignine ” , which is derived from the latin word lignum , meaning wood . it is one of the most abundant organic polymers on earth , exceeded only by cellulose . lignin constitutes 30 % of non-fossil organic carbon and 20 to 35 % of the dry mass of wood . lignin is present in red algae , which suggest that the common ancestor of plants and red algae also synthesised lignin . this finding also suggests that the original function of lignin was structural as it plays this role in the red alga calliarthron , where it supports joints between calcified segments . . structure . lignin is highly heterogeneous polymer derived from a handful of precursor lignols that crosslink in diverse ways . the lignols that crosslink are of three main types , all derived from phenylpropane : coniferyl alcohol ( 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenylpropane ) , sinapyl alcohol ( 3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyphenylpropane ) , and paracoumaryl alcohol ( 4-hydroxyphenylpropane ) . the aryl substituent on these three monomers are sometimes called guaiacyl , syringyl , and 4-hydroxyphenyl from respectively coniferyl , sinapyl , and paracoumaryl alcohols . the relative amounts of the precursor '' monomers '' vary according to the plant source . broadly speaking : hardwoods are rich in coniferyl and sinapyl units softwoods are rich in coniferyl units grasses are rich in coniferyl and sinapyl units lignin 's molecular masses exceed 10,000 u . it is hydrophobic as it is rich in aromatic subunits . the degree of polymerisation is difficult to measure , since the material is heterogeneous . different types of lignin have been described depending on the means of isolation . many grasses have mostly g , while some palms have mainly s . all lignins contain small amounts of incomplete or modified monolignols , and other monomers are prominent in non-woody plants . . biological function . lignin fills the spaces in the cell wall between cellulose , hemicellulose , and pectin components , especially in vascular and support tissues : xylem tracheids , vessel elements and sclereid cells . lignin plays a crucial part in conducting water and aqueous nutrients in plant stems . the polysaccharide components of plant cell walls are highly hydrophilic and thus permeable to water , whereas lignin is more hydrophobic . the crosslinking of polysaccharides by lignin is an obstacle for water absorption to the cell wall . thus , lignin makes it possible for the plant 's vascular tissue to conduct water efficiently . lignin is present in all vascular plants , but not in bryophytes , supporting the idea that the original function of lignin was restricted to water transport . it is covalently linked to hemicellulose and therefore cross-links different plant polysaccharides , conferring mechanical strength to the cell wall and by extension the plant as a whole . its most commonly noted function is the support through strengthening of wood ( mainly composed of xylem cells and lignified sclerenchyma fibres ) in vascular plants . finally , in terms of its other functions , lignin confers disease resistance . . economic significance . image : zellstoffwerk rosenthal 4.jpg thumb pulp mill at blankenstein , germany . in such mills , using the kraft or the sulfite process , lignin is removed from lignocellulose to yield pulp for papermaking . global commercial production of lignin is a consequence of papermaking . in 1988 , more than 220 million tons of paper were produced worldwide . much of this paper was delignified ; lignin comprises about 1/3 of the mass of lignocellulose , the precursor to paper . it can thus be seen that lignin is handled on a very large scale . lignin is an impediment to papermaking as it is colored , it yellows in air , and its presence weakens the paper . once separated from the cellulose , it is burned as fuel . only a fraction is used in a wide range of low volume applications where the form but not the quality is important . mechanical , or high-yield pulp , which is used to make newsprint , still contains most of the lignin originally present in the wood . this lignin is responsible for newsprint 's yellowing with age . high quality paper requires the removal of lignin from the pulp . these delignification processes are core technologies of the papermaking industry as well as the source of significant environmental concerns . in sulfite process , lignin is removed from wood pulp as lignosulfonates , for which many applications have been proposed . they are used as dispersants , humectants , emulsion stabilizers , and sequestrants ( water treatment ) . lignosulfonate was also the first family of water reducers or superplasticizers to be added in the 1930s as admixture to fresh concrete in order to decrease the water-to-cement ( w/c ) ratio , the main parameter controlling the concrete porosity , and thus its mechanical strength , its diffusivity and its hydraulic conductivity , all parameters essential for its durability . it has application in environmentally sustainable dust suppression agent for roads . also , can be used in making of biodegradable plastic along with cellulose as an alternative to hydrocarbon made plastics if lignin extraction is achieved through a more environmentally viable process than generic plastic manufacturing . lignin removed by the kraft process is usually burned for its fuel value , providing energy to power the mill . two commercial processes exist to remove lignin from black liquor for higher value uses : lignoboost ( sweden ) and lignoforce ( canada ) . higher quality lignin presents the potential to become a renewable source of aromatic compounds for the chemical industry , with an addressable market of more than 130bn . given that it is the most prevalent biopolymer after cellulose , lignin has been investigated as a feedstock for biofuel production and can become a crucial plant extract in the development of a new class of biofuels . . biosynthesis . lignin biosynthesis begins in the cytosol with the synthesis of glycosylated monolignols from the amino acid phenylalanine . these first reactions are shared with the phenylpropanoid pathway . the attached glucose renders them water-soluble and less toxic . once transported through the cell membrane to the apoplast , the glucose is removed , and the polymerisation commences . much about its anabolism is not understood even after more than a century of study . the polymerisation step , that is a radical-radical coupling , is catalysis by oxidative enzymes . both peroxidase and laccase enzymes are present in the plant cell walls , and it is not known whether one or both of these groups participates in the polymerisation . low molecular weight oxidants might also be involved . the oxidative enzyme catalyses the formation of monolignol radicals . these radicals are often said to undergo uncatalyzed coupling to form the lignin polymer . an alternative theory invokes an unspecified biological control . . biodegradation . in contrast to other bio-polymers ( e.g . proteins , dna , and even cellulose ) , lignin is resistant to degradation and acid- and base-catalyzed hydrolysis . however the extent to which lignin does or does not degrade varies with species and plant tissue type . for example , syringyl ( s ) lignol is more susceptible to degradation by fungal decay as it has fewer aryl-aryl bonds and a lower redox potential than guaiacyl units . because it is cross-linked with the other cell wall components , lignin minimizes the accessibility of cellulose and hemicellulose to microbial enzymes , leading to a reduced digestibility of biomass . some ligninolytic enzymes include haem peroxidase such as lignin peroxidases , manganese peroxidases , versatile peroxidases , and dye decolorizing peroxidase as well as copper-based laccases . lignin peroxidases oxidize non-phenolic lignin , whereas manganese peroxidases only oxidize the phenolic structures . dye-decolorizing peroxidases , or dyps , exhibit catalytic activity on a wide range of lignin model compounds , but their in vivo substrate is unknown . in general , laccases oxidize phenolic substrates but some fungal laccases have been shown to oxidize non-phenolic substrates in the presence of synthetic redox mediators . . lignin degradation by fungi . well-studied ligninolytic enzymes are found in phanerochaete chrysosporium and other white rot . some white rot fungi , such as c . subvermispora , can degrade the lignin in lignocellulose , but others lack this ability . most fungal lignin degradation involves secreted peroxidases . many fungal laccases are also secreted , which facilitate degradation of phenolic lignin-derived compounds , although several intracellular fungal laccases have also been described . an important aspect of fungal lignin degradation is the activity of accessory enzymes to produce the h 2 o 2 required for the function of lignin peroxidase and other heme peroxidases . . lignin degradation by bacteria . bacteria lack most of the enzymes employed in fungal lignin degradation , yet bacterial degradation can be quite extensive . the ligninolytic activity of bacteria has not been studied extensively even though it was first described in 1930 . many bacterial dyps have been characterized . bacteria do not express any of the plant-type peroxidases ( lignin peroxidase , mn peroxidase , or versatile peroxidases ) , but three of the four classes of dyp are only found in bacteria . in contrast to fungi , most bacterial enzymes involved in lignin degradation are intracellular , including two classes of dyp and most bacterial laccases . bacterial degradation of lignin is particularly relevant in aquatic systems such as lakes , rivers , and streams , where inputs of terrestrial material ( e.g . leaf litter ) can enter waterways and leach dissolved organic carbon rich in lignin , cellulose , and hemicellulose . in the environment , lignin can be degraded either biotically via bacteria or abiotically via photochemical alteration , and oftentimes the latter assists in the former . in addition to the presence or absence of light , several of environmental factors affect the biodegradability of lignin , including bacterial community composition , mineral associations , and redox state . . pyrolysis . pyrolysis of lignin during the combustion of wood or charcoal production yields a range of products , of which the most characteristic ones are methoxy-substituted phenols . of those , the most important are guaiacol and syringol and their derivatives . their presence can be used to trace a smoke source to a wood fire . in cooking , lignin in the form of hardwood is an important source of these two compounds , which impart the characteristic aroma and taste to smoked foods such as barbecue . the main flavor compounds of smoked ham are guaiacol , and its 4- , 5- , and 6-methyl derivatives as well as 2,6-dimethylphenol . these compounds are produced by thermal breakdown of lignin in the wood used in the smokehouse . wittkowski , reiner ; ruther , joachim ; drinda , heike ; rafiei-taghanaki , foroozan '' formation of smoke flavor compounds by thermal lignin degradation '' acs symposium series ( flavor precursors ) , 1992 , volume 490 , pp 232–243 . . chemical analysis . the conventional method for lignin quantitation in the pulp industry is the klason lignin and acid-soluble lignin test , which is standardized procedures . the cellulose is digested thermally in the presence of acid . the residue is termed klason lignin . acid-soluble lignin ( asl ) is quantified by the intensity of its ultraviolet spectroscopy . the carbohydrate composition may be also analyzed from the klason liquors , although there may be sugar breakdown products ( furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural ) . tappi . t 222 om-02 - acid-insoluble lignin in wood and pulp or nrel sluiter , a . , hames , b . , ruiz , r . , scarlata , c . , sluiter , j . , templeton , d . , crocker , d . determination of structural carbohydrates and lignin in biomass . technical report nrel/tp-510-42618 , u.s . department of energy , 2008 . a solution of hydrochloric acid and phloroglucinol is used for the detection of lignin ( wiesner test ) . a brilliant red color develops , owing to the presence of coniferaldehyde groups in the lignin . lignin production and detection in wood . john m . harkin , u.s . forest service research note fpl-0148 , november 1966 ( article ) thioglycolysis is an analytical technique for lignin quantitation . lignin structure can also be studied by computational simulation . thermochemolysis ( chemical break down of a substance under vacuum and at high temperature ) with tetramethylammonium hydroxide ( tmah ) or cupric oxide has also been used to characterize lignins . the ratio of syringyl lignol ( s ) to vanillyl lignol ( v ) and cinnamyl lignol ( c ) to vanillyl lignol ( v ) is variable based on plant type and can therefore be used to trace plant sources in aquatic systems ( woody vs . non-woody and angiosperm vs . gymnosperm ) . ratios of carboxylic acid ( ad ) to aldehyde ( al ) forms of the lignols ( ad/al ) reveal diagenetic information , with higher ratios indicating a more highly degraded material . increases in the ( ad/al ) value indicate an oxidative cleavage reaction has occurred on the alkyl lignin side chain which has been shown to be a step in the decay of wood by many white-rot and some soft rot fungi . lignin and its models have been well examined by 1 h and 13 c nmr spectroscopy . owing to the structural complexity of lignins , the spectra are poorly resolved and quantitation is challenging . . further reading .