1979 in literature

events . may – the merchant ivory productions film the europeans appears . its screenplay by ruth prawer jhabvala draws on the 1878 henry james the europeans . october 25 – the london review of books is first issued , its founding editors being karl miller , mary-kay wilmers and susannah clapp . for its first six months it appears as an insert to the new york review of books . november – dambudzo marechera 's the house of hunger wins the guardian fiction prize . unknown dates k . w . jeter 's novel morlock night pioneers full-length fiction in the genre he later calls steampunk . august wilson 's jitney is first produced ; it becomes the eighth in his '' pittsburgh cycle '' . . new books . fiction . douglas adams – the hitchhiker 's guide to the galaxy v . c . andrews – flowers in the attic jeffrey archer – kane and abel barbara taylor bradford – a woman of substance octavia butler – kindred italo calvino — if on a winter 's night a traveler orson scott card – a planet called treason angela carter – the bloody chamber eileen chang – lust , caution agatha christie – miss marple 's final cases and two other stories l . sprague de camp and lin carter – conan the liberator michael ende – the neverending story ( die unendliche geschichte ) josé pablo feinmann – últimos días de la víctima thomas flanagan — year of the french alan dean foster – alien ( movie novelization ) carlo fruttero and franco lucentini — a che punto è la notte brian garfield - the paladin william golding – darkness visible william goldman – tinsel nadine gordimer – burger 's daughter arthur hailey – overload stratis haviaras – when the tree sings douglas hill – galactic warlord stephen king – the dead zone russell kirk – the princess of all lands milan kundera – the book of laughter and forgetting ( first published in french as le livre du rire et de l'oubli ) john le carré – smiley 's people morgan llywelyn – lion of ireland : the legend of brian boru robert ludlum – the matarese circle norman mailer – the executioner 's song roger mcdonald – 1915 : a novel ellis peters – one corpse too many jerry pournelle – janissaries satyajit ray – hatyapuri harold robbins – memories of another day philip roth – the ghost writer mary stewart – the last enchantment peter straub – ghost story william styron – sophie 's choice trevanian – shibumi kaari utrio – rautalilja jack vance – the face kurt vonnegut – jailbird elizabeth walter – in the mist and other uncanny encounters william wharton – birdy kit williams – masquerade raymond williams – the fight for manod robert anton wilson – schrodinger 's cat tom wolfe – the right stuff roger zelazny – roadmarks . children and young people . chris van allsburg – the garden of abdul gasazi katharine mary briggs ( with anne yvonne gilbert ) – abbey lubbers , banshees , & boggarts : an illustrated encyclopedia of fairies raymond briggs – fungus the bogeyman roald dahl – the twits colin dann – the animals of farthing wood peter dickinson ( with wayne anderson ) – the flight of dragons elizabeth laird – rosy 's garden robie macauley – a secret history of time to come bill peet – cowardly clyde daniel pinkwater – yobgorgle : mystery monster of lake ontario ellen raskin – the westing game jane severance ( with tea schook ) – when megan went away barbara sleigh – carbonel series angela sommer-bodenburg – der kleine vampir . drama . bahram beyzai – death of yazdgerd ( مرگ یزدگرد ) caryl churchill – cloud nine david fennario – balconville richard harris – outside edge elfriede jelinek – was geschah , nachdem nora ihren mann verlassen hatte ; oder stützen der gesellschaften ( what occurred after nora left her husband , or supports of society ) heiner müller – hamletmachine ( first performance ) mark medoff – children of a lesser god neil oram – the warp peter shaffer – amadeus sam shepard – buried child martin sherman – bent tom stoppard – undiscovered country stoppard plays at . poetry . kingsley amis – collected poems . non-fiction . alison adburgham – shopping in style : london from the restoration to edwardian elegance david attenborough – life on earth harold walter bailey – dictionary of khotan saka jerome bruner – on knowing : essays for the left hand l . sprague de camp ( editor ) – the blade of conan elizabeth eisenstein – the printing press as an agent of change peter evans – the music of benjamin britten john fowles – the tree sandra gilbert and susan gubar – the madwoman in the attic eloise greenfield , lessie jones little , pattie ridley jones & ndash ; childtimes : a three-generation memoir douglas hofstadter – gödel , escher , bach henry kissinger – the white house years leon litwack – been in the storm so long jean-françois lyotard – the postmodern condition ( la condition postmoderne : rapport sur le savoir ) jessica mitford – poison penmanship : the gentle art of muckraking stephen pile – the book of heroic failures clark ashton smith – the black book of clark ashton smith margaret trudeau – beyond reason tom wolfe – the right stuff . births . february 4 – ben lerner , american poet , novelist and critic february 10 – johan harstad , norwegian novelist brageprisen nominations 2010 . march 28 – benjamin percy , american short story writer april 14 – patrick somerville , american novelist and short story writer june 28 – florian zeller , french novelist and dramatist july 14 – yukiko motoya , japanese fiction writer , playwright , theatre director and voice actress unknown dates d.d . johnston , scottish political novelist and university lecturer emily st . john mandel , canadian-born novelist '' mandel , emily st . john 1979– -- '' in contemporary authors , v . 301 . gale , 2010 . . deaths . january – dilys cadwaladr , welsh-language poet ( born 1902 ) january 27 – victoria ocampo , argentine publisher , writer and critic ( born 1890 ) february 9 – allen tate , american poet and essayist ( born 1899 ) february 25 – john l . wasserman , american entertainment critic ( car accident , born 1938 ) february 27 – sir george clark , english historian ( born 1890 ) march 26 – jean stafford , american short story writer and novelist ( heart failure , born 1915 ) april 8 – breece d ' j pancake , american short story writer ( suicide , born 1952 ) may 10 – j . b . morton ( beachcomber ) , english humorous newspaper columnist ( born 1893 ) may 14 – jean rhys , dominica , west indies-born english novelist ( born 1890 ) june 1 – eric partridge , new zealand/british lexicographer ( born 1894 ) june 3 – arno schmidt , german novelist ( born 1914 ) june 7 – forrest carter , american genre novelist ( heart failure , born 1925 ) july 6 – malcolm hulke , english television writer ( born 1924 ) july 15 – juana de ibarbourou , uruguayan poet ( born 1892 ) july 21 – eugène vinaver , russian-born english literary scholar ( born 1899 ) july 23 – joseph kessel , french journalist and novelist ( born 1898 ) july 29 – herbert marcuse , german jewish philosopher ( born 1898 ) august 8 – nicholas monsarrat , english novelist ( born 1910 ) august 16 – jerzy jurandot ( jerzy glejgewicht ) , polish poet and dramatist ( born 1911 ) september 5 – john bradburne , english poet and missionary ( killed by guerillas ; born 1921 ) september 25 – zhou libo ( 周立波 ) , chinese novelist and translator ( born 1908 ) october 6 – elizabeth bishop , american poet ( born 1911 ) october 17 – s . j . perelman , american humorist ( born 1904 ) october 18 – virgilio piñera , cuban poet and short-story writer ( born 1912 ) december 12 – goronwy rees , welsh journalist and academic ( born 1909 ) december 19 – donald creighton , canadian historian ( born 1902 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : odysseus elytis . canada . see 1979 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : antonine maillet , pélagie la charette prix médicis french : claude durand , la nuit zoologique prix médicis international : alejo carpentier , la harpe et l'ombre . spain . miguel de cervantes prize : jorge luis borges and gerardo diego . united kingdom . booker prize : penelope fitzgerald , offshore carnegie medal for children 's literature : peter dickinson , tulku cholmondeley award : james tait black memorial prize for fiction : william golding , darkness visible james tait black memorial prize for biography : brian finney , christopher isherwood : a critical biography . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for fiction : nebula award : vonda n . mcintyre , dreamsnake hugo award : vonda n . mcintyre , dreamsnake locus award for best novel : vonda n . mcintyre , dreamsnake newbery medal for children 's literature : bancroft prize : christopher thorne , allies of a kind : the united states , britain , and the war against japan , 1941–1945 bancroft prize : anthony f . c . wallace , rockdale : the growth of an american village in the early industrial revolution pulitzer prize for drama : sam shepard , buried child pulitzer prize for biography or autobiography : leonard baker , days of sorrow and pain : leo baeck and the berlin jews pulitzer prize for fiction : john cheever , the stories of john cheever pulitzer prize for poetry : robert penn warren , now and then : poems 1976–1978 pulitzer prize for history : don e . fehrenbacher , the dred scott case : its significance in american law and politics pulitzer prize for general non-fiction : e . o . wilson , on human nature . elsewhere . miles franklin award : david ireland , a woman of the future premio nadal : carlos rojas , el ingenioso hidalgo y poeta federico garcía lorca asciende a los infiernos viareggio prize : giorgio manganelli , centuria . references .