Mongolic languages

classification . the stages of historical mongolic are : pre-proto-mongolic , from approximately the 4th century ad until the 12th century ad , influenced by common turkic , and previously by bulgar turkic . proto-mongolic , from approximately the 13th century ad , spoken around the time of genghis khan . middle mongol ( depending on classification spoken from the 13th century until the early 15th century or late 16th century ; given the almost entire lack of written sources for the period in between , an exact cutoff point can not be established ) classical mongolian , from approximately 1700 to 1900 mongolian language the standard mongolian language has been in official use since 1919 , and this form of the language is used in the economic , political , and social fields.the script for standard mongolian uses a version of the russian alphabet called the mongolian cyrillic alphabet . it was introduced in the 1940s in the mongolian people 's republic under soviet influence , after a brief period where latin was used as the official script . after the mongolian democratic revolution in 1990 , the traditional mongolian script was considered to replace cyrillic , but this plan was not adopted . however , the government announced it will be official by 2025 . contemporary mongolic languages are classified as follows . ; mongolic dagur ( 96,000 speakers ) central mongolic khamnigan ( 2,000 speakers ) buryat ( 330,000 speakers ) mongolian proper ( 5.2 million speakers ) eastern and central dialect khalkha chakhar khorchin ordos ( 123,000 speakers ) oirat ( including kalmyk ) ( 360,000 speakers ) southern mongolic ( part of a gansu–qinghai sprachbund ) shira yugur ( 4,000 speakers ) shirongolic monguor ( 150,000 speakers ) bonan ( 6,000 speakers ) santa ( dongxiang ) ( 200,000 speakers ) kangjia ( 1,000 speakers ) moghol ( 200 speakers ) alexander vovin ( 2007 ) identifies the extinct tabγač or tuoba language as a mongolic language . vovin , alexander . 2007 . ‘ once again on the tabγač language . ’ mongolian studies xxix : 191-206 . however , chen ( 2005 ) chen , sanping 2005 . turkic or proto-mongolian ? a note on the tuoba language . central asiatic journal 49.2 : 161-73 . argues that tuoba ( tabγač ) was a turkic language . vovin ( 2018 ) suggests that the ruanruan language of the rouran khaganate was a mongolic language , close but not identical to middle mongolian . the classification and numbers of speakers above follow janhunen ( 2006 ) except for southern mongolic , which follows nugteren ( 2011 ) . in another classificational approach , e.g . sečenbaγatur et al . ( 2005:193–194 ) there is a tendency to call central mongolian a language consisting of mongolian proper , oirat and buryat , while ordos ( and implicitly also khamnigan ) is seen as a variety of mongolian proper . within mongolian proper , they then draw a distinction between khalkha on the one hand and southern mongolian ( containing everything else ) on the other hand . a less common subdivision of central mongolic is to divide it into a central dialect ( khalkha , chakhar , ordos ) , an eastern dialect ( kharchin , khorchin ) , a western dialect ( oirat , kalmyk ) , and a northern dialect ( consisting of two buryat varieties ) . quoted from sečenbaγatur et al . ( 2005:167–168 ) the broader delimitation of mongolian may be based on mutual intelligibility , but an analysis based on a tree diagram such as the one above faces other problems because of the close contacts between , for example , buryat and khalkha mongols during history , thus creating or preserving a dialect continuum . another problem lies in the sheer comparability of terminology , as western linguists use language and dialect , while mongolian linguists use the grimmian trichotomy language ( kele ) , dialect ( nutuγ-un ayalγu ) and mundart ( aman ayalγu ) . rybatzki ( 2003 : 388-389 ) rybatzki , volker . 2003 . '' intra-mongolic taxonomy . '' in janhunen , juha ( ed ) . the mongolic languages , 364-390 . routledge language family series 5 . london : routledge . recognizes the following 6 areal subgroups of mongolic . northeastern mongolic ( ne ) dagur northern mongolic ( n ) khamnigan mongol–buryat central mongolic ( c ) mongol proper–ordos–oirat south-central mongolic ( sc ) shira yughur southeastern mongolic ( se ) mongghul–mangghuer–bonan–santa - kangjia southwestern mongolic ( sw ) moghol . mixed languages . the following are mixed sinitic–mongolic languages . tangwang ( mixed mandarin–santa ) wutun ( mixed mandarin–bonan ) . pre-proto-mongolic . pre-proto-mongolic is the name for the stage of mongolic that precedes proto-mongolic . proto-mongolic can be clearly identified chronologically with the language spoken by the mongols during genghis khan 's early expansion in the 1200-1210s . pre-proto-mongolic , by contrast , is a continuum that stretches back indefinitely in time . it is divided into early pre-proto-mongolic and late pre-proto-mongolic . late pre-proto-mongolic refers to the mongolic spoken a few centuries before proto-mongolic by the mongols and neighboring tribes like the merkits and keraits . certain archaic words and features in written mongol go back past proto-mongolic to late pre-proto-mongolic ( janhunen 2006 ) . relationship with turkic . pre-proto-mongolic has borrowed various words from turkic languages . in the case of early pre-proto-mongolic , certain loanwords in the mongolic languages point to early contact with oghur ( pre-proto-bulgaric ) turkic , also known as r-turkic . these loanwords precede common turkic ( z-turkic ) loanwords and include : mongolic ikere ( twins ) from pre-proto-bulgaric ikir ( versus common turkic ekiz ) mongolic hüker ( ox ) from pre-proto-bulgaric hekür ( common turkic öküz ) mongolic jer ( weapon ) from pre-proto-bulgaric jer ( common turkic yäz ) mongolic biragu ( calf ) versus common turkic buzagu mongolic siri- ( to smelt ore ) versus common turkic siz- ( to melt ) the above words are thought to have been borrowed from oghur turkic during the time of the xiongnu . later turkic peoples in mongolia all spoke forms of common turkic ( z-turkic ) as opposed to oghur ( bulgharic ) turkic , which withdrew to the west in the 4th century . the chuvash language , spoken by 1 million people in european russia , is the only living representative of oghur turkic which split from proto turkic around the 1st century ad . words in mongolic like dayir ( brown , common turkic yagiz ) and nidurga ( fist , common turkic yudruk ) with initial d and n versus common turkic y are sufficiently archaic to indicate loans from an earlier stage of oghur ( pre-proto-bulgaric ) . this is because chuvash and common turkic do not differ in these features despite differing fundamentally in rhotacism-lambdacism ( janhunen 2006 ) . oghur tribes lived in the mongolian borderlands before the 5th century , and provided oghur loanwords to early pre-proto-mongolic before common turkic loanwords . proto-mongolic . proto-mongolic , the ancestor language of the modern mongolic languages , is very close to middle mongol , the language spoken at the time of genghis khan and the mongol empire . most features of modern mongolic languages can thus be reconstructed from middle mongol . an exception would be the voice suffix like -caga- 'do together ' , which can be reconstructed from the modern languages but is not attested in middle mongol . the languages of the historical donghu , wuhuan , and xianbei peoples might have been related to proto-mongolic . , '' . believed that at least some of their constituent tribes spoke a mongolian language , though there is still some argument that a particular variety of turkic may have been spoken among them . '' for tabghach , the language of the founders of the northern wei dynasty , for which the surviving evidence is very sparse , and khitan , for which evidence exists that is written in the two khitan scripts ( large and small ) which have as yet not been fully deciphered , a direct affiliation to mongolic can now be taken to be most likely or even demonstrated . see vovin 2007 for tabghach and janhunen 2012 for khitan . juha janhunen ( 2006 ) classified the khitan language into the '' para-mongolic '' family , meaning that it is related to the mongolic languages as a sister group , rather than as a direct descendant of proto-mongolic . alexander vovin ( 2017 ) vovin , alexander . ( 2017 ) . koreanic loanwords in khitan and their importance in the decipherment of the latter . acta orientalia academiae scientiarum hungaricae , 70 ( 2 ) , 207-215 . has also identified several possible loanwords from koreanic languages into the khitan language . vovin ( 2015 ) identified the extinct tuyuhun language as yet another para-mongolic language . vovin , alexander . 2015 . some notes on the tuyuhun ( 吐谷渾 ) language : in the footsteps of paul pelliot . in journal of sino-western communications , volume 7 , issue 2 ( december 2015 ) . . see also . list of mongolic languages inscription of hüis tolgoi