Hisaichi Terauchi

biography . early military career . terauchi was born in tokyo prefecture , and was the eldest son of gensui count terauchi masatake , the first governor-general of korea and the 9th prime minister of japan . at the age of four , his father was transferred to france , and he was sent to live with his maternal aunt in yamaguchi . due to his family 's close connections with former chōshū domain , he was officially registered as a resident of yamaguchi prefecture around that time . after his father returned from an overseas assignment , the family moved back to tokyo . he graduated from the 11th class of the imperial japanese army academy in 1899 , and served as a junior officer in the russo-japanese war with the imperial guard ( japan ) . after the war , terauchi returned to the army staff college and graduated from the 21st class in 1909 . in july 1912 , he was sent as a military attaché to austria-hungary and in july 1914 to germany . he was promoted to lieutenant colonel in november 1916 and attached to the ija 2nd infantry regiment in september 1917 . he worked as several administrative posts within the imperial japanese army general staff from september 1918 . in early november 1919 , he succeeded in the hereditary title of hakushaku ( count ) under the kazoku peerage system upon the death of his father , and was raised in military rank to colonel . in september 1920 , he became commander of the 3rd guards infantry battalion , and chief-of-staff of the imperial guard from september 1923 . as general . terauchi was promoted to major general in february 1924 and was assigned to the staff of the ija 1st division in march 1926 . in september 1926 , the sanyō main line train he was riding on derailed in an accident that killed 34 people , but terauchi was not injured . in august 1927 , terauchi became chief of staff of the chosen army in korea . he was promoted to lieutenant general in august 1929 and was assigned command of the hiroshima-based ija 5th division . in january 1932 , he was transferred to the osaka-based ija 4th division . he was the leading military commander in osaka during the notorious '' go-stop incident '' , in which the verbal altercation between two young men—an off-duty soldier in uniform who had ignored a traffic light and a policeman , which developed into fistfights , and finally into a ministerial-level conflict between the home ministry and the army . terauchi demanded an official apology from the osaka police , insisting that the policeman had unfairly injured the army 's prestige.the osaka police refused to apologize , stating that military personnel should also observe the law . however , the home ministry and the army concluded later an agreement that precluded the civilian police from handling crimes committed by military personnel , which effectively placed military personnel above the law . in august 1934 , terauchi was transferred to command the taiwan army of japan . he was promoted to full general in october 1935 . military-political career . terauchi was strongly associated with the kōdõha faction in military politics and briefly served as interim army minister in march 1936 in the cabinet of prime minister koki hirota . his inflammatory rhetoric brought about the collapse of the hirota administration in january 1937 when he engaged in a verbal shouting match against speaker of the house kunimatsu hamada , accusing him of defaming the army . hamada retorted that he did not insult the army , and would commit seppuku if it could be proven otherwise . on the other hand , hamada said that terauchi should commit seppuku himself if his accusation should be proven false . this clash further intensified the conflict between the military and the civilian political parties in the japanese diet . world war ii . in february 1937 , terauchi was appointed head of the inspectorate general of military training , the third-most prestigious post in the military . with the outbreak of the second sino-japanese war , terauchi was assigned combat duty and was given command of the north china area army in august 1937 . he was awarded the grand cordon of the order of the rising sun in 1938 . in november 1941 , terauchi was transferred to command of the southern expeditionary army group and soon afterward began coordinating war plans with admiral yamamoto isoroku for the pacific war . after leading the conquest of southeast asia , terauchi established his headquarters in singapore . he received the order of the golden kite , 1st class , in march 1942 . promoted to gensui ( field marshal ) on 6 june 1943 , he relocated to the philippines in may 1944 . when this area came under threat from the allied attack , he retreated to saigon in french indochina . soon after receiving word of the loss of burma by japan , he suffered a stroke on 10 may 1945 . as the war in the pacific drew to a close , a british intelligence liaison officer , major richard holbrook mcgregor , was sent by general mountbatten to saigon to verify that count terauchi was indeed in a hospital and unable to make the flight to raf mingaladon airfield to personally discuss terms of a cease-fire . instead , the remaining 680,000 japanese soldiers in southeast asia were surrendered on his behalf in singapore on 12 september 1945 by general seishirō itagaki . terauchi personally surrendered to mountbatten on 30 november 1945 in saigon . on 12 june 1946 , he suffered from another stroke at renggam , johor bahru , malaya while being transferred to a prisoner of war camp and died . he was buried at the japanese cemetery in singapore . the 2nd count terauchi surrendered his family heirloom wakizashi short sword to the then lord louis mountbatten in saigon in 1945 . the sword dates from 1413 , and is now kept at windsor castle . it was almost the subject of a diplomatic incident in the mid-1980s , when queen elizabeth the queen mother wanted to place it on prominent display during a dinner held for crown prince naruhito of japan . however , her daughter , queen elizabeth ii , vetoed the idea . war crimes . terauchi was given command of southern expeditionary army , responsible for the opening japanese offensive of the pacific war . he was critical of homma for being too 'soft ' on filipinos and of imamura for granting too much power to the indonesian puppet government . terauchi 's attitude likely played a role in masaharu homma 's subsequent relief and retirement . terauchi thought the army should stay out of politics , by which he probably meant that the politicians should keep their hands off the army . in other respects he was a typically ruthless japanese army officer . neither the americans nor his own peers thought much of him , but his staff were impressed by the fact that such a wealthy man chose to live so frugally . yamashita felt otherwise , writing in his diary that '' . that damn terauchi lives in luxury in saigon , sleeps in a comfortable bed , eats good food and plays shogi '' yamashita added that : '' if there are two ways of doing something , trust southern army to pick the wrong one . '' when told that terauchi was in too poor health to attend the surrender ceremony at singapore , mountbatten sent his own doctor to examine terauchi . the doctor confirmed his fragile health , and mountbatten had him transferred to a bungalow in malaya in march 1946 . on 11 june 1946 , terauchi became angered by a report of a kempeitai lieutenant colonel who had threatened to disclose japanese war crimes to the allies , and he suffered a second massive stroke and died early the next morning . as a consequence , he never stood trial for war crime , such as his responsibility for mistreatment of laborers on the burma-siam railroad and his order that all allied prisoners of war in his command area were to be massacred if japan was invaded . notes . references . . see also . . external links . -