Dov Ber of Mezeritch

name . the most common transliterations are dov-ber , dov baer and dovber ; rarely used forms are dob ber or dobh ber , which often depend on the region in eastern europe where jews resided and hence the influence of the local yiddish dialects . the name דוב-בער dov-ber literally means '' bear-bear '' , traceable back to the hebrew word דב dov '' bear '' and the yiddish word bär '' bear '' . ghil'ad zuckermann ( 2003 ) , language contact and lexical enrichment in israeli hebrew . palgrave macmillan . / it is thus an example of a bilingual tautological name . dov ber of mezeritch was known as the maggid — '' preacher '' or literally '' sayer , '' one who preaches and admonishes to go in god 's ways — of mezritsh ( the german form meseritz is sometimes used instead of mezeritch ) . towards the end of his life he was also known as the maggid of rivne , the town where he was buried . biography . dov ber was born in lokachi , volhynia in 1710 , according to the jewish encyclopedia , though his year of birth is unknown and some sources place it around 1700 . '' the journeyman/ascetic '' , chabad.org , retrieved may 20 , 2006 little is known about him before he became a disciple of the baal shem tov . a hasidic legend states that , when he was five years old , his family home burst into flames . on hearing his mother weeping , he asked : '' mother , do we have to be so unhappy because we have lost a house ? '' she replied that she was mourning the family tree , which was destroyed , and is traced to king david by way of rabbi yochanan hasandlar and master in the talmud . the boy replied : '' and what does that matter ! i shall get you a new family tree which begins with me ! '' martin buber . tales of the hasidim , schocken 1947 ; this edition 1991 , p . 98-99 . when he was young , he reportedly lived in great poverty with his wife . one legend relates that when a child was born , they had no money to pay the midwife . his wife complained and the maggid went outside to '' curse '' israel . he went outside and said : '' o children of israel , may abundant blessings come upon you ! '' when his wife complained a second time , he went outside again and cried : '' let all happiness come to the children of israel — but they shall give their money to thorn bushes and stones ! '' the baby was too weak to cry , and the maggid sighed rather than '' cursing '' . immediately the answer came , and a voice said : '' you have lost your share in the coming world . '' the maggid replied : '' well , then , the reward has been done away with . now i can begin to serve in good earnest . '' he is buried in hannopil , beside zusha of hanipol . visit to baal shem tov . dov ber later became an admirer of isaac luria 's system of kabbalah , which was becoming popular at that time , and was aware of moshe chaim luzzatto , whose writings , then only in manuscript , were well known among the polish mystics of the period . dov ber followed the lurian school , living the life of an ascetic , fasting a great deal , praying intensely , and living in poverty . he is reported to have become a cripple as a result of poor nourishment . one account has it that on account of his poor health he was persuaded to seek out the baal shem tov for a cure . he arrived at the baal shem tov 's house , expecting to hear expositions of profound mysteries , but instead was told stories of the latter 's everyday life . hearing only similar stories at each subsequent visit , dov ber decided to return home . just as he was about to leave , he was summoned again to the baal shem tov 's house . the baal shem tov opened an '' eitz chaim '' of rabbi chaim vital ( rabbi isaac luria 's chief disciple ) , and asked him to explain a certain passage . dov ber did so to the best of his ability , but the baal shem tov declared that he had not understood the real meaning of the passage . dov ber reviewed it once more and insisted that his interpretation was correct . the baal shem tov then proceeded to explain the passage himself . legend has it that , as he spoke , the darkness suddenly gave way to light , and angels appeared and listened to the baal shem tov 's words . '' your explanations , '' he said to dov ber , '' were correct , but your deductions were thoughts without any soul in them . '' this experience persuaded dov ber to stay with the baal shem tov . martin buber , die erzählungen der chassidim , 12 . auflage , zürich : manesse verlag , 1992 , , p . 194 this day in jewish history 1772 : the maggid , untrained successor to baal shem tov , dies , haaretz dov ber is reported to have learned from the baal shem tov to value everyday things and events , and to emphasize the proper attitude with which to torah study . the mystical philosophy of the baal shem tov rejected the emphasis on mortification of the body in musar and kabbalah traditions , seeing the greater spiritual advantage in transforming the material into a vehicle for holiness , rather than breaking it . this could be achieved by the perception of the omnipresent divine immanence in all things , from understanding the inner mystical torah teachings of hasidic thought . under the guidance of the baal shem tov , dov ber abandoned his ascetic lifestyle , and recovered his health , though his left foot remained lame . the baal shem tov said that '' before dov ber came to me , he was already a pure golden menorah ( candelebrum ) . all i needed to do was ignite it . '' the great maggid by jacob immanuel schochet , kehot publication society regarding his holiness , the baal shem tov also reputedly said that if dov ber had not been lame , and had been able to ritually immerse in the mikvah , then he could have been able to bring the mashiach . hasidic leadership . immediately after the death of the baal shem tov in 1760 , his son rabbi tsvi became the next rebbe . after only a year he gave up this position . among the disciples of the baal shem tov , two stood out as contenders to succeed him , dov ber and yacov yoseph of polonne . yacov yoseph would later become the author of the first hasidic book published ( '' toldos yaacov yosef '' in 1780 ) , one of the most direct records of the teachings of the baal shem tov . by collective consent , the maggid assumed the leadership of hasidism . in effect he became the architect of the hasidic movement and is responsible for its successful dissemination . the maggid was housebound because of his poor physical condition . jewish philosopher solomon maimon records an encounter with the maggid in his memoirs , in which he passes a strong negative judgement on the hasidic movement . he relates that the maggid passed the entire week in his room , permitting only a few confidants to enter . he appeared in public only on shabbat , dressed in white satin . on those occasions he jewish services , and kept open house for anyone who wanted to dine with him . after the meal he would reportedly begin to chant , and placing his hand upon his forehead , would ask those present to quote any verse from the bible . these served as texts for the maggid 's subsequent sermon . solomon maimon wrote : '' he was such a master in his craft that he combined these disjointed verses into an harmonious whole . '' solomon maimon . '' selbstbiographie , '' i . 231 et seq . in kaufmann kohler & louis ginzberg . '' baer 04/06 ( dob ) of meseritz '' , jewish encyclopedia , retrieved may 20 , 2006 he attracted a remarkable group of scholarly and saintly disciples , including most of his fellow students of the baal shem tov . the baal shem tov had travelled across jewish areas , reaching out to and inspiring the common folk , whose sincerity he cherished . he sought to revive the broken spirit of the simple jews . at the same time , he would also seek out the great scholars of talmud and kabbalah , to win them over to hasidism , to whom he taught the inner meaning of his teachings . many hasidic tales relate the stories of the baal shem tov 's travels , accompanied by his close disciples , and led by his non-jewish wagon driver . dov ber , in contrast , set up his court in mezhirichi , where his lameness restricted him , and devoted his main focus to articulating the mystical-philosophical system within the baal shem tov 's teachings to his close circle of disciples , who would lead the future movement . the simple folk were also able to visit during the sabbath public attendancies of dov ber , and receive spiritual encouragement and comfort . the maggid 's court became the spiritual seat and place of pilgrimage of the second generation of the hasidic movement , and moved its centre north from the baal shem tov 's residence in medzhybizh . this move benefited the growth of the movement , as it was closer to new territories in galicia , poland and belarus to reach . it was also nearer to the centre of rabbinic opposition in lithuania , who perceived of the new movement as a spiritual threat . the disciples of dov ber related that : with the move of rabbi dov ber , the shechina ( divine presence ) '' packed up her belongings and moved from medzhybizh to mezeritch , and all we can do is follow '' the elite group of disciples , the '' chevraya kaddisha '' ( '' holy society '' ) , included rabbis aharon of karlin , menachem mendel of vitebsk , levi yitzchok of berditchev , elimelech of lizhensk , zusha of hanipol , shmelka ( later chief rabbi of nikolsburg ) , pinchas horowitz ( later chief rabbi of frankfurt-am-main and author of profound talmudic commentaries ) , and shneur zalman of liadi ( author of the tanya , and by instructions of his master , author of an updated version of the shulchan aruch code of jewish law for the new movement ) . these disciples , being themselves great talmudic authorities and well-versed in kabbalah and hasidic philosophy , were successful in turning hasidus into a vast movement . opposition of the rabbis . hasidism spread rapidly as a result of dov ber 's powerful personality , gaining footholds in volhynia , lithuania , and ukraine . the dissolution of the '' four-lands '' synod in 1764 proved favorable to its spread . the local rabbis were annoyed by the growth of the movement , but could not easily do anything about it . the vilna gaon was the only rabbi whose reputation extended beyond the borders of lithuania . when hasidism appeared in vilna , the vilna gaon enacted the first major herem ( censure ) against hasidism , which was issued on april 11 , 1772 . the vilna gaon believed the movement was antagonistic to talmudic rabbinism and was suspicious that it was a remnant of the recent sabbatean movement . see hasidim and mitnagdim . the maggid 's pupils rabbi menachem mendel of vitebsk and rabbi shneur zalman of liadi tried to visit the vilna gaon to bring about reconciliation , but the vilna gaon declined to meet them . lubavitch legend has it that had the gaon met with these two rabbis , the mashiach ( messiah ) would have come . the ban issued at vilna drew the eyes of the world toward hasidism . rabbi dov ber ignored the opposition , but it is blamed in part for his death in mezhirichi on december 15 , 1772 . . spreading hasidism . dov ber assigned future territories of influence to his leading disciples . after the death of the maggid in 1772 , these disciples dispersed to their assigned territories . under the baal shem tov and then the maggid , hasidism had flourished in podolia and volhynia ( present day ukraine ) . after 1772 , under the third generation of leadership , it rapidly spread far and wide , from galicia and poland to white russia ( belarus ) in the north . the disciples of the maggid took different interpretations and qualities of their master 's teachings . this , combined with the new dispersal of their locations , meant that after the maggid , the hasidic movement avoided appointing one unifying leader to succeed dovber . the maggid 's disciple elimelech of lizhensk began hasidism in poland . his classic work noam elimelech focuses on the hasidic doctrine of the tzaddik ( saintly leader and heavenly intercessor for the wider community ) . schneur zalman of liadi described noam elimelech as the hasidic '' book of the righteous '' . in hasidic history , noam elimelech became the spiritual doctrine for general-hasidism , giving birth to the many leaders , successors and dynasties of mainstream hasidism , and inspiring the emotional attachment and spiritual bond of the common folk to their rebbe . through attachment to the saintly individual , who knew mystical secrets , and interceded in heaven on their behalf , the followers could connect to divinity . where the mainstream role of the tzaddik was emphasised , it often accompanied belief in the benefit of miracle-working , to channel spiritual and material blessing , and increase fervour . the followers would make pilgrimages to their masters , where they would gain enthusiasm , receive teachings , or could gain private audiences . later dynasties such as peshischa-kotzk would break away from this general-hasidic emphasis on tzaddikim and mysticism . among the other followers of dov ber in the academy of mezeritch , the brother of rabbi elimelech of lizhensk , rabbi zusha of hanipol holds a beloved place in hasidic tradition . reputedly unable to receive a full teaching from the maggid , as his excitement caused him to have to run out of the room in dveikus , his holy example personified the elevated soul of the tzaddik . levi yitzchak of berditchev , who spread hasidism in the ukraine , authored the classic hasidic commentary on the torah kedushas levi , and personified the advocacy of the jewish people in its relationship with god . he innovated a new spiritual path in defending the people , and persuading their '' heavenly father '' to nullify harsh decrees . views and teachings . published writings . the maggid left no writings of his own . many of his teachings were recorded by his disciples and appeared in anthologies '' maggid debarav le-ya'akov '' ( מגיד דבריו ליעקב the last letters of which title spell '' dov '' ) , known also under the title of likkutei amarim ( '' collected sayings '' ) , published at korets in 1780 ( second edition with additions korets , 1784 ) , and frequently reprinted ; likkutim yekarim ( '' precious collections '' ) , published at lemberg in 1792 ; or torah ( the largest collection ) published in korets , 1804 ; or ha'emet published in husiatin , 1899 ; kitvei kodesh ( small collection ) published in lemberg . 1862 ; shemu'ah tovah ( small collection ) published in warsaw . 1938 . a number of manuscripts with additional teachings are in the national library of israel . they consist of excerpts from his sermons , transcribed and compiled by his students . the first to be published ( likkutei amarim ) was collated by his relative , rabbi solomon ben abraham of lutzk , who , as he himself notes , was unhappy with the manuscript but did not have time to edit it properly . there is a great deal of overlapping between all these texts , but each contains teachings that do not appear in the others . work and editing has been done on them : maggid devarav layaakov was edited by rabbi avraham yitzchak kohn ( jerusalem , 1961 ) . later , a critical edition was edited by prof . rivkah shatz-uffenheimer ( hebrew university , jerusalem , 1976 ) . kehot publishing of chabad put out another edition edited by rabbi jacob immanuel schochet ( brooklyn , ny , 2008 ) . these editions all contain introductions , annotations and indices . or torah has appeared in an annotated edition with introduction , commentaries , cross-references and indices , authored by schochet ( brooklyn , ny , 2006 ) . likkutim yekarim is in annotated edition by rabbi avraham yitzchak kohn ( jerusalem , 1974 ) . view of god . for the maggid , god manifests himself in creation , which is only one aspect of his activity , and which is therefore in reality a self-limitation . just as god in his goodness limited himself , and thus descended to the level of the world and man , so it is the duty of the latter to strive to unite with god . the removal of the outer shell of mundane things , or '' the ascension of the divine spark , '' being a recognition of the presence of god in all earthly things , it is the duty of man , should he experience pleasure , to receive it as a divine manifestation , for god is the source of all pleasure . . on the ecstasy of prayer . rabbi dov ber 's view of prayer was that it is the purpose of the life on earth to advance until the perfect union with god is attained . thus the vegetable kingdom serves as food for the animal kingdom , in order that the lower manifestation of divinity , existing in the former , may be developed into a higher one . man being the highest manifestation has a duty to attain the highest pinnacle in order to be united with god . the way to achieve this , he argued , is through prayer , in which man forgets himself and his surroundings , and concentrates all his thought and feeling upon union with god . like the neoplatonism , he said that when a man becomes so absorbed in the contemplation of an object that his whole power of thought is concentrated upon one point , his self becomes unified with that point . so prayer in such a state of real ecstasy , effecting a union between god and man , is extremely important , and may even be able to overcome the laws of nature . . role of the tzadik . rabbi dov ber taught that only the tzadik is able to remove all his thoughts from earthly things and concentrate completely on god . because of his union with god , he is the connecting link between god and creation , and thus the channel of blessing and mercy . the love that men have for the tzadik provides a path to god . the duty of the ordinary mortal is therefore to love the tzadik and be a student of his . in this connection hasidim cite the classical jewish teaching ketubot 111b that scripture considers one who serves torah scholars to be cleaving to the almighty himself . see also . amshinov ( hasidic dynasty ) chabad boyan ( hasidic dynasty ) ruzhin ( hasidic dynasty ) list of hasidic dynasties . references . further reading . dubnow , voskhod , ix . nos . 9-11 ; grätz , gesch . der juden , xi.98 et seq . and note 22 ; schochet , jacob immanuel , the great maggid , a comprehensive biography , 1974 kohan , in ha-shaḥar , v.634-639 ; ruderman , ib . vi.93 et seq . ; lobel , in sulamith , ii.315 ; rodkinsohn , toledot 'ammude ha-chabad , 1876 , pp . & nbsp ; 7–23 . . external links . beyond the letters : the question of language in the teachings of rabbi dov baer of mezritch maps : map showing the baal shem tov-medzhibozh , the maggid-mezhirech , and the dissemination of the maggid 's disciples after 1772 map of the spread of hasidism from 1730 and 1760-75 , and its encroachment on the lithuanian centre of rabbinic opposition articles : a biography of dov ber of mezeritch אור תורה fulltext ( hebrew ) , chabadlibrary.org