Ellison Onizuka

early life . born on june 24 , 1946 , onizuka was the oldest son and second-youngest child of masamitsu and mitsue onizuka . he was a buddhist . he had two older sisters , shirley and norma , and a younger brother , claude , who became the family spokesman after the challenger disaster . growing up , ellison was an active participant in ffa , 4-h , and the scouting in hawaii , where he reached the level of eagle scout . onizuka graduated from konawaena high school in 1964 . he received a bachelor of science degree in aerospace engineering in june 1969 , and a master of science degree in that field in december of the same year , from the university of colorado at boulder . he participated in u.s . air force rotc during his time there and is an alumnus of triangle fraternity . onizuka married lorna leiko yoshida on june 7 , 1969 , while completing his studies at the university of colorado . they had two daughters , janelle onizuka-gillilan ( b . 1969 ) and darien lei shizue onizuka-morgan ( b . 1975 ) . air force career . on january 15 , 1970 , onizuka entered active duty with the united states air force , where he served as a flight test engineer and test pilot at sacramento air logistics center at mcclellan air force base . he worked in test flight programs and systems security engineering for the f-84 , f-100 , f-105 , f-111 , ec-121t , t-33 , t-39 , t-28 , and a-1 . from august 1974 to july 1975 , onizuka attended the u.s . air force test pilot school . in july 1975 , he was assigned to the flight test center at edwards air force base in california . he became a squadron flight test engineer at the usaf test pilot school , and later worked as a manager for engineering support in the training resources division . his duties there consisted of course instruction and management of the airship fleet ( a-7 , a-37 , t-38 , f-4 , t-33 , and kc-135 ) being used for the test pilot school and flight test center . while at the school , he registered more than 1,700 flight hours . nasa career . onizuka was selected for the astronaut program in january 1978 and completed one year of evaluation and training in august 1979 . later , he worked in the experimentation team , orbiter test team , and launch support crew at kennedy space center for the sts-1 and sts-2 . at nasa , he worked on the shuttle avionics integration laboratory ( sail ) test and revision software team . onizuka 's first space mission took place on january 24 , 1985 , with the launch of mission sts 51-c on space shuttle discovery , the first space shuttle mission for the department of defense . he was accompanied by commander ken mattingly , pilot loren shriver , fellow mission specialist james buchli , and payload specialist gary e . payton . during the mission , he was responsible for the activities of the primary payloads , which included the unfolding of the inertial upper stage ( ius ) surface . after 48 orbits around the earth , discovery landed at kennedy space center on january 27 , 1985 . he had completed a total of 74 hours in space . onizuka was assigned to the mission sts 51-l on the space shuttle challenger that took off from kennedy space center at 11:38:00 est ( 16:38:00 utc ) on january 28 , 1986 . the other challenger crew members were commander dick scobee , pilot michael j . smith , mission specialists ronald mcnair , judith resnik , and payload specialists gregory jarvis and christa mcauliffe . it was destroyed when a flame jet leaking from a solid rocket booster ruptured the liquid hydrogen fuel tank 73 seconds after launch . all seven crew members were killed . following the challenger disaster , examination of the recovered vehicle cockpit revealed that three of the crew members ' personal egress air packs were activated : those of onizuka , mission specialist judith resnik , and pilot michael smith . the location of smith 's activation switch , on the back side of his seat , means that either resnik or onizuka could have activated it for him . this is the only evidence available from the disaster that shows onizuka and resnik were alive after the cockpit separated from the vehicle . however , if the cabin had lost pressure , the packs alone would not have sustained the crew during the two-minute descent . onizuka was buried at the national memorial cemetery of the pacific in honolulu , hawaii . at the time of his death , he held the rank of lieutenant colonel . posthumously , he was promoted to the rank of colonel . an act to authorize the president to promote posthumously the late lieutenant colonel ellison s . onizuka to the grade of colonel . . memberships and distinctions . onizuka belonged to the following organizations : society of flight test engineers , the air force association , the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics , tau beta pi , sigma tau , arnold air society , and triangle fraternity . among his distinctions are the air force meritorious service medal , air force commendation medal , air force outstanding unit award , air force organizational excellence award , national defense service medal , air force longevity award , and nasa space flight medal . he was posthumously awarded the congressional space medal of honor . legacy . onizuka air force station in sunnyvale , california and onizuka village family housing on hickam air force base are dedicated to him . the ellison s . onizuka space center at kona international airport in the kona district of hawaii island where he was born and raised , was dedicated to him . the center closed in march 2016 and was unable to find a suitable location to reopen . select items from the center 's collection have been put on permanent display at the japanese cultural center of hawaii in moiliili on the island of oahu . they not only feature onizuka 's personal items , but also the only moon rock in hawaii and the space suit from apollo 13 astronaut fred haise . two astronomy features were also named after him : an asteroid discovered by edward l . g . bowell on february 8 , 1984 , 3355 onizuka and a 29-km-diameter crater on the moon , onizuka . little tokyo in los angeles , california also has a street named after him , as does the street surrounding whitcomb elementary school in clear lake city , houston , texas , where his daughters attended . it also named its library the onizuka memorial library . ( at the time of the challenger disaster , his older daughter , janelle , attended clear lake high school . his younger daughter , darien lei , was at whitcomb . ) in addition , onizuka street in little tokyo has a scale replica of the challenger as a memorial , and a permanent memorial to onizuka is located in the lobby of the hompa hongwanji buddhist temple . the onizuka center for international astronomy , named in onizuka 's honor , is the mid-level support and visitor complex for the mauna kea observatories in hawaii . it includes a visitor information station as well as dining , lodging , office , and maintenance facilities for observatory staff and astronomers . a plaque of his face is mounted on a boulder by the entrance to the visitor information station . triangle fraternity has the ellison onizuka young alumnus award in tribute to him . the ann & h.j . smead aerospace engineering sciences building at the university of colorado at boulder features a conference room named after him on the third floor . the arnold air society squadron attached to the 105th air force rotc detachment at the university of colorado at boulder bears onizuka 's name . page 28 ( page x of additional page inserts , or page 52 of the extended length version ) of every new standard u.s . passport contains this quotation : '' every generation has the obligation to free men 's minds for a look at new worlds . to look out from a higher plateau than the last generation . '' - ellison onizuka the hawaii space grant consortium holds an annual astronaut ellison onizuka science day at the university of hawaii-hilo for students in grades 4-12 , parents and teachers . el camino college in torrance , california hosts an annual onizuka space science day , jointly organized by the onizuka memorial committee . the students at the united states air force test pilot school present the onizuka prop wash award to the classmate who contributed most to class spirit and morale . on january 1 , 2017 , the airport in his home district of kona was renamed ellison onizuka kona international airport at keāhole . clear lake high school , where ellison 's children went to school , has on display a soccer ball that was on board the challenger during the accident . it was given to ellison on behalf of the soccer team that he coached , and for which his children played , to be brought into space . the ball was retrieved during the recovery efforts and donated to the school . in 2016 , robert s . kimbrough on expedition 49/50 brought the ball into space . . in media . onizuka was portrayed by keone young in the 1990 tv movie challenger . in star trek : the next generation , a shuttlecraft carried aboard the starship enterprise bears onizuka 's name , as seen in the three episodes '' the ensigns of command '' , '' the mind 's eye '' and '' the outcast . '' . see also . list of asian american astronauts . references . sources . this article draws heavily on the : es : ellison onizuka in the spanish-language wikipedia , which was accessed in the version of july 8 , 2005 . external links . official nasa bio astronaut memorial foundation website