Michael Hordern

life and career . family background . hordern 's mother , margaret murray , was descended from james murray , an irish physician whose research into digestion led to his discovery of the stomach aid milk of magnesia in 1829 . hines-davenport , richard . '' murray , sir james ( 1788–1871 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , 2004 , online edition , january 2016 , accessed 27 january 2016 the invention earned him a knighthood and brought the family great wealth . margaret grew up in england , and attended st audries park in somerset . hordern , p . 2 . hordern 's father , edward , was the son of a lancastrian priest who was the rector at the holy trinity church in bury . as a young man edward joined the royal indian navy and gained the rank of lieutenant . during a short break on home-leave he fell in love with margaret , after they were introduced by one of his brothers . the courtship was brief and the young couple married in burma on 28 november 1903 . hordern , pp . 2–3 . they had their first child , a son , geoffrey , in 1905 , followed by another , peter , in 1907 . hordern , pp . 3–4 . . early years . four years after the birth of peter , a pregnant margaret returned to england where michael hordern , her third son , was born on 3october 1911 in berkhamsted , hertfordshire . still stationed abroad , edward was promoted to the rank of captain for which he received a good salary . the family lived in comfort and margaret employed a scullery maid , nanny , groundsman , and full-time cook . hordern , p . 4 . margaret left for india to visit her husband in 1916 . the trip , although planned only as a short term stay , lasted two years because of the ferocity of the first world war . in her absence , hordern was sent to windlesham house school in sussex at the age of five . his young age exempted him from full-time studies but he was allowed to partake in extracurricular activities , including swimming , football , rugby and fishing . hordern , p . 6 . after a few years , and along with a fellow enthusiast , he set up the '' a acting association '' ( aaa ) , a small theatrical committee , which organised productions on behalf of the school . as well as the organisation of plays , hordern arranged a regular group of players , himself included , to perform various plays which they wrote , directed , and choreographed themselves . hordern , p . 8 . he stayed at windlesham house for nine years , later describing his time there as '' enormous fun '' . hordern was 14 when he left windlesham house to continue his schooling as a member of chichester house at brighton college . sir michael hordern . the daily telegraph , 4 may 1995 , accessed 28 june 2015 . by the time he joined the college , his interest in acting had matured . in his 1993 autobiography , a world elsewhere , he admitted : '' i did n't excel in any area apart from singing ; i could n't read music but i sang quite well . '' there he helped organise amateur performances of various gilbert and sullivan operas . the first of these was the gondoliers , in which he played the role of the duchess . the tutors called his performance a great success , and he was given a position within the men 's chorus in the next piece , iolanthe . hordern , pp . 12–13 . over the next few years , he took part in the mikado as a member of the chorus , and then appeared as the major-general in the pirates of penzance . it was a period which he later acknowledged as being the start of his career . hordern , p . 13 . when the war ended in 1918 , edward , who was by now a port officer in calcutta , arranged for margaret to return to england . with her , she brought home an orphaned baby girl named jocelyn , whom she adopted . hordern , p . 9 . the following year , edward retired from active service and returned to england where he relocated his family to haywards heath in sussex . there , michael developed a love for fishing , a hobby about which he remained passionate for the rest of his life . hordern , p . 11 . in his autobiography hordern admitted that his family showed no interest in the theatre and that he had not seen his first professional play , ever green , until he was 19 . around this time he met christopher hassall , a fellow student at brighton college . hassall , who also went on to have a successful stage career , was , as hordern noted , instrumental in his decision to become an actor . hordern , p . 15 . in 1925 hordern moved to dartmoor with his family where they converted a disused barn into a farm house . for hordern the move was ideal ; his love of fishing had become stronger and he was able to explore the remote landscape and its isolated rivers . hordern , p . 20 . . early acting career ( 1930–39 ) . . theatrical beginnings . hordern left brighton college in the early 1930s '' sir michael hordern ( c . 1925–30 ) '' , oldbrightonians.com , accessed 31 january 2016 . and secured a job as a teaching assistant in a prep school in beaconsfield . he joined an amateur theatre company hordern , pp . 29–30 . and in his spare time , rehearsed for the company 's only play , ritzio 's boots , which was entered into a british drama league competition , with hordern in the title role . the play did well but conceded the prize , a professional production at a leading london theatre , to not this man , a drama written by sydney box . so envious was he of the rival show 's success that hordern supplied a scathing review to the welwyn times calling box 's show a '' blasphemous bunk and cheap theatrical claptrap '' . hordern , pp . 30–31 . the comment infuriated box , who issued the actor with a writ to attend court on a count of slander . hordern won the case and left box liable for the proceeding 's expenses . years later the two men met on a film set where box , much to hordern 's surprise , thanked him for helping to kick-start his career in film making , as he had received a lot of publicity as a result of the court case . with the death of his mother in january 1933 , hordern decided to pursue a professional acting career . he briefly took a job at a prep school hordern , p . 40 . but fell ill with poliomyelitis and had to leave . upon his recuperation , hordern , p . 39 . he was offered a job as a travelling salesman for the british educational suppliers association , a family-run business belonging to a former school friend at windlesham house . as part of his job he spent some time in stevenage where he joined an amateur dramatics company and appeared in two plays ; journey 's end , in which he played raleigh , and diplomacy , a piece which the actor disliked as he considered it to be '' too old-fashioned '' . both productions provided him with the chance to work with a cue-script , something which he found to be helpful for the rest of his career . that summer he joined a shakespearean theatre company which toured stately homes throughout the united kingdom . his first performance was orlando in as you like it , followed by love 's labour 's lost , in which he co-starred with osmond daltry . hordern admired daltry 's acting ability and later admitted to him being a constant influence on his shakespearean career . hordern , p . 41 . in addition to his shakespearean commitments , hordern joined the st pancras people 's theatre , a london-based company partly funded by the theatrical manager lilian baylis . hordern enjoyed his time there , despite the tiresome commute between sussex and london , and stayed with the company for five years . by the end of 1936 he had left his sales job in beaconsfield to pursue a full-time acting career . hordern , pp . 41–42 . he moved into a small flat at marble arch and became one of the many jobbing actors eager to make a name for themselves on the london stage . hordern , p . 42 . . london debut . hordern 's london debut came in january 1937 , as an understudy to bernard lee in the play night sky at the savoy theatre . on nights when he was not required , hordern would be called upon to undertake the duties of stage management , for which he was paid £2.10s a week . in march , daltry , who had since formed his own company , westminster productions , cast hordern as ludovico in othello . herbert , p . 745 . the part became hordern 's first paid role as an actor for a theatre company . the play was an instant hit and ran at the people 's theatre in mile end for two weeks . hordern , pp . 47–48 . it also starred the english actor stephen murray in the title role , but he became contractually obliged elsewhere towards the end of the run . this allowed hordern to take his place for which daltry paid hordern an extra £1 a week . hordern , p . 48 . the theatre critic kenneth hurren '' enjoyed it immoderately '' and thought the revival revealed a '' tidier play than it looked '' . hordern compared it to the 1972 version by saying : '' it is unquestionably a busy little number , and my first impression of the piece , back in 1972 , was that it had more decoration than substance , and that the decoration was more chaotic than coherent . '' . television and radio : 1980–83 . in 1981 hordern played the role of gandalf in the bbc radio adaptation of tolkien 's the lord of the rings . the bbc 's budget was generous , and attracted well-known actors from stage and television . the series ran for 26 episodes and was a hit with audiences and critics . the author ernest mathijs singled out hordern in particular as being one of the more powerful characters of the series and his personal favourite , mathijs , p . 62 . while co-star ian holm , writing years later in his autobiography acting my life , said he thought hordern interpreted the role '' in a grand , rather old fashioned way '' . holm , p . 381 . writing in his autobiography in 1993 , hordern said he found the part of gandalf to be '' a bit of a slog '' . hordern , p . 183 . hordern and jonathan miller reprised their collaboration in 1982 with a final performance of king lear for the bbc television shakespeare production . the actor considered this version to be his best and attributed its success to the fact he was getting older and therefore able to better understand the character . hordern p . 140 . the author joseph pearce , writing in 2008 , claimed that hordern played the king '' straight up with no gloss '' pearce , p . 240 . and made a '' reliable and workmanlike lear '' who is '' forceful when he should be forceful , compassionate when he should be compassionate , and sorrowful when he should be sorrowful '' . despite the praise , pearce thought that hordern 's performance in act3 '' lacked the required fierceness and missed the mythic quality when compared to some of the bigger names '' . in january 1983 hordern was knighted , an honour which the actor called '' a great thrill and a surprise to us all '' . hordern , p . 151 . that year he became popular among children as the voice of badger in the itv film the wind in the willows . '' wind in the willows ( 1983 ) '' , british film institute , accessed 22 january 2016 . he then spent the rest of 1983 appearing as sir anthony absolute in the rivals for peter wood at the royal national theatre and received excellent notices . hordern , p . 152 . he was nominated for an award at that year 's olivier awards for best comedy performance of the year , but lost out to griff rhys jones . '' olivier winners ( 1983 ) '' , olivierawards.com , accessed 22 january 2016 . his success on the stage was tinged with private turmoil ; eve was taken ill after she suffered a brain haemorrhage , a condition from which she never fully recuperated . she required constant care but recovered enough to become partially self-sufficient . however , in 1986 she had a fatal heart attack at the couple 's london flat . hordern , pp . 156–157 . hordern was devastated and became consumed in self-pity , hordern , p . 157 . in part because of his guilt at the extramarital affairs he had had with many of his leading ladies during the marriage . hordern , p . 156 . . paradise postponed and you never can tell . in 1986 , john mortimer , a writer whom hordern respected greatly , engaged the actor in paradise postponed , an eleven-part drama which took a year to make and cost in excess of £6 million . set in rural england , the saga depicts the struggles within british middle-class society during the post-war years . hordern , pp . 159–160 . in his autobiography , hordern described himself as '' a man of prejudice rather than principle '' and as such , had very little in common with his character , the left-wing , marxist-loving vicar , simeon simcox . despite the political differences , hordern felt great empathy towards his character , and admired his '' plain , straightforward attitude to life , his dottiness , and the way he hung to his faith in a wicked world with a saintliness verging on the simple '' . hordern , p . 160 . hordern made a return to the london stage in 1987 after a four-year absence . the play in which he starred , you never can tell , transferred to the haymarket theatre that december having made its debut at the theatr clwyd in wales earlier that year . hordern , p . 158 . it was the second time the actor had appeared in the play , the first being back in bristol fifty years previously when he starred as the youthful lead , valentine . this time he was cast as william , the elderly waiter , a part which he considered to be '' a real hell to play '' , partly because of the many meals he had to serve up on stage , whilst at the same time trying to remember the complex script . he enjoyed the play immensely and was thrilled at its successful run . his engagement also gave him a chance to reunite with some old friends , including irene worth , michael denison and frank middlemass , all of whom were in the cast . hordern admitted that , on the whole , the experience made him feel '' a little happier '' about life . hordern , pp . 158–159 . . final years and death . by the early 1990s hordern was concentrating more on television . his roles were mostly those of ageing teachers , bank managers , politicians and clergymen . hordern , p . 161 . in 1989 he appeared alongside john mills in an adaptation of kingsley amis ending up , '' obituary : sir michael hordern '' by adam benedick . the independent , 3 may 1995 , accessed 18 january 2016 . a tale about a group of pensioners growing old together in a residential home . after that he took the part of godfrey colston in memento mori , '' memento mori ( 1992 ) '' , british film institute , accessed 18 january 2016 . a television film about a group of elderly friends succumbing to old age , which was adapted for television from the muriel spark memento mori ( novel ) . the film received excellent notices and hordern 's performance was described as outstanding by the critic neil sinyard . all that was required of hordern in his next role , the wealthy but terminally ill landowner peter featherstone in the bbc adaptation middlemarch , was for him simply to lie in bed and pretend to die . it was the kind of role which he found to be most fitting for someone of his advanced years and confirmed to him that the older he got , the more typecast he became . it was a situation that did not altogether bother him as he felt grateful for being employable at the age of 81 . in january 1995 hordern was invited back to his old college in brighton , where a room was named in his honour . '' brighton college '' , independent schools yearbook 2012–2013 , p . 61 . inside , the college had commissioned the sculptor peter webster to create a bronze bust of the actor which is displayed with a plaque . hordern 's last physical acting role came shortly afterwards as lord langland in the comedy film a very open prison . '' a very open prison ( 1995 ) '' , british film institute , accessed 20 january 2016 . this was followed by two narration performances , firstly in spode a history of excellence , '' spode a history of excellence ( 1995 ) '' , british film institute , accessed 20 january 2016 . and then in the five-part film dinosaurs and their living relatives . '' dinosaurs and their living relatives ( 1995 ) '' , british film institute , accessed 20 january 2016 . hordern died of kidney disease at the churchill hospital , oxford , on 2may 1995 , at the age of 83 . medical staff confirmed that he had been suffering from '' a long illness and had been receiving dialysis treatment '' . '' sir michael hordern dies '' , herald scotland , 3 may 1995 , accessed 19 january 2016 . . approach to acting . hordern was a self-confessed '' lazy bugger '' hordern , p . 92 . when it came to role preparation . he did not regret his lack of formal acting training , and attributed his abilities to watching and learning from other actors and directors . he said : '' i am bored of the intellectual view of the theatre . actually , it scares the shit out of me , my view being that an actor should learn the lines without too much cerebral interference . '' hordern , p . 162 . in 1951 , he asked byam shaw how best to rehearse unfamiliar roles . the director advised him to '' never read up on them '' before going on to say '' read the plays as much as you like but never read the commentators or critics '' . it was advice which hordern adopted for the role of king lear , and for the rest of his career . the critic brian mcfarlane , writing for the british film institute , said that hordern , despite his relaxed attitude , '' had one of the most productive careers of any 20th century british actor '' . '' hordern , sir michael ( 1911–1995 ) '' , by brian mcfarlane . bfi screenonline , british film institute , accessed 27 august 2015 . throughout his 1993 autobiography a world elsewhere , hordern exhibited his pride on being able to play a wide range of parts , something which made him a frequent subject among theatrical critics . the author martin banham thought that many of hordern 's characters shared a general identity of '' an absent-minded , good-hearted english eccentric '' . banham , p . 497 . the american journalist mel gussow , writing in hordern 's obituary in the new york times in 1995 , described the actor as being '' a classical actor with the soul of a clown '' , while the actors john hurt and michael bryant described hordern as being '' the austin princess among british actors '' , '' sir michael hordern obituary '' , the times , 4 may 1995 , p . 23 . which implied to the author sheridan morley that hordern possessed an element of '' reliability but with a faint lack of charisma '' . morley , who wrote hordern 's biography for the oxford dictionary of national biography , went on to describe the actor as being '' one of the great eccentrics of his profession , perched perilously somewhere half way between alastair sim and alec guinness '' . . stage roles and filmography . notes and references . notes references . sources . . external links . sir michael hordern – daily telegraph obituary the adventures of captain horatio hornblower radio series