Conrad Aiken

biography . early years . aiken was the eldest son of william ford and anna ( potter ) aiken . in savannah , aiken 's father became a respected physician and eye surgeon , while his mother was the daughter of a prominent massachusetts unitarian minister . on february 27 , 1901 , dr . aiken murdered his wife and then committed suicide . according to his autobiography , ushant , aiken , then 11 years old , heard the two gunshots and discovered the bodies immediately thereafter . after his parents ' deaths , he was raised by his great-aunt and uncle in cambridge , massachusetts , attending middlesex school then harvard university . at harvard , aiken edited the advocate with t . s . eliot , who became a lifelong friend , colleague , and influencer . it was also at harvard where aiken studied under another significant influencer in his writing , the philosopher george santayana . . adult years . aiken was strongly influenced by symbolism , especially in his earlier works . in 1930 he received the pulitzer prize for poetry for his selected poems . many of his writings had strong psychological themes . he wrote the widely anthologized short story '' silent snow , secret snow '' ( 1934 ) , partially based on his childhood tragedy . other influences were aiken 's grandfather , potter , who had been a church preacher , as well as whitman 's freestyle poetry . this helped aiken shape his poetry more freely while his recognition of a god grounded his more visually rich explorations into the universe . some of his best-known poetry , such as '' morning song of senlin '' , use these influences to great effect . his collections of verse include earth triumphant ( 1914 ) , the charnel rose ( 1918 ) and and in the hanging gardens ( 1933 ) . his poem '' music i heard '' has been set to music by a number of composers , including leonard bernstein and henry cowell . aiken wrote or edited more than 51 books , the first of which was published in 1914 , two years after his graduation from harvard . his work includes novels , short stories ( the collected short stories appeared in 1961 ) , reviews , an autobiography , and poetry . he received numerous awards and honors for his writing , though for most of his lifetime , he received little public attention . though aiken was reluctant to speak of his early trauma and ensuing psychological problems , he acknowledged that his writings were strongly influenced by his studies of sigmund freud , carl g . jung , otto rank , ferenczi , adler , and other depth psychology . it was n't until the publication of his autobiography , ushant , that aiken revealed the emotional challenges that he had battled for much of his adult life . during the 1920s freud heard of him , and offered to psychoanalyze him . while aboard a europe-bound ship to meet with freud , aiken was discouraged by erich fromm from accepting the offer . consequently , despite freud 's strong influence on aiken , aiken never met the noted psychoanalyst . as he later shared , '' freud had read great circle , and i ’ m told kept a copy on his office table . but i did n't go , though i started to . misgivings set in , and so did poverty . '' . personal life . aiken married jessie mcdonald in 1912 , and the couple moved to england in 1921 with their youngest two children ; john ( born 1913 ) and jane ( born 1917 ) , settling in rye , east sussex ( where the american novelist henry james had once lived ) . aiken returned to cambridge , massachusetts , as a tutor at harvard from 1927 to 1928 . for many years , he divided his time between rye , new york , and boston . in 1936 , he met his third wife , mary , in boston . in the following year the couple visited malcolm lowry in cuernavaca , mexico , where aiken divorced clarissa and married mary . the couple moved to rye , where they remained until the outbreak of world war ii in 1940 . the aikens settled in brewster , massachusetts , on cape cod , where he and his wife mary later ran a summer program for writers and painters named after their antique farmhouse , '' forty-one doors '' . despite living for many years abroad and receiving recognition as a southern writer , aiken always considered himself an american , and , in particular , a new englander . over the years , he served in loco parentis as well as mentor to the english author malcolm lowry . david markson ’ s malcolm lowry ’ s volcano : myth , symbol , meaning : in 1923 he acted as a witness at the marriage of his friend , poet w . h . davies . from 1950 to 1952 , he served as poet laureate consultant in poetry to the library of congress , more commonly known as poet laureate of the united states . in 1960 he visited grasmere in the lake district , england ( once the home of william wordsworth ) , with his friend from rye , painter edward burra . arts council , hayward gallery catalogue , 1985 image : conradaikenbench.jpg thumb 220px bench at grave of conrad aiken in bonaventure cemetery in savannah , georgia the aikens lived primarily at their farmhouse in west brewster , and wintered in savannah in a home adjacent to his early childhood house . aiken died on 17 august 1973 and was buried in bonaventure cemetery in savannah , georgia on the banks of the wilmington river , and so was mary after her death in 1992 . the burial site was featured in midnight in the garden of good and evil by john berendt . according to local legend , aiken wished to have his tombstone fashioned in the shape of a bench as an invitation to visitors to stop and enjoy a martini at his grave . the bench is inscribed with '' give my love to the world '' , and '' cosmos mariner—destination unknown '' . he was married three times : firstly to jessie mcdonald ( 1912–1929 ) ; secondly to clarissa lorenz ( 1930–1937 ) ( author of a biography , lorelei two ) ; and thirdly to the painter mary hoover ( 1937–1973 ) . he fathered three children by his first wife jessie : john aiken , jane aiken hodge and joan aiken , all of whom became writers . aiken had three younger siblings , kempton potter ( k . p . a . taylor ) , robert potter ( r . p . a . taylor ) , and elizabeth . after their parents ' deaths , the four children were adopted by frederick winslow taylor and his wife louise , their great-aunt . his siblings took taylor 's last name . kempton helped establish the aiken taylor award for modern american poetry . a primary source for information on aiken 's life is his autobiographical novel ushant ( 1952 ) , one of his major works . in it , he wrote candidly about his various affairs and marriages , his attempted suicide and fear of insanity , and his friendships with t . s . eliot ( who appears in the book as the tsetse ) , ezra pound ( rabbi ben ezra ) , malcolm lowry ( hambo ) , and others . awards and recognition . named poetry consultant ( now u.s . poet laureate ) of the library of congress from 1950 to 1952 , aiken earned numerous prestigious writing honors , including a pulitzer prize in 1930 for selected poems , the 1954 national book award for collected poems , '' national book awards – 1954 '' . national book foundation . retrieved 2012-03-02 . ( with acceptance speech by aiken and essay by evie shockley from the awards 60-year anniversary blog . ) the bollingen prize in poetry , the national institute of arts and letters gold medal in poetry , and a national medal for literature . he was awarded a guggenheim fellowship in 1934 , academy of american poets fellowship in 1957 , huntington hartford foundation award in 1960 , and brandeis university creative arts award in 1967 . aiken was the first georgia-born author to win a pulitzer prize , and was named georgia 's poet laureate in 1973 . he was the first winner of the poetry society of america ( psa ) shelley memorial award , in 1929 . in 2009 , the library of america selected aiken 's 1931 story '' mr . arcularis '' for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of american fantastic tales . selected works . poetry collections . earth triumphant ( aiken , 1914 ) ( available online at archive.org ) turns and movies and other tales in verse ( aiken , 1916 , houghton mifflin ) ( available online at archive.org ) the jig of forslin : a symphony , 1916 nocturne of remembered spring : and other poems ( aiken , 1917 ) ( available online at archive.org ) charnel rose ( aiken , 1918 ) ( available online at archive.org ) the house of dust : a symphony , 1920 punch : the immortal liar , documents in his history , 1921 priapus and the pool , 1922 the pilgrimage of festus , 1923 priapus and the pool , and other poems , 1925 selected poems , 1929 john deth , a metaphysical legacy , and other poems , 1930 the coming forth by day of osiris jones , 1931 preludes for memnon , 1931 landscape west of eden , 1934 time in the rock ; preludes to definition , 1936 and in the human heart , 1940 brownstone eclogues , and other poems , 1942 the soldier : a poem , 1944 the kid , 1947 the divine pilgrim , 1949 skylight one : fifteen poems , 1949 collected poems , 1953 a letter from li po and other poems , 1955 sheepfold hill : fifteen poems , 1958 the morning song of lord zero , poems old and new , 1963 thee : a poem , 1967 collected poems , 2nd ed . , 1970 . short stories . '' bring ! bring ! '' '' the last visit '' '' mr . arcularis '' '' the bachelor supper '' '' bow down , isaac ! '' '' a pair of vikings '' '' hey , taxi ! '' '' field of flowers '' '' gehenna '' '' the disciple '' '' impulse '' '' the anniversary '' '' hello , tib '' '' smith and jones '' '' by my troth , nerisa ! '' '' silent snow , secret snow '' '' round by round '' '' thistledown '' '' state of mind '' '' strange moonlight '' '' the fish supper '' '' i love you very dearly '' '' the dark city '' '' life is n't a short story '' '' the night before prohibition '' '' spider , spider '' '' a man alone at lunch '' '' farewell ! farewell ! farewell ! '' '' your obituary , well written '' '' a conversation '' '' no , no , go not to lethe '' '' pure as the driven snow '' '' all , all wasted '' '' the moment '' '' the woman-hater '' '' the professor 's escape '' '' the orange moth '' '' the necktie '' '' o how she laughed ! '' '' west end '' '' fly away ladybird '' . other books . scepticisms : notes on contemporary poetry ( 1919 ) blue voyage ( 1927 ) great circle ( 1933 ) king coffin ( 1935 ) a heart for the gods of mexico ( 1939 ) the conversation ( 1940 ) ushant ( 1952 ) a reviewer 's abc : collected criticism of conrad aiken from 1916 to the present ( 1958 ) collected short stories ( 1960 ) collected short stories of conrad aiken ( 1965 ) . references . external links . poems by conrad aiken an extensive collection of aiken 's poetry conrad aiken : unitarian prodigy poet biography conrad aiken 's grave in savannah , georgia new georgia encyclopedia entry index entry for conrad aiken at poets ' corner famous poets and poems , aiken biography bookrags.com libs.uga.edu collected poems by conrad aiken on the national book awards poetry blog guides to conrad aiken 's prose , poetry , and correspondence at houghton library , harvard university conrad aiken historical marker conrad aiken at the stuart a . rose manuscript , archives , and rare book library