Schönbrunn Palace

history . in 1569 , holy roman emperor maximilian ii purchased a large floodplain of the wien river beneath a hill , situated between meidling and hietzing . the former owner , in 1548 , had erected a mansion called katterburg . the emperor ordered the area to be fenced and put game there such as pheasants , ducks , deer and boar , in order for it to serve as the court 's recreational hunting ground . in a small separate part of the area , “ exotic ” birds such as turkeys and peafowl were kept . fishponds were also built . image : canaletto ( i ) 059.jpg thumb upright 1.35 das kaiserliche lustschloß schönbrunn , ehrenhofseite by bernardo bellotto , 1759-1760 during the next century , the area was used as a hunting and recreation ground . eleonora gonzaga , who loved hunting , spent much time there and was bequeathed the area as her widow 's residence after the death of her husband , ferdinand ii . from 1638 to 1643 , she added a palace to the katterburg mansion , while in 1642 came the first mention of the name “ schönbrunn ” on an invoice . the origins of the schönbrunn orangery seem to go back to eleonora gonzaga as well . the schönbrunn palace in its present form was built and remodelled during the 1740–50s during the reign of empress maria theresa who received the estate as a wedding gift . franz i commissioned the redecoration of the palace exterior in the neoclassical style as it appears today . franz joseph , the longest-reigning emperor of austria , was born at schönbrunn and spent a great deal of his life there . he died there , at the age of 86 , on 21 november 1916 . following the downfall of the habsburg monarchy in november 1918 , the palace became the property of the newly founded austrian republic and was preserved as a museum . after world war ii and during the austrian state treaty ( 1945—55 ) , schönbrunn palace was requisitioned to provide office space for both the british delegation to the allied commission austria , and for the headquarters for the small british military garrison present in vienna . with the reestablishment of the austrian republic in 1955 , the palace once again became a museum . it is still sometimes used for important events such as the meeting between u.s . president john f . kennedy and soviet premier nikita khrushchev in 1961 . since 1992 the palace and gardens have been owned and administered by the schloss schönbrunn kultur-und betriebsges.m.b.h . , a limited-liability company wholly owned by the republic of austria . the company conducts preservation and restoration of all palace properties without state subsidies . unesco catalogued schönbrunn palace on the world heritage list in 1996 , together with its gardens , as a remarkable baroque ensemble and example of synthesis of the arts ( gesamtkunstwerk ) . file : schoenbrunn palace precursor 1672.jpg missing foot toad and gonzaga 's palace , 1672 file : schoenbrunn palace utopic design i 1688.jpg johann bernhard fischer von erlach 's first design , 1688 file : schoenbrunn palace design ii c1696.jpg fischer von erlach 's second design , after 1693 file : мирные будни в послевоенной вене-5.png soviet troops in the schönbrunn palace gardens , 1945 file:1952 schönbrunn.jpg schönbrunn during british occupation , 1951 . gardens . thumb the sculpted garden space between the palace and the neptune fountain is called the great parterre . the french garden , a big part of the area , was planned by jean trehet , a disciple of andré le nôtre , in 1695 . it contains , among other things , a maze . the complex however includes many more attractions : besides the tiergarten , an orangerie erected around 1755 , staple luxuries of european palaces of its type , a palm house ( replacing , by 1882 , around ten earlier and smaller glass houses in the western part of the park ) is noteworthy . western parts were turned into english garden style in 1828–1852 . the area called meidlinger vertiefung ( engl . : depression of meidling ) to the west of the castle was turned into a play area and drill ground for the children of the habsburgs in the 19th century . at this time it was common to use parks for the military education of young princes . whereas the miniature bastion , which was built for this purpose , does not exist anymore , the garden pavilion that was used as shelter still does . it was turned into a café in 1927 and is known as landtmann ’ s jausen station since 2013 . at the outmost western edge , a botanical garden going back to an earlier arboretum was re-arranged in 1828 , when the old palm house was built . a modern enclosure for orangutans , was restored besides a restaurant and office rooms in 2009 . sculptures . the great parterre of schönbrunn has 32 sculptures , which represent deities and virtues . gloriette . the garden axis points towards a hill , which since 1775 has been crowned by the gloriette structure ( fischer von erlach had initially planned to erect the main palace on the top of this hill ) . maria theresa decided the gloriette should be designed to glorify habsburg power and the just war ( a war that would be carried out of “ necessity ” and lead to peace ) , and thereby ordered the builders to recycle “ otherwise useless stone ” which was left from the near-demolition of schloss neugebäude . the same material was also to be used for the roman ruin . the gloriette was destroyed in the second world war , but had already been restored by 1947 , and was restored again in 1995 . the gloriette today houses a café and an observation deck which provides panoramic views of the city . roman ruins . originally known as the ruin of carthage , the roman ruin is a set of folly that was designed by the architect johann ferdinand hetzendorf von hohenberg and erected as an entirely new architectural feature in 1778 . fully integrated into its parkland surroundings , this architectural ensemble should be understood as a picturesque horticulture feature and not simply as a ruin , which due to lack of maintenance it had increasingly grown to resemble prior to its recent restoration . the fashion for picturesque ruins that became widespread with the rise of the romanticism soon after the middle of the 18th century symbolized both the decline of once great powers and the preservation of the remains of a heroic past . erected at the same time not far from the roman ruin , the obelisk fountain was intended to complete the iconographic program of the park at schönbrunn as a symbol of stability and permanence . the roman ruin consists of a rectangular pool enclosed by a massive arch with lateral walls , evoking the impression of an ancient edifice slowly crumbling into the ground . in the pool in front of the ruin is a seemingly haphazard arrangement of stone fragments supporting a figural group which symbolizes the rivers vltava and elbe . activities at schönbrunn today . schönbrunn is vienna 's most popular tourist destination , which has been attended by 3,800,000 visitors in 2017 . the whole schönbrunn complex with tiergarten schönbrunn , palmenhaus , wüstenhaus , the wagenburg , and the schoenbrunn palace concerts accounted for more than five million visitors in 2009 . schönbrunn ist wiens beliebteste sehenswürdigkeit . die presse , august 4 , 2010 . retrieved 2010-08-15 . at the official website tickets can be purchased in advance for tours . in addition to tours and tour packages , many classical concerts featuring the music of mozart and his contemporaries can be enjoyed with the added benefit of more time in the spectacular halls , orangerie , or schlosstheater . the annual summer night concert schönbrunn is held on the grounds of schönbrunn . . the schoenbrunn palace concerts . the schoenbrunn palace concerts are served by the schoenbrunn palace orchestra founded in 1997 , it is led by the chief opera conductor maestro guido mancusi since 1998 . he also founded chamber opera schoenbrunn in the schönbrunn palace concert series . in vienna , they offer daily concerts at the original location of the world-famous contest between mozart & salieri ( 1786 ) . they have a wealth of experience working with singers and ballet dancers . the orchestra has regular worldwide tours in china , japan , singapore , russia , sweden , denmark , norway , finland , iceland , estonia , germany , switzerland , the czech republic , and brazil . film and television productions . the gardens and palace have been the location for many films and television productions including such productions as the sissi trilogy in the 1950s , a breath of scandal with sophia loren , and also briefly in james bond 's the living daylights when bond and kara are riding through the palace garden ; the palace is also seen during the end credits . the comedy the great race was filmed there in 1965 . jackie chan shot scenes for armour of god on the grounds . more recently , the television drama the crown prince starring max von thun as crown prince rudolf and klaus maria brandauer as kaiser franz-josef was filmed there . the austrian television series , kommissar rex has shot several episodes there . in the kuroshitsuji episode 2 : his butler , omnipotent , sebastian michaelis tells his master that he was a guest at the schönbrunn palace soirees before his contract was sealed with ciel as he teaches the young master how to dance . dutch violinist andré rieu and the johann strauss orchestra , along with the opera babes used it as the back drop for a version of the european anthem , “ ode to joy ” in 2003 . in the third leg of the amazing race 4 , the palace hosted a “ fast forward ” task where one team had to carry trays of champagne glasses across a ballroom floor of waltzing couples . in the sixth leg of the amazing race 23 , teams had to race through the garden 's maze and search for the pit stop located at the gloriette . the disney animated tv show series little einsteins featured the schönbrunn palace during the season 2 episode the glass slipper ball , based on the disney animated fairy tale cinderella which first aired in january 2007 . gallery . palacio de schönbrunn , viena , austria , 2020-02-02 , dd 10.jpg a garden pavilion , kammergarten pavilion cafe gloriette schönbrunn 1.jpg cafe gloriette schönbrunn roman ruin - schönbrunn.jpg the roman ruin . schonbrunn gardens.jpg view from great parterre towards the gloriette ( app . towards south ) . austria august2010 0033.jpg view of the gardens autumn in schoenbrunn - schöbrunn'da sonbahar 04.jpg view of the gardens in autumn orangerie 07932.jpg orangery , in ne part of the gardens . columbary ( schönbrunn ) ( 2 ) . jpg columbary vena 04.jpg palm pavilion in western part of the gardens palmenhaus.schönbrunn august 2006.jpg the palm house sundial house ( schönbrunn ) original main entrance 0080216 244.jpg sundial house privy garden schönbrunn winter.jpg privy garden in winter schoenbrunn palace as seen from neptune fountain , september 2016.jpg schönbrunn seen through neptune fountain schönbrunni kastély.tif schönbrunn . the schönbrunn palace silver coin . the palace was selected as the main motif of a high value commemorative coin : the austrian 10-euro the palace of schönbrunn silver coin , minted on october 8 , 2003 . the obverse shows the central part of the frontage of the palace behind one of the great fountains in the open space . see also . chinese cabinets in schönbrunn palace tiergarten schönbrunn , the zoo in the palace gardens that claims to be the oldest one in the world gloriette list of baroque residences list of world heritage sites in austria