Yoshizawa–Randlett system

history . the concept of diagramming originated in the 1797 book “ senbazuru orikata ” , the first origami book ever published . the diagrams in this book were very unclear , and often only showed the end result of the folding process , leaving the folder unsure how the model was created . later books began to devise a system of showing precisely how a model was folded . these ranged from an unwieldy set of symbols to a photograph or sketch of each step attempting to show the motion of a fold . none of these systems were sufficient to diagram all models , and so none were widely adopted . in the 1950s and '60s , akira yoshizawa proposed a system of diagramming . he introduced its diagramming notation in his first published monograph , atarashi origami geijutsu ( new origami art ) in 1954 . he employed dotted and dashed lines to represent mountain and valley folds , and a few other symbols such as the “ inflate ” and “ round ” symbols . this system caught the attention of samuel randlett and robert harbin , who added a few symbols such as “ rotate ” and “ zoom in ” , and then adopted it as the standard . the yoshizawa–randlett system was first described in samuel randlett 's art of origami in 1961 . it was then accepted as the default throughout the international origami community , and is still in general use today . origami symbols . basic folds . there are two main types of origami symbol , lines and arrows . the arrows show how the paper is bent or moved . lines show various types of edges : a thick line shows the edge of the paper a dashed line shows a valley fold . the paper is folded in front of itself . a dashed and dotted line shows a mountain fold ( there may be one or two dots per dash depending on the author ) . the paper is folded behind itself , this is normally done by turning the paper over , folding a valley fold and then turning the paper back over again . a thin line shows where a previous fold has creased the paper . a dotted line shows a previous fold that 's hidden behind other paper , or sometimes shows a fold that 's not yet made . common operations . the operations shown here are all fairly common . the pleat folds and reverse folds are often done with the two creases at an angle . reverse folds of a corner are typically used to produce feet or birds heads . the sink fold is considered an intermediary to high skill . the version shown here is called an open sink and there is another version called a closed sink which generates a triangular pocket with no flaps showing . in simple cases the model can be partly unfolded and then folded with the sink in place . compound folds . a squash fold starts with a flap with at least two layers ( for example , one flap of a waterbomb base ) . make a radial fold from the closed point down the center of this flap . open the flap and refold downward to make two adjacent flaps . a rabbit ear fold starts with a reference crease down a diagonal . fold two radial folds from opposite corners along the same side of the reference crease ; the resulting flap should be folded downwards so that the previous edges are aligned . a petal fold starts with two connected flaps , each of which has at least two layers . ( for example , two flaps of a preliminary base ) . the two flaps are attached to each other along a reference crease . make two radial folds from the open point , so that the open edges lie along the reference crease . unfold these two radial folds . make another fold across the top connecting the ends of the creases to create a triangle of creases . unfold this fold as well . fold one layer of the open point upward and flatten it using the existing creases . a petal fold is equivalent to two side-by-side rabbit ears , which are connected along the reference crease . squash-fold.svg squash fold applied to one flap of a waterbomb base rabbit-ear-fold.svg rabbit ear fold petal-fold.svg petal fold on one half of a preliminary fold . origami bases . in origami , there is a series of several bases that many models are created with . in general , '' base '' refers to any folded paper that immediately precedes final folding and shaping of the model-to-be . the ones listed below are generally accepted as the traditional origami bases . a blintz base is made by folding the corners of a square into the center . the resulting square can then be used as the starting point for any base or blintzed again . the resulting base will then have more points available for folding . the kite base is merely two valley folds that bring two adjacent edges of the square together to lie on the square 's diagonal . the fish base consists of two radial folds against a diagonal reference crease on each of two opposite corners . the flaps that result on the other two corners are carefully folded downwards in the same direction . in other words , it consists of two side-by-side rabbit ears . the waterbomb base consists of two perpendicular valley folds down the diagonals of the square and two perpendicular mountain folds down the center of the square . this crease pattern is then compressed to form the waterbomb base , which is an isosceles-right triangle with four isosceles-right triangular flaps . the waterbomb base is an inside-out preliminary fold . the preliminary fold consists of two perpendicular diagonal mountain folds that bisect the corners of the square and two perpendicular valley folds that bisect the edges of the square . the paper is then collapsed to form a square shape with four isosceles-right triangular flaps . it is sometimes called the square base the bird base , or crane base , consists of a preliminary fold with both the front and the back sides petal folded upward . the frog base starts with a waterbomb base or preliminary fold . all four flaps are squash-folded ( the result is the same in either case ) , and then the corners are petal folded upward . blintz-fold.svg blintz base base du cerf-volant.svg kite base fish-base.svg fish base water-bomb-base.svg water bomb base before flattening preliminary-fold.svg preliminary fold or square base bird base.svg bird base . more advanced skills . the swivel fold is difficult to describe as the term is loosely defined and there are so many different versions that could be called '' swivel folds '' . however , generally swivel folds involve a flap of paper '' swivelling '' at a certain point or vertex and another flap or edge of paper , connected to the first , dragged around that point or vertex . most of the creases in a stretched bird base are present in the regular bird base . when forming this bird base , make sure to crease the triangle at the center corner through all layers . ( if you unfold completely , you will see a small square at the center of the paper . ) after forming the bird base , either partially unfold the paper , and/or '' stretch '' two opposite corners of the bird base . these two corners , their associated flaps , and the central square will all lie flat . the other two flaps will form a pyramid . rabbit ear each flap that is in the pyramid , so that the model lies flat . all of the raw edges will lie along the centerline of the model . the stretched bird base is used in lang 's bald eagle , greenberg 's eeyore , and some other high-intermediate and complex models . the open sink usually involves opening out the paper , and reversing creases to make a waterbomb base in the middle of the model . the open double sink is equivalent to making an open sink , and then open-sinking the point in the opposite direction . it is a sinked analog of the crimp fold . when made in a single step ( after pre-creasing ) , it can be easier to make than a single open sink , because it does not require neatly reversing the point . the open double sink is used in many box-pleated models . the spread squash can similarly be considered the sinked analog of the squash fold . it is used to flatten a closed flap or twist fold ( see below ) . instead of creating a long point to one side of the flap 's base , the spread squash creates a wide splat around the flap 's base . the spread squash is used in the eyes of engel 's octopus , in marie 's rose , and in some other intermediate and complex models . the closed sink simultaneously makes a locking flap inside of a sink . it is difficult because the paper can not be opened out further than a triangle . this technique is illustrated in the origami forum 's thread 462 . the closed sink appears in some high-intermediate and complex models . the twist fold involves , as the name implies , twisting a section of the paper with respect to its original position . the section twisted will be a polygon ; the numerous required support creases include pleat folds radiating from its corners . marie 's rose demonstrates this on a pentagon . it is also possible to twist a single conical point indefinitely , collapsing the sides in a waterbomb-base-like fashion as one goes . ( if this is tried with a non-conical point , such as the waterbomb base itself , eventually the fold will terminate in a spread squash . ) this variant is used in many of tomoko fuse 's modular boxes . unsink , or sometimes open unsink , makes a concave pocket convex without fully unfolding the paper , or the opposite of an open sink . it is more difficult than the closed unsink below because there is no internal flap to grab onto to help unsink the paper , so the paper must be opened out and the area to be unsunk is pushed out ( to be convex ) from inside the model and from behind . it is a common fold in lang 's insects . the closed unsink inverts a closed sink without completely opening out the affected paper . in theory , it is '' just '' the opposite of a closed sink . in practice , it is very difficult , because the paper being '' popped '' into place usually must be pulled ( not pushed ) , and because it involves simultaneously folding over a locking flap that is hidden inside the sink . however , it is easier to manipulate than an open unsink as there is an internal flap to pull to pop the unsink in place ; in an open unsink there is nothing to hold . the closed unsink appears in some complex models , such as a few of lang 's insects . references . further reading . almost every origami book has basic instructions and a set of folding symbols . the following are books that happen to have detailed explanations of these techniques , and how the techniques are related to each other : robert j . lang ( 1988 ) . the complete book of origami : step-by-step instructions in over 1000 diagrams . mineola , ny : dover publications . peter engel ( 1989 ) . origami from angelfish to zen . mineola , ny : dover publications . robert j . lang ( 2003 ) . origami design secrets : mathematical methods for an ancient art . natick , ma : a k peter . tomoko fuse ( 1990 ) . unit origami : multidimensional transformations . toyoko : japan publications , inc . external links . www.folds.net/tutorial folds.net guide to paperfolding – instructions on the web is laid out in a similar order to this tech tree . it has pictures of simple models at the start , and pictures of complicated models at the end . an article on '' origami diagramming conventions by robert j . lang . happyfolding.com site featuring instructional origami videos , an origami dictionary , etc .