Gianni Agnelli

early life . agnelli was born in turin , but maintained strong ties with the village of villar perosa , near turin in the piedmont region . his father was the prominent italian industrialist edoardo agnelli and his mother was princess virginia bourbon del monte , daughter of carlo , 4th prince of san faustino , head of a noble family established in perugia . agnelli was named after his grandfather giovanni agnelli , the founder of the italian car manufacturer fiat . his maternal grandmother was american . gianni – as he was known to differentiate from his grandfather , with whom he shared his first name – inherited the command of fiat and the agnelli family assets in general in 1966 , following a period in which fiat was temporarily '' ruled '' by vittorio valletta while gianni was learning how his family 's company worked . agnelli raised fiat to become the most important company in italy , and one of the major car-builders of europe . he also developed the accessory business , with minor companies also operating in military industry . agnelli and fiat would come to share a common vision , agnelli meaning fiat and , more sensibly , fiat meaning agnelli . agnelli was educated at pinerolo cavalry academy , and studied law at the university of turin , although he never practiced law . he joined a tank regiment in june 1940 when italy entered world war ii on the side of the axis powers . he fought on the eastern front , being wounded twice . he also served in a fiat-built armoured-car division in north africa , where he was shot in the arm by a german officer during a bar fight over a woman . after italy surrendered , due to his fluency in english , agnelli became a liaison officer with the occupying american troops . his grandfather , who had manufactured vehicles for the axis powers during the war , was forced to retire from fiat , but named valletta to be his successor . gianni 's grandfather died , leaving gianni head of the family but valletta running the company . fiat then began producing italy 's first inexpensive mass-produced car . prior to his marriage on 19 november 1953 to marella caracciolo di castagneto – a half-american , half-neapolitan nobility who made a small but significant name as a fabric designer , and a bigger name as a tastemaker almanach de gotha ( gotha : justus perthes , 1942 ) , 398–399 . – agnelli was a noted playboy whose mistresses included the socialite pamela harriman and even jackie kennedy . though agnelli continued to be involved with other women during his marriage , including the film star anita ekberg and the american fashion designer jackie rogers , the agnellis remained married until his death of prostate cancer in 2003 at the age of 81 . for most of his life , he was considered to be a man of exquisite taste . he left his extraordinary paintings to the city of turin in 2002 . his only son , edoardo agnelli , was born seven months after the couple 's wedding , in new york on 9 june 1954 . gianni gave up trying to groom him to take over fiat , seeing how the boy was more interested in mysticism than making cars ( he studied religion at princeton university and took part in a world day of prayer in assisi ) . edoardo , who seemed burdened by the mantle of his surname , committed suicide on 15 november 2000 by jumping off a bridge near turin ; gianni himself joined police at the scene . edoardo never married , but he had one son ( born out of wedlock in 1973 ) who was not recognized by gianni agnelli . the agnellis had only one daughter , countess margherita agnelli de pahlen . she is the mother of john elkann , lapo elkann and ginevra elkann . she has five other children from her second marriage to count serge de pahlen . maria de pahlen , peter de pahlen , anna de pahlen and tatiana de pahlen . head of fiat . agnelli became president of fiat in 1966 . he opened factories in many places , including russia ( at the time the soviet union ) and south america , and started international alliances and joint-ventures ( like iveco ) , which marked a new industrial mentality . in the 1970s , during the international petrol crisis , he sold part of the company to lafico , a libyan company owned by colonel qaddhafi ; agnelli would later repurchase these shares , however . his relationships with the left , especially with enrico berlinguer 's communist party , were the essence of the relationships between labour forces and italian industry . the social conflicts related to fiat 's policies ( some say politics ) always saw agnelli keeping the leading role ; in the 1980s , during the last important trade union action , a dramatic situation in which a strike was blocking all of fiat 's production , he was able to organise the march of 40,000 workers who broke the pickets and re-entered the factories . this marked the demise of the power of trade unions , which to this day have not recovered their influence on italy 's politics and economy . in the 1970s , fiat and its leaders were attacked , mostly by the red brigades , prima linea and nap . several people working for the group were killed , and trade unions were initially suspected of hiding some of the attackers in their organizations , though the same terrorists later targeted trade unionists like guido rossa . agnelli 's politics and the events at fiat in the 1970s were the subject of dario fo 's 1981 satirical play trumpets and raspberries . agnelli was named senator for life in 1991 and subscribed to the independent parliamentary group ; he was later named a member of the senate 's defence commission . in the early 2000s , agnelli made overtures to general motors resulting in an agreement under which general motors progressively became involved in fiat . the recent serious crisis of fiat found agnelli already fighting against cancer , and he could take little part in these events . agnelli was also closely connected with juventus , the most renowned italian football club , of which he was a fan and the direct owner . his phone calls , every morning at 6 am , from wherever he was , whatever was he doing , to the club 's president giampiero boniperti , were legendary . agnelli encountered a number of difficulties with mediobanca through cesare romiti , who caused agnelli profound anxiety . mediobanca made a policy of constantly supervising the fiat because of their financial interests in the company , often becoming significantly involved in executive decisions and important issues . vincenzo maranghi , who later became the ceo of the bank , eventually developed a close friendship with agnelli , despite previous tensions . nicknamed l'avvocato ( '' the lawyer '' ) because he had a degree in law ( though he was never admitted to the order of lawyers ) , agnelli was the most important figure in italian economy , the symbol of capitalism throughout the second half of 20th century , and regarded by many as the true '' king of italy '' . a cultivated man of keen intelligence and a peculiar sense of humour , he was perhaps the most famous italian abroad , forming deep relationships with international bankers and politicians , largely through the bilderberg group , whose conferences he attended regularly since 1958 . some of the other bilderberg regulars became close friends , among them henry kissinger . another longtime associate was david rockefeller ( yet another bilderberg regular ) , who appointed him to the international advisory committee ( iac ) of chase manhattan bank , of which rockefeller was chairman ; agnelli sat on this committee for thirty years . he was also a member of a syndicate with rockefeller that for a time in the 1980s owned rockefeller center . association with david rockefeller – see his memoirs , new york : random house , 2002 ( pp . 208 , 479 , 481 ) . later life and death . agnelli stepped down in 1996 , but stayed on as honorary chairman until his death . giovanni alberto agnelli , the son of gianni 's younger brother , umberto agnelli , died of a rare form of cancer in 1997 at age 33 while he was being groomed by his uncle to head the fiat group . john elkann , the son of gianni and marella 's daughter , margherita , was expected to take over fiat after gianni 's death . however , umberto became chairman , taking over from paolo fresco . fresco had diversified the group 's holdings , but umberto refocused its activities on its auto and mechanics division . he then brought in giuseppe morchio to mastermind a rescue strategy for the company . morchio was expected to continue to run the fiat group as it attempted to claw its way out of its latest financial crisis . however , upon umberto 's death , ferrari chairman luca cordero di montezemolo was named chairman , with elkann as vice chairman ; morchio immediately offered his resignation . his successor sergio marchionne was an expert of reorganisation who between 2002 and 2004 led the swiss certification company societé générale de surveillance ( sgs ) . gianni agnelli died in 2003 of prostate cancer at age 81 in turin . fiat-owned scuderia ferrari named their 2003 f1 contender the f2003-ga , in tribute to agnelli . . style . agnelli 's fashion sense and style inspired and influenced menswear throughout the years in italy and around the world . in his retirement speech , milanese fashion designer nino cerruti named agnelli as one of his biggest inspirations along with james bond and john f . kennedy . esquire magazine named agnelli as one of five best dressed men in the history of the world . agnelli 's dress style featured a foundation of classic suits . he had a large number of bespoke caraceni suits , which were of high quality and classic design . he was known for wearing his wristwatch over his cuff and was regarded as conveying sprezzatura , the italian art of making the difficult look easy . agnelli 's nickname '' the rake of the riviera '' inspired the classical menswear magazine the rake . interview with editor on a continuous lean blog . ancestry . references . external links . giovanniagnelli.it gianni agnelli 's life in images obituary : gianni agnelli dead at 81 from united press international