Passing (sociology)

ethnicity and race . historically and genealogically , the term passing has referred to mixed-race , or biracial americans identifying as or being perceived as belonging to a different racial group . in passing and the fictions of identity , elaine ginsberg cites an ad for escaped slave edmund kenney as an example of racial passing ; edmund kenney , a biracial person , was able to pass as white in the united states in the 1800s . in the entry '' passing '' for the glbtq encyclopedia project , tina gianoulis states , '' for light-skinned african americans during the times of slavery and the intense periods of racial resegregation that followed , passing for white was a survival tool that allowed them to gain education and employment that would have been denied them had they been recognized as '' colored '' people . '' the term passing has since been expanded to include other ethnicities and identity categories . discriminated groups in north america and europe may modify their accents , word choices , manner of dress , grooming habits , and even names in an attempt to appear to be members of a majority group or of a privileged minority group . nella larsen 's 1929 novella , passing , helped to establish the term after several years of prior use . the writer and subject of the novella is a mixed african-american/caucasian who passes for white . the novella was written during the harlem renaissance , when passing was commonly found in both reality and fiction . since the civil rights movement of the 1960s , racial pride decreased the weight given to passing as an important issue for black americans . still , it is possible and common for biracial people to pass based on appearance or by hiding or omitting their backgrounds . in '' adjusting the borders : bisexual passing and queer theory , '' lingel quotes bell hooks ' discussion of racial passing . . social class and caste . class passing , similar to racial and gender passing , is the concealment or misrepresentation of one 's social class . in class-passing : social mobility in film and popular culture , gwendolyn audrey foster suggests racial and gender passing is often stigmatized , while class passing is generally accepted as norm ( sociology ) . foster , gwendolyn audrey . class-passing : social mobility in film and popular culture , carbondale , il : southern illinois university press , 2005 , pp . 1-5 . class passing is common in the united states and is linked to the notions of the american dream and of upward class mobility . . popular culture . english-language novels which feature class passing include the talented mr . ripley , anne of green gables , and horatio alger novels . films featuring class-passing characters include catch me if you can , my fair lady , pinky , atl , and andy hardy meets debutante . class passing also figures into reality television programs such as joe millionaire : contestants are often immersed in displays of great material wealth or may have to conceal their class status . . sexuality and gender . the perception of an individual 's sexual orientation is often based on their visual identity . the term visual identity refers to the expression of personal , social , and cultural identities through dress and appearance . in visible lesbians and invisible bisexuals : appearance and visual identities among bisexual women it is proposed that through the expression of a visual identity , others 'read ' our appearance and make assumptions about our wider identity . therefore , visual identity is a prominent tool of non-verbal communication . the concept of passing is showcased in the research done by jennifer taub in her work bisexual women and beauty norms . some participants in the study stated that they attempted to dress as what they perceived as heterosexual when partnered with a man while others stated that they tried to dress more like a 'lesbian ' . this exemplifies how visual identities can greatly alter people 's immediate assumptions of sexuality . therefore , by presenting oneself as 'heterosexual ' one is effectively 'passing' . passing by sexual orientation occurs when an individual 's perceived sexual orientation or sexuality differs from the sexuality or sexual orientation with which they identify . in the entry '' passing '' for the glbtq encyclopedia project , tina gianoulis notes '' the presumption of heterosexuality in most modern cultures , '' which in some parts of the world , such as the united states , may be effectively compulsory , '' most gay men and lesbians in fact spend a great deal of their lives passing as straight even when they do not do so intentionally . '' the phrase '' in the closet '' may be used to describe an individual who is hiding or concealing their sexual orientation . in passing : identity and interpretation in sexuality , race , and religion , maria sanchez and linda schlossberg state '' the dominant social order often implores gay people to stay in the closet ( to pass ) . '' individuals may choose to remain '' in closeted , '' or pass as heterosexual , for a variety of reasons . examples of such reasons include a desire to maintain positive relationships with family and policies or requirements associated with employment . do n't ask , do n't tell was an example of a policy that required passing as heterosexual within the military or armed forces . gender passing refers to when an individual is perceived as belonging to a gender identity group that differs from the gender with which they were assigned at birth . in passing and the fictions of identity , elaine ginsberg provides the story of brandon teena as an example of gender passing in the united states . he was assigned female at birth , but lived as a man . in 1993 , brandon moved to falls city , nebraska , where he initially was able to pass as a man ; however , when community members discovered that brandon had been assigned female at birth , two men in the community shot and murdered brandon . ginsberg further cites billy tipton , a jazz musician who was also assigned female at birth , but lived and performed as a man until his death in 1989 , as another example of gender passing . within the transgender community , passing refers to the perception or recognition of a trans individual as belonging to the gender identity to which they are transitioning rather than the sex or gender they were assigned at birth . . religion . passing as a member of a different religion or as not religious at all is not uncommon among minority religious communities . in the entry '' passing '' for the glbtq encyclopedia project , tina gianoulis states '' at times of rabid anti-semitism in europe and the americas , many jewish families also either converted to christianity or passed as christian '' for the sake of survival . circumcised jewish males in germany during world war ii attempted to restore their foreskins as part of passing as gentile . the film europa , europa explores this theme . in shia islam there is the doctrine of taqiyya , whereby one is lawfully allowed to disavow islam and profess another faith ( whilst secretly remaining a muslim ) if one 's life is at risk . the concept has also been practised by various minority faiths in the middle east such as the alawites and druze . . ability or disability . disability passing may refer to the intentional concealment of impairment in order to avoid the stigma of disability ; however , it may also describe the exaggeration of an ailment or impairment in order to receive some benefit , which may take the form of attention or care . in disability and passing : blurring the lines of identity , jeffrey brune and daniel wilson define passing by ability or disability as '' the ways that others impose , intentionally or not , a specific disability or non-disability identity on a person . '' similarly , in '' compulsory able-bodiedness and queer/disabled existence , '' robert mcruer argues that '' the system of compulsory able-bodiedness.produces disability . '' . passing as disabled . people with disabilities may exaggerate their disabilities when being evaluated for medical care or accommodations , often for fear of being denied support . '' there are too many agencies out there with the ostensible purpose of helping us that still believe that as long as we technically can do something , like crab-walking our way into a subway station , we should have to do it , '' writes gabe moses , a wheelchair user who has a limited ability to walk . these pressures can result in disabled people exaggerating symptoms or tiring out their body before an evaluation so that they are seen on a '' bad day '' instead of a '' good day . '' . passing as non-disabled . individuals whose disabilities are '' invisible , '' such as people with mental illness , intellectual or cognitive disabilities , or physical disabilities that are not immediately obvious to others such as ibs , crohn 's disease or ulcerative colitis , may choose whether or not to reveal their identity or to pass as '' normal . '' while passing as non-disabled may protect against discrimination , it could also result in lack of support or accusations of faking . autism people may employ strategies known as '' masking '' or '' camouflaging '' in order to pass as non-disabled . this can involve behavior like suppressing or redirecting repetitive movements , avoiding talking about one 's interests , or faking a smile in an environment that feels uncomfortable or distressing . masking may be done to reduce the risk of ostracism or abuse . autistic masking is correlated with a higher risk of depression and suicide . it can also lead to exhaustion . individuals with visible physical impairments or disabilities , such as people with mobility impairment , including individuals who use wheelchairs or scooters , face greater challenges in concealing their disability . . intersectional . though passing may occur on the basis of a single subordinate identity such as race , often people 's intersectional locations involve multiple marginalized identities . intersectionality provides a framework for seeing the interconnected nature of oppressive systems and how multiple identities interact within them . gay asian men possess two key subordinated identities which , in combination , create unique challenges for them when passing . sometimes these men must pass as straight to avoid stigma but around other gay men they may attempt to pass as a non-racialized person or white to avoid the disinterest or fetishization often encountered upon revealing their asian identities . by recognizing the hidden intersection of the gendered aspects of gay and asian male stereotypes , these two distinct experiences make even more sense . gay men are often stereotyped as effeminate and thereby insufficiently masculine as men . stereotypes characterizing asian men as too sexual ( overly masculine ) or too feminine ( hypo-masculine ) or even both also exhibit the gendered nature of racial stereotypes . thus , passing as the dominant racial or sexuality category also often means passing as gender correct . when black transgender men transition in the workplace from identifying as female to passing as cisgender males , gendered racial stereotypes characterizing black men as overly masculine and violent can affect how previously acceptable behaviors will be interpreted . as one such black trans man discovered , he 'd gone from '' being an obnoxious black woman to a scary black man '' , and therefore had to adapt his behavior to gendered scripts to pass . . see also . beard ( companion ) closeted closet jew dramaturgy ( sociology ) identity politics masking ( personality ) minority stress model minority '' on the internet , nobody knows you 're a dog '' shibboleth stigma management uncanny valley undercover . footnotes .