LexisNexis Risk Solutions

overview . market segments . lexisnexis risk solutions operates in four market segments : insurance services business services health care services government services . technology . lexisnexis risk solutions uses hpcc systems , also known as das ( data analytics supercomputer ) , extensively —its software architecture runs from commodity computing to provide high-performance , data-parallel processing for big data applications . the hpcc systems platform includes a data refinery ( thor ) and a rapid data delivery engine ( roxie ) that utilize the enterprise control language ( ecl ) . lexisnexis risk solutions open-sourced the hpcc systems platform in 2011 , and has seen some success with the adoption of this platform by diverse entities , an example being guardhat , which makes smart hard hats with embedded hpcc systems technology . history . a subsidiary of relx ( formerly reed elsevier ) , lexisnexis risk solutions first began as the risk & information analytics group ( riag ) within lexisnexis , a corporation offering legal database services . in 2000 , reed elsevier acquired riskwise and peoplewise , which together became the basis of riag . the creation of riag expanded lexisnexis offerings to include public records collections . in 2000 , lexisnexis also launched hpcc systems , its data-intensive computing system platform . lexisnexis risk solutions moved into collections after reed elsevier acquired the public records businesses of dolan media company in 2003 . that same year , the lexisnexis special services inc . ( lnssi ) was founded to provide government agencies with global sources of data fusion technology and analytics . lnssi also granted reed elsevier the ability to participate in classified u.s . government programs as a foreign-owned entity . in 2004 , reed elsevier purchased seisint inc . , based in boca raton , florida . seisint housed and operated the multistate anti-terrorism information exchange ( matrix ) . in september 2008 , reed elsevier purchased data aggregator choicepoint . this acquisition included an insurance business and the c.l.u.e . database , an underwriting database for the u.s . auto insurance market . lexisnexis completed the migration of public records to hpcc systems the same year . launch . in september 2009 , choicepoint was integrated with the risk & information analytics group ( riag ) , and the combined new entity became lexisnexis risk solutions . in 2011 , lexisnexis risk solutions was officially launched as a separate company within the reed elsevier portfolio . mark kelsey was named ceo of lexisnexis risk solutions in december 2012 . over the next two years the company purchased 12 companies including : worldcompliance , enclarity , mapflow , tracesmart , wunelli and health market science . divestiture . in january 2013 , lexisnexis risk solutions announced it would sell its background screening business to the palo alto-based private equity firm symphony technology group ( stg ) . stg planned to combine lexisnexis screening with its portfolio company , first advantage . . insurance initiatives ltd . ( 2016 ) . in july 2016 , lexisnexis risk solutions acquired insurance initiatives ltd . ( iil ) , a data distribution platform that extracts , hosts and processes large quantities of data to deliver information into the point-of-quote in the u.k . 's property and casualty insurance industry . . threatmetrix ( 2018 ) . relx purchased threatmetrix , a digital identity and risk-based authenticator platform , in february 2018 . . lumen ( 2019 ) . in may 2019 , lexisnexis risk solutions purchased lumen , an integrated data platform leveraged by public safety and law enforcement from numerica corporation . . id analytics ( 2020 ) . in january 2020 , lexisnexis risk solutions closed its acquisition of id analytics , a provider of fraud and credit risk solutions . previously id analytics was a nortonlifelock company . . emailage ( 2020 ) . in march 2020 , lexisnexis risk solutions , acquired emailage , an arizona-based fraud prevention and risk management solutions provider . . governance . lexisnexis risk solutions is a subsidiary of relx ( tickers : relx and rel.uk ) . lexisnexis risk solutions and reed business information compose relx ’ s risk & business analytics market segment , led by ceo mark kelsey and overseen by the relx board of directors . corporate social responsibility . missing children . . u.s . lexisnexis risk solutions developed the adam ( automated delivery of alerts on missing children ) program in 2000 to help the national center for missing & exploited children ( ncmec ) find missing children . adam distributes missing child alert posters to law enforcement , hospitals , libraries and businesses within specific geographic search areas . the system was expanded in 2017 to allow individuals to receive an email alert when a child is reported missing near to them . in 2017 , a feature was added to adam to allow ncmec to focus on a highway where a missing child and abductor may be travelling in order to distribute posters to recipients along the relevant corridor . combining this filter along with the system ’ s radius search allows for broad , yet targeted , poster coverage . functionality was added to adam to allow members of the public to sign up for missing child email alerts in their area . more than 1.8 million individuals , private enterprises , hospitals , schools , news outlets and law agencies have signed up to receive automated adam alerts . u.k . in 2017 , lexisnexis risk solutions began working with the charity missing people and the uk national crime agency to support their child rescue alert service , which disseminates missing alerts via text message . along with charlie hedges advisory ( one of the u.k . ’ s foremost experts on missing persons ) , lexisnexis risk solutions and missing people scoped a training course to assist law enforcement , schools , hospitals and others with missing cases , particularly those involving children who are abducted and/or trafficked . food stamp fraud prevention . since 2013 , the florida department of children families has used lexisnexis risk solutions to identity management solutions to prevent food stamp fraud and improve operational efficiencies , achieving a total cost avoidance of more than 843.7 million . humanitarian emergency education . in 2017 , lexisnexis risk solutions developed the global business coalition for education ’ s rapid education action ( react ) database to record private sector educational contributions and assets that can be deployed quickly in the wake of a humanitarian emergency . law enforcement . . psde database . the public safety data exchange ( psdex ) is a contributory database that of more than 1,300 law enforcement agencies across the u.s . that was created by lexisnexis risk solutions . psdex helps its participants solve crimes , identify threats and anticipate future threats . lexisnexis risk solutions created an advisory committee to advise on policy and governance of psdex data , to help assure adherence to federal criminal justice information services ( cjis ) , state and local standards for security and privacy of law enforcement-provided data . the psdex advisory committee is composed of former federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , secret service , metropolitan police department and other criminal justice experts , in partnership with lexisnexis risk solutions leaders . lexisnexis accurint virtual crime center . the lexisnexis accurint virtual crime center gives law enforcement “ greater visibility into crime in both their jurisdictions and nationwide by linking billions of public records with agency-provided data . ” it links to psdex and brings together disconnected data to provide a more comprehensive view of people ’ s identities so that law enforcement agencies can better target investigations , identify patterns , predict upcoming events and deploy resources more efficiently . covid-19 . covid-19 analyzer . in april , 2020 , lexisnexis risk solutions created a free tracking tool to monitor and report the progress of the covid-19 virus and provide better contextual understanding of the pandemic ’ s evolution . using data from johns hopkins university ( daily cases and deaths ) , the us census bureau ( us population ) and the un desa ( world population ) , the tracker provides metrics and analysis for locations across the globe , with maps that drill down to country and regional levels , helping to understand how the virus is propagating . hpcc systems blog , july , 20 , 2020 in july 2020 , researchers from florida atlantic university ’ s college of engineering and computer science in collaboration with lexisnexis risk solutions , received a grant for rapid research ( rapid ) from the national science foundation to develop a model of covid-19 spread using innovative big data analytics techniques and tools . the project leverages prior experience in modeling ebola spread to successfully model the spread of covid-19 . big data analytics enables scientists to model covid-19 spread , giselle galoustian , fau news desk , july 14 , 2020 . covid-19 data resource center . lexisnexis risk solutions health care announced in april 2020 the launch of a free covid-19 data resource center to provide county-level insights on at-risk populations and potential care capacity gaps to support the u.s . healthcare industry ’ s response to the covid-19 pandemic . by combining its own data and analytics with those of other industry stakeholders , the company created insights to be used by healthcare organizations , public health officials and health researchers to help allocate resources to the populations with the greatest need . lexisnexis risk solutions launches covid-19 national data resource center , april 22 , 2020 , pr newswire the covid-19 data resource center features heat maps with insights that identify at-risk populations and correlated gaps in provider coverage . each county is assigned a percentile rank on a scale of 0 ( low-risk ) to 100 ( high-risk ) across various parameters . the map is updated regularly to quickly address the care needs of the community . in june 2020 , the group added national telehealth trending insights to its covid-19 data resource center to show exponential growth of telehealth adoption resulting from the covid-19 pandemic . lexisnexis risk solutions publishes telehealth statistics via covid-19 data resource center ; executive biz , june 18,2020 . see also . lexisnexis relx national center for missing and exploited children