Gennadius Scholarius

biography . he was born georgios in constantinople in c . 1400 . his abecedary was mark of ephesus m . pilavakis , introduction to '' first antirrhetic against manuel kalekas . '' ( london : doctoral diss . , 1988 ) , p . 24 ( d . 1444 ) . for mark of ephesus ’ death , see j . gill , '' the year of the death of mark eugenicus , '' byzantinische zeitschrift , 52 ( 1952 ) 23–31 . following his tutelage under the famous john chortasmenos ( '' didaskalos '' of the patriarchal school ) , manuel-mark might have then recommended him to study under his own previous master , georgios gemistus pletho ( d . 1452/1454 ) , c . 1428 . however , his studies under pletho are a matter of speculation and , at any rate , would have been more likely attendance at pletho 's lectures at mistra . scholarius had been a teacher of philosophy before entering the service of the emperor john viii palaeologus as a theological advisor . in fact , in 1437 – in anticipation of the council of ferrara-florence – the emperor formally studied nilus cabasilas 's works along with mark of ephesus and gennadius scholarius . curiously , the trio also formally studied the works of john duns scotus ( d . 1308 ) because of his rejection of the filioque in thomistic metaphysics , as well as scotus ' doctrine of a '' formal distinction '' between the persons and essence of god , as well as god 's attributes ( or '' energies '' ) . it was for this reason that scholarius wrote an academic refutation of the first eighteen of mark of ephesus ' '' syllogistic chapters against the latins . '' from this , we can surmise that scholarius was likely writing an academic exercise to inform his former master that thomas aquinas ' opinions did not constitute a universally latin approach to questions on the trinity . council of florence . georgios scholarius became historically important when , as judge in the civil courts under john viii ( 1425–1448 ) , he accompanied his emperor to the council of ferrara-florence , held in 1438–1439 in ferrara and florence . the object of this endeavor was bringing a union between the greek and latin churches , which he supported at that time . he made four speeches at the council – all exceedingly conciliatory . at the same council appeared the celebrated platonist , gemistus pletho , the most powerful opponent of the then dominant aristotelianism , and consequently an antagonist of scholarius . in church matters , as in philosophy , the two were opposed – pletho advocated a partial return to greek paganism in the form of a syncretic union between christianity and zoroastrianism ; while scholarius , more cautious , pressed the necessity for ecclesiastical union with rome on doctrinal grounds , and was instrumental in drawing up a form which from its vagueness and ambiguity might be accepted by both parties . georgios scholarius was at a serious disadvantage because , being a layman , he could not directly take part in the discussions of the council . return to constantinople . despite his initial advocacy of the union ( and berating many of the orthodox bishops for their lack of theological learnedness ) , georgios scholarius soured on union during the council , and left it early in june 1440 . at the behest of his mentor mark of ephesus , who converted him completely to anti-latin orthodoxy , till his death , georgios scholarius was known ( with mark of ephesus ) as the most uncompromising enemy of the union . it was at just about this time ( 1444 ) that he began to draw attention to the putative heterodoxy of aquinas ' '' distinction of reason '' between the attributes ( viz . , energies ) and essence of god . first , as contained in jugie 's edition of his opera omnia , georgios scholarius interrupts chapters 94–96 of his discourse '' on being and essence '' of thomas aquinas , and replaces the thomistic explanation with that of scotism in order to agree better with palamas . however , he initially mitigates total condemnation of aquinas , noting that later scholastics ( like hervaeus natalis ) interpret aquinas in a more orthodox light . this point marks scholarius ' increasing theological distance from aquinas , where he begins to be more theologically condemnatory of him in later works ( e.g . , his treatises on the holy spirit and his preface to the greek '' summa theologiae '' ) . however , this distance can be overstated . marcus plested observes that scholarios ' '' love and esteem for thomas was to continue undimmed throughout his career '' '' although he would often accentuate the note of caution in later works . '' marcus plested ( 2012 ) orthodox readings of aquinas , oxford university press , pp . 128,129 despite his cautions , scholarios writes of thomas '' we love this divinely-inspired and wise man . '' luis petit , xenophon sidéridès , martin jugie , eds . ( 1928-36 ) oeuvres complètes de georges scholarios , 8 vols . , paris , vi:177-8 . quoted in plested , p . 129 he wrote many works to defend his new convictions , which differ so much from the earlier conciliatory ones that allatius thought there must be two people of the same name ; diatriba de georgiis in fabricius-harles bibliotheca græca , x , 760–786 to whom gibbon : '' renaudot has restored the identity of his person , and the duplicity of his character '' . e . gibbon , decline and fall , lxviii , note 41 after the death of john viii in 1448 , georgios entered the zeyrek mosque in constantinople under constantine xi ( 1448–1453 ) and took , according to the invariable custom , a new name : gennadius . before the fall of the city he was already well known as a bitter opponent of the union . he and mark of ephesus were the leaders of the anti-latin party . in 1444 , mark of ephesus on his deathbed praised gennadius 's irreconcilable attitude towards the latins and the union . patrologia graeca , clx , 529 it was to gennadius that the angry people went after seeing the uniate services in the great church of hagia sophia . it is said that he hid himself , but left a notice on the door of his cell : '' o unhappy romans , why have you forsaken the truth ? why do you not trust in god , instead of in the italians ? in losing your faith you will lose your city . '' quoted by e . gibbon , decline and fall , ed . j.b . bury , vii , 176 . ottoman period . after the fall of constantinople , gennadius was taken prisoner by the turks . in administering his new conquest , 21-year-old conquering sultan mehmed ii wished to assure the loyalty of the greek population and above all avoid them appealing to the west for liberation , potentially sparking a new round of crusades . mehmed therefore sought the most anti-western cleric he could find as a figure of unity for the greeks under turkish rule – and gennadius as leading anti-union figure was a natural choice . on 1 june 1453 , just three days after the fall of the city , the new patriarch 's procession passed through the streets where mehmed received gennadius graciously and himself invested him with the signs of his office – the crosier ( dikanikion ) and mantle . this ceremonial investiture would be repeated by all sultans and patriarchs thereafter . the city 's famous patriarchal basilica , the hagia sophia , had already been converted into a mosque by the conquerors , so gennadius established his seat at the church of the holy apostles . three years later the edifice , which was in a dilapidated state ( in 1461 it was demolished by the ottomans to make way for the fatih mosque ) , müller-wiener , wolfgang ( 1977 ) . bildlexikon zur topographie istanbuls : byzantion , konstantinupolis , istanbul bis zum beginn d . 17 jh . ( in german ) . tübingen : wasmuth . , 406 was abandoned by the patriarch , who moved again to the pammakaristos church . the ottomans divided their empire into millets or subject nations , of which the greeks were the largest , known as the rum millet . the patriarch was appointed the official head or ethnarch of the greek millet , which was used as the ottomans as a source for imperial administrators . gennadius became a political authority as well as a religious one , as were all his successors under the ottomans . as was normal when a monk or lay scholar was appointed patriarch , gennadius was consecutively ordained , first as a deacon , then as a priest , then finally as a bishop before being appointed patriarch . patriarch . in the spring of 1454 he was consecrated by the metropolitan of heraclea perinthus , but , since both the church of hagia sophia and the palace of the patriarch were now in the hands of the ottomans , he took up his residence successively in two monastery of the city . while holding the episcopal office gennadius drew up , apparently for the use of mehmed , a confession or exposition of the christian faith , which was translated into turkish by ahmed , qadi of berrhoea ( and first printed by a . brassicanus at vienna in 1530 ) . gennadius was unhappy as patriarch , and tried to abdicate his position at least twice , in 1456 he resigned . the full reason for this step commonly attributed to his disappointment at the sultan 's treatment of christians , though mehmed seems to have kept the fairly tolerant conditions he had allowed to them ; various writers hint darkly at other motives . eventually , he found the tensions between the greeks and the ottomans overwhelming . he was later called two times to guide the christian community as patriarch during the turbulent period that followed the patriarchate of isidore ii . there is no consensus among scholars about the exact dates of his last two patriarchates : according to kiminas ( 2009 ) , he reigned again from april 1463 to c . june 1463 and from august 1464 to autumn 1465 . for the different scholars ' suggestions about the second and third terms of gennadius see the list of patriarchs of constantinople . blanchet objects to the existence itself of these two additional terms . gennadius then , like so many of his successors , ended his days as an ex-patriarch and a monk . he lived in the monastery of john the baptist near serrae in macedonia , where he wrote books until he died in about 1473 . gennadius fills an important place in byzantine history . he was the last of the old school of polemical writers and one of the greatest . unlike most of his fellows he had an intimate acquaintance with latin theological literature , especially with st . thomas aquinas and other scholastics . he was as skillful an opponent of catholic theology as mark of ephesus , and a more learned one . however , his opposition to aquinas can be overstated . marcus plested observes that scholarios ' '' love and esteem for thomas was to continued undimmed throughout his career '' '' although he would often accentuate the note of caution in later works . '' marcus plested ( 2012 ) orthodox readings of aquinas , oxford university press , pp . 128,129 despite his cautions scholarios writes of thomas '' we love this divinely-inspired and wise man . '' luis petit , xenophon sidéridès , martin jugie , eds . ( 1928-36 ) , oeuvres complètes de georges scholarios 8 vols . , paris , vi:177-8 . quoted in plested , p . 129 his writings show him to be a student not only of western philosophy but of controversy with jews and muslims , of the great hesychast question ( he attacked barlaam and defended the monks ; naturally , the barlaamites were '' latinophrones '' ) , in short , of all the questions that were important in his time . he has another kind of importance as the first patriarch of constantinople under the turks . from this point of view he stands at the head of a new period in the history of his church ; the principles that regulated the condition of orthodox christians in the turkish empire are the result of mehmed ii 's arrangement with him . writings . about 100 to 120 of his alleged writings exist , some of which have never been published , and some of which are of doubtful authenticity . as far as is known , his writings may be classified into philosophical ( interpretations of aristotle , porphyry and others ) , translations of peter of spain and thomas aquinas , defenses of aristotelianism against the recrudescence of neoplatonism ) and theological and ecclesiastical ( partly concerning the union and partly defending christianity against muslims , jews , and pagans ) , in addition to numerous homily , hymns , and letters . gennadius was a prolific writer during all the periods of his life . the complete works of gennadius were published in eight volumes by jugie , petit & siderides , 1928–1936 . m . jugie , l . petit , and x.a . siderides , 1928–1930 , oeuvres complètes de georges ( gennadios ) scholarios , paris : maison de la bonne presse ( note : this edition supersedes the references made below . ) . first period ( pro-union ) . the chief works of this time are the '' speeches '' made at the council of florence , printed in hardouin , ix , and patrologia graeca , clx , 386 sqq . also a number of letters addressed to various friends , bishops , and statesmen , mostly unedited . an apology for five chapters of the council of florence edited first ( in latin ) at rome in 1577 , and again in 1628 . is doubtful . in patrologia graeca , clix it is attributed to joseph of methone . a history of the council of florence under his name ( in manuscript only ) is really identical with that of syropulos . ed . creighton , the hague , 1660 . . second period ( anti-union ) . a great number of polemical works against latins were written in this time . two books about the procession of the holy ghost ; one in simonides , the other in patrologia graeca , clx , 665 another one '' against the insertion of the filioque in the creed '' ; patrologia graeca , clx , 713 two books and a letter about '' purgatory '' ; various sermons and speeches ; a panegyric of marcus eugenicus ( in 1447 ) , etc . some translations of works of st . thomas aquinas , and polemical treatises against his theology by gennadius are still unedited , as is also his work against the barlaamites . however , his hostility toward aquinas can be overstated . marcus plested observes that scholarios ' '' love and esteem for thomas was to continue undimmed throughout his career '' '' although he would often accentuate the note of caution in later works . '' despite his cautions scholarios writes of thomas '' we love this divinely-inspired and wise man . '' luis petit , xenophon sidéridès , martin jugie , eds . ( 1928-36 ) , oeuvres complètes de georges scholarios 8 vols . , paris , vi:177-8 . quoted in plested , p . 129 there are also various philosophical treatises of which the chief is a defence of aristotle ( antilepseis hyper aristotelous ) against the neoplatonist , gemistus pletho . patrologia graeca , clx , 743 sqq . his most important work is easily his '' confession '' ( ekthesis tes pisteos ton orthodoxon christianon , generally known as homologia tou gennadiou ) addressed to mehmed ii . it contains twenty articles , of which however only the first twelve are authentic . it was written in greek ; achmed , qadi of berrhoea , translated it into turkish . this is the first ( in date ) of the orthodox symbolic books . it was published first ( in greek and latin ) by brassicanus ( vienna , 1530 ) , and again by chytræus ( frankfurt , 1582 ) . martin crusius printed it in greek , latin , and turkish ( in greek and latin script ) in his turco-græcia ( basle , 1584 reprinted in patrologia graeca , clx 333 , sqq . ) . rimmel reprinted it ( greek and latin ) ( in his monumenta fidei eccl . orient . ( jena , 1850 ) , i , 1–10 . ) ; and michalcescu in greek only . there exists an arrangement of this confession in the form of a dialogue in which mehmed asks questions ( '' what is god ? '' – '' why is he called theos ? '' – '' and how many gods are there ? '' and so on ) and gennadius gives suitable answers . this is called variously gennadius 's dialogue ( dialexis , διάλεξις ) , or confessio prior , or de via salutis humanæ ( peri tes hodou tes soterias anthropon ) . rimmel prints it first , in latin only , and thinks it was the source of the confession . it is more probably a later compilation made from the confession by someone else . it should be noticed that gennadius 's ( quasi-platonic ) philosophy is in evidence in his confession ( god can not be interpreted , theos from theein , etc . ; cf . rimmel . either for the same reason or to spare muslim susceptibility he avoids the word prosopa in explaining the trinity , speaking of the three persons as idiomata '' which we call hypostases '' . third period ( post-resignation ) . during the third period , from his resignation to his death ( 1459–1468 ) , he continued writing theological and polemical works . an encyclical letter to all christians in defence of his resignation is unedited , as are also a dialogue with two turks about the divinity of christ , and a work about the adoration of god . jahn ( anecdota græca ) has published a dialogue between a christian and a jew and a collection of prophecies about christ gathered from the old testament . a treatise , about our god , one in three , against atheists and polytheists , patrologia graeca , clx , 667 sqq . is chiefly directed against the theory that the world may have been formed by chance . five books , about the foreknowledge and providence of god and a treatise on the manhood of christ , are also in patrologia graeca , clx . lastly , there are many homilies by gennadius , most of which exist only in manuscript at mount athos . codd . athous , paris , 1289–1298 . . in popular media . in 2012 film , fetih 1453 , gennadius is played by adnan kürtçü . gennadius is a significant character in the historical novel porphyry and ash which covers the final year of the byzantine empire and the controversy of the act of union . see also . greek scholars in the renaissance joannes chortasmenos . notes . . citations . . bibliography . . further reading . athanasios angelou ‘ ‘ who am i ? ’ ’ scholarios ’ answers and the hellenic identity '' , in φιλέλλην . studies in honour of robert browning , venice 1996 , p . & nbsp ; 1-19 . marie-hélène blanchet , georges-gennadios scholarios ( vers 1400-vers 1472 ) : un intellectuel orthodoxe face à la disparition de l'empire byzantin , institut français d'études byzantines , paris , 2008 . joseph gill , ‘ george scholarius ’ , in j . gill , personalities of the council of florence and other essays , oxford , 1964 , pp . & nbsp ; 79–94 . eugenia russell , '' st demetrius of thessalonica ; cult and devotion in the middle ages '' , peter lang , oxford , 2010 . c.j.g . turner , ‘ the career of georgios gennadios scholarios ’ , byzantion 39 ( 1969 ) , 420–55 c.j.g . turner , ‘ george gennadius scholarius and the council of florence ’ , journal of theological studies 18 ( 1967 ) , 83–103 thesaurus linguae graecae : bibliography of gennadius scholarius