Plovdiv

industry . industry has been the sole leader in attracting investment . industry has been expanding since the late 1990s , with manufacturing plants being built in the city or in its outskirts mainly the municipality of maritsa . in this period , some €500,000,000 has been invested in the construction of new factories . trakia economic zone which is one of the largest industrial zones in eastern europe , is located around plovdiv . some of the biggest companies in the region include the austrian utility company evn , pimk ( transport ) , insa oil ( fuels ) , liebherr ( refrigerator plant ) , magna international ( automotive industry ) , bella bulgaria ( food manufacturing ) , socotab ( tobacco processing ) , abb group , schneider electric , osram , sensata technologies , etc . shopping and commerce . the commercial sector is developing quickly . shopping centers have been built mainly in the central district and the district of trakiya . those include shopping center grand , grand trade center to open in plovdiv . market center , and two more all on the kapitan raycho street , forum in trakiya , excelsior , and others . plovdiv has three large shopping centers : the €40 & nbsp ; million mall of plovdiv ( opened 2009 ) with a shopping area of , 11 cinema halls , and parking for 700 cars ; markovo tepe mall ( opened 2016 ) ; and plovdiv plaza mall which is 6 stories high with 127 000 m 2 area , half of which is the parking lot and the rest is shopping area . due to the high demand for business office space , new office and commercial buildings have been built . several hypermarkets have been built mainly on the outskirts of the city : metro , kaufland , triumf , praktiker , billa , mr . bricolage , baumax , technopolis , technomarket europa , and others . the main shopping area is the central street with its shops , cafés , and restaurants . a number of cafés , craftsmen workshops , and souvenir shops are in the old town and the small streets in the centre , known among the locals as '' the trap '' . the plovdiv international fair , held annually since 1892 , is the largest and oldest fair in the country and all of southeastern europe , gathering companies from all over the world in an exhibition area of located on a territory of on the northern banks of the maristsa river . it attracts more than 600,000 visitors from many countries . the city has had a duty-free zone since 1987 . it has a customs terminal handling cargo from trucks and trains . file : mall plovdiv.jpg mall plovdiv file : dzhendem.jpg markovo tepe mall file : trade center forum , trakiya , plovdiv.jpg forum trakia shopping center . transport . plovdiv 's geographical position makes it an international transport hub . three of the ten pan-european corridors run into or near the city : corridor iv ( dresden–bucharest–sofia-plovdiv- istanbul ) , corridor viii ( durrës-sofia-plovdiv-varna/burgas ) , and corridor x ( salzburg–belgrade-plovdiv-istanbul ) . transport in plovdiv . see the map . a major tourist centre , plovdiv lies at the foot of the rhodope mountains , and most people wishing to explore the mountains choose it as their trip 's starting point . the city is a major road and railway hub in southern bulgaria with the trakia motorway ( a1 ) only to the north . it lies on the important national route from sofia to burgas via stara zagora . first-class roads lead to sofia to the west , karlovo to the north , asenovgrad , kardzhali to the south , and stara zagora and haskovo to the east . there are intercity buses which link plovdiv with cities and towns all over the country and many european countries . they are based in three bus stations : south , rodopi , and north . railway transport in the city dates back to 1872 when it became a station on the lyubimets–belovo railway line . there are railway lines to sofia , panagyurishte , karlovo , peshtera , stara zagora , dimitrovgrad , and asenovgrad . there are three railway stations : plovdiv central , trakia , and filipovo as well as a freight station . plovdiv has a large public transport system including around 29 main and 10 extra bus lines . however , there are no trams in the city , and the trolleybuses in plovdiv was closed in autumn 2012 . trolleybus magazine no . 308 ( march–april 2013 ) , p . 47 . national trolleybus association ( uk ) . six bridges span the maritsa river including a railway bridge and a covered bridge . there are important road junctions to the south , southwest , and north . plovdiv has a well-developed cycling infrastructure which covers almost all districts of the city . the total length of the cycling roads is are completed and are under construction ) . the city has a total of 690 bike parkings . file : velo1.jpg file : velo2.jpg file : velo3.jpg file : velo4.jpg file : velo5.jpg file : velo6.jpg the number of registered private automobiles in the city increased from 178,104 in 2005 to 234,298 in 2009 . '' statistics of the european cities city of plovdiv ( in bulgarian ) . there are around 658 cars per 1,000 inhabitants '' eurostat . transport in urban audit cities , core city '' . the plovdiv international airport is near the village of krumovo , southeast of the city . it takes charter flights from europe and has scheduled services with ryanair to london and s7 to moscow . many small airports are in the city 's surroundings , including the graf ignatievo air base in graf ignatievo to the north of plovdiv . the biaf airshow is held every two years on the krumovo airbase and is one of the biggest airshows in the balkans . education . around two thirds of the citizens ( 62,38 % ) have secondary , specialized , or higher education . that percentage increased from 1992 to 2001 . plovdiv has 78 schools including elementary , high , foreign language , mathematics , technical , and art schools . there are also 10 private schools and a seminary . the number of pupils in 2005 was 36,964 and has been constantly decreasing since the mid-1990 due to lower birth rate . among the most prestigious schools are the english language school , the high school of mathematics , the ivan vazov language school , the national schools of commerce plovdiv , the english academy , the academy of music , dance and fine arts plovdiv , '' national school for music and dance art plovdiv '' . and the french high school of plovdiv . the city has six universities and a number of state and private colleges and branches of other universities . those include plovdiv university , with 900 lecturers and employees and 13,000 students ; the plovdiv medical university , with 2,600 students ; the medical college ; the technical university of sofiabranch plovdiv ; the agricultural university plovdiv ; the university of food technologies ; university of food technologies . the academy for music , dance and fine arts ; academy of music , dance and fine arts . and others . the 2009 international olympiad in informatics ( ioi ) was held at the plovdiv university , between 8 and 15 august 2009 . the 2009 ioi honorary patron was bulgarian president georgi parvanov . between 1875 and 1906 , the zariphios school was one of the local greek educational institutions that provided elementary and secondary education . . sports and recreation . plovdiv sports complex consists of plovdiv stadium with several additional football fields , tennis courts , swimming pools , a rowing base with a 2 & nbsp ; km-long channel , restaurants , and cafés in a spacious park in the western part of the city just south of the maritsa river . there are also playgrounds for children . it is popular among the citizens and guests of plovdiv who use it for jogging , walking , and relaxation . plovdiv stadium ( 55,000 seats ) is the largest football venue in bulgaria . other stadiums include stadion botev , lokomotiv ( 10,000 seats ) , maritsa stadium ( 5,000 seats ) , and todor diev stadium ( 7,000 seats ) . there are seven indoor sports halls : kolodruma , university hall , olimpia , lokomotiv , dunav , stroitel , chaika , akademik , and total sport . in 2006 , aqualand , a water park , was opened near the city centre . several smaller water parks are in the city as well . file : kolodruma_plovdiv_2015.jpg kolodruma file : plovdiv_stadium.jpg plovdiv stadium and sport complex file : гребната през есента.jpg rowing base file : dsc01891a.jpg lokomotiv stadium file : hristo_botev_stadium_plovdiv_tb.jpg hristo botev stadium file : sports hall of plovdiv university , plovdiv , bulgaria 2.jpg plovdiv university sports hall football is the most popular sport in the city ; plovdiv has three professional teams . the city has pfc botev plovdiv , founded in 1912 and pfc lokomotiv , founded in 1926 . both teams are a regular fixture in the top bulgarian league . the rivalry between them is considered to be even more fierce than the one between levski and cska of sofia . there are two other football clubs in the city – maritsa fc ( founded in 1921 ) and spartak plovdiv ( 1947 ) . plovdiv is host of the international boxing tournament '' strandzha '' which has taken place since 1949 . in 2007 , 96 boxers from 20 countries participated in the tournament . there is a horse racing club and a horse base near the city . plovdiv has several volleyball and basketball teams . three of the city 's seven hills are protected natural territories since 1995 . two of the first parks in bulgaria are located in the city center tsar simeon garden – city garden , where the very first work of the italian sculptor arnoldo zocchi could be seen , and dondukov garden – old city garden . some of the larger parks include the botanical garden , beli brezi , ribnitsa , and lauta . notable citizens . ivan andonov ( 1934–2011 ) , actor vladimir arabadzhiev ( born 1984 ) , racing driver rusev ( wrestler ) ( born 1984 ) , professional wrestler , performing under the name of miro zlatyu boyadzhiev ( 1903–1976 ) , painter boris christoff ( 1914–1993 ) , basso hristo g . danov ( 1828–1911 ) , publisher dimcho debelyanov writer samuel finzi ( born 1966 ) , german actor george ganchev ( born 1939 ) , fencer , actor , writer , politician nayden gerov ( 1823–1900 ) , linguist , folklorist and writer ivan evstratiev geshov former prime minister of bulgaria georgi hristov ( born 1985 ) , professional footballer , currently playing for the tampa bay rowdies georgi ivanov cosmonaut todor kableshkov revolutionary petko karavelov revolutionary asen kisimov actor stefka kostadinova world-record holder in the women 's high jump milcho leviev musician andrey lyapchev former prime minister of bulgaria aleksandar malinov former prime minister of bulgaria stoika milanova ( born 1945 ) – classical violinist ivan mrkvička painter sava mutkurov former regent of bulgaria , the chief architect of the bulgarian unification apostolos nikolaidis greek athlete antonios komizopoulos greek merchant and the 4th member of filiki eteria georgios kleovoulos greek scholar and educator tsvetana pironkova professional tennis player iva prandzheva , long jumper and triple jumper the birthplace of silvena rowe british chef , food writer , television personality and restaurateur pencho slaveykov writer hristo stoichkov football player konstantin stoilov ( 1853–1901 ) , former prime minister of bulgaria petar stoyanov former president of bulgaria slavik tabakov medical physicist , president iomp emma tahmizian ( born 1957 ) , pianist nayden todorov ( born 1974 ) , conductor serafim todorov ( born 1969 ) , boxer christos tsigiridis greek electrical engineer and technological pioneer ivan vazov ( 1850–1921 ) , writer zhan videnov former prime minister of bulgaria sonya yoncheva ( born 1981 ) , opera singer yordan yovchev gymnast yordan yovkov writer . international relations . twin towns – sister cities . plovdiv is twinned with : bursa , turkey changchun , china columbia , united states daegu , south korea donetsk , ukraine gyumri , armenia jeddah , saudi arabia istanbul , turkey ivanovo , russia kastoria , greece košice , slovakia kumanovo , north macedonia kutaisi , georgia leskovac , serbia luoyang , china ohrid , north macedonia okayama , japan petra , jordan rome , italy saint petersburg , russia samarkand , uzbekistan shenzhen , china thessaloniki , greece valencia , venezuela yekaterinburg , russia . honour . the asteroid ( minor planet ) 3860 plovdiv is named after the city . it was discovered by the belgian astronomer eric w . elst and the bulgarian astronomer violeta g . ivanova on 8 august 1986 . plovdiv peak on livingston island in the south shetland islands , antarctica , is also named after plovdiv . gallery . file : plovdivpanorama.jpg a panoramic view file : plovdiv bulgaria street view.jpg looking down one of the streets in plovdiv . file : plovdiv fortress plan.png plan of the medieval fortress . see also . list of airports in bulgaria list of cities and towns in bulgaria list of mayors of plovdiv . references . external links . official website tourism department – visit plovdiv the history of plovdiv – short youtube movie pictures from plovdiv ( the old town ) the ancient plovdiv small basilica , plovdiv plovdiv web page and virtual tour map of plovdiv information for plovdiv the ancient stadium and the ancient city of philippopolis virtual tour around plovdiv plovdiv 2019 foundation – capital of culture