1954 in film

top-grossing films . united states . the top ten 1954 released films by box office gross in the united states are as follows : . notable films released in 1954 . united states unless stated . . 3 ring circus , starring dean martin and jerry lewis 20,000 leagues under the sea , starring kirk douglas and james mason . a . aar paar ( this or that ) , directed by and starring guru dutt – ( india ) about mrs . leslie , starring shirley booth robinson crusoe ( aventuras de robinson crusoe ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) alaska seas , starring robert ryan and jan sterling amar ( immortal ) , starring madhubala , nimmi and dilip kumar – ( india ) un americano a roma ( un americano a roma ) , starring alberto sordi – ( italy ) andha naal ( that day ) – ( india ) animal farm , an animated film – ( gb ) apache , starring burt lancaster attila , starring anthony quinn and sophia loren – ( france/italy ) . b . bahut din huwe , starring madhubala – ( india ) the back of beyond – ( australia ) the barefoot contessa , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring humphrey bogart , ava gardner , edmond o'brien , rossano brazzi beachhead , starring tony curtis and mary murphy beau brummell , starring stewart granger , elizabeth taylor , peter ustinov beautiful stranger , aka twist of fate , starring ginger rogers – ( gb/u.s . ) the belles of st . trinian 's , starring alastair sim , joyce grenfell and george cole – ( gb ) betrayed , fourth and final film co-starring clark gable and lana turner a big family ( bolshaya semya ) – ( ussr ) the black knight , starring alan ladd – ( gb/u.s . ) the black shield of falworth , starring tony curtis and janet leigh black tuesday , starring edward g . robinson and peter graves black widow , starring ginger rogers , gene tierney , peggy ann garner , van heflin , george raft boot polish – ( india ) boris godunov – ( ussr ) the bowery boys meet the monsters , starring leo gorcey , huntz hall and ellen corby bread , love and jealousy ( pane , amore e gelosia ) , starring vittorio de sica and gina lollobrigida – ( italy ) the bridges at toko-ri , directed by mark robson , starring william holden , grace kelly , fredric march , mickey rooney brigadoon , directed by vincente minnelli , starring gene kelly , cyd charisse , van johnson broken lance , starring spencer tracy , robert wagner , jean peters , richard widmark , katy jurado . c . the caine mutiny , directed by edward dmytryk , starring humphrey bogart , van johnson , fred macmurray , josé ferrer , robert francis , may wynn , e . g . marshall canaris , directed by alfred weidenmann – ( west germany ) carmen jones , starring dorothy dandridge ( first african-american to be oscar-nominated for best actress ) casanova 's big night , starring bob hope chronicle of poor lovers ( cronache di poveri amanti ) – ( italy ) circus fandango – ( norway ) the country girl , directed by george seaton , starring bing crosby , grace kelly , william holden creature from the black lagoon , directed by jack arnold crime wave , directed by andré de toth , starring sterling hayden and phyllis kirk crossed swords ( il maestro di don giovanni ) , starring errol flynn and gina lollobrigida – ( united states/italy ) the crucified lovers ( chikamatsu monogatari ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi , starring kazuo hasegawa – ( japan ) . d . dangerous mission , starring victor mature and piper laurie deep in my heart , directed by stanley donen , starring josé ferrer and merle oberon demetrius and the gladiators , starring victor mature and susan hayward désirée , starring marlon brando and jean simmons dial m for murder , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring ray milland , robert cummings , grace kelly doctor in the house , starring dirk bogarde , first of '' doctor '' series – ( gb ) down three dark streets , starring broderick crawford and ruth roman drive a crooked road , starring mickey rooney and dianne foster drum beat , directed by delmer daves , starring alan ladd . e . the egyptian , starring jean simmons , gene tierney , victor mature , bella darvi , edmund purdom eight o'clock walk , starring richard attenborough and cathy o'donnell – ( gb ) elephant walk , starring elizabeth taylor and peter finch executive suite , starring william holden , barbara stanwyck , june allyson , fredric march , louis calhern , walter pidgeon , nina foch . f . the far country , directed by anthony mann , starring james stewart , ruth roman , walter brennan father brown , starring alec guinness – ( gb ) fear ( la paura ) , directed by roberto rossellini , starring ingrid bergman – ( west germany/italy ) five boys from barska street ( piątka z ulicy barskiej ) – ( poland ) flame and the flesh , starring lana turner french cancan , starring jean gabin – ( france/italy ) the french line , starring jane russell . g . garden of evil , starring gary cooper , susan hayward , richard widmark the glenn miller story , directed by anthony mann , starring jimmy stewart and june allyson godzilla ( gojira ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the gold of naples ( l'oro di napoli ) , directed by vittorio de sica , starring silvana mangano and sophia loren – ( italy ) the good die young , directed by lewis gilbert , starring stanley baker and laurence harvey – ( gb ) . h . hansel and gretel : an opera fantasy , a stop motion animated film happy ever after , starring david niven and yvonne de carlo – ( gb ) hell and high water , directed by samuel fuller , starring richard widmark hell below zero , starring alan ladd hell 's half acre , starring evelyn keyes and wendell corey the high and the mighty , starring john wayne , robert stack , laraine day , claire trevor , phil harris highway dragnet , starring richard conte and joan bennett hobson 's choice , directed by david lean , starring charles laughton and john mills – ( gb ) the house across the lake , aka heat wave , starring alex nicol and hillary brooke – ( gb ) human desire , starring glenn ford , gloria grahame , broderick crawford . i-j . la ilusión viaja en tranvía ( la ilusión viaja en tranvía ) , directed by luis buñuel , starring lilia prado – ( mexico ) inauguration of the pleasure dome , directed by kenneth anger an inspector calls , with alastair sim , based on the j . b . priestley play – ( gb ) it should happen to you , starring judy holliday , peter lawford , jack lemmon jagriti ( the awakening ) – ( india ) johnny guitar , directed by nicholas ray , starring joan crawford , sterling hayden , mercedes mccambridge journey to italy ( viaggio in italia ) , directed by roberto rossellini , starring ingrid bergman and george sanders – ( france/italy ) . k-l . king richard and the crusaders , starring rex harrison and virginia mayo knock on wood , starring danny kaye the lady of the camellias ( la mujer de las camelias ) – ( argentina ) the last bridge ( die letzte brücke ) , starring maria schell and bernhard wicki – ( austria ) late chrysanthemums ( bangiku ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) a lesson in love ( en lektion i kärlek ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring eva dahlbeck and gunnar björnstrand – ( sweden ) a life at stake , starring angela lansbury liliomfi – ( hungary ) living it up , starring dean martin and jerry lewis the long , long trailer , starring lucille ball and desi arnaz the long wait , starring anthony quinn loophole , starring barry sullivan and dorothy malone . m-n . mad about men , starring glynis johns and margaret rutherford – ( u.k . ) madame x ( i agnostos ) madame x ( 1954 film ) – ( greece ) maddalena – ( italy ) the maggie , directed by alexander mackendrick – ( gb ) magnificent obsession , directed by douglas sirk , starring jane wyman and rock hudson the million pound note , starring gregory peck – ( gb ) nagin , starring vyjayanthimala and pradeep kumar – ( india ) naked alibi , starring sterling hayden and gloria grahame the naked jungle , starring eleanor parker and charlton heston neelakuyil ( the blue cuckoo ) – ( india ) night people , directed by nunnally johnson , starring gregory peck , broderick crawford , buddy ebsen nothing but trouble ( aldri annet enn bråk ) – ( norway ) . o-p . on the waterfront , directed by elia kazan , starring marlon brando with eva marie saint , karl malden , lee j . cobb , rod steiger—winner of eight oscars on trial ( l'affaire maurizius ; il caso mauritius ) , directed by julien duvivier – ( france/italy ) the outcast , starring john derek phantom of the rue morgue , starring karl malden , patricia medina , merv griffin phffft , starring judy holliday , jack lemmon , kim novak pride of the blue grass , starring lloyd bridges and vera miles prince valiant , starring robert wagner , james mason , janet leigh prisoner of war , starring ronald reagan private hell 36 , directed by don siegel , starring ida lupino pushover , starring fred macmurray and kim novak ( in her film debut ) . q-r . radio cab murder , directed by vernon sewell , starring jimmy hanley and lana morris – ( gb ) the raid , starring van heflin , anne bancroft , lee marvin rear window , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring james stewart , grace kelly , thelma ritter , wendell corey , raymond burr red garters , directed by george marshall , starring rosemary clooney return to treasure island , starring tab hunter riot in cell block 11 , directed by don siegel , starring neville brand river of no return , directed by otto preminger , starring robert mitchum and marilyn monroe robinson crusoe , starring dan o'herlihy rogue cop , starring robert taylor and janet leigh romeo and juliet , starring laurence harvey – ( italy/gb ) . s . sabrina , directed by billy wilder , starring humphrey bogart , audrey hepburn , william holden salt of the earth , starring rosaura revueltas and will geer samurai i : musashi miyamoto ( miyamoto musashi ) , directed by hiroshi inagaki , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) sansho the bailiff ( sanshō dayũ ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi , starring kinuyo tanaka – ( japan ) saskatchewan , starring alan ladd the sea shall not have them , directed by lewis gilbert , starring michael redgrave , dirk bogarde , anthony steel , nigel patrick – ( gb ) secret of the incas , starring charlton heston the seekers , starring jack hawkins and glynis johns – ( gb ) senso , directed by luchino visconti , starring alida valli and farley granger – ( italy ) seven brides for seven brothers , directed by stanley donen , starring jane powell and howard keel seven samurai ( shichinin no samurai ) , directed by akira kurosawa , starring toshiro mifune and takashi shimura – ( japan ) she could n't say no , starring robert mitchum and jean simmons shield for murder , starring edmond o'brien the silver chalice , starring paul newman ( in his film debut ) silver lode , starring dan duryea sira ` fi al-wadi ( struggle in the valley ) , directed by youssef chahine – ( egypt ) sitting bull , starring dale robertson and j . carrol naish sound of the mountain ( yama no oto ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) a star is born , directed by george cukor , starring judy garland and james mason , musical remake of 1937 film star of india , starring cornel wilde and herbert lom – ( gb ) la strada ( the road ) , directed by federico fellini , starring anthony quinn – ( italy ) suddenly , starring frank sinatra and sterling hayden supir istimewa , directed by rempo urip and starring ms priyadi and ermina zaenah ( indonesia ) susan slept here , starring debbie reynolds and dick powell . t-v . tanganyika , starring van heflin and ruth roman taza , son of cochise , starring rock hudson them ! , starring james whitmore , edmund gwenn , joan weldon , james arness there 's no business like show business , starring ethel merman , dan dailey , donald o'connor , mitzi gaynor , marilyn monroe they who dare , starring dirk bogarde – ( gb ) three coins in the fountain , starring jean peters , dorothy mcguire , maggie mcnamara three young texans , starring jeffrey hunter , mitzi gaynor , keefe brasselle too bad she 's bad ( peccato che sia una canaglia ) , starring marcello mastroianni , sophia loren , vittorio de sica – ( italy ) top banana , starring phil silvers touchez pas au grisbi ( hands off the loot ) , starring jean gabin – ( france/italy ) track of the cat , directed by william a . wellman , starring robert mitchum and teresa wright twenty-four eyes ( nijū-shi no hitomi ) – ( japan ) twist of fate , starring ginger rogers vera cruz , starring gary cooper and burt lancaster . w-z . the weak and the wicked , directed by j . lee thompson , starring glynis johns and diana dors – ( gb ) west of zanzibar ( 1954 film ) , directed by harry watt , starring anthony steel , sheila sim , edric connor & orlando martins – ( u.k . ) white christmas , directed by michael curtiz , starring bing crosby , danny kaye , rosemary clooney , vera-ellen , dean jagger windfall in athens ( kyriakatiko xypnima ) , directed by michael cacoyannis – ( greece ) witness to murder , directed by roy rowland , starring barbara stanwyck , gary merrill , george sanders woman 's world , starring june allyson , clifton webb , fred macmurray , van heflin , lauren bacall , arlene dahl wyoming renegades , starring phil carey young at heart , starring frank sinatra and doris day the young lovers , directed by anthony asquith – ( gb ) . serials . gunfighters of the northwest , starring clayton moore and phyllis coates man with the steel whip , starring dick simmons riding with buffalo bill trader tom of the china seas , starring harry lauter and aline towne . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) chip ' n ' dale ( 1943–1956 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) barney bear ( 1939–1954 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) ranger don ( 1953–1956 ) . births . january 1 – helen wellington-lloyd , south african-born british artist and actress january 6 – anthony minghella , english film director and screenwriter ( d . 2008 ) january 9 - john sparkes , welsh actor and comedian january 29 – oprah winfrey , american actress and television personality february 2 – christie brinkley , american model and actress february 6 – aare laanemets , estonian actor ( d . 2000 ) february 17 – rene russo , american actress february 18 – john travolta , american actor march 1 – ron howard , american director and actor march 4 – catherine o'hara , canadian actress march 15 – craig wasson , american actor march 17 – lesley-anne down , english actress march 24 – robert carradine , american actor april 7 – jackie chan , hong kong-born actor april 9 – dennis quaid , american actor april 10 – peter macnicol , american actor april 16 – ellen barkin , american actress april 27 – john cygan , american actor , voice artist and comedian ( d . 2017 ) april 29 – jerry seinfeld , american stand-up comedian and actor may 7 – amy heckerling , american director may 8 – david keith , american actor and director june 2 – dennis haysbert , american actor june 6 – merle talvik , estonian actress june 14 – will patton , american actor june 15 – jim belushi , american actor june 19 – kathleen turner , american actress june 22 – chris lemmon , american actor and author june 28 – alice krige , south african actress august 12 – sam j . jones , american actor august 13 – tõnu kilgas , estonian actor and singer august 16 – james cameron , canadian-born director august 20 - al roker , american weather forecaster , journalist , television personality , actor and author august 23 – jeannie elias , canadian actress october 2 – lorraine bracco , american actress october 9 – scott bakula , american actor john o'hurley , american actor , comedian , singer , author , game show host and television personality october 10 – rekha , indian actress october 23 – ang lee , taiwanese director november 7 – kamal haasan , indian actor , director , script-writer , producer and singer november 19 – kathleen quinlan , american actress november 29 – joel coen , american director , producer and screenwriter december 4 – tony todd , american actor and producer december 18 – ray liotta , american actor december 28 – denzel washington , american actor . deaths . january 5 – lillian rich , 54 , english actress , the golden bed , on the front page january 11 – oscar straus , 83 , viennese composer , la ronde january 16 – baburao painter , 63 , indian film director , savkari pash january 18 – sydney greenstreet , 74 , english actor , casablanca , the maltese falcon , christmas in connecticut , the mask of dimitrios january 30 – john murray anderson , 67 , canadian director , king of jazz january 31 – florence bates , 65 , american actress , rebecca february 1 – yvonne de bray , 64 , french actress , les parents terribles february 9 – mabel paige , 73 , american actress , lucky jordan , murder , he says february 12 – dziga vertov , 58 , russian filmmaker , man with a movie camera february 13 – stephen auer , 53 , american producer , trail of kit carson february 21 – william k . howard , 54 , american director , the power and the glory , johnny come lately march 5 – john eberson , 78 , american movie palace architect march 7 – will h . hays , 74 , american movie censor , first chairman of the motion picture producers and distributors of america march 8 – john l . balderston , 64 , american screenwriter , the prisoner of zenda , gaslight march 14 – otto gebühr , 76 , german actor , the great king march 18 – louis lipstone , 61 , american conductor , head of paramount pictures music department march 24 – alberto colombo , 65 , american film composer and music director , portia on trial march 30 – pauline brunius , 73 , swedish actress , director and screenwriter , charles xii april 1 – jack lait , 71 , american author , new york confidential april 3 – ernest vajda , 67 , hungarian actor and screenwriter , smilin ' through april 4 – frederick lonsdale , 73 , english playwright and screenwriter , the private life of don juan april 10 – auguste lumiere , 91 , french film pioneer april 29 – joe may , 73 , austrian director , the house of fear , the invisible man returns may 1 – arthur johnston , 56 , composer , pennies from heaven may 3 – tom tyler , 50 , american actor , adventures of captain marvel , the phantom may 15 – herbert i . leeds , 54 , american director , mr . moto in danger island may 17 – ethel hill , 56 , american screenwriter , the little princess , in old oklahoma may 18 – fred waller , 67 , american film pioneer , inventor of cinerama may 20 – hans von wolzogen , 65 , german film producer and director , sprengbagger 1010 may 25 – hans janowitz , 63 , german writer , the cabinet of dr . caligari may 31 – guglielmo barnabò , 66 , italian actor , miracle in milan june 27 – theodor loos , 71 , german actor , die nibelungen june 28 – ludwig schmitz , 70 , german actor , the heath is green july 1 – thea von harbou , 65 , german screenwriter , novelist , director and actress , metropolis july 6 – gabriel pascal , 60 , hungarian film producer and director , pygmalion july 8 – gerald geraghty , 47 , american screenwriter , the jungle princess july 12 – lord grantley , 62 , british film executive july 13 – irving pichel , 63 , american director and actor , the most dangerous game , santa fe , oliver twist , how green was my valley july 23 – leonard goldstein , 51 , american producer , ma and pa kettle july 24 – effie shannon , 87 , american actress , sally of the sawdust august 4 – harald paulsen , 58 , german actor and director , ave maria august 11 – murray kinnell , 65 , english-born american actor , the public enemy august 19 – terry ramsaye , 68 , american producer and movie historian , author of a million and one nights : a history of the motion picture august 24 – lewis d . collins , 55 , american director , the desert trail september 3 – eugene pallette , 65 , american actor , my man godfrey , the adventures of robin hood september 28 – bert lytell , 69 , american actor , the lone wolf october 22 – charles skouras , 65 , american movie executive and president of fox west coast october 22 – george mcmanus , 70 , american cartoonist , bringing up father november 11 – reinhold schünzel , 68 , german director and actor , the ice follies of 1939 , notorious november 15 – lionel barrymore , 76 , american actor , it 's a wonderful life , you ca n't take it with you , key largo , treasure island , grand hotel november 22 – moroni olsen , 65 , american actor , the three musketeers november 22 – roy rene , 63 , australian comedian , strike me lucky november 29 – eero kilpi , 77 , finnish actor , anna liisa december 6 – truly shattuck , 79 , american actress , a wise fool december 8 – gladys george , 50 , american actress , the maltese falcon , the best years of our lives , the roaring twenties , detective story december 18 – maria eis , 58 , austrian actress , the eternal waltz . film debuts . ursula andress – an american in rome sean connery – lilacs in the spring angie dickinson – lucky me charles grodin – 20,000 leagues under the sea jack lemmon – it should happen to you roger moore – the last time i saw paris paul newman – the silver chalice kim novak – the french line eva marie saint – on the waterfront omar sharif – devil of the sahara rod taylor – king of the coral sea godzilla . notes . references .