Maine de Biran

life . maine de biran was born at bergerac ; died at paris , 16 july , 1824 . the name maine he assumed ( some time before 1787 ) from an estate called le maine , near mouleydier . after studying with distinction at périgueux , he entered the life guards of king louis xvi of france , and was present at versailles during the events of october 1789 . he entered politics and was part of the conseil des cinq cents in april , 1797 ; however , as he incurred the hostility of the directory by his royalist sympathies he withdrew to his patrimonial inheritance of grateloup , near bergerac , where he avoided the excesses of the french revolution and where he devoted himself to philosophy . it was at this period that , to use his own words , he '' passed per saltum from frivolity to philosophy '' . he began with psychology , which he made the study of his life . after the reign of terror , maine de biran took part in politics and was elected to parliament in 1812 , 1815 , and 1820 . having been excluded from the council of the five hundred on suspicion of royalism , he took part with his friend joseph lainé in the commission of 1813 , which first expressed direct opposition to the will of the emperor napoleon . after the restoration of the monarchy , he became treasurer to the chamber of deputies , retiring during each autumn recess to study at home . his constitution was delicate and sensitive and his philosophic bent had already manifested itself by his observations on the influence of the physical state on the moral . as an ideologist he won the prize at the institut with his essay '' sur l'habitude '' ( 1802 ) ; but his '' décomposition de la pensée '' ( 1805 ) shows him deviating from the theory of that school , and in '' la perception immédiate '' ( 1807 ) , and '' rapports du physique et du morale de l'homme '' ( 1811 ) , he is an opponent of the eighteenth-century philosophy . in his latter days his tendency to mysticism gradually brought him back towards practical christianity , and he died a faithful child of the catholic church . naville , maine de biran , sa vie et ses pensées ( paris , 1877 ) ; cousin , preface to his edition of the works ( paris , 1834-41 ) ; turner , history of philosophy ( boston , 1903 ) , 606-7 ; ueberweg , history of philosophy , tr . morris , ii ( new york . 1903 ) , 340-1 ; truman , maine de biran 's philosophy of will ( new york , 1904 ) ; gérard , philosophie de maine de biran , an essay with unpublished fragments ( paris , 1876 ) ; mayonade , pensées et pages inédites de maine de biran ( périgueux , 1896 ) ; couailhac , maine de biran ( paris , 1905 ) , an excellent study of his philosophy . . thought . only a few of maine de biran 's writings appeared during his lifetime : the essay on habit ( influence de l'habitude sur la faculté de penser , '' the influence of habit on the faculty of thinking '' , 1802 ) , a critical review of pierre laromiguière 's lectures ( 1817 ) , and the philosophical portion of the article '' leibnitz '' in the biographie universelle ( 1819 ) . a treatise on the analysis of thought ( sur la décomposition de la pensée , '' on the decomposition of thought '' ) was never printed . in 1834 these writings , together with the essay entitled nouvelles considérations sur les rapports du physique et du moral de l'homme , were published by victor cousin , who in 1841 added three volumes , under the title œuvres philosophiques de maine de biran . but the publication ( in 1859 ) by édouard naville ( from manuscripts placed at his father 's disposal by biran 's son ) of the œuvres inédites de maine de biran , in three volumes , first rendered possible a connected view of his philosophical development . at first a sensualist , like condillac and john locke , next an intellectualism , he finally became a mystical theosophist . the essai sur les fondements de la psychologie represents the second stage of his philosophy , the fragments of the nouveaux essais d'anthropologie the third . maine de biran 's early essays in philosophy were written from the point of view of locke and condillac , but showed signs of his later interests . dealing with the formation of habits , he is compelled to note that passive impressions do not furnish a complete or adequate explanation . with laromiguière he distinguishes attention as an active effort , of no less importance than the passive receptivity of sense , and like joseph butler , he distinguishes passively formed customs from active habits . he concluded that condillac 's notion of passive receptivity as the one source of conscious experience was an error of method – in short , that the mechanical mode of viewing consciousness as formed by external influence was fallacious and deceptive . for it he proposed to substitute the genetic method , whereby human conscious experience might be exhibited as growing or developing from its essential basis in connection with external conditions . the essential basis he finds in the real consciousness , of self as an active striving power , and the stages of its development , corresponding to what one may call the relative importance of the external conditions and the reflective clearness of self-consciousness he designates as the affective , the perceptive and the reflective . in connexion with this biran treats most of the obscure problems which arise in dealing with conscious experience , such as the mode by which the organism is cognized , the mode by which the organism is distinguished from extra-organic things , and the nature of those general ideas by which the relations of things are known to us – cause , power , force , etc . in the last stage of his philosophy , biran distinguished the animal existence from the human , under which the three forms above noted are classed . and both from the life of the spirit , in which human thought is brought into relation with the supersensible , divine system of things . this stage is left imperfect . altogether biran 's work presents a very remarkable specimen of deep metaphysics thinking directed by preference to the psychological aspect of experience . so , it has been said there are three stages marking the development of his philosophy . up to 1804 , a stage called by naville '' the philosophy of sensation '' , he was a follower of condillac 's sensism , as modified by de tracy , which he soon abandoned in favour of a system based on an analysis of internal reflection . in the second stage — the philosophy of will — 1804-18 , to avoid materialism and fatalism , he embraced the doctrine of immediate apperception , showing that man knows himself and exterior things by the resistance to his effort . on reflecting he remarks the voluntary effort which differentiates his internal from his external experience , thus learning to distinguish between the ego and the non-ego . in the third stage — the philosophy of religion — after 1818 , we find de biran advocating a mystical intuitional psychology . to man 's two states of life : representation ( common to animals ) , and volition ( volition , sensation , and perception ) , he adds a third : love or life of union with god , in which the life of divine grace absorbs representation and volition . maine de biran 's style is laboured , but he is reckoned by cousin as the greatest french metaphysician from the time of malebranche . his genius was not fully recognized till after his death , as the essay '' sur l'habitude '' ( paris , 1803 ) was the only book that appeared under his name during his lifetime ; but his reputation was firmly established on the publication of his writings , partly by cousin ( '' œuvres philosophiques de maine de biran '' , paris , 1834-41 ) , and partly by naville ( '' œuvres inédites de maine de biran '' , paris , 1859 ) . criticism . equating '' cause '' with '' force '' . schopenhauer , claimed that '' no one has carried this confusion , or rather identification , of natural force with cause so far as maine de biran in his nouvelles considérations des rapports du physique au moral , since this is essential to his philosophy . '' schopenhauer , arthur ( 1903 ) . on the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason . london : george bell & sons , p . 52 . this confusion of force of nature and cause occurred often throughout the book . '' when he speaks of causes , he hardly ever puts cause alone , but almost always says cause ou force & hellip ; . '' schopenhauer ( 1903 ) , p . 52 . schopenhauer believed that the confusion was intentional . biran was '' conscious of identifying two disparate concepts in order to be able to make use of either of them according to the circumstances . '' therefore , he purposely equated cause with force in order '' to keep the identification present in the reader ’ s mind . '' schopenhauer ( 1903 ) , p . 53 . . works . œuvres de maine de biran ( edited by pierre tisserand , 1920–32 ) vol . i . vol . ii . vol . iii . vol . iv . vol . v . vol . vi . vol . vii . vol . viii . vol . ix . see also . philipp albert stapfer james mark baldwin implicit cognition . notes . references . '' maine de biran , '' the british quarterly review , vol . 44 , october 1866 , pp . & nbsp ; 301–346 . '' maine de biran and his philosophy , '' the methodist review , vol . 44 , 1862 , pp . & nbsp ; 627–641 . hallie , philip p . ( 1959 ) . maine de biran : reformer of empiricism , 1766–1824 . cambridge : harvard university press . michel henry ( 1973 ) . the essence of manifestation . the hague : nijoff . henry , michel ( 1975 ) . philosophy and phenomenology of the body . the hague : nijoff . moore , f.c.t . ( 1970 ) . the psychology of maine de biran . oxford : clarendon press . truman , nathan e . ( 1904 ) . maine de biran 's philosophy of will . new york : the macmillan company . further reading . boas , george ( 1925 ) . '' maine de biran , '' the philosophical review , vol . 34 , no . 5 , pp . & nbsp ; 477–490 . couailhac , marius ( 1905 ) . maine de biran . paris : félix alcan . gérard , jules ( 1876 ) . la philosophie de maine de biran . paris : librairie germer baillière . la valette monbrun , amable de ( 1914 ) . maine de biran ( 1766–1824 ) : essai de biographie historique et psychologique . paris : fontemoing et cie . lucien lévy-bruhl ( 1899 ) . '' maine de biran , cousin and eclecticism . '' in : history of modern philosophy in france . chicago : the open court , pp . & nbsp ; 321–351 . moore , f.c.t . ( 1966 ) . '' maine de biran and pestalozzi : some unpublished letters , '' revue internationale de philosophie , vol . 20 , no . 75 ( 1 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 27–52 . naville , ernest ( 1857 ) . maine de biran , sa vie et ses pensées . paris : joel cherbuliez . robinson , arthur ( 1914–15 ) . '' the philosophy of maine de biran : the way out of sensationalism , '' proceedings of the aristotelian society , vol . 15 , pp . & nbsp ; 252–270 . external links . works by maine de biran at hathi trust mémoire sur la décomposition de la pensée . tome i at classiques.uqac.ca