Puff, the Magic Dragon

lyrics . the lyrics for '' puff , the magic dragon '' are based on a 1959 poem by leonard lipton , then a 19-year-old cornell university student . lipton was inspired by an ogden nash poem titled '' custard the dragon '' , about a '' realio , trulio little pet dragon '' . the lyrics tell a story of the ageless dragon puff and his playmate , jackie paper , a little boy who grows up and loses interest in the imaginary adventures of childhood and leaves puff to be with himself . the story of the song takes place '' by the sea '' in the fictional land of '' honalee '' . lipton was friends with yarrow 's housemate when they were all students at cornell . he used yarrow 's typewriter to get the poem out of his head . he then forgot about it until years later , when a friend called and told him yarrow was looking for him , to give him credit for the lyrics . on making contact , yarrow gave lipton half the songwriting credit , and he still gets royalties from the song . yarrow now sings the line '' a dragon lives forever , but not so little boys '' as '' a dragon lives forever , but not so girls and boys '' , to be fair to boys and girls . the original poem also had a stanza that was not incorporated into the song . in it , puff found another child and played with him after returning . neither yarrow nor lipton remembers the verse in any detail , and the paper that was left in yarrow 's typewriter in 1958 has since been lost . . speculation about drug references . after the song 's initial success , speculation arose—as early as a 1964 article in newsweek—that the song contained veiled references to smoking marijuana . the word '' paper '' in the name of puff 's human friend jackie paper was said to be a reference to rolling papers , the words '' by the sea '' were interpreted as '' by the c '' ( as in cannabis ) , the word '' mist '' stood for '' smoke '' , the land of '' honahlee '' stood for hashish , and '' dragon '' was interpreted as '' draggin ' '' ( i.e . , inhaling smoke ) . similarly , the name '' puff '' was alleged to be a reference to taking a '' puff '' on a joint . the supposition was claimed to be common knowledge in a letter by a member of the public to the new york times in 1984 . the authors of the song have repeatedly rejected this interpretation and have strongly and consistently denied that they intended any references to drug use . both lipton and yarrow have stated , '' 'puff , the magic dragon ' is not about drugs . '' yarrow has frequently explained that the song is about the hardships of growing older and has no relationship to drug-taking . he has also said that the song has '' never had any meaning other than the obvious one '' and is about the '' loss of innocence in children . '' he has dismissed the suggestion of it being associated with drugs as '' sloppy research '' . in 1973 , peter yarrow 's bandmate , paul stookey of peter , paul and mary , also upheld the song 's innocence in a novel way . he recorded a version of the song at the sydney opera house in march 1973 where he set up a mock trial . released in 1977 on the album '' real to reel '' and distributed by sparrow records the prosecutor of the trial claimed the song was about marijuana , but puff and jackie protested . the judge finally left the case to the '' jury '' ( the opera house audience ) and said if they would sing along , the song would be acquitted . the audience joined in with stookey and at the end of their sing-along , the judge declared the '' case dismissed . '' . notable recordings and chart performance . in 1961 , peter yarrow joined paul stookey and mary travers to form peter , paul and mary . the group incorporated the song into their live performances before recording it in 1962 . the trio 's 1962 recording of '' puff the magic dragon '' entered the top 40 of the billboard hot 100 charts on march 30 , 1963 , and peaked at number two , kept out of the top spot by '' i will follow him '' by peggy march . it topped billboard 's adult contemporary charts . it also reached number ten on billboard 's r & b chart . in canada , the song reached number four in april 1963 . barry 's hits of all decades pop rock n roll music chart hits . weekly charts . . adaptations . a 1978 animated television special , puff the magic dragon , adapted the song . it was followed by two sequels , puff the magic dragon in the land of the living lies and puff and the incredible mr . nobody . in all three films , burgess meredith voiced puff . in december 2016 , it was announced that fox animation would produce a live-action/animation film based on the song with mike mitchell as director . the song was adapted for a children 's pantomime , which played at sydney 's seymour centre in 1983 . in september 1979 , a picture-book version of the short used pictures based on the animated feature . it was published by avon books and dedicated to peter , paul , and mary . the book featured words and sheet music to several songs that were featured in the short at the back of the book . this included '' the boat song '' and '' weave me the sunshine '' . the book also used the original song throughout the book as the short had . in 2007 , jazz pianist jason rebello recorded and released an album entitled jazz rainbow featuring the song '' puff , the magic dragon '' arranged for a jazz trio . a 2007 book adaptation of the song 's lyrics by yarrow , lipton , and illustrator eric puybaret gives the story a happier ending with a young girl ( presumed by reviewers to be jackie paper 's daughter ) seeking out puff to become her new companion . the lyrics remain unchanged from the peter , paul , and mary version ; the young girl is only seen in the pictures by illustrator puybaret . on the last page of the book , she is introduced to puff by an older jackie paper . the tune was used by versatec , a computer printer company , in the promotional lp push the magic button for the song of the same name . . parodies . in the mid 1970s , an american jewish band named ruach created a parody version of the song entitled '' puff the kosher dragon '' . in the course of the song , kosher puff eats kosher food , has a bar mitzvah , fights anti-semites , and finally marries and brings up his children as loyal members of the faith . the ruach song has been noted as one of the first examples of a modern jewish band using a popular secular tune . both tune and elements of the lyrics were adapted in the controversial parody '' barack the magic negro , '' written and recorded by paul shanklin for rush limbaugh 's radio program , after the term was first applied to then presidential candidate barack obama by movie and culture critic david ehrenstein , in a los angeles times op ed column of march 19 , 2007 . yarrow condemned the act as '' shocking and saddening in the extreme , '' stating that '' taking a children 's song and twisting it in such vulgar , mean-spirited way , is a slur to our entire country and our common agreement to move beyond racism… puff , himself , if asked , would certainly agree . '' . vietnam war-era gunship . during the vietnam war the ac-47 spooky gunship was nicknamed the '' dragon '' or '' dragon ship '' by the americans because of its armament and firepower—the nickname soon caught on , and american troops began to call the ac-47 '' puff the magic dragon . '' robert mason 's chickenhawk states , in reference to the peter , paul , and mary song playing on a turntable : puff the magic dragon ' was making me uncomfortable . it was the saccharine song that had inspired the naming of the murderous gatling-gun-armed c-47s . i could n't listen . '' . in popular culture . elon musk , founder of spacex , said his spacex dragon was named after '' puff , the magic dragon '' . the orlando magic mascot is named '' stuff the magic dragon '' . british comedian and magician john van der put performs under the stage name '' piff the magic dragon '' and jokes ( as piff ) about having a more famous brother , . named steve . . see also . list of number-one adult contemporary singles of 1963 ( u.s . ) '' lucy in the sky with diamonds '' , another song thought to be about the use of drugs , which was denied by its author . references . external links . disputes the drug-reference interpretation .