Bonampak

excavations . from 1993 to 1997 , the mexican national institute of anthropology and history ( inah ) excavated at bonampak , discovering 27 burials . history of the polity . bird jaguar in the early 5th century fought against k'inich tatb ' u skull i in yaxchilan , and lost his freedom . martin & grube 2000 , p.119 . other nobles were captured in a later war against knot-eye jaguar i . martin & grube 2000 , p.120 . in 514 , knot-eye jaguar i was himself taken captive ( by ruler c of piedras negras ) , sharer & traxler 2006 , p . 422 giving bonampak some respite ; but after 526 , his successor k'inich tatb ' u skull ii attacked bonampak again and captured more lords . martin & grube 2000 , p.121 . bonampak by 600 ce had become a satellite of yaxchilan . in that time , the ajaw of yaxchilan installed yajaw chan muwaan i as lord in bonampak . subsequent ajawob reconstructed the site to orient toward the metropolis . c . 790 ce , yaxchilan 's king shield jaguar iii oversaw the installation of chan muwaan ii , and hired yaxchilano artisans to commemorate it in '' structure i '' 's murals . bonampak collapsed with yaxchilan in the 9th century . david stuart : '' orienting bonampak '' , april 30 , 2009 . temple of the murals . thumbstructure 1 : structure 1 at bonampak , built at the end of the eighth century a.d . ( officially dedicated on november 11 , 791 a.d . ) , measures 16 meters long , four meters deep , and seven meters tall , and is constructed atop a t-shaped platform . although there is no evidence to support the claim , some speculate that it may have also had a roofcomb , such as can be seen on structure 33 at nearby yaxchilan . structurally symmetrical , balanced and stable , it is composed of three separate rooms , which contain murals that narrate the events surrounding the accession to the throne by chooj , son of bonampak ruler yajaw chaan muwan , and grandson of aj sak teles . although there has been some disagreement as to the temporal sequence of events , it is generally agreed that the narrative should be viewed in chronological order , beginning in room 1 ( scene of tribute , dressing , dance , mummery and musical performance ) ; then on to room 2 ( scene of violent conflict , and a display in which a human cull is presented , tortured and killed in the company of the highest members of court and upper echelons of the victorious force ) ; and , finally , to room 3 ( scene of a dance , with observers , and ritual bloodletting ) . in total , there are some 281 human figures represented within the three rooms , many with captions ( approximately 1/3 of the figures are named , while another 10 percent of the figures have blank captions , and slightly more than half have no caption at all ) . a few theories as to why some captions were left blank include deaths or political realignment , an interruption of the murals related to the ostensible lowland maya collapse during the period of structure 1 's creation , and the possibility that it became politically impolite to name certain figures . the planning and execution of the bonampak murals points to a large team of specialists , and not to one solitary genius . this team would have included plasterers , pigment preparers , and possibly calligraphers , in addition to the painters and planners whose artistic conception is most visible on the walls . the exterior of structure 1 , although poorly preserved , was once richly painted in bright hues of maya blue , blue-green , red , and yellow . indeed , almost everything would have been covered in paint , as even the floors in each room were painted black . only the top surfaces of the interior benches appear to have been left unpainted . in addition to the various colors applied , there were further artistic elements on the facade of structure 1 . just below the binder molding , there are remnants of a single band of some eighty glyphs that wrapped around the building , and broad vertical bands of red , interchanged with areas of unpainted white stucco . essentially , the artists at bonampak framed the lower course of the exterior of structure 1 as if it were a maya vase ; more specifically , this was done in the codex-style vases of the petén , and not mirroring those of the usumacinta region where bonampak is located . above each room there is a small niche housing a seated figure—likely representations of a ruling lord . between these niches there were two larger stucco scenes , only one of which has survived the ravages of time . hinting at what is depicted within on the murals , the image depicts a figure in a forward stride toward a captive on his knees before him , his hair being gripped firmly by his vanquisher . on the east and west sides of the building , the upper course featured additional seated figures within niches set atop long-snouted god heads—these still have some remnants of red paint visible . finally , the doorway to each room features a carved lintel of a warrior subduing a captive . lintel 1 ( room 1 ) depicts yajaw chaan muwan , ruler of bonampak , capturing an enemy on january 12 , a.d . 787 ( longcount date : 9.17.16.3.12 , 8 eb 10 k ’ umk ’ u ) ; lintel 2 ( room 2 ) likely shows the overlord from yaxchilan , shield jaguar iv , on january 4 , a.d . 787 ( longcount date : 9.17.16.3.8 , 4 lamat 6 k ’ umk ’ u ) ; and lintel 3 ( room 3 ) displays aj sak teles , probably on july 25 , a.d . 780 ( longcount date : 9.17.9.11.14 , 3 ix 2 yax ) . it is worth noting that the height of each doorway is only roughly 5 ’ 7 ” ( 1.75 meters ) , and around 3 feet wide . thus , it is clear that no maya noble in full regalia would have ever entered these rooms without a bow of deferential respect . in 1996 , a team from yale university led by professor mary miller began the bonampak documentation project , which included making an even more detailed study , photographic record , and reproductions of the murals . these reproductions , completed by artists heather hurst and leonard ashby , bring to life many details , thanks to infrared photographs , that can no longer be seen with the naked eye . most saliently , the images captured many glyphs that were previously unknown , lost either to natural erosion , or due to the many failed attempts at preservation , some of which did far more damage than conservation . for a more detailed description about the bonampak documentation project , and a thorough discussion on the murals , see mary miller and claudia brittenham 's 2013 seminal work on the subject titled , the spectacle of the late maya court : reflections on the murals of bonampak . note : the numbered human figures ( hf ) mentioned below can be found in the aforementioned publication on page 73 , in addition to excellent large foldouts in the back of the book . room 1 : thumbthis is the scene of a regal event : the acknowledgement , in front of the court and visiting dignitaries , by the bonampak ruler , yajaw chaan muwan , of his son 's right to rule . there are 77 human figures in this first room fulfilling various functions within the narrative . some of the actors that capture immediate attention are the elegantly costumed figures on the lower register of the south wall ( hf 's 62 , 63 , and 64 ) . the large , feathered back racks , in addition to the various jaguar , quetzal and serpent elements in their costumes , underscore the importance of these figures . these are the three ch ’ oks ( young heirs ) . it was at first thought that the central figure ( hf 63 ) was the ruler of bonampak , yajaw chaan muwan . however , further readings of the accompanying glyphs show this figure to be the future ruler , chooj , who is in between his two brothers : bird balam and aj balam . with heels raised , all three brothers are in the middle of a ritual dance . to the viewer 's left of hf 62 , beginning on the south wall and leading to the east wall , there are several figures playing instruments ( rattles , drums , and turtle shells ) and singing , which fill this room with celebratory music . to the viewer 's right of the three ch ’ oks , leading to the west wall , there are eight ( regional governors ) . of particular note is hf 71 , standing in a familiar pose to smokers of today , as he , too , embraces a long , thin cigarette , expressing some combination of calm , lack of interest and boredom . behind him , hf 's 73 and 74 , as well as hf 's 52 and 54 on the east wall work together , holding parasols that frame the initial series text right above them on the middle register . these are the only quotation marks in all of the pre-columbian new world . on the lower register of the north wall , still more musicians ( hf 's 43 and 44 ) blast their trumpets , while other performers ( hf 's 45–50 ) wear various costumes , including that of a crocodile ( hf 48 ) . of all the images of visiting messengers , nobles and dancers held within the upper register , a few individuals , and one recently discovered detail in particular , stand out . conspicuously placed upon a raised platform on the upper register of the south wall , just above two holes where wooden beams had once ran through to help support the structure , stands a lone figure ( hf 16 ) presenting a child ( hf 15 ) to the lords . at first , many thought that this child was the young heir ; however , as noted previously , the central dancing figure below ( hf 63 ) was the heir to the throne at bonampak . yet , even without having decoded the glyphs next to the three festive brothers , one notices a couple of peculiarities . firstly , the young figure is actually wearing face paint and garments that are suggestive of a girl , perhaps a wife for the future ruler . secondly , no one is looking at the child , not even the individual holding her . in fact , he is glancing over his left shoulder into the upper register of the west wall at the figure ( hf 19 ) sitting upon an elevated throne . this seated figure is likely yajaw chaan muwan , ruler of bonampak . it is important to mention here that the caption above this individual , like so many captions in structure 1 , was left blank . therefore , the identification of hf 19 as yajaw chaan muwan is deduced rather than known unequivocally based on a name glyph . beneath the throne , one can view five bundles , albeit with some difficulty . it was not until professor mary miller 's aforementioned bonampak documentation project that scholars finally knew what these bundles contained . after analyzing infrared images of this scene , glyphs for “ 5 pi kakaw ” were revealed . “ kakaw ” was the classic maya term for the cacao bean , and harvard university professor david stuart has suggested that the “ pi ” glyph represents units of 8,000 beans . therefore , if this is so , it appears that there has been a tribute payment to yajaw chaan muwan of 40,000 cacao beans , which is a considerable sum of wealth . finally , in the vault across the whole scene in room 1 , the faces of the sun god are shown as it moves across the sky . on the east wall , a large crocodilian , representing the vault of the sky , carries the myriad avatars of the sun god upon its back . room 2 : this is the scene of what has been referred to as the greatest battle scene in all of maya art . room 2 is the largest of the three , which alludes to its greater importance . it also contains more human figures than either room 1 or room 2 , with 139 of them . the south wall , which is the first that is viewed upon entering , along with the east and the west walls , depict warriors in the heat of battle . bodies are intertwined on both the lower and the upper registers . trumpets blast as the battle rages on ( hf 7 ) . as one begins to focus more and more on the individuals , a couple of artistic elements and their symbolic meanings become clear . the ancient maya believed that to be left-handed was a sign of femininity and weakness , thus the warriors who are shown as defeated—including already being stripped nude , with the victors gripping them by the hair—or those in the process of being defeated , are depicted as being left-handed ( e.g . , hf 's 61 and 67 ) . some are even illustrated with two left hands . to contrast this sharply , several victors are given two right hands , doubling their strength and masculinity . in addition to left-handedness , the losers are also all wearing some element of a bird—or , at least those that are still in their battle costumes , and have not yet been stripped of them . this is also indicative of defeat . the victors , on the other hand , all wear costumes with feline elements—specifically , the jaguar . therefore , it is of no surprise to see the main character on the upper register of the south wall , yajaw chan muwaan ( hf 55 ) , firmly gripping a jaguar skin-covered spear in his right hand while donning a large , extravagant jaguar headdress—which may contain a water-lily scroll—and wearing a jaguar jerkin and jaguar boots . although it is clear that the events surrounding the ascension to the thrown of chooj depicted in structure 1 are narrating actual events , it is equally clear that bonampak 's version of the actual events is more propagandistic in nature . the aforementioned outfits of the losers underscore this fact . that is , no one intending to win would enter battle wearing costumes related to defeat , nor would all of the warriors of the losing side be left-handed . professor mary miller describes the battle scene of room 2 as an “ . official historical portraiture , not by any means a photographic glimpse of maya warfare . ” above the chaotic battle , the south vault depicts three individuals within ancestor centipede cartouches . between them are two bound captives . as one turns to view the north wall , the viewer is greeted by the sequel to the battle : torture and sacrifice of the captives taken in battle . to view the north wall , a visitor would have sat on the south bench above bound captives , as though becoming a part of the scene . the north wall is one of pain and suffering . nude and almost nude captives ( only wearing a loin cloth ) are depicted in deep agony , as some of them are in the process of getting their fingernails ripped off , or have already undergone this torture and bleed from their wounds ( hf 's 101–109 ) . hf 101 may have even had his teeth removed , while hf 106 has already expired , and hf 120 is only a severed head . yajaw chan muwaan is the main figure here , too , wearing only a slightly different variant of his battle costume from the south wall . he stands stately over his captives , while several warriors and nobles observe the ritual , including his wife ( hf 97 ) . in the vault , directly above this scene , are four cartouches representing various celestial imagery . note : during a radar survey of structure 1 in 2010 , archaeologists discovered a tomb beneath room 2 . it is small and relatively simple . it contained the body of one man between the ages of 35 and 42 . it was a complete skeleton , minus the cranium , which scientists believe is simply due to natural erosion , and not evidence of beheading . the skeleton was accompanied by jade earrings , a jade necklace and bracelets , a spondylus shell pendant , two polychrome plates , an alabaster vase with a hole in the base , and a stone knife . the last two items—perforated vase and a stone knife—lead some to believe that this individual was one of the sacrifice victims depicted in room 2 . other theories include him being a wounded warrior , or a possible relative of yajaw chan muwaan , as his jewelry matched that of the nobles depicted in room 1 . it is clear that this tomb was part of the original construction of structure 1 and was not , therefore , created at a later date . room 3 : alt this is the scene of ritual celebration for victory in battle , including bloodletting by nobles , and contains 65 human figures . as with rooms 1 and 2 , the south wall is the first to be viewed . what captures one 's attention immediately are the three elaborately dressed individuals in the upper register ( hf 's 16 , 21 , and 24 ) wearing tall , green , quetzal-feathered headdress and dancers wings . these are the same brothers from room 1 , with the young heir , chooj , in the center ( hf 21 ) . each brother holds a bloody femur bone that has been modified into a ritual ax . right below chooj is another figure ( hf 22 ) on his knees ; he is also holding an ax in his right hand and another object in his left . here is another instance where the bonampak documentation project was able to decipher that which is not able to be seen by the naked eye—in this instance , the paint had been completely eroded in this area . however , the infrared images revealed that what hf 22 had in his left hand was none other than the still beating heart of the sacrificial victim below ( hf 19 ) , who is being dragged down the pyramid steps by two attendants ( hf 's 18 and 20 ) . covering almost the entire bottom register of the south and west walls are seven more elaborately costumed characters ( hf 's 13 , 15 , 17 , 26 , 26 , 27 and 28 ) with similar headdresses to those of the brothers above them . they are depicted with one heel raised and arms stretched out , as if captured right before a spinning dance , perhaps to imitate the flight of the quetzal . above the entire south wall scene , set among a background of yellow —the first appearance of a color not representing reality — is a supernatural entity with square eyes , and a single frontal , pointed tooth . it lacks pupils and a real nose ; behind it emerge two serpent-like supernatural entities that expel additional entities . the upper register of the west wall contains a musical procession with masked performers , carrying a dwarf ( hf 42 ) who is lifted into the yellow background of the vault , demonstrating his connection to the supernatural world . the upper register of the east wall shows the noble women of bonampak ( hf 's 2 , 5 and 6 ) holding stingray spines to their tongues in a bloodletting ritual . meanwhile , a large man ( hf 7 ) offers bloodletting supplies to the women on the throne . of note is the fact that these individuals also seem to appear previously—hf 7 in room 2 on the middle of the east wall ; the others in room 1 on the west wall throne scene . above them , surrounded by yellow , another supernatural entity appears to spew blood . turning to the north wall , one can see an almost identical supernatural in the vault as that of the south wall vault . below , 10 ebeets ( lords ) dressed in white mantles engage in conversation , while nine more seated individuals below also gesticulate as they talk to one another , perhaps commenting on the performance taking place on the south wall in front of them . finally , on the bottom register , more musicians raise their instruments skyward as part of the procession on the west wall . room 3 engulfs the viewer in the celebration . professor mary miller wrote , '' perhaps no single artifact from the ancient new world offers as complex a view of prehispanic society as do the bonampak paintings . no other work features so many maya engaged in the life of the court and rendered in such great detail , making the bonampak murals an unparalleled resource for understanding ancient society . '' . monuments . stele 1 . it is located in the central part of the great plaza , it represents the moment of the height of chan muwan ii , the importance of the character is reflected in the way it is represented and in the difficulty to elaborate the monument , that is , in a huge slab of stone of little thickness without suffering any fracture . with its almost 6 meters high it is one of the highest in the mayan world . chan muwan ii is standing and carrying a ceremonial cane , the styling of the pupil gives him a greater strength to his look ; in the lower part of the stele is observed the monster of the earth from which the faces of the young god of corn emerge . a band of glyphs under the feet of the ruler refers to his genealogy , while in another vertical band the emblem glyph of the city can be observed . stele 2 . it is located on a low terrace right in the center of the acropolis and next to stela 3 , it shows chan muwan ii richly dressed in the company of two women , in front of him her mother lady shield skull and behind him his wife the lady green rabbit of yaxchilán who wear a huipil . the scene revolves around the ritual of self-sacrifice , performed by the ruler who carries in his right hand a bag with copal from which the face of the bat god is seen and assisted by his mother , who carries the stingray spines to perform the piercing while his wife holds the basket with the strips of paper ready to receive the blood drops of the ruler , which will later be incinerated in honor of their deities . stele 3 . it represents a scene in which chan muwan ii is standing in front of a second person squatting and in a position of submission wearing paper ear-rings , symbol of the captives . see also . list of mesoamerican pyramids fish-fin . notes . publications . sotomayor , arturo . dos sepulcros en bonampak . juarez , mexico : ediciones libreria del prado . 1949 staines , leticia . coord . de la fuente , beatriz . dir . la pintura mural prehispánica en méxico ii . área maya . tomo i . bonampak . catálogo tomo ii . bonampak . estudios instituto de investigaciones estéticas , unam . méxico . 1998 . external links . life magazine nov . 21 , 1949 - article about bonampak proyecto la pintura mural prehispánica en méxico , unam yale bonampak documentation project bonampak murals on ancientmexico.com - good large photographs of the originals mesoamerican photo archives by david r . hixson - more good photos ( click on the first link for bonampak )