1945 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1945 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . 1945 film releases . january–march . january 1945 4 january this man 's navy 18 january a song to remember 26 january national velvet february 1945 2 february here come the co-eds 15 february the seventh veil march 1945 3 march the picture of dorian gray 16 march the house of fear . april–june . april 1945 7 april brewster 's millions 17 april rockin ' in the rockies 20 april the horn blows at midnight 29 april tarzan and the amazons may 1945 25 may the clock june 1945 1 june that 's the spirit 23 june murder , he says 30 june conflict . july–september . july 1945 13 july story of g.i . joe 19 july along came jones 27 july the woman in green august 1945 11 august christmas in connecticut 30 august state fair september 1945 22 september rhapsody in blue . october–december . october 1945 20 october mildred pierce 26 october love letters 31 october and then there were none november 1945 1 november vacation from marriage 10 november confidential agent december 1945 7 december house of dracula 8 december the enchanted forest 20 december dick tracy 25 december a walk in the sun 28 december spellbound scarlet street 31 december they were expendable . notable films released in 1945 . united states unless stated . a . the abandoned ( las abandonadas ) , starring dolores del río and pedro armendáriz – ( mexico ) abbott and costello in hollywood , starring bud abbott and lou costello allotment wives , starring kay francis along came jones , starring gary cooper and loretta young amok – ( mexico ) anchors aweigh , starring gene kelly and frank sinatra and then there were none , starring barry fitzgerald , walter huston , louis hayward , judith anderson . b . back to bataan , directed by edward dmytryk , with john wayne a bell for adano , starring gene tierney and john hodiak the bells of st . mary 's , directed by leo mccarey , starring bing crosby and ingrid bergman blithe spirit , directed by david lean , starring rex harrison and constance cummings , based on the play by noël coward – ( gb ) blood on the sun , starring james cagney the body snatcher , directed by robert wise , starring boris karloff boule de suif ( angel and sinner ) – ( france ) bugambilia ( bugambilia ) , starring pedro armendariz and dolores del río – ( mexico ) brewster 's millions , starring dennis o'keefe brief encounter , directed by david lean , starring celia johnson and trevor howard- ( gb ) . c . caesar and cleopatra , directed by gabriel pascal , starring vivien leigh and claude rains – ( gb ) captain kidd , starring charles laughton the cheaters , starring joseph schildkraut and billie burke the cherokee flash , starring sunset carson and linda stirling children of paradise ( les enfants du paradis ) , by marcel carné , starring arletty , released following the liberation of france christmas in connecticut , starring barbara stanwyck circus cavalcade ( la cabalgata del circo ) – ( argentina ) the clock , starring judy garland confidential agent , starring charles boyer and lauren bacall conflict , starring humphrey bogart counter-attack , starring paul muni and marguerite chapman the corn is green , starring bette davis and john dall cornered , directed by edward dmytryk , starring dick powell . d . dakota , starring john wayne les dames du bois de boulogne , directed by robert bresson – ( france ) dead of night , ealing studios chiller compendium starring mervyn johns and googie withers – ( gb ) death mills , directed by billy wilder detour , starring tom neal and ann savage diamond horseshoe , starring betty grable dick tracy , starring morgan conway and mike mazurki dillinger , starring lawrence tierney the dolly sisters , starring betty grable . e . the enchanted cottage , starring dorothy mcguire and robert young the enchanted forest , starring harry davenport escape in the fog , starring otto kruger and nina foch . f . fallen angel , directed by otto preminger , starring alice faye in her last major film role , dana andrews and linda darnell flame of barbary coast , starring john wayne . g . the great flamarion , directed by anthony mann , starring erich von stroheim guest wife , starring claudette colbert and don ameche gun smoke , starring johnny mack brown and jennifer holt . h . hangover square , starring laird cregar , linda darnell and george sanders here come the co-eds , starring bud abbott and lou costello high powered , starring phyllis brooks and robert lowery the horn blows at midnight , starring jack benny hotel berlin , starring faye emerson and raymond massey the house i live in , a short film starring frank sinatra house of dracula , starring lon chaney , jr . and john carradine the house on 92nd street , produced by louis de rochemont , starring lloyd nolan and signe hasso humayun , starring ashok kumar – ( india ) . i . i know where i 'm going ! , directed by michael powell and emeric pressburger , starring wendy hiller and roger livesey – ( gb ) i live in grosvenor square , starring anna neagle , rex harrison and robert morley – ( gb ) i 'll be your sweetheart , directed by val guest , starring margaret lockwood ( gb ) incendiary blonde , starring betty hutton the invisible army ( den usynlige hær ) – ( denmark ) isle of the dead , starring boris karloff and ellen drew it 's in the bag ! , starring fred allen , jack benny , don ameche . j . johnny angel , starring george raft and claire trevor . k . kiss and tell , starring shirley temple kitty , directed by mitchell leisen , starring paulette goddard and ray milland . l . lady on a train , starring deanna durbin and ralph bellamy the last chance ( die letzte chance ) – ( switzerland ) leave her to heaven , starring gene tierney and cornel wilde life begins anew , directed by mario mattoli starring alida valli , fosco giachetti ( italy ) the lost letter ( propavshaya gramota ) – ( ussr ) the lost weekend , directed by billy wilder , starring ray milland and jane wyman love letters , starring jennifer jones and joseph cotten . m . madonna of the seven moons , starring phyllis calvert and stewart granger – ( gb ) the man in half moon street , starring nils asther a medal for benny , starring dorothy lamour the men who tread on the tiger 's tail ( tora no o wo fumu otokotachi ) , directed by akira kurosawa – ( japan ) mildred pierce , directed by michael curtiz , starring joan crawford , ann blyth , jack carson , zachary scott , eve arden mom and dad , a hygiene documentary momotarō : umi no shinpei ( momotarō : umi no shinpei ) , the first feature-length animated film from japan my name is julia ross , starring nina foch . n . the naughty nineties , starring bud abbott and lou costello . o . objective , burma ! , starring errol flynn our vines have tender grapes , starring edward g . robinson and margaret o'brien . p . pardon my past , starring fred macmurray and marguerite chapman perfect strangers , starring robert donat and deborah kerr – ( gb ) the picture of dorian gray , starring george sanders and hurd hatfield pink string and sealing wax , starring googie withers and mervyn johns – ( gb ) la porta del cielo ( the gate of heaven ) , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) pride of the marines , starring john garfield pursuit to algiers , starring basil rathbone and nigel bruce . r . the rake 's progress , starring rex harrison – ( gb ) the red meadows ( de røde enge ) – ( denmark ) rhapsody in blue , a biopic of george gershwin starring robert alda rockin ' in the rockies , starring the three stooges roll call in heaven ( cuando en el cielo pasen lista ) – ( argentina ) rome , open city ( roma città aperta ) , directed by roberto rossellini , starring anna magnani and aldo fabrizi – ( italy ) a royal scandal , starring tallulah bankhead rustlers ' hideout , starring buster crabbe and al st . john . s . salome where she danced , starring yvonne de carlo san antonio , starring errol flynn and alexis smith saratoga trunk , starring gary cooper and ingrid bergman scarlet street , directed by fritz lang , starring edward g . robinson and joan bennett la selva de fuego ( the forest fire ) , starring dolores del río and arturo de córdova – ( mexico ) the seventh veil , starring james mason and ann todd – ( gb ) sherlock holmes and the house of fear , starring basil rathbone and nigel bruce son of lassie , starring peter lawford a song to remember , a biopic of frédéric chopin starring cornel wilde the southerner , starring zachary scott the spanish main , starring maureen o'hara and paul henreid spellbound , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring ingrid bergman and gregory peck state fair , starring dana andrews and jeanne crain the stork club , starring betty hutton the story of g.i . joe , directed by william wellman , starring burgess meredith and robert mitchum the strange affair of uncle harry , starring george sanders . t . that 's the spirit , starring jack oakie they were expendable , directed by john ford , starring robert montgomery and john wayne the thin man goes home , starring william powell and myrna loy this man 's navy , starring wallace beery the three caballeros , a walt disney animated film starring donald duck and dora luz thrill of a romance , directed by richard thorpe , starring esther williams and van johnson thunderhead , son of flicka , starring roddy mcdowall tonight and every night , starring rita hayworth a tree grows in brooklyn , directed by elia kazan , starring dorothy mcguire twice blessed , starring lee and lyn wilde two o'clock courage , starring ann rutherford and tom conway . u . the unseen , starring joel mccrea and gail russell . v . the valley of decision , starring greer garson and gregory peck la vida en un hilo ( life on a wire ) – ( spain ) . w . a walk in the sun , starring dana andrews war comes to america , directed by frank capra and anatole litvak waterloo road , starring john mills and stewart granger – ( gb ) the way to the stars , starring john mills and michael redgrave , written by terence rattigan – ( gb ) the wicked lady , starring margaret lockwood and james mason – ( gb ) without love , starring spencer tracy , katharine hepburn , lucille ball the woman in green , starring basil rathbone ( as sherlock holmes ) and nigel bruce wonder man , starring danny kaye and virginia mayo . y . yolanda and the thief , starring fred astaire and lucille bremer . z . ziegfeld follies , with an mgm all-star cast . serials . brenda starr , reporter , starring joan woodbury federal operator 99 , starring marten lamont jungle queen , starring edward norris and eddie quillan jungle raiders manhunt on mystery island , starring richard bailey and linda stirling the master key , starring dennis moore the monster and the ape , starring robert lowery the purple monster strikes , starring dennis moore and linda stirling the royal mounted rides again secret agent x-9 , starring lloyd bridges who 's guilty ? . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) scrappy ( 1931–1941 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) donald duck ( 1937–1956 ) goofy ( 1939–1955 ) andy panda ( 1939–1949 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–1949 ) swing symphonies ( 1941-1945 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) red hot riding hood ( 1943–1949 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) screwball squirrel ( 1944–1946 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) . births . january 25 – leigh taylor-young , american actress january 28 – marthe keller , swiss actress january 29 – tom selleck , american actor february 9 – mia farrow , american actress february 12 – maud adams , swedish actress february 16 – jeremy bulloch , english actor ( died 2020 ) february 17 – brenda fricker , irish actress february 20 – brion james , american actor ( died 1999 ) february 24 – barry bostwick , american actor february 28 – bubba smith , american professional football player and actor ( died 2011 ) april 2 – linda hunt , american actress march 28 – raine loo , estonian actress may 24 – priscilla presley , american actress may 31 – rainer werner fassbinder , german director , producer and screenwriter ( died 1982 ) june 2 – jon peters , american producer june 6 – david dukes , american actor ( died 2000 ) june 11 – adrienne barbeau , american actress july 23 - edie mcclurg , american actress and voice actress july 26 – helen mirren , english actress august 2 – joanna cassidy , american actress august 5 – loni anderson , american actress august 14 steve martin , american actor and comedian wim wenders , german director , producer and screenwriter august 21 – patty mccormack , american actress august 23 – bob peck , english actor ( died 1999 ) september 17 – bruce spence , new zealand actor september 22 – paul le mat , american actor october 7 – michael wallis , american journalist , popular historian , author speaker and voice actor october 18 – huell howser , american actor , television personality , host , comedian ( died 2013 ) october 19 – john lithgow , american actor october 26 – jaclyn smith , american actress october 27 – carrie snodgress , american actress ( died 2004 ) october 30 – henry winkler , american actor october 31 – brian doyle-murray , american actor and comedian november 21 – goldie hawn , american actress november 27 – james avery , american actor ( died 2013 ) december 1 – bette midler , american actress , comedian and singer december 17 – ernie hudson , american actor december 21 – mari lill , estonian actress december 24 – nicholas meyer , american screenwriter , director and producer december 31 – barbara carrera , nicaraguan-born american actress . deaths . january 14 – heinrich schroth , 73 , german actor , dr . hart 's diary , melody of a great city , die entlassung , rembrandt february 23 – reginald barker , 58 , american director , civilization , the bargain , the coward , the moonstone march 4 – lucille la verne , 72 , american actress , snow white and the seven dwarfs , abraham lincoln , orphans of the storm , a tale of two cities march 4 – mark sandrich , 44 , american director , the gay divorcee , follow the fleet , holiday inn march 30 – béla balogh , 60 , hungarian director april 10 – gloria dickson , 27 , american actress , lady of burlesque , they wo n't forget april 29 – malcolm mcgregor , 52 , american silent screen star , lady of the night , the circle , the whispering shadow , the ladybird may 4 – anna dodge , 77 , american actress , the extra girl , ride for your life july 13 – alla nazimova , 66 , ukrainian-born stage and film actress , blood and sand , salomé , since you went away , madame peacock august 11 – stefan jaracz , 61 , polish actor , countess walewska september 1 – terry , 11 , american performing cairn terrier , the wizard of oz november 11 – jerome kern , 60 , american composer , show boat , swing time november 12 – jaro fürth , 74 , austrian actor , diary of a lost girl , joyless street november 21 – robert benchley , 56 , american writer and actor , foreign correspondent , you 'll never get rich , road to utopia . debuts . vittorio gassman – inconto con laura jane greer – pan-americana silvana mangano – the last judgment dean stockwell – the horn blows at midnight lizabeth scott – you came along betty white – time to kill . notes .