Fountains of Wayne

career . 1995–1999 . after montclair-based adam schlesinger and sellersville-based chris collingwood first met as freshmen at williams college ( where adam joined williams 's premiere a cappella group , the octet ) , they played music in various bands and eventually went their separate ways , with collingwood forming the mercy buckets in boston and schlesinger forming ivy in new york city . in the mid-1990s , they came together to form fountains of wayne , named after a lawn ornament store in wayne , new jersey that closed in 2009 . at first collingwood hated the name but eventually warmed to it . previous band names included woolly mammoth , are you my mother ? and three men who when standing side by side have a wingspan of over twelve feet . the band cut a demo and signed with atlantic records , then recruited guitarist jody porter and still-active posies drummer brian young after recording their debut album . young got in touch with a friend who worked at fountains of wayne 's label to see if there were any job openings , and when he auditioned for the band , they asked him to play the beat of '' swingtown '' by steve miller band . though collingwood and schlesinger shared cowriter credit for all original fountains of wayne material , for most of their career together , they wrote their songs separately . in 2005 collingwood said , '' we decided early on , it ’ s better to not have arguments that some bands have where someone might say , ‘ i wrote 15 % of that song , ’ and try to figure out those numbers . it just seems ridiculous . '' schlesinger added , '' we just agreed many years ago that if we were to have a band we ’ d just split the songwriting to avoid having a conversation every time we tried to finish a song . but we really haven ’ t collaborated as writers in years . and that ’ s kind of intentional too because we didn ’ t want it to turn into a thing where people would say , 'adam ’ s songs are like this… ' we wanted the band to have an identity more than we wanted each of us to have an identity in the band . '' in 1996 , the band released its self-titled debut , which spawned the singles '' radiation vibe '' and '' sink to the bottom '' , and the band toured the world extensively behind its debut album , playing alongside bands including the smashing pumpkins , sloan , and the lemonheads . that same year , schlesinger wrote the academy award-nominated , riaa gold-certified title song for the film that thing you do ! . in 1999 , the band released utopia parkway , an album named after a road in queens , new york . the album was a concept record that dealt with life in modern suburbia . utopia parkway was received well by critics , garnering many favorable reviews , and was album of the week in people magazine . the group once again toured extensively behind the album , but frustrations grew between the band and the label . the band was later dropped by atlantic in late 1999 . 2000–2013 . the band was inactive for a period of time . collingwood , in particular , had a difficult time coping with the band being dropped by their label . in 2004 he said , '' when we got dropped from atlantic , it ’ s my fault that it took so long , because i wasn ’ t sure i wanted to keep doing it . at the end of four years of the hardest work i ’ d ever done in my life , more traveling and being away from my wife the whole time , i had nothing to show for it . i got back home and i had nothing . i was broke , i was demoralized , i was exhausted . i think i just needed a year to recharge my batteries . '' schlesinger cowrote many of the songs for the josie and the pussycats film and soundtrack , produced albums for verve pipe , david mead , and they might be giants , and released a third record with his other band , ivy . collingwood formed and fronted a northampton , massachusetts-based pop-country band , called gay potatoes , and played a string of solo shows in the boston and los angeles areas . guitarist jody porter worked with his band , the astrojet , alongside famed producer gordon raphael and keyboardist david zhang in new york city . percussionist brian young moved to los angeles and did session work for various artists such as producer steve fisk , ivy , heather duby , and greg dulli . the band reunited recording a cover of the kinks ' '' better things '' for the tribute album , this is where i belong : songs of ray davies and the kinks , in 2001 . in 2003 , the band released welcome interstate managers , a successful album that spawned the grammy-nominated riaa gold-certified hit single '' stacy 's mom '' , which adam schlesinger says was a tribute to the band , the cars ; initially , the single stalled at commercial alternative radio in the us , but mtv president judy mcgrath championed the single 's music video , a fast times at ridgemont high homage featuring rachel hunter . another song off the album , '' all kinds of time '' , was used for nfl commercial promotions during the 2005 season . in 2005 , the band released out-of-state plates , a collection of b-sides and two new songs , which was supported by the single '' maureen '' and a limited us tour that included some acoustic-only sets , a set on pbs soundstage , and american songbook . also included on the album is a 1999 cover of the britney spears hit , '' . baby one more time '' . also in 2005 , robbie fulks released a song in honor of the band called '' fountains of wayne hotline . '' in 2006 , while on tour in tokyo , collingwood had a mental breakdown in which he had n't slept for four days , experienced hallucinations for two days and did n't believe that he was in tokyo to play in front of 25,000 . the show was cancelled and collingwood was taken to an emergency department , followed by recovery in a mental hospital after returning to the us . in 2007 , the band released traffic and weather , an album which included the song '' i-95 '' , which rolling stone named 54 of the year 's top 100 songs . collingwood had less involvement during the making of the album due to his struggles with depression and alcoholism , only managing to contribute three songs . in 2008 , porter released his debut solo album close to the sun , a collection of songs he had written and recorded over a period of years in between fountains of wayne albums and tours . in 2009 , the band released no better place : live in chicago , a live concert dvd which included newly recorded acoustic songs . also that year , they played a short run of full-band acoustic shows where they showcased songs from their forthcoming album . also , on a sadder note that year , the store for which their band was named ( seen also in the sopranos episode , '' another toothpick '' ) went out of business . in 2010 , fountains of wayne commenced work on their fifth album , which was influenced by the recent acoustic tours they had done . according to porter , '' it ’ s a little bit more introspective and not as loud of a record as the last two . i think that came from the fact that we started last year doing acoustic-based tours because we didn ’ t have a record out . we wanted to get back out on tour and did it stripped-down . overall it ’ s not as brash or guitar-heavy . '' in 2011 , the band released sky full of holes , an album put out in japan by warner music japan ( with two bonus tracks ) , europe by lojinx , and the u.s . by yep roc records . the now-sober collingwood once again became more involved , but this turned out to be the hardest album for them to make . according to collingwood in 2013 , '' the most recent record was definitely the hardest that we 've ever done . i think i 'm partly to blame for that . i checked out on the previous record , so when i came back in , i had to assert myself . every single thing about that record was a fight . it was not this blissful reconciliation that led to the release ; it was a brutal thing right up to the end . we 'll see what happens if we end up making another record . '' the band toured sky full of holes into 2012 . after about a one-year layoff , they played a number of u.s . dates in september and october of 2013 , on a tour with soul asylum and evan dando . the final fountains of wayne show took place in minneapolis , minnesota , on october 19 , 2013 . post-breakup . the band never issued an official announcement that they had broken up , but by 2016 all the members were speaking of fountains of wayne in the past tense . neither schlesinger nor collingwood had ruled out a future reunion , but both saw the possibility as remote . '' i try never to say never , '' collingwood said , '' but it ’ s staggering to think of everything that would have to happen for me to want to repeat that experience . '' in 2016 , collingwood released what was essentially a solo album that was issued under the group name look park . at the time of the album release , he elaborated on fountains of wayne 's demise by saying , '' when we were recording the record before the last fountains of wayne record , which was called traffic and weather , i did n't really have a whole lot to contribute to that album . i was out to lunch a little bit , mentally , and just drinking too much . and i think that the fact that i sort of removed myself from the process at that point made it really easier for adam to take over . and when i was ready to actually make another album , you know , several years later after i 'd sort of cleaned up my act , it was very difficult . it was very , very hard to get back into the position where we were equals . '' porter and young joined schlesinger in 2016 on the monkees ' album good times ! and again in 2018 on the group 's christmas party . schlesinger produced and wrote songs for both albums . schlesinger and collingwood , meanwhile , remained distant . '' i don ’ t even know where adam lives now , '' collingwood told an interviewer in 2019 . . death of schlesinger and reunion . adam schlesinger died of complications from covid-19 on april 1 , 2020 . the surviving members of fountains of wayne performed together for the first time since 2013 on april 22 , 2020 , as part of a charity livestream event to raise funding for the new jersey pandemic relief fund . the performance was a tribute to schlesinger , and featured sharon van etten taking his place on bass guitar . . band members . chris collingwood – lead vocals , rhythm guitar ( 1995–2013 , 2020 ) adam schlesinger – bass guitar , backing vocals , guitar , keyboards , drums ( 1995–2013 ) ( died 2020 ) jody porter – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1997–2013 , 2020 ) brian young – drums , percussion ( 1997–2013 , 2020 ) . discography . studio albums fountains of wayne ( 1996 ) utopia parkway ( 1999 ) welcome interstate managers ( 2003 ) traffic and weather ( 2007 ) sky full of holes ( 2011 ) . references . external links . fountains of wayne interview with blender