1921 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top eight films released in 1921 by u.s . gross are as follows : . events . january 21 – the silent comedy-drama the kid , written by , produced by , directed by and starring charlie chaplin ( in his tramp character ) – his first full-length film as a director – and featuring jackie coogan , is released in the united states . it is the year 's second-highest-grossing film . march 6 – the silent epic war film the four horsemen of the apocalypse , adapted for the screen by june mathis , is released in the united states . it is the year 's highest-grossing film ( and the sixth-best-grossing silent film of all time ) , propels rudolph valentino to stardom and inspires a tango craze and a fashion for gaucho pants . august 29 – broadway 's first 1 million theatre , loew 's state opens . september 5 – popular comedian roscoe '' fatty '' arbuckle attends a party at the st . francis hotel , san francisco , during which actress virginia rappe is fatally injured ; although he is eventually acquitted of rape and manslaughter , the scandal derails his career . october 21 – george melford 's silent film the sheik , which enhances leading actor rudolph valentino 's international reputation as a latin lover , is premiered in los angeles . within the first year of its release , it exceeds 1 million in ticket sales . october 26 – the chicago theatre , which will be the oldest surviving french-style baroque revival grand movie palace , opens . the experimental short documentary film manhatta is shot by painter charles sheeler and photographer paul strand in new york city . notable films released in 1921 . united states unless stated . a . the ace of hearts , directed by wallace worsley , starring lon chaney and leatrice joy a connecticut yankee in king arthur 's court action , directed by john ford ; , starring hoot gibson the adventures of mr . pickwick , directed by thomas bentley , starring frederick volpe – ( gb ) the adventures of tarzan , directed by robert f . hill and scott sidney , starring elmo lincoln the affairs of anatol , directed by cecil b . demille ; starring gloria swanson and wallace reid after midnight , directed by ralph ince after your own heart , directed by george marshall , starring tom mix among those present , starring harold lloyd l'atlantide ( missing husbands ) , directed by jacques feyder – ( france ) . b . die bergkatze ( the wild cat ) , directed by ernst lubitsch , starring victor janson – ( germany ) the bigamist , starring guy newall , ivy duke – ( gb ) the blot , directed by lois weber ; starring claire windsor the boat , a buster keaton short the bonnie brier bush , directed by and starring donald crisp – ( gb ) brewster 's millions , directed by joseph henabery , starring roscoe arbuckle brownie 's little venus , starring baby peggy bullets or ballots , the film debut of mary astor buried treasure , directed by george d . baker ; starring marion davies and norman kerry . c . the call of youth , starring mary glynne camille , starring alla nazimova , rudolph valentino , rex cherryman and patsy ruth miller the conquering power , directed by rex ingram ; starring rudolph valentino and alice terry . d . desire ( sehnsucht ) , directed by f.w . murnau , starring conrad veidt – ( germany ) destiny ( der müde tod/ the weary death ) , directed by fritz lang , starring lil dagover , rudolf klein-rogge and walter janssen – ( germany ) the devil , directed by james young , based on ferenc molnár 's az ordog disraeli directed by henry kolker , starring george arliss the dollar-a-year man , directed by james cruze , starring roscoe arbuckle kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 124 . dracula 's death ( drakula halála ) , directed by károly lajthay – ( hungary ) . e . el capullo marchito , directed by jose nepomuceno - philippines el dorado , directed by marcel l'herbier , starring ève francis and jaque catelain – ( france ) enchantment , directed by robert g . vignola ; starring marion davies and forrest stanley experience , directed by george fitzmaurice ; starring richard barthelmess and lilyan tashman . f . faust , directed by frederick a . todd the fire eater , directed by b . reeves eason , starring hoot gibson fool 's paradise , directed by cecil b . demille ; starring conrad nagel , mildred harris , theodore kosloff and baby peggy forever , directed by george fitzmaurice , starring wallace reid and elsie ferguson the four feathers , directed by rené plaissetty – ( gb ) the four horsemen of the apocalypse , directed by rex ingram ; starring rudolph valentino . g . get-rich-quick peggy , starring baby peggy gevatter tod ( aka death ) directed by heinz hanus ( austria ) the goat , a buster keaton short the ghost in the garret , directed by f . richard jones , starring dorothy gish the golem 's last adventure ( der golem 's letzte abenteur ) , directed by julius szomogyl ( austria ) golfing , starring baby peggy the gunsaulus mystery , directed by oscar micheaux , starring evelyn preer . h . hail the woman , directed by john griffith wray , starring florence vidor the haunted castle ( schloss vogeloed ) , directed by f . w . murnau , based on the rudolf stratz novel – ( germany ) the haunted house , a buster keaton short the high sign , directed by edward f . cline and buster keaton the hound of the baskervilles , directed by maurice elvey , starring ellie norwood ( british ) kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 125 . humor risk , the marx brothers debut , never released . i . the idle class , a charles chaplin short the indian tomb ( das indische grabmal ) , directed by joe may , starring conrad veidt – ( germany ) . j . jánošík , starring theodor pištěk – ( czechoslovakia ) jim the penman , directed by kenneth webb , starring lionel barrymore journey into the night ( der gang in die nacht ) , directed by f.w . murnau – ( germany ) . k . the kid , directed by & starring charlie chaplin with edna purviance and jackie coogan . l . land of my fathers directed by fred rains and starring john stuart and yvonne thomas – ( gb ) leaves from satan 's book ( blade af satans bog ) , directed by carl theodor dreyer – ( denmark ) little lord fauntleroy , directed by alfred e . green and jack pickford , starring mary pickford the lost shadow , directed by rochus gliese , starring paul wegener and lyda salmanova ( germany ) kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 126 . the lotus eater , directed by marshall neilan , starring john barrymore and colleen moore the love light , directed by frances marion , starring mary pickford lucky carson , directed by wilfrid north , starring earle williams and betty ross clarke the lucky dog , starring stan laurel and oliver hardy . m . the man from beyond , directed by burton king , starring harry houdini and nita naldi the man who laughs , directed by julius herzka , starring franz hobling ( austria ) mathias sandorf , directed by henri fescourt , starring romuald joubé , yvette andréyor ( france ) the mechanical man ( l'uomo meccanico ) , directed by andre deed – ( italy ) a message from mars , directed by maxwell karger , starring burt lytell a midnight bell , directed by albert ray , starring charles ray miss lulu bett , directed by william c . demille , starring lois wilson and milton sills a muddy bride , starring baby peggy . n . never weaken , a harold lloyd short the nut , directed by theodore reed , starring douglas fairbanks and marguerite de la motte . o . the offenders , directed by fenwick l . holmes , starring margery wilson on with the show , starring baby peggy orphans of the storm , directed by d.w . griffith ; starring lillian gish and dorothy gish the other person , directed by b . e . doxat-pratt , starring zoe palmer ( british ) . p . the painting of osvaldo mars , directed by guido brignone , starring mercedes brignone and domenico serra ( italy ) the passion flower , starring norma talmadge peck 's bad boy , directed by sam wood , starring jackie coogan the phantom carriage ( körkarlen ) , directed by & starring victor sjöström – ( sweden ) the playhouse , a buster keaton short the price of silence , directed by f . l . granville . q . the queen of sheba , directed by j . gordon edwards , starring betty blythe queen of spades , directed by paul fejos ( hungary ) . r . the resident patient , directed by maurice elvey , starring eille morwood , based on an arthur conan doyle story ( british ) kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 127 . . s . a sailor-made man , directed by fred c . newmeyer , starring harold lloyd sentimental tommy , directed by george fitzmaurice ; starring gareth hughes seven years bad luck , directed by and starring max linder the sheik , directed by george melford , starring rudolph valentino and agnes ayres the silver lining , directed by roland west , starring coit albertson and jewel carmen the sky pilot , directed by king vidor a spectre haunts europe , directed by vladimir r . gardin , based on an edgar allan poe story ( russia ) squibs directed by george pearson and starring betty balfour – ( gb ) sybil directed by jack denton , starring evelyn brent – ( gb ) . t . third class male , starring baby peggy the three musketeers , directed by fred niblo , starring douglas fairbanks through the back door , directed by alfred e . green and jack pickford , starring mary pickford tol'able david directed by henry king ; starring richard barthelmess les trois mousquetaires ( the three musketeers ) , directed by henri diamant-berger – ( france ) . w . white and unmarried the witching hour , directed by william desmond taylor , starring elliott dexter kinnard , roy ( 1995 ) . '' horror in silent films '' . mcfarland and company inc . page 128 . woman 's place , directed by victor fleming , starring constance talmadge the wonderful thing , starring norma talmadge the yellow face ( an entry in the british adventures of sherlock holmes film series ) , directed by william j . elliott , starring eille norwood as sherlock holmes ( british ) . comedy film series . harold lloyd ( 1913–1938 ) charlie chaplin ( 1914–1940 ) lupino lane ( 1915–1939 ) buster keaton ( 1917–1944 ) laurel and hardy ( 1921–1945 ) . animated short film series . aesop 's film fables ( 1921–1934 ) felix the cat ( 1919–1936 ) koko the clown ( 1919–1963 ) . births . january 3 – john russell , actor ( died 1991 ) january 27 – donna reed , actress ( died 1986 ) january 31 carol channing , musical actress ( died 2019 ) mario lanza , singer , actor ( died 1959 ) february 1- peter sallis , english actor ( died 2017 ) february 8 – lana turner , actress ( died 1995 ) february 16 – vera-ellen , actress , dancer ( died 1981 ) february 22 – giulietta masina , actress ( died 1994 ) february 24 – abe vigoda , actor ( died 2016 ) february 26 – betty hutton , actress ( died 2007 ) march 3 – diana barrymore , actress ( died 1960 ) march 4 – joan greenwood , actress ( died 1987 ) march 10 - charlotte zucker , actress , mother of jerry zucker and david zucker ( died 2007 ) march 12 – gordon macrae , actor , singer ( died 1986 ) march 25 nancy kelly , actress ( died 1995 ) simone signoret , actress ( died 1985 ) march 26 – julie harris , costume designer ( died 2015 ) march 28 – dirk bogarde , actor ( died 1999 ) april 3 – jan sterling , actress ( died 2004 ) april 10 – chuck connors , actor ( died 1992 ) april 16 – peter ustinov , actor ( died 2004 ) april 23 – janet blair , actress ( died 2007 ) may 2 – satyajit ray , indian filmmaker ( died 1992 ) may 23 – grigori chukhrai , ukrainian film director ( died 2001 ) may 31 – alida valli , actress ( died 2006 ) june 8 – alexis smith , actress ( died 1993 ) june 19 – louis jourdan , actor ( died 2015 ) june 21 judy holliday , born judith tuvim , actress ( died 1965 ) jane russell , actress ( died 2011 ) july 3 – susan peters , actress ( died 1952 ) july 6 – nancy reagan , born anne robbins , actress and first lady of the united states ( died 2016 ) july 17 – františek zvarík , slovakian actor ( died 2008 ) july 23 – robert brown , actor ( died 2003 ) august 3 – marilyn maxwell , actress ( died 1972 ) august 8 – esther williams , actress , swimmer ( died 2013 ) august 19 – gene roddenberry , american screenwriter and producer ( died 1991 ) september 8 – harry secombe , actor , singer ( died 2001 ) september 27 – miklós jancsó , hungarian director ( died 2014 ) september 30 – deborah kerr , actress ( died 2007 ) october 13 – yves montand , singer , actor ( died 1991 ) november 3 – charles bronson , actor ( died 2003 ) november 5 – moritz yomtov , screenwriter ( died 1992 ) november 22 – rodney dangerfield , actor , comedian ( died 2004 ) november 23 – fred buscaglione , italian actor and singer ( died 1960 ) december 4 – deanna durbin , actress ( died 2013 ) december 24 - liz smith , english character actress ( died 2016 ) december 26 – steve allen , actor , composer , comedian , author ( died 2000 ) . deaths . february 8 – george formby sr , 45 , british music hall entertainer who appeared in one film ( pulmonary tuberculosis ) may 17 – karl mantzius , 61 , danish actor , theatre director , writer june 5 – georges feydeau , 58 , french playwright , many of whose plays were adapted for the screen ( syphilis ) june 20 – george loane tucker , 49 , american actor , screenwriter and director july 9 – robert broderick , 56 , american stage and film actor robert broderick ; imdb.com september 9 – virginia rappe , 26 american actress september 17 – van dyke brooke , 62 , american actor , screenwriter and film director . film debuts . richard arlen george arliss billie dove basil rathbone carole lombard in a perfect crime ( 1921 ) fredric march . see also . list of american films of 1921 . references .