Minnesang

social status . in the absence of reliable biographical information , there has been debate about the social status of the . some clearly belonged to the higher nobility – the 14th century codex manesse includes songs by dukes , counts , kings , and the emperor henry vi . some minnesänger , as indicated by the title meister ( master ) , were clearly educated commoners , such as meister konrad von würzburg . it is thought that many were ministerialis , that is , members of a class of lower nobility , vassals of the great lords . broadly speaking , the minnesänger were writing and performing for their own social class at court , and should be thought of as courtiers rather than professional hired musicians . friedrich von hausen , for example , was part of the entourage of friedrich barbarossa , and died on crusade . as a reward for his service , walther von der vogelweide was given a fief by the emperor frederick ii . several of the best known minnesänger are also noted for their epic poetry , among them heinrich von veldeke , wolfram von eschenbach and hartmann von aue . history . the earliest texts date from perhaps 1150 , and the earliest named minnesänger are der von kürenberg and dietmar von aist , clearly writing in a native german tradition in the third quarter of the 12th century . this is referred to as the danubian tradition . from around 1170 , german lyric poets came under the influence of the provençal troubadours and the french trouvères . this is most obvious in the adoption of the strophic form of the canzone , at its most basic a seven-line strophe with the rhyme scheme ab ab cxc , and a musical aab structure , but capable of many variations . a number of songs from this period match trouvère originals exactly in form , indicating that the german text could have been sung to an originally french tune , which is especially likely where there are significant commonalities of content . such songs are termed contrafacta . for example , friedrich von hausen 's '' ich denke underwilen '' is regarded as a contrafactum of guiot de provins 's '' ma joie premeraine '' . by around 1190 , the german poets began to break free of franco-provençal influence . this period is regarded as the period of classical minnesang with albrecht von johansdorf , heinrich von morungen , reinmar von hagenau developing new themes and forms , reaching its culmination in walther von der vogelweide , regarded both in the middle ages and in the present day as the greatest of the minnesänger . the later minnesang , from around 1230 , is marked by a partial turning away from the refined ethos of classical minnesang and by increasingly elaborate formal developments . the most notable of these later minnesänger , neidhart von reuental introduces characters from lower social classes and often aims for humorous effects . melodies . only a small number of minnelied melodies have survived to the present day , mainly in manuscripts dating from the 15th century or later , which may present the songs in a form other than the original one . additionally , it is often rather difficult to interpret the musical notation used to write them down . although the contour of the melody can usually be made out , the rhythm of the song is frequently hard to fathom . there are a number of recordings of minnesang using the original melodies , as well as rock groups such as ougenweide performing songs with modern instruments . later developments . in the 15th century , minnesang developed into and gave way to the tradition of the meistersinger . the two traditions are quite different , however ; minnesänger were mainly aristocrats , while meistersänger usually were commoners . at least two operas have been written about the minnesang tradition : richard wagner 's tannhäuser and richard strauss ' guntram . list of minnesänger . ; danubian lyric burggraf von regensburg burggraf von rietenburg dietmar von aist ( fl . 1143 ) der von kürenberg ( fl . 1143 ) leuthold von seven ( fl . 1147–1182 ) meinloh von sevelingen engelhardt von adelnburg ; early courtly lyric friedrich von hausen henry vi , holy roman emperor ( d . 1197 ) heinrich von veldeke ( fl . 1173–1184 ) reinmar der fiedler ( fl . 1182–1217 ) spervogel ; classical minnesang albrecht von johansdorf bernger von horheim gottfried von strassburg hartmann von aue ( 1160/1170–1210/1220 ) heinrich von morungen reinmar von hagenau ( ca . 1210 ) walther von der vogelweide wolfram von eschenbach ; later minnesang reinmar von brennenberg regenbogen friedrich von sonnenburg gottfried von neifen heinrich frauenlob ( 1250/1260–1318 ) hugo von montfort konrad von würzburg ( 1220/1230–1287 ) neidhart von reuental ( 1st half of the 13th century ) otto von botenlauben ( 1177 – before 1245 ) reinmar von zweter ( 1200 – after 1247 ) hawart süßkind von trimberg der tannhäuser ulrich von liechtenstein ( ca . 1200–1275 ) walther von klingen ( 1240–1286 ) johannes hadlaub ( d . 1340 ) muskatblüt der von wissenlo oswald von wolkenstein . example of a minnelied . the following love poem , of unknown authorship , is found in a latin codex of the 12th century from the tegernsee abbey . editions . the standard collections are 12th and early 13th century minnesang ( up to reinmar von hagenau ) : h . moser , h . tervooren , des minnesangs frühling . vol . i : texts , 38th edn ( hirzel , 1988 ) vol ii : editorial principles , melodies , manuscripts , notes , 36th edn ( hirzel , 1977 ) vol iii : commentaries ( hirzel , 2000 ) 13th century minnesang after walther von der vogelweide : carl v . kraus , g . kornrumpf , deutsche liederdichter des 13 . jahrhunderts ( niemeyer 1978 ) . 14th and 15th centuries : thomas cramer , die kleineren liederdichter des 14 . und 15 . jhs . , 4 vols ( fink 1979-1985 ) there are separate editions of walther 's works , and of a number of the most prolific minnesänger . there are many published selections with modern german translation . see also . liederhandschrift . references . olive sayce , the medieval german lyric , 1150-1300 : the development of its themes and forms in their european context ( oxford university press , 1982 ) ronald j . taylor , the art of the minnesinger . songs of the thirteenth century transcribed and edited with textual and musical commentaries ( university of wales press , 2 vols . , 1968 ) alwin schultz , das höfische leben zur zeit der minnesinger ( “ court life at the time of the minnesinger , ” 2 vols . , 1889 ) barbara garvey seagrave and wesley thomas , the songs of the minnesingers . includes lp record that presents songs of many of the principal minnesingers , with instruments of the period accompanying the vocalists ( university of illinois press , 1966 ) . external links . 1857 edition of karl lachmann adolph ernst kroeger the minnesinger of germany 1873