1951 in film

top-grossing films . united states . the top ten 1951 released films by box office gross in the united states are as follows : . notable films released in 1951 . united states release unless stated . . the 13th letter , directed by otto preminger , starring linda darnell and charles boyer . a . abbott and costello meet the invisible man , starring bud abbott and lou costello ace in the hole ( a.k.a . the big carnival ) , directed by billy wilder , starring kirk douglas and jan sterling across the wide missouri , starring clark gable the african queen , directed by john huston , starring humphrey bogart ( oscar for best actor ) and katharine hepburn – ( gb/us ) air cadet , starring gail russell and stephen mcnally alice in wonderland , an animated film by walt disney along the great divide , starring kirk douglas an american in paris , directed by vincente minnelli , starring gene kelly and leslie caron ( oscar for best picture ) angels in the outfield , starring paul douglas and janet leigh anna , starring silvana mangano , raf vallone and vittorio gassman – ( italy ) another man 's poison , directed by irving rapper , starring bette davis , gary merrill , emlyn williams and anthony steel – ( gb ) apache drums , starring stephen mcnally and coleen gray appointment with danger , starring alan ladd , with future dragnet ( series ) co-stars jack webb and harry morgan appointment with venus , starring glynis johns and david niven – ( u.k . ) as young as you feel , starring monty woolley atoll k , starring laurel and hardy in their final film awaara ( tramp ) , directed by and starring raj kapoor – ( india ) the axe of wandsbek ( das beil von wandsbek ) – ( east germany ) . b . badal ( cloud ) , starring madhubala and prem nath – ( india ) baazi ( gamble ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) bedtime for bonzo , starring ronald reagan ( with a chimpanzee ) bellissima , directed by luchino visconti , starring anna magnani – ( italy ) blackmailed , starring mai zetterling and dirk bogarde – ( gb ) the blue veil , starring jane wyman bright victory , starring arthur kennedy the browning version , directed by anthony asquith , starring michael redgrave and jean kent – ( gb ) bullfighter and the lady , starring robert stack and joy page . c . callaway went thataway , starring fred macmurray , dorothy mcguire , howard keel call me mister , starring betty grable captain horatio hornblower , starring gregory peck – ( gb ) cattle drive , starring joel mccrea , dean stockwell and chill wills cause for alarm ! , starring loretta young and barry sullivan china corsair , starring jon hall circle of danger , starring ray milland – ( gb ) the clouded yellow , starring trevor howard and jean simmons – ( gb ) come fill the cup , starring james cagney and gig young comin ' round the mountain , starring abbott and costello cops and robbers ( guardie e ladri ) , directed by mario monicelli – ( italy ) cry danger , starring dick powell and rhonda fleming cry , the beloved country , directed by zoltan korda , starring sidney poitier – ( gb ) . d . darling , how could you ! , starring joan fontaine la hija del engaño ( la hija del engaño ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) david and bathsheba , starring gregory peck and susan hayward the day the earth stood still , directed by robert wise , starring michael rennie and patricia neal death of a salesman , starring fredric march decision before dawn , starring richard basehart , gary merrill and oskar werner deedar , starring ashok kumar , dilip kumar , nargis – ( india ) the desert fox : the story of rommel , starring james mason detective story , starring kirk douglas , eleanor parker , william bendix , lee grant , horace mcmahon , and george macready diary of a country priest ( journal d'un curé de campagne ) , directed by robert bresson – ( france ) distant drums , directed by raoul walsh , starring gary cooper double dynamite , starring jane russell , frank sinatra and groucho marx dream of a cossack ( kavalier zolotoy zvezdy ) , starring sergei bondarchuk – ( u.s.s.r . ) daar doer in die bosveld ( far away in the bushveld ) , starring jamie uys – ( south africa ) . e-f . early summer ( bakushū ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) encore , starring nigel patrick and kay walsh – ( gb ) the enforcer ( murder , inc . ) , starring humphrey bogart and zero mostel fbi girl , starring audrey totter and cesar romero the family secret , starring john derek and lee j . cobb father 's little dividend , starring spencer tracy and elizabeth taylor the fighting seventh ( a.k.a . little big horn ) , starring lloyd bridges flying leathernecks , starring john wayne and robert ryan follow the sun , starring glenn ford ( as ben hogan ) the forbidden christ ( il cristo proibito ) , starring raf vallone – ( italy ) fort worth , starring randolph scott four in a jeep ( die vier im jeep ) , starring ralph meeker and viveca lindfors – ( switzerland ) fourteen hours , starring paul douglas , richard basehart , jeffrey hunter and grace kelly the frogmen , starring richard widmark and dana andrews furrows ( surcos ) – ( spain ) . g . go for broke ! , starring van johnson golden girl , starring mitzi gaynor , dale robertson , dennis day the golden horde , starring ann blyth goodbye my fancy , starring joan crawford and robert young the great caruso , starring mario lanza the groom wore spurs , starring ginger rogers grounds for marriage , starring kathryn grayson and van johnson the guy who came back , starring paul douglas . h . half angel , starring loretta young happy go lovely , starring david niven and vera-ellen – ( gb ) he ran all the way , starring john garfield and shelley winters here comes the groom , directed by frank capra , starring bing crosby his kind of woman , starring robert mitchum , jane russell , vincent price and raymond burr the house in montevideo ( das haus in montevideo ) – ( west germany ) the house on telegraph hill , starring richard basehart . i-j . i can get it for you wholesale , starring susan hayward i 'll never forget you i 'll see you in my dreams i want you , directed by mark robson , starring dana andrews the idiot ( hakuchi ) , directed by akira kurosawa – ( japan ) inside the walls of folsom prison , starring steve cochran jim thorpe – all-american , starring burt lancaster journey into light , directed by stuart heisler , starring sterling hayden juliette , or key of dreams ( juliette ou la clef des songes ) , directed by marcel carné – ( france ) . k-l . kind lady , directed by john sturges , starring ethel barrymore , maurice evans , keenan wynn , angela lansbury kon-tiki , a documentary directed by and starring thor heyerdahl – ( norway ) the last outpost , starring ronald reagan laughter in paradise , starring alastair sim – ( gb ) the lavender hill mob , directed by charles crichton , starring alec guinness , stanley holloway , sid james and alfie bass , with an early appearance by audrey hepburn – ( gb ) the lemon drop kid , starring bob hope , marilyn maxwell , william frawley and tor johnson let 's go crazy , starring spike milligan and peter sellers – ( gb ) leva på 'hoppet ' , starring ingrid thulin – ( sweden ) lightning strikes twice , starring ruth roman and mercedes mccambridge little egypt , starring rhonda fleming and mark stevens the long dark hall , starring rex harrison – ( gb ) lost continent , starring cesar romero love nest , starring june haver and marilyn monroe lullaby of broadway . m . the magic box , starring robert donat , a biopic of william friese-greene – ( gb ) the man with a cloak , starring joseph cotten the magnificent yankee , starring louis calhern malliswari , starring n.t . rama rao – ( india ) the man in the white suit , directed by alexander mackendrick , starring alec guinness , joan greenwood , cecil parker , michael gough and ernest thesiger – ( gb ) the mating season , starring gene tierney , john lund , miriam hopkins and thelma ritter the medium , starring marie powers – ( italy ) miracle in milan ( miracolo a milano ) , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) miss julie ( fröken julie ) , directed by alf sjöberg – ( sweden ) the model and the marriage broker , starring jeanne crain , thelma ritter , scott brady , zero mostel mr . imperium , starring lana turner and ezio pinza my favorite spy , starring bob hope and hedy lamarr . n-o . new mexico , starring lew ayres and marilyn maxwell the night before christmas ( noch pered rozhdestvom ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) no highway in the sky ( no highway ) , starring james stewart , glynis johns and marlene dietrich – ( gb ) olivia , directed by jacqueline audry – ( france ) on dangerous ground , starring ida lupino and robert ryan on moonlight bay , starring doris day and gordon macrae on the riviera , starring danny kaye one summer of happiness ( hon dansade en sommar ) – ( sweden ) only the valiant , starring gregory peck . p-q . painting the clouds with sunshine , starring virginia mayo pandora and the flying dutchman , starring ava gardner and james mason – ( gb ) paris vice squad ( identité judiciaire ) – ( france ) payment on demand , starring bette davis and barry sullivan penny points to paradise , starring harry secombe , peter sellers and spike milligan – ( gb ) the people against o'hara , starring spencer tracy people will talk , starring cary grant , jeanne crain , hume cronyn and finlay currie a place in the sun , directed by george stevens , starring montgomery clift , elizabeth taylor , shelley winters and raymond burr pool of london , directed by basil dearden , starring leslie phillips , james robertson justice and earl cameron – ( gb ) the prowler , directed by joseph losey , starring van heflin and evelyn keyes quo vadis , directed by mervyn leroy , starring robert taylor , deborah kerr , peter ustinov and leo genn . r . the racket , starring robert mitchum the raging tide , starring richard conte and shelley winters rawhide , starring tyrone power and susan hayward the red badge of courage , directed by john huston , starring audie murphy red mountain , starring alan ladd and lizabeth scott repast ( meshi ) , directed by mikio naruse , written by the novelist yasunari kawabata – ( japan ) el revoltoso ( the rebellious ) – ( mexico ) rhubarb , starring ray milland , jan sterling , william frawley and leonard nimoy rich , young and pretty , starring jane powell the river ( le fleuve ) , directed by jean renoir – ( france/india/us ) royal wedding , starring fred astaire , peter lawford and jane powell . s . . sans laisser d'adresse ( no forwarding address ) , starring bernard blier and danièle delorme – ( france ) santa fe , starring randolph scott saturday 's hero , starring john derek and donna reed scrooge ( a christmas carol ) , starring alastair sim – ( gb ) the secret of convict lake , starring glenn ford and gene tierney selamat berdjuang , masku ! , starring rendra karno and marlia hardi – ( indonesia ) show boat , a remake of the hit musical , starring kathryn grayson , howard keel , and ava gardner , with songs by oscar hammerstein ii and jerome kern silver city , starring edmond o'brien and yvonne de carlo the sinner , directed by willi forst , starring hildegard knef and gustav fröhlich ( west germany ) sirocco , starring humphrey bogart and märta torén slaughter trail , starring gig young and virginia grey smuggler 's island , starring jeff chandler and evelyn keyes bahar ( film ) ( bahar ) , first hindi film of vyjayanthimala and the producer a . v . meiyappan – ( india ) starlift , starring janice rule and ruth roman the steel helmet , directed by samuel fuller storm warning , starring ginger rogers , ronald reagan and doris day the strange door , starring charles laughton and boris karloff strangers on a train , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring farley granger and robert walker a streetcar named desire , directed by elia kazan , starring vivien leigh ( oscar for best actress ) , marlon brando , kim hunter and karl malden strictly dishonorable , starring ezio pinza and janet leigh the strip , starring mickey rooney and sally forrest sugarfoot , starring randolph scott summer interlude ( sommarlek ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) superman and the mole men , starring george reeves susana ( a.k.a . the devil and the flesh ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) the sword of monte cristo , starring george montgomery . t-v . take care of my little girl , directed by jean negulesco , starring jeanne crain and mitzi gaynor a tale of five cities ( passaporto per l'oriente ) – ( italy/gb ) the tale of genji ( genji monogatari ) – ( japan ) the tales of hoffmann , a cinematic opera directed by powell and pressburger and starring moira shearer – ( gb ) the tall target , starring powell , adolphe menjou , marshall thompson and ruby dee tarana , starring madhubala and dilip kumar – ( india ) esa pareja feliz ( esa pareja feliz ) , directed by juan antonio bardem and luis garcía berlanga – ( spain ) that 's my boy , starring dean martin and jerry lewis the thing from another world , produced by howard hawks , starring kenneth tobey and james arness as the title creature three guys named mike , starring jane wyman thunder on the hill , directed by douglas sirk , starring claudette colbert and ann blyth tom brown 's schooldays , starring john howard davies and robert newton – ( gb ) tomahawk , starring van heflin and yvonne de carlo two of a kind , starring edmond o'brien and lizabeth scott two tickets to broadway , starring janet leigh , tony martin , gloria dehaven vengeance valley , starring burt lancaster and joanne dru victimas del pecado ( victims of sin ) – ( mexico ) . w & y . warpath , starring edmond o'brien , forrest tucker , polly bergen warsaw premiere , directed by jan rybkowski ( poland ) the well , starring harry morgan westward the women , starring robert taylor when worlds collide , starring richard derr , barbara rush , larry keating , john hoyt and hayden rorke where no vultures fly , directed by harry watt , starring anthony steel , dinah sheridan , harold warrender and meredith edwards – ( u.k . ) you never can tell , starring dick powell young wives ' tale , starring joan greenwood – ( gb ) you 're in the navy now , starring gary cooper lak yawm ya zalem ( lak yawm ya zalem ) – ( egypt ) . serials . captain video : master of the stratosphere , starring judd holdren don daredevil rides again , starring ken curtis and aline towne government agents vs phantom legion , starring walter reed mysterious island , starring richard crane roar of the iron horse , starring buster crabbe . short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1956 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) donald duck ( 1936–1956 ) pluto ( 1937–1951 ) goofy ( 1939–1953 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1964 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) chip and dale ( 1943–1956 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1971 ) noveltoons ( 1944–1967 ) . births . january 1 – nana patekar , indian actor , screenwriter , and film director january 8 – john mctiernan , american director january 12 – kirstie alley , american actress january 15 – charo , spanish american actress , singer and comedian january 30 - phil collins , english drummer , singer , songwriter , multi-instrumentalist , record producer and actor february 13 – david naughton , american actor & singer february 15 – jane seymour , english actress february 16 – william katt , american actor february 22 – ellen greene , american singer and actress march 17 – kurt russell , american actor april 6 – rita raave , estonian actress april 12 – tom noonan , american actor april 17 – olivia hussey , argentine-born english actress april 21 – tony danza , american actor and boxer may 30 – stephen tobolowsky , american actor june 9 – james newton howard , american film composer june 20 - tress macneille , american voice actress , and singer july 4 – vincent marzello , american-born actor ( died 2020 ) july 6 – geoffrey rush , australian actor july 7 - roz ryan , american actress , singer , voice actress and comedian july 8 – anjelica huston , american actress july 9 – chris cooper , american actor july 10 – phyllis smith , american actress july 12 – cheryl ladd , american actress july 21 – robin williams , american actor & comedian ( died 2014 ) july 24 – lynda carter , american actress & singer august 6 – catherine hicks , american actress august 14 – carl lumbly , american actor august 30 – timothy bottoms , american actor september 5 – michael keaton , american actor september 12 – joe pantoliano , american actor september 17 – cassandra peterson , american actress september 25 – mark hamill , american actor october 30 – harry hamlin , american actor november 9 – lou ferrigno , american actor november 15 – beverly d'angelo , american actress november 17 – stephen root , american actor and voice actor november 20 – rodger bumpass , american actor & voice actor november 27 – kathryn bigelow , american director december 1 – treat williams , american actor . deaths . january 11 – charles w . goddard , american playwright , screenwriter ( born 1879 ) , the exploits of elaine january 18 – jack holt , american actor ( born 1888 ) , flight , san francisco march 6 – ivor novello , welsh actor , singer , composer ( born 1893 ) , the lodger , i lived with you march 14 – val lewton , russian-american director ( born 1904 ) , cat people , the body snatcher march 25 – oscar micheaux , american director , author ( born 1884 ) , the girl from chicago april 4 – al christie , canadian-born director , producer ( born 1881 ) , charley 's aunt april 22 – stanley ridges , british actor ( born 1890 ) , to be or not to be , sergeant york may 2 – edwin l . marin , american director ( born 1899 ) , fort worth , maisie may 2 – paul l . stein , austrian director ( born 1892 ) , red wagon , the twenty questions murder mystery may 7 – warner baxter , american actor ( born 1882 ) , 42nd street , crime doctor may 17 – s . sylvan simon , american director ( born 1910 ) , the fuller brush man , i love trouble may 29 – fanny brice , american entertainer and actress , my man , everybody sing june 2 – ernst pittschau , german actor ( born 1883 ) , the picture of dorian gray june 6 – olive tell , american actress ( born 1894 ) , the trap june 9 – mayo methot , american actress ( born 1904 ) , marked woman july 23 – robert j . flaherty , american documentary filmmaker ( born 1884 ) , nanook of the north august 28 – robert walker , american actor ( born 1918 ) , strangers on a train , the clock august 30 – konstantin märska , estonian cinematographer ( born 1896 ) september 7 – maria montez , dominican-born actress ( born 1912 ) , arabian nights , ali baba and the forty thieves october 12 – leon errol , australian-born actor ( born 1881 ) , never give a sucker an even break , joe palooka october 22 – phil rosen , polish-american director ( born 1876 ) , charlie chan in the chinese cat , roar of the press november 3 – richard wallace , american director ( born 1894 ) , tycoon , framed . film debuts . ernest borgnine – china corsair jeff bridges – the company she keeps charles bronson – you 're in the navy now leslie caron – an american in paris john cassavetes – fourteen hours scatman crothers – yes sir , mr . bones james dean – fixed bayonets ! mamie van doren – footlight varieties lee grant – detective story jeffrey hunter – fourteen hours grace kelly – fourteen hours harvey lembeck – you 're in the navy now lee marvin – you 're in the navy now patty mccormack – two gals and a guy leonard nimoy – queen for a day william shatner – the butler 's night off robert shaw – the lavender hill mob rod steiger – teresa jack warden – you 're in the navy now joseph wiseman – detective story . notes . references .