Passion Play

spain . in catalonia , it is common for villages to present different passion plays every easter , like the ones in esparreguera , olesa de montserrat , ulldecona or cervera , first documented in 1538 . olesa 's 1996 production surpassed the world record for the most people acting on stage at the same time , with 726 persons . balmaseda , in the spanish basque country , holds the leading passion play in the region . . sri lanka . the earliest passion plays in sri lanka , at vanny in mannar , pesalai , pamanugama , mutuwal , pallansena , kalamulla , duwa and pitipana in negombo , used life-size statues instead of living actors . influenced by the oberammergau passion play , k . lawrence perera , began the practice of using living actors in the borelassa passion play . women later began to take part in the play . however , for a period of time after 1939 , the archbishop of colombo banned performances because of his disapproval of the women 's participation . rohan , wijith ( 26 april 2012 ) . '' negombo ready for passion play in ballet form '' . daily mirror . retrieved 2 may 2013 . in the late 20th and early 21st centuries , there are many passion play enactments in sri lanka : duwa passion play , near negombo ( 1988 ) the yagaya passion play at kandawala , katana ( 1990/92 ) aho mage senageni and aho mage senageni at halpe , katana ( 1990s ) kurusiya matha miyadunemi , a modern passion play enacted in the villages of katuwapitiya and bolawalana in negombo ( 1999 , 2000 , 2001 ) thambakande paskuwa at st . bruno 's church in negombo with a large number of celebrities as actors ( 2012 ) tharakayano , the first ballet style passion play , enacted in negombo ( 2012 ) . maha premaya , the easter passion play , was enacted on 24 march 2018 at dungalpitiya , don bosco auditorium in negombo . over 80 actors participated . produced by rev . fr . manjula priyantha ( sdb ) , directed by george dinesh manthrige . thailand . the church of immaculate conception in bangkok and chanthaburi holds an annual passion play on good friday . united kingdom . ; aberdeen the aberdeen passion is staged biennially in the north east of scotland . first performed in 2012 , this passion play recreates 1st-century jerusalem in modern aberdeen . ; abingdon the town of abingdon passion play was a free , open-air production performed in 2013 . this was the result of a community enterprise combining drama , music and dance which took place in different locations within abingdon 's historic abbey gardens . ; alresford members of churches together in new alresford produced a broad street adaptation from palm sunday to good friday through song , dance , mime and drama for the second time in ten years in 2014 . costumes were chosen reflecting what jesus might have worn had he lived in the modern age ; he wore jeans and those arresting him wore combat fatigues . ; belper belper passion play took place in 2017 and 2018 with 120 performers . the passion play ( directed by jannice richthof and written by george gunby ) included music from the 'this man ' oratorio by local composer anne de waal and this was supplemented by the ctib flash mob on the streets . ; bewdley bewdley passion play took place in 2013 and was a promenade through the town in worcestershire . its central river severn bridge was closed for over an hour and the cast of volunteer and professional actors drew hundreds of spectators . ; birmingham 1 the old joint stock theatre based in birmingham presented a modern retelling of the passion play in association with birmingham cathedral during easter 2014 . ; birmingham 2 in 2019 the birmingham passion play was performed by a diverse team of a hundred community actors , musicians and stewards alongside saltmine theatre company . this unique contemporary re-telling of the easter story processed from birmingham bullring , along new street to victoria square and finished inside st philip ’ s cathedral . ; brighton in 'soul by the sea ' volunteers from local communities in brighton dramatised the days leading up to jesus ' arrest , death and resurrection from a script faithful to original scripture . local community volunteers included a mixture of backgrounds , denominations and nationalities . this passion play is part of the broader easter celebrations of soul by the sea and has drawn crowds in the thousands since 2011 . ; carlisle in 2019 the carlisle passion play was performed by a cast of 47 actors , crew of 10 , plus 55 singers and musicians from ctc musicians , a professional soloist , the salvation army band and songsters , and the carlisle taize choir rehearsed over a period of weeks in local churches and the historical tithe barn . the play was a modern , contemporary interpretation performed using the whole of the city centre historical town hall square and a specially constructed stage . ; cowbridge the town of cowbridge in the vale of glamorgan presented a passion play on good friday 22 april 2011 at holy cross church with the cast drawn from each of the denominations of churches there . ; devizes a passion play takes place every ten years in the town in west wiltshire ; events from christ arrest to his crucifixion are depicted in a jerusalem style promenade performance . ; edinburgh since 2005 , a passion play has been staged in princes street gardens over the easter weekend . crowds of up to 2,000 people come to watch the community theatre productions portraying the events of the easter story . the 2014 production was written by rob drummond with obvious reference to modern-day scotland without taking political sides ; the diverging behaviours and reactions of the split jewish community in jerusalem played served to point to the dangers of people letting the 2014 independence referendum public debate break down any of their normal relationships . ; great north passion the great north passion drew a crowd of thousands and was televised on bbc one in a live one-hour event on good friday 2014 . the twelve stations of the cross were the focus of twelve dramatic , artistic and musical interpretations from different local communities in northumberland , middlesbrough , north and south tyneside and gateshead . ; havant the town performed its first passion play in 2015 as a collective effort by its church congregations and their leaders in worship . a bbc news clip shows the final preparations for the cast and crew of the havant passion play . ’ behold the man ! ’ , bbc , bbc radio solent - tim daykin , havant passion play . exploring the wardrobe , behold the man ! ; isle of man the manx passion was a promenade performance that took place in the spring of 2014 , often outdoors at scenic sites on the isle . its acts and scenes selected important teachings and messages in the bible from creation to the passion . it was adapted from the mystery plays of york , chester and the wakefield cycles by christopher denys . ; lannarkshire “ resurrection ! ” was performed in hamilton town centre at 2:00 pm on saturday , 31 march and an excerpt was performed in strathclyde country park on saturday , 14 april at 2:00 pm by drama kirk . the play was adapted from an edinburgh easter play script by kamala jane santos . other passion plays have been performed between 2017 and 2020 . ; leominster the town of leominster in herefordshire holds a passion play on good friday every four years , performed by volunteers from churches of all denominations in the town . the play is performed outdoors with each scene in a different position in the streets and squares of the town centre . the 2008 performance included bespoke music by local composer liam dunachie . ; manchester ( 2006 ) bbc three broadcast a modern eclectic musical-genre passion play , the manchester passion in 2006 . the last hours of jesus christ 's life told through legendary music from some of manchester 's greatest musicians , including new order , oasis and the smiths . it was narrated by keith allen , and starred darren morfitt as jesus . denise johnson played mary , tim booth played judas , and nicholas bailey played peter . ; manchester ( 2017 ) the people of greater manchester came together to stage a performance of christ 's crucifixion and resurrection . it was filmed by bbc songs of praise and was the subject of a documentary available online . ; newark-on-trent the town of newark-on-trent hosted the newark passion written by james pacey performed in 2011 in the church of st . mary magdalene and in 2012 performed in nearby southwell minster . '' the parish church of st mary magdalene , newark-on-trent '' , retrieved 2011-04-12 ; liverpool liverpool cathedral presents a passion play each year to dramatise the events of holy week . the 2014 production was written by mark lovelady and dan bishop hand included an extra act showing jesus ' resurrection . ; oxford the cowley road passion play first took place in oxford in 2012 . its 2014 production attracted national attention because it was cancelled at the last moment . city council licensing officials refused to let it proceed without a fully debated decision , having presumed the motive for notifying that authority regarding the 'passion play'as a sex-related production necessitating full permission under the 2003 act . despite the producers enquiring if the council would share the widespread view it fell within the meaning of '' the provision of any entertainment or entertainment facilities for the purposes of , or for purposes incidental to , a religious meeting or service '' following licensing deregulation by the licensing act 2003 . ; poole the town of poole stages the play viewed through the eyes of a child every two years known as poole community passion play ( pcpp ) . it has been performed since written in 2009 . it is performed by a diverse inter-generational group of amateur and professional actors , actresses , singers and choreographed performers . ; port talbot the town of port talbot at bbc wales studios hosted a passion play directed by award-winning actor michael sheen on 22–24 april 2011 . '' michael sheen 's port talbot passion play to be filmed '' , bbc , 31 january 2011 . passion in port talbot/clips '' michael sheen 's port talbot passion play '' clips bbc programmes . accessed 2015-04-20 . ; shrewsbury the market town of shrewsbury , in the heart of shropshire staged its first passion play on good friday 2019 called the shrewsbury passion . what began many years ago as a silent 'walk of witness ' through the town every good friday reached a culmination in 2019 when it was decided by the head of the shrewsbury street pastors steve jones to create a short script which would dramatize the crucifixion of christ . this was enthusiastically met by the town council . the shrewsbury passion brought together a cast of 14 locals and operated on a budget of only £1000 . many christian denominations were involved in the production ; anglican , catholic , protestant , evangelical and most notably the role of jesus christ played by an orthodox christian ( actor ryan clement kouroukis ) . the shrewsbury passion included the traditional 'walk of witness ' ( starting from st . mary 's church and ending in front of the old market hall ) . the new inaugural production in 2019 was seen by approximately 600 people and lasted just over an hour . a new theatre company was formed soon afterwards to further promote and tell the gospel stories through theatre . the shrewsbury mystery plays is now a registered charity , and plans to perform the passion play , a christmas play and others on a regular year-to-year basis . the 2020 shrewsbury passion was to involve an expanded script , larger cast and larger budget but was cancelled due to the covid-19 government shutdown . ; southampton the city of southampton hosted a modern largely musical-genre version , southampton passion , on good friday , 22 april 2011 . another performance , one man ’ s passion , was performed in 2019 with 7 different characters , each with their own voice/accent , as well as the main ‘ storyteller ’ . this was recorded for a radio program and broadcast on unity radio on easter morning . t '' southampton passion play brings easter story to life '' , bbc , 23 february 2011 . ; south woodham ferrers the town in essex performed its first passion play 2009 'to speak to all people of all times ' ; the characters variously wore contemporary clothes or traditional costumes and the actor playing jesus arrived in the play on a harley davidson motorcycle . its script is based on original accounts in the bible , using modern language and realistic performances . ; tonbridge tonbridge passion play takes place in the grounds of tonbridge castle and rochester prison over the easter weekend since 2013 . ; trafalgar square trafalgar square hosts the passion of christ play twice on good friday afternoon , drawing up to 20,000 spectators and having a large cast with colourful costumes , horses and a donkey . the wintershall players ' performance from surrey is supported by the mayor of london and complements the one-week running the nativity and the life of christ plays in june and december in wintershall , bramley , surrey supported by the diocese of guildford , the roman catholic diocese covering surrey and sussex ( arundel & brighton ) and ticket sales of the latter two plays . wintershall plays alpha beta , march 2015 edition . monthly publication of the ( roman catholic ) diocese of arundel and brighton , page 10 . ; wirral christ 's passion for wirral ( 2017 ) was a live , contemporary retelling of the greatest story ever told and a weekend of activity across the whole of the wirral . it was a chance for people across wirral , merseyside , cheshire and beyond to engage with the real-life events of the first easter . the four-day easter event on the wirral was made into a radio documentary by flame christian radio with interviews and sounds from the live events . the line-up of events on easter sunday took place at birkenhead park took place in front of the jackson memorial opposite the grand entrance and past the visitors ' centre . ; woodstock woodstock passion play in 2014 saw a promenade performance in the town square and the oxfordshire museum gardens ; a local community production with a cast of over 70 people and hundreds of spectators in the crowd . . united states . ; arkansas in eureka springs , arkansas , the great passion play is regularly performed from may through october , by a cast of 170 actors and dozens of live animals . since its first performance in 1968 , the great passion play in eureka springs has been seen by over 7.7 million people , which makes it the largest-attended outdoor drama in america , according to the institute of outdoor theatre of the university of east carolina at greenville , north carolina . also on the grounds of the great passion play was the christ of the ozarks statue ( the largest christ statue in north america ) , the new holy land tour , a full-scale re-creation of the tabernacle in the wilderness , a section of the berlin wall , and a bible museum with over 6,000 bibles ( including an original 1611 king james bible , a leaf from the gutenberg bible , and the only bible signed by all of the original founders of the gideons ) . from time to time popular artists visit the great passion play to perform in the 4,000-seat amphitheater where the play is performed . ; arizona the mesa arizona easter pageant jesus the christ began in 1928 as a small sunrise easter presentation . the pageant is now the '' largest annual outdoor easter pageant in the world . '' with a 450-member cast , the 65-minute pageant depicts the birth , life , death , and resurrection of jesus christ using song and dance . ; california the glory of easter at the crystal cathedral in garden grove , california is an extremely popular passion play and family tradition to southern californians . it has a cast of hundreds , live animals , and flying angels , among other unique aspects . since 1993 , church of good shepard in pittsburg , california has been doing their adaptation of the passion play . tryouts are usually held in december and rehearsals are held in january through march , with 5 performances until good friday . this event has been held annually since its 1993 incarnation . the theme changes every year . teens who try out are given scripts , props , costumes , and near the end of rehearsal timing , they do pictures and music . all that had to be done before their first performance , then they have 4 more performances after the first one , with the last one being on good friday . ; colorado since 1998 , the thorn has been performing during the easter season in colorado springs . often described as the passion of the christ meets cirque du soleil , this epic portrayal of jesus ' life and death features indoor pyrotechnics , acrobats , aerialists , and a cast and crew of nearly 1000 . beginning in 2011 , the thorn started holding an annual national tour and has performed for tens of thousands people in cities that include charleston , austin , denver , nashville and seattle . ; connecticut for 38 years and counting , the st . thomas church of southington , connecticut has performed a passion play . made up entirely of volunteers , rehearsals begin in january and conclude with a week 's worth of shows prior to easter , the last show being on good friday . every year it is general admission , and there is no cost to view the play ( however , donations are appreciated . ) ; florida florida 's passion play is held in wauchula , at the cattleman 's arena , beginning good friday and continuing for the next several following weekends . it has a cast of over 200 people and 150 animals . ; georgia atlanta 's passion play was produced by the first baptist church of atlanta . it ran annually from 1977 to 2011 . ; illinois in bloomington , illinois , the american passion play has been portrayed annually since 1924 at the bloomington center for the performing arts and is one of the oldest continuously running passion plays in north america . this play is unique in that it dramatizes jesus ' entire ministry , rather than only the events from passion week onward . in zion , illinois , the zion passion play has been performed at christ community church since 1935 . central christian church in mount vernon , illinois portrayed '' the gospel of christ '' in an easter drama , using members of the church and church staff , choir , and children 's groups . it was directed by drummer and church member jimmy bass . although the play was a huge success , it has not been restaged , and is instead copied onto dvds available at the church . inverness , illinois – holy family parish teens put on a performance on good friday every year . ; michigan andrews university in berrien springs , michigan has been performing an annual indoor and outdoor walk-through passion play since 2003 . the play 's outdoor scenes include a marketplace , and a roman encampment . ; minnesota the north heights passion play was a popular indoor musical stage production sponsored by north heights lutheran church of arden hills , minnesota , a suburb of the twin cities . the minneapolis star-tribune says , '' with 700 participants , dozens of live animals , flames , rain and 'lightning ' , north heights lutheran church 's annual passion play is spectacular . '' more than 400,000 attended the performances over 19 years before the production was discontinued . over 20,000 attended the final season , including more than 150 tour buses and groups . performances began in april 1989 and ended 22 april 2007 . ; missouri the new melle community passion play is presented by an all-volunteer ecumenical group in a '' theater in the round '' indoor setting . the story of the last days in the life of christ is told using a script and music , based loosely on the cantata '' then came sunday '' , by rodger strader . it has grown in size and popularity over the past 32 years . ; mississippi the first united methodist church in kosciusko , mississippi has been performing their passion play for 30 years . it has been a mainstay in the community as well as the state . members of the church and community come together to share in fellowship and learn about the last days of jesus christ . this is an original script of the passion , written by a former minister of the church . ; new jersey the longest running passion play in the united states has been performed in north hudson , new jersey since 1915 and at the park performing arts center since 1931 . jay romano . '' union city journal ; 2 passion plays thrive on a 'friendly rivalry ' '' the new york times 5 march 1989 in 1997 , there was a minor controversy when an african-american actor was cast as jesus . briggs , david ; '' ' i was looking at him and i could n't see color ' '' stories on the passion play controversy at passionplayusa.net the jesus story , presented by bible baptist church in hasbrouck heights , new jersey , has been running for 20 years . first starting out as a small representation of the passion of jesus , this production has developed into a full-time musical performance . over the years , the play 's format has changed focusing on the point of view of several different people including mary the mother of jesus , the roman soldiers , the thieves on the cross , and many others . the show is performed at felician college in lodi , new jersey , and runs for approximately seven shows per year . every year it is general admission , and there is no cost to view the play . ; ohio in cambridge , ohio , the living word outdoor drama has been offered every summer since 1975 . in duncan falls , ohio , cornerstone full gospel church has put on the drama worthy is the lamb , for over 30 years . the drama features a cast of over 150+ , is free to the public , and is presented on good friday and easter sunday of each year . ; oklahoma one of the u.s . 's longest-running passion plays is held at the holy city of the wichitas , located within the wichita mountains wildlife refuge in oklahoma . the holy city started as an easter passion play in the wichita mountains in 1926 . the impetus behind both the pageant and city was the reverend anthony mark wallock ( b . 1890 , in austria ) . in 1926 , he took his sunday school class up a mountain , where a tableau of the resurrection was presented . the popularity of this service led to its becoming an annual event . in 1927 , the service became nonsectarian and was referred to by the lawton constitution as '' oklahoma 's oberammergau . '' since 1990 , the muskogee first assembly of god has performed a widely popular version of the passion beginning good friday and running through easter under the direction of debra rose . the drama utilizes acting , music , dance and live animals by a volunteer cast and crew of 50 . ; pennsylvania in downingtown , pennsylvania , the hopewell united methodist church has performed a version of the play in a 1,000 seat outdoor amphitheater each year since 1963 . the original version of the passion play , initiated in 1963 , is based in the king james version of the bible , but a newer version , entitled the power and the glory was launched in 2005 , based in several modern-language translations of the bible . the church offers both versions on successive weekends in june each year as a free offering to their audience . in harrisburg , pennsylvania , harrisburg christian performing arts center performs annual passion plays during the two weekends before easter . they have been doing this since 1973 , with 2013 marking their 40th annual passion play . the passion plays produced here are written by staff members , and music under public domain is added to give it a musical aspect . a new play is produced every year , apart from the 40th passion play the keys , which was previously produced in the early 90s . ; south dakota the black hills passion play was performed every summer for almost 70 years in spearfish , south dakota ; this production was an american version of the lünen passion play that was brought over in 1932 by immigrants , who claimed that it had been produced since 1242 . '' the theatre : black hills passion play '' , 18 november 1940 . the production was americanized by seventh-generation passion player josef meier , who toured it around the country before bringing it to spearfish in the 1930s ; until its last performance on 31 august 2008 , the show was produced under the auspices of meier 's daughter johanna , a world-famous opera singer who had her debut in the play at the age of five weeks . during the winter months from 1953 through 1998 , the same cast also performed the play in lake wales , florida . ; tennessee east tennessee has hosted many passion plays , including the smoky mountain passion play in townsend , tennessee from 1973 to 1992 , the great passion play at pigeon forge , tennessee in 1988 , and the gatlinburg , tennessee musical passion play , which closed in 1996 . ; texas the passion is performed annually in downtown san antonio , texas , with a procession leading from milam park to san fernando cathedral . one of the most widely viewed modified passion plays in the united states is the promise , performed near glen rose , texas . between glen rose and its sister production in branson , missouri , over one million people have seen the promise . the play has also been performed in hughes springs , texas as the passion play . ; utah the mormon miracle pageant is performed every summer in manti , utah , by members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints . it includes a visitation by jesus christ , shortly after his resurrection , to inhabitants of ancient america , as recorded in the book of mormon . ; virginia the american version of the oberammergau passion play was performed in strasburg , virginia , each summer from 1973 to 1986 . this version was originally written by val balfour . locals volunteered as extras , and church groups came from all over virginia , maryland , etc . to see the play . the same play toured all over the country in the fall and winter months . the loudoun passion play is an outdoor re-enactment of the easter story that has the audience walk between scenes to follow the story . it has been performed every year since 1986 on palm sunday weekend , in parks and other outdoor locations in and around purcellville , virginia . ; washington in seattle , washington , a large group of 8th graders performs the passion play at st . joseph 's school , on palm sunday and good friday . their piece involves several songs from jesus christ superstar , including '' heaven on their minds '' and '' trials and tribulations '' . this story also involves some minor parts , including the women with perfume , mary mother of jesus , peter denying knowing jesus , and the prayer in gethsemane . this has been tradition at st . joseph 's for over 30 years . ; wisconsin from 1990 to 2012 , lighthouse christian church 's impact productions in fond du lac , wisconsin performed the promise during holy week , with breaks in 1995 , 2006 , and 2009 . beginning in 2000 , the show was merged with another production by david t . clydesdale , the power of his love , and the production was entitled the promise : the power of his love . mexico . in the town of iztapalapa they do a passion play every easter , and is according to the via crucis . the passion play in motion pictures . 2004 's the passion of the christ ( produced and directed by mel gibson ) had a plot similar to that of passion plays . 1989 's jesus of montreal ( jésus de montréal ) ( directed by denys arcand ) presented the staging of a very unorthodox passion play while the players ' own lives mirrored the passion . antisemitism in passion plays . many passion plays historically blamed the jews for deicide in a polemical fashion , depicting a crowd of jewish people condemning jesus to crucifixion and a jewish leader assuming eternal collective guilt for the crowd for the murder of jesus , which , the boston globe explains , '' for centuries prompted vicious attacks – or pogroms – on europe 's jewish communities '' . sennott , charles m . '' in poland , new 'passion ' plays on old hatreds '' , the boston globe , 10 april 2004 . time magazine in its article , the problem with passion , explains that '' such passages ( are ) highly subject to interpretation '' . van biema , david . '' the problem with passion '' , time magazine , 25 august 2003 . although modern scholars interpret the '' blood on our children '' as '' a specific group 's oath of responsibility '' some audiences have historically interpreted it as '' an assumption of eternal , racial guilt '' . this last interpretation has often incited violence against jews ; according to the anti-defamation league , '' passion plays historically unleashed the torrents of hatred aimed at the jews , who always were depicted as being in partnership with the devil and the reason for jesus ' death '' . abraham foxman '' 'passion ' relies on theme of antisemitism '' , the palm beach post , 25 january 2004 . the christian science monitor , in its article , capturing the passion , explains that '' historically , productions have reflected negative images of jews and the long-time church teaching that the jewish people were collective guilt for jesus ' death . violence against jews as 'christ-killers ' often flared in their wake . '' lampman , jane . '' capturing the passion '' , christian science monitor , 10 july 2003 . christianity today in why some jews fear the passion ( of the christ ) observed that '' outbreaks of christian antisemitism related to the passion narrative have been.numerous and destructive . '' hansen , colin . '' why some jews fear the passion '' , christianity today , 2004 . some of the oldest currently-running passion plays have had to reckon with past polemic portrayals of jews in the work . the oberammergau passion play is an especially notable example . first performed in 1634 , the play continues to run today . in its original incarnation , the play relied upon the antisemitic canard that jews bore greater responsibility than any other group in the killing of christ . it utilizes juxtaposition between pure christians and wicked jews in order to portray a greater battle between fundamental good versus evil . hitler attended the passion play in oberammergau twice and praised it for its convincing portrayal of '' the menace of jewry '' . 1 although he praised the passion play , he also derided christianity . according to alan bullock , writing in hitler : a study in tyranny , hitler saw christianity as a religion fit only for slaves , and its teaching as a rebellion against the natural law of selection by struggle of the fittest . following the events of world war ii and the explicit support of adolf hitler for the play , several reforms and modifications were made . in the last few decades , it has revised its script and performance with the help of representatives from jewish organizations . james shapiro , oberammergau : the troubling story of the world 's most famous passion play ' ( little , brown & company , 2000 ) while oberammergau is perhaps the most famous example , this was not the only instance of anti-semitism or anti-semitic rhetoric in a passion play . the towneley mystery plays , also known as the wakefield mystery plays , also featured anti-semitic imagery , and ran from the late middle ages until 1578 . it is believed to be one of the earliest and most explicit portrayals of pontius pilate as a king or a jew ( and sometimes as king of the jews ) in theater ( although this tradition had already become well-established medieval antisemitism ) . through these stylings , the jews are further implicated in the killing of christ as being both the judge and the jury . this consistent rendering was emulated throughout christendom in the middle ages , and is perpetuated in subtler forms even today . in 1965 , a vatican declaration titled nostra aetate held that the crucifixion could not be blamed on the jewish people , whether they were living in the first century or born after the death of christ . the religion newswriters association observed that '' in easter 2001 , three incidents made national headlines and renewed jewish and christian leaders ' fears . one was a column by paul weyrich , a conservative christian leader and head of the free congress foundation , who argued that '' christ was crucified by the jews . '' another was sparked by comments from the nba point guard and born-again christian charlie ward , who said in an interview that jews were persecuting christians and that jews '' had his jesus ' blood on their hands . '' finally , the evangelical christian comic strip artist johnny hart published a b.c . strip that showed a menorah disintegrating until it became a cross , with each panel featuring the last words of jesus , including '' father , forgive them , for they know not what they do '' . '' 'passion ' plays out locally '' february 17 , 2004 on 16 november 1998 , church council of evangelical lutheran church in america similarly adopted a resolution prepared by its consultative panel on lutheran-jewish relations urging any lutheran church presenting a passion play to adhere to their guidelines for lutheran-jewish relations , stating that '' the new testament . must not be used as justification for hostility towards present-day jews , '' and that '' blame for the death of jesus should not be attributed to judaism or the jewish people . '' evangelical lutheran church in america '' guidelines for lutheran-jewish relations '' 16 november 1998 world council of churches '' guidelines for lutheran-jewish relations '' in current dialogue , issue 33 july 1999 in 2003 and 2004 some people compared mel gibson 's film the passion of the christ to these kinds of passion plays , but this characterization is hotly disputed ; an analysis of that topic is in the article on the passion of the christ . supporters of passion plays . passion trust . the passion trust supports the resurgence of passion plays in the united kingdom through resourcing , networking , advocating and financing new and existing plays . established in 2011 , its vision is to energise the growing number of passion plays taking place in the uk . the passion trust hosts an annual conference in various locations around the uk , drawing together actors , arts practitioners , producers , directors , fundraisers and journalists to explore new and time-tested approaches to passion plays . . europassion . europassion is a large european organisation which supports passion plays in europe . established in 1982 , this umbrella organisation draws together passion play communities from countries all over europe , some of which have been performing their plays for hundreds of years . according to mons . fausto panfili , the chaplain of the europassion : '' the experience of the europassion constantly lets us experience a so far unexplored pathway , so that we can continue to grow . surmounting a self-referred vision of our own experience obligates us to confront a regional , national , european and universal horizon . that is why a new vision , not fragmentary , is necessary . unity doesn ’ t mean uniformity . a spiritual energy , stronger and more attentive to cultural elaboration , a more evident solidarity in order to be recognised as bearers of hope , to help the people and communities grow . '' . see also . arrest of jesus crucifixion of jesus christian drama dramatic portrayals of jesus gospel jesus christ superstar morality play mummers play mystery play resurrection of jesus sacri monti of piedmont and lombardy sanhedrin trial of jesus sordevolo ta'ziya - a shia islam passion play ( ta'zieh ) commemorating the martyrdom of husayn bin ali . references . external links . official english website for the oberammergau passion play 2010 encyclopædia britannica entry for passion play