Lantau Island

tourist attractions . ngong ping . the ngong ping plateau features the po lin monastery and its vegetarian restaurant , as well as the -high bronze tian tan buddha ( or '' giant buddha '' ) statue , once the world 's largest seated outdoor bronze buddha statue . lantau island , po lin monastery , big buddha , temple walkers can ascend from tung chung to the monastery in two hours . visitors can also take a 25-minute ride on a ngong ping 360 from tung chung to the ngong ping plateau . ngong ping 360 is a tourism experience which combines a 5.7 & nbsp ; km cable car journey with a cultural themed village and easy access to the tian tan buddha statue . tai o . tai o is a fishing village located in the northwest of lantau island which is more than three centuries old . tourists visit tai o for its several hundred stilt houses ( pang uk ) , though some of those houses have been repaired after a fire in july 2000 and others from damage caused by super typhoons and related storm surges in subsequent years . while tai o is in the process of being revitalised with a series of measures such as new signages and two bridges to facilitate movement of visitors , tai o retains most of its historical setting such as waterways , stilt houses and fishing boats and is famous for its fishing village scenery in a mountainous setting . traditional chinese food like salted fish and locally produced shrimp paste can be found there . tung chung . tung chung fort was built in 1817 to thwart the opium trade and defend the coast from pirates . there are 6 old cannons and the enclosures are made of granite . during world war ii , the japanese army occupied the fort . in 1979 , it was listed as one of the historical monuments of hong kong and was refurbished in 1988 . the ruins of the tung chung battery , also a historical monument , are located nearby . trappist haven monastery . the trappist haven monastery at tai shui hang , home to a number of roman catholic monks , sits on the east coast of lantau island , approximately halfway between the towns of mui wo and discovery bay . the lantau trappist congregation was established in beijing in the 19th century . hong kong disneyland . hong kong disneyland lies on the northeastern part of the island , approximately two kilometres from discovery bay . it opened on 12 september 2005 on a massive land reclamation project in penny 's bay . the us 1.8 billion project includes a disney theme park , three hotels , and retail , dining and entertainment facilities stretching over 1.26 & nbsp ; km² ( 310 acres ) . the project also has its own rail network linking from sunny bay station in yam o . nature . over 50 % of lantau consists of national parks , including a large number of well-marked trails . the best known of these is the 70 kilometre , 12 section lantau trail composed of beauty of natural stone steps and the dense woodland along a 3-kilometer stretch . section 11 of the lantau trail starts just across the tung chung road , which is not far from ngong ping 360 . this section of the trail will reach south lantau road at pui o and hikers can appreciate the beauty of natural stone steps and the dense woodland along the 3 & nbsp ; km journey . lantau island lantau island the national parks feature campsites and youth hostels . lantau 's longest beach is cheung sha and one of its most famous hikes is to sunset peak ( tai tung shan , the third highest peak in hong kong . serious hike : sunset peak on lantau island ( mui wo/pui o to pak kung au ) hkfiles . flora and fauna . chinese white dolphins , often called pink dolphins , can be seen off the coast of lantau . , a marine park , the southwest lantau marine park , is being planned to protect them . in the southern parts of lantau island , local residents rely on local oyster fields , lemon and tangerine trees to make preserved fruits . there are also water buffalos living in bei o . the entire southern part of lantau island has a well-established eco-system rthk tv : hong kong connection - 2016-4-17 . prisons . there are six prisons on lantau island : chi ma wan correctional institution , chi sun correctional institution ( formerly the chi ma wan drug addiction treatment centre ) , ma mo ping prison , tong fuk centre west of tong fuk , sha tsui detention centre and the maximum security shek pik prison , both located near shek pik reservoir . plans were put forward by the government to build an enormous '' super prison '' on the sparsely populated nearby island of hei ling chau , to be connected by a bridge to mui wo . however , this plan was indefinitely shelved after organised resistance by local residents . transport . airport . hong kong international airport ( hkg/hkia ) is located on chek lap kok island and started service in july 1998 . it is located off the north coast of lantau , near the new town of tung chung and is connected to urban areas by the lantau link , which is composed of the kap shui mun bridge , the ma wan viaduct , and the tsing ma bridge . rail . the airport also has a metro rail connection to the rest of hong kong via the mtr 's airport express , along with several bus routes . this was built in the 1990s , whilst the new airport was being built . using the airport express , the journey time between central , hong kong 's business district , and chep lap kok airport is 23 minutes ( though the airport express does n't make any stops in lantau proper ) . in addition , one can reach tung chung by train on the tung chung line of the mtr , and the disneyland resort line branches off of the tung chung line at sunny bay station , serving the disneyland resort station at hong kong disneyland resort . water transport . tourists can get to lantau using ferry services provided by new world first ferry . this ferry service is available between mui wo and central with a transportation time of about 30 to 50 minutes , depending on the vessel . a 24-hour ferry service operated by hkr international connects pier 3 in central to discovery bay with a transportation time of 25 minutes . there are also several smaller inter-island ferry services linking neighbouring islands and the mainland . these ferries , known locally as kai-tos ( pronounced guy-doe ) provide scheduled services . these include nim shue wan ; adjacent to discovery bay , and peng chau island with a stopover at the trappist haven monastery on lantau , nim shue wan and mui wo on lantau . other kai-to and ferry services link peng chau , mui wo lantau , chi ma wan lantau , and cheung chau island , and another links tuen mun , tung chung , sha lo wan , and tai o . travel between islands is also possible by walla-walla , a traditional water taxi , typically from nearby cheung chau island . road transport . residents and tourists can travel within lantau island either by taxi or bus . the new lantao bus provides major bus services within the island , where one can get to tai o and po lin monastery from mui wo pier . some of the roads and bridges were built in the 1990s , whilst the new airport was being built . in hong kong , there are three types of taxis . red taxis serve the urban areas , green taxis serve the new territories while taxis on lantau island are blue in colour . all three taxi services can ply for passengers at the airport and tung chung , but only the blue taxis can take passengers to other locations on lantau island . there are 75 blue taxis serving the lantau island area . ( 25 added in 2016 ) the southern part of lantau island are the most dangerous roads in all of hong kong due to the narrow and hilly roads that are inaccessible to buses with lack of safety barriers . from february , 2016 , owners of private vehicles that wish to travel to these roads must obtain a temporary permit . however , due to the dangerous roads , the permit only lasts from 8am-7pm , only has 25 allotments , and only available on weekdays , while residents of these areas must obtain a permanent permit . tvb - “ scoop ” 25-3-2016 . cable car . the ngong ping 360 , a gondola lift , is located on lantau and is operated by the mtr . opened on 18 september 2006 , this provides a 5.7 & nbsp ; km 20 minute gondola cableway journey between tung chung and ngong ping . proposed development . the lantau development advisory committee ( landac ) was formed within the development bureau to advise the government on lantau island 's development potential . the committee first met in 2014 . save lantau alliance , an activist group opposed to large-scale development of the island , called on the council members to disclose their conflicts of interest . numerous members hold business interests on the island , including 10 non-official members who subsequently declared interests ranging from running the asiaworld–expo events centre ( allen ha ) to holding directorships at major developers with land holdings in and around lantau ( andrew lam of shui on land , randy yu of sino land , ivan chu of swire ) . following the first meeting of the landac , development chief paul chan mo-po told the press that the government would not rule out developing country parks . landac member wu chi-wai stated publicly that the committee was ignoring a 2007 concept plan for lantau , developed with public consultation , and spoke against developing the country parks . lam chiu ying , conservationist and former head of the hong kong observatory , responded that chan 's remarks were '' unacceptable '' and stated , '' while other cities are aiming for an increase ( in greenery ) , we are doing the opposite . it 's ridiculous . '' the committee 's first report , a 33-page document entitled '' space for all '' , was discreetly released online on 10 january 2016 . only a chinese version of the full report was released , with an english synopsis provided . the report recommends developing lantau island into a '' metropolis '' housing between 700,000 and 1,000,000 people , a new commercial hub , and a centre of tourism . it proposes large-scale land reclamation on the north shore of the island , and a series of highway and railway connections between kennedy town on hong kong island , passing through hei ling chau and a series of artificial islands , to land at mui wo . leung chun-ying praised the report for having '' fully considered the current situations of various districts in lantau , including the conservation needs and the development potential '' while it was denounced by green groups for being environmentally destructive . on 13 january 2016 , during his annual policy address , cy leung announced that a dedicated lantau development office would be set up as soon as possible to take forward development on the island . the lantau tomorrow vision was announced in 2018 , with the intention of creating additional islands on the east coast of lantau . see also . beaches of hong kong public housing estates on lantau island route 8 ( hong kong ) wanshan archipelago . references . external links . lantau - island of secrets and surprises illustrated article .