Neighbourhood

preindustrial cities . in the words of the urban scholar lewis mumford , “ neighbourhoods , in some annoying , inchoate fashion exist wherever human beings congregate , in permanent family dwellings ; and many of the functions of the city tend to be distributed naturally—that is , without any theoretical preoccupation or political direction—into neighbourhoods . ” mumford , lewis ( 1954 ) . the neighborhood and the neighborhood unit . town planning review 24:256–270 , p . 258 . most of the earliest cities around the world as excavated by archaeologists have evidence for the presence of social neighbourhoods . for example , spence , michael w . ( 1992 ) tlailotlacan , a zapotec enclave in teotihuacan . in art , ideology , and the city of teotihuacan , edited by janet c . berlo , pp . 59–88 . dumbarton oaks , washington , d.c . stone , elizabeth c . ( 1987 ) nippur neighbourhoods . studies in ancient oriental civilization vol . 44 . oriental institute , university of chicago , chicago historical documents shed light on neighbourhood life in numerous historical preindustrial or nonwestern cities . some examples : heng , chye kiang ( 1999 ) cities of aristocrats and bureaucrats : the development of medieval chinese cityscapes . university of hawai ' i press , honolulu . marcus , abraham ( 1989 ) the middle east on the eve of modernity : aleppo in the eighteenth century . columbia university press , new york . smail , daniel lord ( 2000 ) . imaginary cartographies : possession and identity in late medieval marseille . cornell university press , ithaca . neighbourhoods are typically generated by social interaction among people living near one another . in this sense they are local social units larger than households not directly under the control of city or state officials . in some preindustrial urban traditions , basic municipal functions such as protection , social regulation of births and marriages , cleaning and upkeep are handled informally by neighbourhoods and not by urban governments ; this pattern is well documented for historical islamic cities . abu-lughod , janet l . ( 1987 ) the islamic city : historic myth , islamic essence , and contemporary relevance . international journal of middle east studies 19:155–176 . in addition to social neighbourhoods , most ancient and historical cities also had administrative districts used by officials for taxation , record-keeping , and social control . dickinson , robert e . ( 1961 ) the west european city : a geographical interpretation . routledge & paul , london , p . 529 . see also : jacobs , jane ( 1961 ) the death and life of great american cities . random house , new york , p . 117 . administrative districts are typically larger than neighbourhoods and their boundaries may cut across neighbourhood divisions . in some cases , however , administrative districts coincided with neighbourhoods , leading to a high level of regulation of social life by officials . for example , in the t ’ ang period chinese capital city chang ’ an , neighbourhoods were districts and there were state officials who carefully controlled life and activity at the neighbourhood level . xiong , victor cunrui ( 2000 ) sui-tang chang'an : a study in the urban history of medieval china . center for chinese studies , university of michigan , ann arbor . neighbourhoods in preindustrial cities often had some degree of social specialisation or differentiation . ethnic neighbourhoods were important in many past cities and remain common in cities today . economic specialists , including craft producers , merchants , and others , could be concentrated in neighbourhoods , and in societies with religious pluralism neighbourhoods were often specialised by religion . one factor contributing to neighbourhood distinctiveness and social cohesion in past cities was the role of rural to urban migration . this was a continual process in preindustrial cities , and migrants tended to move in with relatives and acquaintances from their rural past . kemper , robert v . ( 1977 ) migration and adaptation : tzintzuntzan peasants in mexico city . sage publications , beverly hills . greenshields , t . h . ( 1980 ) '' quarters '' and ethnicity . in the changing middle eastern city , edited by g . h . blake and r . i . lawless , pp . 120–140 . croom helm , london . . sociology . neighbourhood sociology is a subfield of urban sociology which studies local communities wellman , b . & leighton , b . ( 1979 , march ) . networks , neighbourhoods and communities : approaches to the study of the community question . urban affairs quarterly , 14 ( 3 ) : 363-390 . warren , d . ( 1977 ) . the functional diversity of urban neighbourhoods . urban affairs quarterly , 13 ( 2 ) : 151-180 . neighbourhoods are also used in research studies from postal codes and health disparities , to correlations with school drop out rates or use of drugs . overman , h.g . ( 2002 ) . neighborhood effects in large and small neighborhoods . urban studies , 39 ( 1 ) : 117-130 . some attention has also been devoted to viewing the neighbourhood as a small-scale democracy , regulated primarily by ideas of reciprocity among neighbours . . improvement . neighbourhoods have been the site of service delivery or '' service interventions '' in part as efforts to provide local , quality services , and to increase the degree of local control and ownership . king , b . & meyers , j . ( 1996 ) . the annie e . casey foundation 's mental health initiative for urban children . ( pp . 249-261 ) . in : b . stroul & r.m . friedman , children 's mental health . baltimore , md : paul h . brookes . alfred kahn , as early as the mid-1970s , described the '' experience , theory and fads '' of neighbourhood service delivery over the prior decade , including discussion of income transfers and poverty . kahn , a.j . ( 1976 ) . service delivery at the neighborhood level : experience , theory and fads . social service review , 50 ( 1 ) : 23-56 . neighbourhoods , as a core aspect of community , also are the site of services for youth , including children with disabilities kutash , k . , duchnowski , a.j . , meyers , j . & king , b . ( 1997 ) . ch . 3 : community and neighborhood-based services for youth . in : s . henggeler & a . b . santor , innovative approaches to difficult to treat populations . washington , dc : american psychiatric press . and coordinated approaches to low-income populations . riessman , f . ( 1967 ) . a neighborhood-based mental health approach . ( pp.1620184 ) . in : e . cowen , e . gardier , & m . zak , emergent approaches to mental health problems . ny , ny : appleton-century-crofts . while the term neighbourhood organisation cunningham , j v . & kotler , m . ( 1983 ) . building neighborhood organizations . notre dame & london : notre dame press . is not as common in 2015 , these organisations often are non-profit , sometimes grassroots or even core funded community development centres or branches . community and economic development activists have pressured for reinvestment in local communities and neighbourhoods . in the early 2000s , community development corporations , rehabilitation networks , neighbourhood development corporations , and economic development organisations would work together to address the housing stock and the infrastructures of communities and neighbourhoods ( e.g . , community centres ) . rubin , h.j . ( 2000 ) . renewing hope within neighborhoods of despair : the community-based development model . albany , ny : state university of new york . community and economic development may be understood in different ways , and may involve '' faith-based '' groups and congregations in cities . mc roberts , o.m . ( 2001 , january/february ) . black churches , community and development . shelterforce online . washington , dc : author . at nhi.org . as a unit in urban design . in the 1900s , clarence perry described the idea of a neighbourhood unit as a self-contained residential area within a city . the concept is still influential in new urbanism . practitioners seek to revive traditional sociability in planned suburban housing based on a set of principles . at the same time , the neighbourhood is a site of interventions to create age-friendly cities and communities ( afcc ) as many older adults tend to have narrower life space . urban design studies thus use neighbourhood as a unit of analysis . . neighbourhoods around the world . asia . . china . in mainland china , the term is generally used for the urban administrative division found immediately below the district level , although an intermediate , subdistrict level exists in some cities . they are also called streets ( administrative terminology may vary from city to city ) . neighbourhoods encompass 2,000 to 10,000 families . within neighbourhoods , families are grouped into smaller residential units or quarters of 100 to 600 families and supervised by a residents ' committee ; these are subdivided into residents ' small groups of fifteen to forty families . in most urban areas of china , neighbourhood , community , residential community , residential unit , residential quarter ' have the same meaning : or or or , and is the direct sublevel of a subdistrict , which is the direct sublevel of a district , which is the direct sublevel of a city . ( see administrative divisions of china ) . europe . . united kingdom . the term has no general official or statistical purpose in the united kingdom , but is often used by local boroughs for self-chosen sub-divisions of their area for the delivery of various services and functions , as for example in kingston-upon-thames or is used as an informal term to refer to a small area within a town or city . the label is commonly used to refer to organisations which relate to such a very local structure , such as neighbourhood policing or neighbourhood watch schemes . in addition , government statistics for local areas are often referred to as neighbourhood statistics , although the data themselves are broken down usually into districts and wards for local purposes . in many parts of the uk wards are roughly equivalent to neighbourhoods or a combination of them . north america . in canada and the united states , neighbourhoods are often given official or semi-official status through neighbourhood association , neighbourhood watch or block watches . these may regulate such matters as lawn care and fence height , and they may provide such services as block party , neighbourhood parks and community security . in some other places the equivalent organisation is the parish , though a parish may have several neighbourhoods within it depending on the area . in localities where neighbourhoods do not have an official status , questions can arise as to where one neighbourhood begins and another ends . many cities use districts and wards as official divisions of the city , rather than traditional neighbourhood boundaries . zip code boundaries and post office names also sometimes reflect neighbourhood identities . see also . barangay ( philippines ) barrio ( spanish ) bairro ( portuguese ) block parent program ( canada ) borough census-designated place committees for the defense of the revolution ( cuba ) community comparison of home owners ' and civic associations frazione ( italian ) homeowners ' association kiez komshi ( balkan states during the ottoman empire ) mahalle mister rogers ' neighborhood neighbourhood watch new urbanism electoral precinct quarter quartiere residential community suburbs unincorporated community