1942 in literature

events . january 1 – the u.k . book production war economy agreement comes into force . february 20 – jean bruller 's novella le silence de la mer ( silence of the sea ) , about resistance to the nazi occupation of france , is issued clandestinely as the first publication of les éditions de minuit in paris , under the pseudonym '' vercors '' . a hundred copies are distributed from late summer ; the rest are destroyed by the occupying authorities . february 22 – the austrian-born novelist stefan zweig and his wife lotte are found dead of a barbiturate overdose in their home in petrópolis , brazil , leaving notes indicating despair at the future of european civilization . the manuscript of zweig 's autobiography the world of yesterday , posted to his publisher a day earlier , is first published in stockholm later in the year as die welt von gestern . laurent seksik 's 2010 novel les derniers jours de stefan zweig is set at this time . march – isaac asimov 's three laws of robotics are introduced in his short story '' runaround '' , published in astounding science-fiction . march 1 – the canadian novelist robertson davies begins a 13-year spell as editor of the peterborough examiner in ontario . march 28 – the spanish poet miguel hernández dies of tuberculosis as a political prisoner in a prison hospital , having scrawled his last verse on the wall . april 9 – the new york times launches the national version of its influential new york times best seller list . april 29 – the newspaper asia raja is first published in the dutch east indies under japanese occupation ; it will publish a number of literary works . may – the german novelist thomas mann moves to california . may 4 – the french novelist andré gide moves to tunis . may 8 – the english novelist david garnett marries as his second wife , the painter and writer angelica bell , daughter of garnett 's lover duncan grant and vanessa bell . june 4 – the film mrs . miniver is released , for which the novelist james hilton will share an academy award for best writing ( adapted screenplay ) on 4 march 1943 . june 12 – anne frank , on her 13th birthday , makes the first entry in her new diary in nazi-occupied amsterdam . august – the french resistance unit to which expatriate irish writer samuel beckett belongs is betrayed . he has to flee from occupied paris on foot to roussillon , vaucluse in south-eastern france , where he continues work on his novel watt . autumn – vasily grossman attends the battle of stalingrad as a reporter for the soviet army newspaper krasnaya zvezda . the experience later governs his novels stalingrad ( « сталингра́д » , original russian publication 1952 ) and life and fate ( « жизнь и судьба » , completed 1959 ) . october – the english poet keith douglas takes part in the second battle of el alamein , against orders . november 19 – the polish jewish writer and artist bruno schulz is shot dead by a gestapo officer , while walking through the '' aryan quarter '' of his home town , drohobych . new books . fiction . samuel hopkins adams – the harvey girls nelson algren – never come morning nigel balchin – darkness falls from the air henry bellamann – floods of spring earle birney – david taylor caldwell – the strong city albert camus – the stranger ( l'étranger ) john dickson carr the emperor 's snuff-box the gilded man ( as by carter dickson ) joyce cary – to be a pilgrim camilo josé cela – the family of pascual duarte ( la familia de pascual duarte ) raymond chandler – the high window agatha christie the body in the library five little pigs the moving finger james gould cozzens - the just and the unjust lloyd c . douglas – the robe daphne du maurier – frenchman 's creek rachel field – and now tomorrow natalia ginzburg ( as alessandra tornimparte ) – la strada che va in città ( the road to the city ) robert a . heinlein – beyond this horizon robert hichens – a new way of life kalki krishnamurthy magudapathi parthiban kanavu ( பார்த்திபன் கனவு , parthiban 's dream ) maura laverty – never no more c . s . lewis – the screwtape letters ( christian apologetics ) mary mccarthy – the company she keeps sándor márai – embers ( a gyertyák csonkig égnek , the candles burn right down ) beryl markham – west with the night ellery queen – calamity town raymond queneau – pierrot mon ami marjorie kinnan rawlings – cross creek clayton rawson – no coffin for the corpse anna seghers – the seventh cross ( das siebte kreuz ) nevil shute – pied piper curt siodmak – donovan 's brain clark ashton smith – out of space and time eleanor smith caravan the man in grey john steinbeck – the moon is down rex stout – black orchids antal szerb ( as a . h . redcliff ) – oliver vii ( vii . olivér ) phoebe atwood taylor the six iron spiders three plots for asey mayo tomita tsuneo ( 富田常雄 ) – sanshiro sugata ( 姿三四郎 ) vercors – le silence de la mer hugh walpole ( died 1941 ) – the killer and the slain evelyn waugh – put out more flags franz werfel – the song of bernadette cornell woolrich – black alibi s . fowler wright second bout with the mildew gang the siege of malta wu cheng'en ( 吳承恩 ) , translated by arthur waley – monkey ( 15th century ) xiao hong ( 蕭紅 ) – hulanhe zhuan ( 呼兰河传 , tales of the hulan river ) francis brett young – a man about the house . children and young people . bb ( denys watkins-pitchford ) – the little grey men enid blyton five on a treasure island mary mouse and the doll 's house eleanor estes – the middle moffat janette sebring lowrey – the poky little puppy diana ross – the little red engine gets a name ( first in the little red engine series of nine books ) david severn – rick afire solomon simon – di helden fun khelm ( the heroes of chełm ) hildegarde swift – the little red lighthouse and the great gray bridge elizabeth gray vining ( as elizabeth janet gray ) – adam of the road ursula moray williams – gobbolino , the witch 's cat . drama . jean anouilh – antigone jacinto benavente – paul vincent carroll – the strings are false constance cox – the romance of david garrick henry de montherlant – la reine morte maurice druon – mégarée patrick hastings – escort arthur miller – thunder from the hills ( radio play ) kaj munk – niels ebbesen eugene o'neill – a touch of the poet ( written ) terence rattigan – flare path john van druten – the damask cheek . poetry morwenna donnelly – beauty and ashes t . s . eliot – little gidding patrick kavanagh – the great hunger saint-john perse – exil . non-fiction . elizabeth bowen – bowen 's court albert camus – the myth of sisyphus ( le mythe de sisyphe ) salvador dalí – the secret life of salvador dalí edith hamilton – mythology richard hillary – the last enemy aldous huxley – the art of seeing c . s . lewis – a preface to paradise lost elliot paul – the last time i saw paris adam clayton powell , sr . – picketing hell radu d . rosetti – odinioară antoine de saint-exupéry – flight to arras rebecca west – black lamb and grey falcon . births . january 7 – božin pavlovski , macedonian-australian author january 9 – enrique estrázulas , uruguayan writer , poet , essayist , playwright , journalist , and diplomat ( died 2016 ) january 31 – derek jarman , english film director , writer and diarist ( died 1994 ) tony peake , derek jarman : a biography ( woodstock : overlook press , 1999 ) , pp . 12–13 . february 1 – terry jones , welsh comedic actor and writer ( died 2020 ) february – david williamson , australian playwright march 2 – john irving , american novelist and screenwriter march 28 – daniel dennett , american philosopher , writer and cognitive scientist april 1 – samuel r . delany , american novelist , essayist and critic april 4 – kitty kelley , american biographer and journalist april 20 – arto paasilinna , finnish novelist and journalist may 6 – ariel dorfman , argentine/chilean novelist , playwright and essayist may 11 – rachel billington , english author june 25 – michel tremblay , french canadian novelist and playwright august 2 – isabel allende , chilean novelist august 7 – garrison keillor , american humorous writer and broadcaster september 1 – antónio lobo antunes , portuguese novelist and physician october 20 – bob graham , australian children 's writer and illustrator october 23 michael crichton , american writer and director ( died 2008 ) douglas dunn , scottish poet and scholar october 24 – frank delaney , irish-born novelist , journalist and broadcaster ( died 2017 ) november 8 – fernando sorrentino , argentine writer november 19 – sharon olds , american poet november 24 – craig thomas , welsh novelist ( died 2011 ) december 6 – peter handke , austrian novelist and playwright unknown date – ghada al-samman , syrian writer . deaths . february 2 – daniil kharms , russian poet , writer and dramatist ( died in prison , born 1905 ) february 18 – henri stahl , romanian historian , short story writer , memoirist and stenographer ( born 1877 ) march 26 – carolyn wells , american novelist and poet ( born 1862 ) march 28 – miguel hernández , spanish poet ( died in prison , born 1910 ) april 24 – lucy maud montgomery , canadian novelist and children 's writer ( born 1874 ) may 11 – sakutarō hagiwara ( 萩原 朔太郎 ) , japanese poet ( born 1886 ) may 20 – nini roll anker , norwegian novelist and playwright ( born 1873 ) may 26 – libero bovio , neapolitan dialect poet ( born 1883 ) may 29 – akiko yosano ( 与謝野 晶子 , yosano shiyo ) , japanese poet and feminist ( born 1878 ) may – jakob van hoddis ( hans davidsohn ) german poet ( died in extermination camp , born 1887 ) june 30 – léon daudet , french writer and journalist ( born 1867 ) july 1 – peadar toner mac fhionnlaoich , irish writer in irish ( born 1857 ) august 17 – irène némirovsky , russian-born french novelist ( died in concentration camp , born 1903 ) august 27 – lev nussimbaum , russian and azerbaijani novelist ( gangrene , born 1905 ) september 26 – oskar kraus , czech philosopher ( born 1872 ) october 14 – cosmo hamilton , english dramatist and novelist ( born 1870 ) october 20 – friedrich münzer , german classicist ( born 1868 ) october 29 – màrius torres , catalan spanish poet ( born 1910 ) november 4 eleanor stackhouse atkinson , american novelist and textbook and children 's writer ( born 1863 ) clementine krämer , german poet and short-story writer ( died in concentration camp , born 1873 ) december 23 – konstantin balmont , russian symbolist poet and translator ( born 1867 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : denys watkins-pitchford , the little grey men frost medal : edgar lee masters james tait black memorial prize for fiction : arthur waley , translation of monkey by wu cheng'en james tait black memorial prize for biography : lord ponsonby of shulbrede , henry ponsonby : queen victoria 's private secretary newbery medal for children 's literature : walter d . edmonds , the matchlock gun nobel prize for literature : not awarded pulitzer prize for drama : not awarded pulitzer prize for poetry : william rose benet , the dust which is god pulitzer prize for the novel : ellen glasgow , in this our life . references .