Pavel Chekov

origin . star trek creator gene roddenberry wanted to include a younger cast member to appeal to teenage audiences . with a second season of star trek to be produced , roddenberry interviewed walter koenig on the recommendation of director joseph pevney . after casting koenig , roddenberry wrote a letter to mikhail zimyanin , editor of pravda , informing him of the introduction of a russian character , and an nbc press release announcing the character at the time stated that it was in response to a pravda article , condemning the show for having no russian characters . the existence of such a pravda article is disputed . roddenberry also acknowledged that the character was in response to the popularity of the monkees ' davy jones . koenig always denied the '' russian origin '' story and affirmed that his character was added in response to the popularity of the monkees , and the character 's hairstyle and appearance are a direct reference to this . source : the making of star trek , by stephen e . whitfield and gene roddenberry , ( c ) 1968 ballantine books , pps 249-250 tv guide , september 4–10 , 1993 p 20 roddenberry had previously mentioned , in a memo to his casting director , a desire to have someone reminiscent of one of the beatles or monkees on the show . koenig 's modest height , eyes , thick eyebrows , boyish face , and smile were all strikingly evocative of the lone british '' monkee '' who captivated millions of pre-teen girls . early attempts were made to style koenig 's brown hair similar to that of jones too . wigs were used in a couple of early episodes but not in others , which reveals a stage of experimentation to attentive viewers . eventually , a final look for koenig 's hair length and fullness was reached and used consistently thereafter . after paramount television signed koenig to a contract because of the number of fan letters he received as chekov , roddenberry wrote in another memo '' kirk and spock and the others actually seem rather 'middle aged ' to the large youthful segment of our audience . we badly need a young man aboard the enterprisewe need youthful attitudes and perspectives . chekov can be used potently here '' . in actuality , koenig is only five years younger than co-stars leonard nimoy and william shatner . the episode '' amok time '' , which was the first episode broadcast during the second season , was chekov 's first television appearance ( '' catspaw '' , the first episode shot with the chekov character , would be broadcast a month later to roughly coincide with halloween ) . because of budgetary constraints , the character did not appear in the animated star trek . . depiction . pavel andreievich chekov was born in 2241 in the soviet union and is a young and naïve ensign who first appears on-screen in the original series ’ second season as the enterprises navigator . according to roddenberry , he is '' an extraordinarily capable young man—almost spock 's equal in some areas . an honor graduate of the space academy . '' chekov also substitutes for mr . spock at the science officer station when necessary . his promotion to lieutenant for star trek : the motion picture brings with it his transfer as the ship 's tactical officer and chief of security . by the events of star trek ii : the wrath of khan , chekov is executive officer aboard the uss reliant . in that film , khan noonien singh uses a creature that wraps itself around chekov 's cerebral cortex to control him and his captain . chekov overcomes the creature 's mind control and serves as enterprise tactical officer in the film 's climactic battle . a common myth about star trek is that khan recognizing chekov in the film is a continuity error because '' space seed '' , with the villain , was broadcast before koenig 's casting . adaptations : from text to screen , screen to text calls this '' the apparent gaffe notorious throughout star trek fandom '' . see p . 180 . it is also noted as a typical continuity error in the sociological study of television textual poachers : television fans and participitory culture by henry jenkins p . 104 and oops ! : movie mistakes that made the cut by matteo molinari , jim kamm p . 196 although chekov does not appear in '' space seed '' , '' catspaw '' —with the character—has an earlier stardate . koenig joked that khan remembers chekov from the episode after he takes too long in a restroom khan wants to use . chekov is an accomplice in kirk 's theft of the enterprise to rescue spock in star trek iii : the search for spock , but is exonerated in star trek iv : the voyage home . he serves as navigator aboard the enterprise-a during the events of star trek v : the final frontier and star trek vi : the undiscovered country . the character 's final film appearance is as a guest aboard the enterprise-b on its maiden voyage in star trek generations . spinoff novels show a continued career path , but these are not considered canon in the star trek universe . novels written by william shatner detail that chekov reaches the rank of admiral , and even serves as commander in chief of starfleet . reboot films . the star trek ( film ) creates an alternate timeline in the franchise . in this timeline , anton yelchin 's portrayal presents chekov as a 17-year-old prodigy whose mathematical ability proves instrumental in a few events within the film , and whose accent provides some of the film 's comic relief . in the sequel , star trek into darkness , chekov finds himself promoted to chief engineer after scotty resigns . when kirk orders him to put on a red shirt , a brief sting is heard as a closeup shows chekov 's nervous face , playing on the reputation of redshirts in the franchise as much as the character 's shock regarding his sudden promotion . the third film , star trek beyond , was yelchin 's final appearance as chekov , the film seeing chekov accompanying kirk after the entire crew are marooned on an uncharted planet following the destruction of the enterprise , forcing them to destroy the last of the enterprise to escape a trap and later work with the rest of the senior staff to restart a long-lost starfleet ship to escape the planet and defeat a plan to attack the federation . yelchin was crushed to death by his 2016 jeep grand cherokee on june 19 , 2016 , little more than a month before its scheduled release on july 22 , 2016 . all filming had been completed and post-production had started . a dedication to yelchin 's memory was inserted into the credits . j . j . abrams , producer of the reboot trilogy and director of its first two films , has stated that the role will not be recast for future sequels , implying the character of chekov will be written out in future films . fan productions . walter koenig reprised his role as chekov 12 years after star trek generations in the fan-created series new voyages episode '' to serve all my days '' . andy bray portrayed a younger chekov in that episode . koenig reprised the character again in star trek : renegades as 143-year-old admiral chekov , the newly appointed head of section 31 . he has stated that should there be a sequel , he would reprise chekov and then retire from the role . he also returned as chekov in the online miniseries star trek : of gods and men . in scientific illustrator jenny parks ' 2017 book star trek cats , chekov is depicted as a russian blue . . reception . in 2018 , thewrap placed chekov as 21st out 39 in a ranking of main cast characters of the star trek franchise prior to star trek : discovery . in 2016 , chekov was ranked as the 30th most important character of starfleet within the star trek science fiction universe by wired magazine , out of 100 characters . in 2018 , comic book resources ranked chekov the 22nd best member of starfleet . . references . external links . '' pavel chekov '' at startrek.com