Galleon

etymology . the word galleon , '' large ship '' , comes from spanish ( castilian ) galeón , '' armed merchant ship '' , from old french galion , '' little ship '' ( 13c . ) , from portuguese galeão , '' war ship '' , from medieval greek galea , '' galley '' + augmentative suffix -on . another possible origin is the old french word galie , meaning '' galley '' ; also from byzantine greek galea . anderson , roger charles , oared fighting ships : from classical times to the coming of steam . london . 1962 . pp . 37–39 the galea was a warship of the byzantine navy , and its name may be related to the greek word galeos , '' dogfish shark '' . henry george liddell & robert scott . '' galeos '' . a greek-english lexicon the term was originally given to certain types of war galleys in the middle ages . the annali genovesi mentions galleons of 60 , 64 and 80 oars , used for battle and on missions of exploration , in the 12th and 13th centuries . it is very likely that the galleons and galliots mentioned in the accounts of the crusades were the same vessels . in the early 16th century , the venetian galleoni was a new class of galley used to hunt down pirates in the mediterranean . later , when the term started to be applied to sail-only vessels , it meant , like the english term '' man-of-war '' , any large warship that was otherwise no different from the other sailing ships of the time . history . in the beginning of the 16th century , a lowering of the carrack 's forecastle and elongation of the hull gave the ocean-going galleons an unprecedented level of stability in the water , and reduced drag ( physics ) at the front , leading to a faster , more maneuverable vessel . the galleon differed from the older types primarily by being longer , lower and narrower , with a square tuck stern instead of a round tuck , and by having a snout or head projecting forward from the bows below the level of the forecastle . in portugal at least , portuguese carracks were usually very large ships for their time ( often over 1,000 tons ) , while galleons were mostly under 500 tons , although the manila galleons were to reach up to 2,000 tons . with the introduction of the galleon in portuguese india armadas during the first quarter of the 16th century , os navios e as técnicas náuticas atlânticas nos séculos xv e xvi : os pilares da estratégia 3c – rear admiral antonio silva ribeiro – revista militar galeão – navegações portuguesas by francisco contente domingues carracks ' armament was reduced as they became almost exclusively cargo ships ( which is why the portuguese carracks were pushed to such large sizes ) , leaving any fighting to be done to the galleons . one of the largest and most famous of portuguese galleons was the são joão baptista ( nicknamed botafogo , '' spitfire '' ) , a 1,000-ton galleon built in 1534 , said to have carried 366 guns . carracks also tended to be lightly armed and used for transporting cargo in all the fleets of other western european states , while galleons were purpose-built warships , and were stronger , more heavily armed , and also cheaper to build ( five galleons could cost around the same as three carracks ) and were therefore a much better investment for use as warships or transports . there are disputes about its origins and development but each atlantic sea power built types suited to its needs , while constantly learning from their rivals . it was the captains of the spanish navy , pedro menéndez de avilés and álvaro de bazán , who designed the definitive long and relatively narrow hulled galleon for spain in the 1550s . '' the galleon evolved in response to spain 's need for an ocean-crossing cargo ship that could beat off corsairs . pedro de menéndez , along with álvaro de bazán ( hero of lepanto ) , is credited with developing the prototypes which had the long hull—and sometimes the oars—of a galley married to the poop and prow of a portuguese nau or merchantman . galeones were classed as 1- , 2- or 3-deckers , and stepped two or more masts rigged with square sails and topsails ( except for a lateen sail on the mizzenmast ) . capacity ranged up to 900 tons or more . menéndez 's san pelayo of 1565 was a 900-ton galleon which was also called a nau and galeaza . she carried 77 crewmen , 18 gunners , transported 317 soldiers and 26 families , as well as provisions and cargo . her armament was iron . '' —p.100 menéndez : pedro menéndez de avilés , captain general of the ocean sea albert c . manucy , published 1992 by pineapple press , inc walton , timothy r . ( 2002 ) . the spanish treasure fleets . pineapple press inc , p . 57 . the galleon was powered entirely by wind , using sails carried on three or four masts , with a lateen sail continuing to be used on the last ( usually third and fourth ) masts . they were used in both military and trade applications , most famously in the spanish treasure fleet , and the manila galleons . while carracks played the leading role in early global explorations , galleons also played a part in the 16th and 17th centuries . in fact , galleons were so versatile that a single vessel may have been refitted for wartime and peacetime roles several times during its lifespan . the galleon was the prototype of all square-rigged ships with three or more masts for over two and a half centuries , including the later full-rigged ship . the principal warships of the opposing england and spain fleets in the 1588 confrontation of the spanish armada were galleons , with the modified english race-built galleons developed by john hawkins proving decisive , while the capacious spanish galleons , designed primarily as transports , showed great endurance in the battles and in the great storms on the voyage home ; most survived the ordeal . construction . galleons were constructed from oak ( for the keel ) , pine ( for the masts ) and various hardwoods for hull and decking . hulls were usually carvel-built . the expenses involved in galleon construction were enormous . hundreds of expert tradesmen ( including carpenters , pitch-melters , blacksmiths , coopers , shipwrights , etc . ) worked day and night for months before a galleon was seaworthy . to cover the expense , galleons were often funded by groups of wealthy businessmen who pooled resources for a new ship . therefore , most galleons were originally consigned for trade , although those captured by rival states were usually put into military service . the most common gun used aboard a galleon was the demi-culverin , although gun sizes up to demi-cannon were possible . because of the long periods often spent at sea and poor conditions on board , many of the crew often perished during the voyage ; therefore advanced rigging systems were developed so that the vessel could be sailed home by an active sailing crew a fraction of the size aboard at departure . distinguishing features . galleons were a class of blue-water sailing ship that combined the easy-to-maneuver fore-and-aft rig of smaller shipping ( boats ) with the square rig of late middle ages cargo vessels . the galleons solidified the place of the square-rig and the centrally situated tallest main-masts and the slightly shorter fore-masts of a square-rigged ship characteristic of the 16th–19th centuries , but introduced the use of the lateen rig to sail closer to the wind on a tack than could a square-rigged vessel—an important attribute in restricted waters , but more so over long voyages where holding a few compass points closer to the wind might save hundreds of miles and days or weeks of sailing 'beating into the wind ' . the most distinguishing features of the galleon include the long , prominent beakhead followed by a mast ( sailing ) , both noticeably taller than the single or double lateen-rigged mizzenmasts with their sloped lateen-rig yards , and below those the square quarter gallery at the stern . on average with three masts , in larger galleons , a fourth mast was added , usually another lateen-rigged mizzen , called the mast ( sailing ) . the galleon continued to be used into the 18th century , by which time purpose-built vessels such as the fluyt , the brig and the full-rigged ship , both as a trading vessel and ship of the line , rendered it obsolete for trade and warfare respectively . the oldest english drawings . the oldest known scale drawings in england are in a manuscript called '' fragments of ancient shipwrightry '' made in about 1586 by mathew baker , a shipwright . this manuscript , held at the pepysian library , magdalene college , cambridge , provides an authentic reference for the size and shape of typical english galleons built during this period . based on these plans , the science museum , london has built a 1:48 scale model ship that is an exemplar of galleons of this era . fragments of ancient english shipwrightry . notable galleons . são joão baptista nicknamed botafogo , the most powerful warship when launched ( 1534 ) by the portuguese ; became famous during the conquest of tunis ( 1535 ) , where it was commanded by infante luís , duke of beja . '' la galga '' the assateague spanish galleon that was shipwrecked in 1794 and according to legend the ancestors of the now famous chincoteague pony swam ashore . adler von lübeck the largest ship of its day when launched in 1566 . the manila galleons , spanish trading ships that sailed once or twice per year across the pacific ocean between manila in the philippines and acapulco in new spain ( now mexico ) ; ( 1565–1815 ) . san salvador , flagship vessel in the joão rodrigues cabrilho 's 1542 exploration of present-day california in the united states . san pelayo , the large 906-ton galleon which served as the flagship of pedro menéndez de avilés during his expedition to establish st . augustine , florida in 1565 . the vessel was so large it could not enter st . augustine 's harbor , so menendez ordered it offloaded and sent it back to hispaniola . at a later date her crew mutinied and sailed to europe where the ship wrecked off the coast of denmark . golden hind , the ship in which sir francis drake circumnavigated the globe 1577–1580 . dainty , ship with which sir richard hawkins sought to emulate the circumnavigation voyage of his cousin drake . he was captured by the spanish in the action of atacames bay in 1594 and served in the spanish navy in the south american pacific for several years . ark raleigh , the ship was designed and built by sir walter raleigh . she was later chosen by lord howard , admiral of the fleet to be the flagship of the english fleet in the fight against the spanish armada in 1588 and was summarily renamed ark royal . revenge , a galleon built in 1577 , the flagship of sir francis drake in the battle of the spanish armada in 1588 , was captured by a spanish fleet off flores in the azores in 1591 and sank while being sailed back to spain . são martinho , the portuguese galleon , the flagship of duke of medina sidonia , commander-in-chief of the spanish armada . triumph , the largest elizabethan galleon ; flagship of sir martin frobisher in the battle of the spanish armada . san juan bautista ( originally called date maru , 伊達丸 in japanese ) . she crossed the pacific ocean from japan to new spain in 1614 . she was of the spanish galleon type , known in japan as nanban-sen ( 南蛮船 ) . nuestra señora de la concepción , a spanish galleon , known to her crew as cacafuego for her strong cannon . she was captured by sir francis drake in 1578 and all her treasures were brought to england . she was holding treasures mined in one year by the spanish in the americas . padre eterno , a portuguese galleon launched in 1663 . she was considered to be the biggest ship of her time , carrying 144 pieces of artillery and able to carry up to 2,000 & nbsp ; tons of cargo . vasa , the only original galleon to be preserved . she sank in 1628 and was raised in 1961 for preservation as a museum ship . notes .