1956 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1956 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . 1956 film releases . january–march . january 1956 12 january diane february 1956 5 february invasion of the body snatchers 16 february carousel 25 february the lone ranger march 1956 9 march come next spring meet me in las vegas 10 march never say goodbye 23 march serenade 24 march raw edge 25 march the indestructible man world without end 28 march the conqueror . april–june . april 1956 4 april the maverick queen 6 april jubal 11 april backlash 24 april our miss brooks 26 april the creature walks among us may 1956 8 may the man in the gray flannel suit 9 may the harder they fall 15 may invitation to the dance 26 may the searchers 30 may trapeze while the city sleeps june 1956 1 june the man who knew too much 6 june the killing 10 june crime in the streets 12 june a kiss before dying 13 june star in the dust 15 june gunslinger 16 june female jungle 20 june safari 21 june the eddy duchin story 22 june the catered affair 29 june the king & i . july–september . july 1956 6 july the fastest gun alive 12 july foreign intrigue 15 july it conquered the world 17 july high society 23 july dakota incident 29 july hold back the night 30 july run for the sun august 1956 1 august autumn leaves 17 august a cry in the night these wilder years 21 august war and peace 24 august a strange adventure 26 august the swan 29 august the first traveling saleslady the vagabond king september 1956 12 september the bad seed 15 september lust for life 21 september the last wagon 28 september the best things in life are free . october–december . october 1956 5 october the ten commandments 17 october around the world in 80 days attack julie 31 october death of a scoundrel you ca n't run away from it november 1956 1 november naked gun the white squaw 15 november love me tender gun the man down 18 november blonde sinner 24 november giant 25 november friendly persuasion december 1956 1 december the girl ca n't help it 6 december hollywood or bust 12 december bundle of joy 13 december anastasia the rainmaker 21 december the king and four queens 25 december written on the wind 29 december baby doll . notable films released in 1956 . united states unless stated . . 7th cavalry , starring randolph scott and barbara hale 23 paces to baker street , starring van johnson and vera miles 1984 , directed by michael anderson , starring edmond o'brien and michael redgrave – ( gb ) . a . accused of murder , starring vera ralston alexander the great , starring richard burton ali baba and the 40 thieves ( alibabavum 40 thirudargalum ) – ( india ) the ambassador 's daughter , starring olivia de havilland , myrna loy , john forsythe anastasia , starring ingrid bergman and yul brynner and god created woman , directed by roger vadim , starring brigitte bardot – ( france ) aparajito ( the unvanquished ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) around the world in 80 days , directed by michael anderson , starring david niven , cantinflas , shirley maclaine – academy award for best picture at gunpoint , starring fred macmurray , walter brennan , dorothy malone attack , a.k.a . attack ! , directed by robert aldrich , starring jack palance , eddie albert , lee marvin autumn leaves , starring joan crawford and cliff robertson away all boats , starring jeff chandler . b . baby doll , directed by elia kazan , starring carroll baker , karl malden , eli wallach back from eternity , starring robert ryan , anita ekberg , rod steiger backlash , starring richard widmark and donna reed the bad seed , starring nancy kelly and patty mccormack bandido , starring robert mitchum the battle of the river plate , a.k.a . pursuit of the graf spee , written and directed by powell and pressburger , starring john gregson and peter finch – ( gb ) before sundown ( vor sonnenuntergang ) – ( west germany ) behind the headlines , starring paul carpenter and hazel court the benny goodman story , starring steve allen and donna reed the best things in life are free , starring gordon macrae , dan dailey , sheree north between heaven and hell , directed by richard fleischer , starring robert wagner and buddy ebsen beyond a reasonable doubt , directed by fritz lang , starring dana andrews and joan fontaine bhowani junction , starring ava gardner and stewart granger – ( gb/united states ) bigger than life , directed by nicholas ray , starring james mason , barbara rush , walter matthau the birds and the bees , starring george gobel and mitzi gaynor the black tent , directed by brian desmond hurst , starring donald sinden , anthony steel , anna maria sandri & andré morell – ( u.k . ) bob le flambeur ( bob the gambler ) , directed by jean-pierre melville – ( france ) the bold and the brave , starring wendell corey and mickey rooney the boss , starring john payne and doe avedon the bottom of the bottle , directed by henry hathaway , starring van johnson , joseph cotten , ruth roman the brave one , directed by irving rapper the burmese harp ( biruma no tategoto ) , directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) the burning hills , starring natalie wood and tab hunter bus stop , starring marilyn monroe and don murray . c . c.i.d . , starring dev anand – ( india ) calabuch ( a.k.a . the rocket from calabuch ) , directed by luis garcía berlanga , starring edmund gwenn and valentina cortese – ( spain ) calle mayor ( main street ) , directed by juan antonio bardem , starring betsy blair – ( spain ) carnival night ( karnavalnaya noch ) – ( ussr ) carousel , directed by henry king , starring shirley jones and gordon macrae the case of the mukkinese battle horn , comedy short starring peter sellers , spike milligan , dick emery – ( gb ) the catered affair , starring bette davis , ernest borgnine , debbie reynolds checkpoint ( 1956 film ) , directed by ralph thomas , starring anthony steel , odile versois , stanley baker & james robertson justice – ( u.k . ) child of sorrow ( anak dalita ) – ( philippines ) chori chori , starring nargis and raj kapoor – ( india ) comanche , starring dana andrews and linda cristal come next spring , starring ann sheridan and steve cochran congo crossing , starring virginia mayo and peter lorre the conqueror , directed by dick powell , starring john wayne ( as genghis khan ) the court jester , starring danny kaye crazed fruit ( kurutta kajitsu ) , directed by kō nakahira – ( japan ) crime against joe , starring julie london crime in the streets , directed by don siegel , starring james whitmore and john cassavetes a cry in the night , starring edmond o'brien , natalie wood , raymond burr . d . d-day the sixth of june , starring robert taylor dakota incident , starring dale robertson dance with me , henry , starring bud abbott and lou costello death in the garden ( la mort en ce jardin ) , directed by luis buñuel , starring simone signoret and charles vanel – ( france ) death of a scoundrel , starring george sanders and zsa zsa gabor diane , starring lana turner in her final mgm film after nearly 20 years with the studio donatella , directed by mario monicelli , starring elsa martinelli – ( italy ) do n't look back , my son ( ne okreći se sine ) – ( yugoslavia ) o drakos ( o drakos ) – ( greece ) . e . early spring ( soshun ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) earth vs . the flying saucers , starring hugh marlowe the eddy duchin story , starring tyrone power and kim novak elena and her men , starring ingrid bergman – ( france/italy ) . f . the fastest gun alive , starring glenn ford and broderick crawford the first texan , starring joel mccrea the first traveling saleslady , starring ginger rogers , barry nelson , carol channing forbidden planet , starring walter pidgeon , leslie nielsen , anne francis forever , darling , starring desi arnaz , lucille ball , james mason friendly persuasion , directed by william wyler , starring gary cooper , dorothy mcguire , anthony perkins funtoosh ( funny man ) , starring dev anand – ( india ) . g . gaby , starring leslie caron gervaise , directed by rené clément , starring maria schell – ( france ) giant , directed by george stevens , starring elizabeth taylor , rock hudson and james dean in his final film the girl ca n't help it , starring tom ewell and jayne mansfield in her first starring role the girl he left behind , starring tab hunter and natalie wood a girl in black , directed by michael cacoyannis – winner of golden globe – ( greece ) godzilla , king of the monsters ! directed by terry morse and ishirō honda , starring raymond burr and takashi shimura – ( japan/united states ) good-bye , my lady , directed by william a . wellman , starring brandon dewilde , walter brennan , phil harris great day in the morning , directed by jacques tourneur , starring robert stack and virginia mayo the great locomotive chase , starring fess parker and jeffrey hunter the great man , directed by and starring josé ferrer , with julie london , keenan wynn , ed wynn the green man , starring alastair sim , george cole , terry-thomas – ( gb ) gun the man down , starring james arness and angie dickinson in her film debut gunslinger , directed by roger corman , starring john ireland and beverly garland . h . the harder they fall , starring humphrey bogart in his final film the harvest month ( elokuu ) – ( finland ) helen of troy , starring rossana podestà , stanley baker high society , starring bing crosby , frank sinatra and grace kelly in her final film hilda crane , starring jean simmons hold back the night , starring john payne hollywood or bust , starring dean martin and jerry lewis , with anita ekberg , in the final martin and lewis film hot blood , starring jane russell and cornel wilde the houston story , starring barbara hale and gene barry the hunchback of notre dame , starring gina lollobrigida and anthony quinn – ( france/italy ) . i . ich suche dich ( i seek you ) , starring o . w . fischer and anouk aimée – ( west germany ) the indian fighter , starring kirk douglas and walter matthau invasion of the body snatchers , directed by don siegel , starring kevin mccarthy invitation to the dance , directed by and starring gene kelly it conquered the world , directed by roger corman , starring peter graves and beverly garland . j . jagte raho ( stay awake ) , starring raj kapoor – ( india ) johnny concho , starring frank sinatra jubal , starring glenn ford , rod steiger , ernest borgnine , felicia farr , charles bronson julie , starring doris day and louis jourdan . k . kanał , directed by andrzej wajda – ( poland ) the killer is loose , directed by budd boetticher , starring joseph cotten , rhonda fleming , wendell corey the killers , a short film directed by andrei tarkovsky – ( u.s.s.r . ) the killing , directed by stanley kubrick , starring sterling hayden , coleen gray , marie windsor , vince edwards the king and four queens , starring clark gable the king and i , starring deborah kerr and yul brynner a kiss before dying , starring robert wagner and joanne woodward . l . the last hunt , directed by richard brooks , starring robert taylor and stewart granger the last wagon , starring richard widmark the leech ( shabab emraa ) – ( egypt ) the lieutenant wore skirts , directed by frank tashlin , starring tom ewell and sheree north lisbon , directed by and starring ray milland , with maureen o'hara and claude rains the lone ranger , starring clayton moore and jay silverheels the long arm , starring jack hawkins – ( gb ) love me tender , starring elvis presley in his film debut lust for life , starring kirk douglas ( as vincent van gogh ) and anthony quinn . m . a man escaped ( un condamné à mort s'est échappé ou le vent souffle où il veut ) , directed by robert bresson – ( france ) the man in the gray flannel suit , starring gregory peck , jennifer jones , fredric march , keenan wynn , lee j . cobb man on the tracks ( człowiek na torze ) – ( poland ) the man who knew too much , directed by alfred hitchcock ( a remake of his own 1934 british film ) , starring james stewart and doris day the man who never was , starring clifton webb and gloria grahame – ( gb ) the maverick queen , starring barbara stanwyck and barry sullivan meet me in las vegas , starring cyd charisse merry-go-round ( körhinta ) – ( hungary ) michel strogoff miracle in the rain , starring jane wyman moby dick , directed by john huston , starring gregory peck , richard basehart , leo genn mukh o mukhosh ( the face and the mask ) – ( east pakistan ) . n . naked gun starring mara corday and willard parker nagareru ( flowing ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) never say goodbye , starring rock hudson , david janssen , cornell borchers new delhi – ( india ) . o . old khottabych ( starik khottabych ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) on the threshold of space , starring guy madison the opposite sex , starring june allyson , leslie nielsen , joan collins othello , starring sergei bondarchuk – ( u.s.s.r . ) over-exposed , starring cleo moore . p-q . pardners , starring dean martin and jerry lewis patterns , starring van heflin and ed begley pillars of the sky , starring jeff chandler and dorothy malone please murder me , starring angela lansbury and raymond burr poveri ma belli ( poveri ma belli ) – ( italy ) the power and the prize , starring robert taylor , burl ives , mary astor , cedric hardwicke , elisabeth müller private 's progress , a boulting brothers film starring ian carmichael and richard attenborough – ( gb ) professor hannibal ( hannibál tanár úr ) , directed by zoltán fábri ( hungary ) the proud and profane , starring william holden and deborah kerr the proud ones , starring robert ryan and virginia mayo qivitoq – ( denmark ) . r . the rack , starring paul newman , edmond o'brien , walter pidgeon , anne francis the railroad man ( il ferroviere ) , directed by and starring pietro germi – ( italy ) the rainmaker , starring burt lancaster and katharine hepburn raj hath , starring madhubala – ( india ) ransom ! , starring glenn ford and donna reed reach for the sky , a biopic of douglas bader starring kenneth more – ( gb ) the red balloon ( le ballon rouge ) – ( france ) the road of life ( el camino de la vida ) – ( mexico ) rock around the clock , featuring bill haley and his comets rodan , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the roof ( il tetto ) , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) run for the sun , starring richard widmark , trevor howard , jane greer . s . samurai iii : duel at ganryu island , directed by hiroshi inagaki , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) the searchers , directed by john ford , starring john wayne , jeffrey hunter , vera miles , ward bond , ken curtis , natalie wood serenade , directed by anthony mann , starring mario lanza and joan fontaine seven men from now , directed by budd boetticher , starring randolph scott and lee marvin seven wonders of the world , a documentary film directed by tay garnett and others seven years in tibet – ( gb ) the she-creature , starring marla english the silent world , a marine documentary by jacques-yves cousteau and louis malle – ( france ) sira ` fi al-mina ( a.k.a . dark water ) , directed by youssef chahine , starring omar sharif – ( egypt ) slightly scarlet , starring john payne and rhonda fleming the solid gold cadillac , starring judy holliday somebody up there likes me , starring paul newman the spanish gardener , starring dirk bogarde – ( gb ) the square jungle , starring tony curtis and patricia crowley star in the dust , starring john agar and mamie van doren stars in your eyes – ( gb ) storm center , starring bette davis and kim hunter street of shame ( akasen chitai ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi – ( japan ) . t-v . tea and sympathy , directed by vincente minnelli , starring deborah kerr and john kerr the teahouse of the august moon , starring marlon brando and glenn ford the ten commandments , directed by cecil b . demille , starring charlton heston , yul brynner , anne baxter , yvonne de carlo , edward g . robinson there 's always tomorrow , starring barbara stanwyck , fred macmurray , joan bennett three brave men , starring ray milland time table , directed by and starring mark stevens , with felicia farr toward the unknown , starring william holden and virginia leith a town like alice , starring virginia mckenna and peter finch – ( gb ) trapeze , directed by carol reed , starring burt lancaster , tony curtis , gina lollobrigida tribute to a bad man , directed by robert wise , starring james cagney , irene papas , stephen mcnally , don dubbins , vic morrow the twelve months ( dvenadtsat mesyatsev ) – ( ussr ) uncle hyacynth ( mi tío jacinto ) – ( spain ) valley of peace ( dolina miru ) – ( yugoslavia ) i vampiri ( the vampire ) – ( italy ) . w . war and peace , directed by king vidor , starring audrey hepburn , henry fonda , mel ferrer , anita ekberg what a woman ! , starring sophia loren , charles boyer and marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) while the city sleeps , starring dana andrews , ida lupino , rhonda fleming , george sanders , vincent price who done it ? , starring benny hill – ( gb ) a woman 's devotion , starring ralph meeker and janice rule written on the wind , directed by douglas sirk , starring rock hudson , lauren bacall , robert stack , dorothy malone the wrong man , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring henry fonda and vera miles . x-z . x the unknown , starring dean jagger and leo mckern – ( gb ) yield to the night , starring diana dors – ( gb ) you ca n't run away from it , directed by dick powell , starring june allyson and jack lemmon zarak , starring victor mature – ( gb ) . serials . blazing the overland trail , starring lee roberts and dennis moore perils of the wilderness . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) ending this year donald duck ( 1934-1956 ) chip ' n ' dale ( 1943-1956 ) . births . january 3 – mel gibson , american irish actor and director january 7 – david caruso , american actor january 9 imelda staunton , english actress kimberly beck , american actress january 21 geena davis , american actress robby benson , american actor january 25 – dinah manoff , american actress and director january 27 susan blakeslee , american voice actress and musical theatre actress mimi rogers , american actress february 3 – nathan lane , american actor february 17 – richard karn , american actor february 19 – kathleen beller , american actress february 28 – lloyd sherr , american voice actor march 1 – tim daly , american actor march 7 – bryan cranston , american actor and director march 11 – rob paulsen , american voice actor march 12 – lesley manville , english actress march 13 – dana delany , american actress march 26 – erika kaljusaar , estonian actress april 12 – andy garcía , cuban-american actor april 18 – eric roberts , american actor april 30 – lars von trier , danish director may 7 – s . scott bullock , american voice actor may 9 – wendy crewson , canadian actress may 10 paige o'hara , american actress , voice actress , singer and painter jonathan roberts , american screenwriter , producer and author may 12 – kimiko yo , japanese actress june 4 – keith david , american actor july 1 – alan ruck , american actor july 9 – tom hanks , american actor and director july 11 – sela ward , american actress july 31 – michael biehn , american actor august 12 – bruce greenwood , canadian actor august 20 – joan allen , american actress august 21 – kim cattrall , english-born canadian actress august 28 – luis guzman , puerto rican character actor september 20 – gary cole , american actor september 26 – linda hamilton , american actress october 2 - charlie adler , american voice actor and voice director october 4 – christoph waltz , austrian-german actor october 20 – danny boyle , english director and producer october 21 – carrie fisher , american actress ( d . 2016 ) october 26 – rita wilson , american actress and producer november 8 – richard curtis , new zealand-born british director and screenwriter november 20 – bo derek , american actress and model november 22 – richard kind , american actor and voice actor december 17 – peter farrelly , american film director . deaths . january 9 – marion leonard , 74 , american early silent actress , the prussian spy , the gibson goddess january 12 – norman kerry , 61 , american actor , the phantom of the opera , the unknown january 19 – charles dingle , 68 , american actor , call me madam , state of the union january 23 – alexander korda , 62 , hungarian film director , the founder of london films , that hamilton woman , the private life of henry viii february 2 bob burns , 65 , american actor , waikiki wedding , belle of the yukon charley grapewin , 86 , american actor , the wizard of oz , the grapes of wrath february 26 – elsie janis , 66 , american actress and screenwriter , a regular girl , women in war march 17 – fred allen , 61 , american actor , it 's in the bag ! , o . henry 's full house march 25 – robert newton , 50 , english actor , oliver twist , odd man out april 15 – kathleen howard , 71 , canadian-american opera singer and actress , it 's a gift , ball of fire april 21 – charles macarthur , 60 , american screenwriter and playwright , wuthering heights , his girl friday april 26 – edward arnold , 66 , american actor , mr . smith goes to washington , diamond jim may 12 – louis calhern , 61 , american actor , duck soup , notorious , the asphalt jungle , high society june 2 – jean hersholt , 69 , danish-american actor , heidi june 6 – margaret wycherly , 74 , english-american actress , white heat , sergeant york june 30 – thorleif lund , 76 , norwegian actor , skibsrotten , republikaneren july 8 – mona mårtenson , 54 , swedish actress , pippi longstocking , the saga of gosta berling july 16 – olof winnerstrand , 80 , swedish actor , torment , a lesson in love august 16 – bela lugosi , 73 , hungarian-born american actor , dracula , white zombie , the black cat august 23 – kenji mizoguchi , 58 , japanese director , the life of oharu , a geisha october 2 – george bancroft , 74 , american actor , stagecoach , mr . deeds goes to town october 9 – marie doro , 74 , american actress , oliver twist , sally bishop october 17 – anne crawford , 35 , british actress , knights of the round table , night beat november 6 – paul kelly , 57 , american actor , juvenile court , adventure in sahara november 10 – victor young , 56 , american composer , around the world in 80 days , for whom the bell tolls november 26 – tommy dorsey , 56 , american musician , the fabulous dorseys , dubarry was a lady , ship ahoy november 30 – viggo wiehe , 81 , danish actor , doctor nicholson and the blue diamond , røverne fra rold december 8 – jack cohn , 67 , co-founder of columbia pictures december 12 – e . a . dupont , 64 , german writer , director , jealousy , the scarf december 26 – holmes herbert , 74 , british actor , dr . jekyll and mr . hyde , the invisible man . film debuts . jean-paul belmondo – molière michael caine – panic in the parlor james garner – toward the unknown glenda jackson – the extra day robert loggia – somebody up there likes me robert morse – the proud and profane leslie nielsen – ransom ! joan plowright – moby dick elvis presley – love me tender john schlesinger – sunday in the park maggie smith – child in the house rip torn – baby doll cicely tyson – carib gold robert vaughn – the ten commandments john vernon – 1984 tuesday weld – rock , rock , rock . notes .