Contact (novel)

plot . the message . as a child , eleanor '' ellie '' arroway displays a strong aptitude for science and mathematics . dissatisfied with a school lesson , she goes to the library to convince herself that is transcendental . in sixth grade her father and role-model theodore ( '' ted '' ) dies . a man named john staughton becomes her stepfather and does not show as much support for her interests . ellie refuses to accept him as a family member and concludes that her mother only remarried out of weakness . after graduating from harvard university , ellie receives a doctorate from caltech supervised by david drumlin , a well-known radio astronomer . she eventually becomes the director of '' project argus '' , a radiotelescope array in new mexico dedicated to the search for extraterrestrial intelligence ( seti ) . this puts her at odds with most of the scientific community , including drumlin , who tries to have the funding to seti cut off . to his surprise , the project discovers a signal containing a series of prime numbers coming from the vega system 26 light years away . a sequence of prime numbers is a commonly predicted first message from alien intelligence , since mathematics is considered a universal language , and it is conjectured that algorithms that produce successive prime numbers are sufficiently complicated so as to require intelligence to implement them . further analysis reveals information in the polarization modulation of the signal : a retransmission of adolf hitler 's opening speech at the 1936 summer olympics in berlin , the first television signal powerful enough to escape earth 's ionosphere . sagan 1985 . p . 94 . the president of the united states meets with ellie to discuss the implications of the first confirmed communication from extraterrestrial beings . ellie begins a relationship with presidential science advisor ken der heer . with the help of her soviet colleague vaygay lunacharsky , ellie is able to set up redundant monitoring of the signal so that a telescope remains pointed at vega at all times . a third message is discovered describing plans for an advanced machine . with no way of decoding the 30,000 pages , seti scientists surmise that there must be a primer that they have missed . the machine . at the president 's insistence , ellie agrees to meet with two religious leaders , billy jo rankin and palmer joss . a lifelong religious skeptic , ellie tries to convince joss of her faith in science by standing near a heavy foucault pendulum and trusting that its amplitude will not increase . although dismissing rankin 's outbursts , ellie is intrigued by joss ' worldview . shortly after , ellie travels to paris to discuss the machine with a newly formed consortium . the participants reach a consensus that the machine is a dodecahedron-shaped vehicle with five seats . at the conference , ellie meets devi sukhavati , a doctor who left india to marry the man she loved , only to lose him to illness a year later . the final piece of the message is discovered when s . & nbsp ; r . hadden , a billionaire in multiple high-tech industries with an obsessive personal interest in the concept of immortality , suggests that ellie check for phase modulation . this reveals the primer , thus allowing construction of the machine to begin . the american and soviet governments enter a race to construct identical copies of the machine . as errors in the soviet project are discovered , the american machine becomes the only option . ellie applies to be one of the five passengers , but her spot is given to david drumlin instead . despite heavy security , a group of extremists is able to get a bomb into one of the fabrication plants in wyoming . during a visit by three astronomers , the bomb explodes , killing drumlin and postponing completion of the machine indefinitely . ellie 's family also suffers when her mother has a stroke , which causes paralysis . john staughton accuses ellie of ignoring her own mother for years . ellie learns that s . & nbsp ; r . hadden has taken up residence aboard a private space station . while on board , he reveals that his company has been covertly building a third copy of the machine in hokkaido . the activation date is set for december 31 , 1999 and ellie , vaygay and devi are given three of the seats . the other two are given to abonnema eda , a nigerian physicist credited with discovering the theory of everything and xi qiaomu , a chinese archaeologist and expert on the qin dynasty . while in japan , ellie receives a medallion from joss , which she carries aboard the machine as it is activated . the galaxy . once activated , the dodecahedron transports the group through a series of wormholes to a massive station near the center of the milky way . the station contains a surreal earth-like beach where the five are split up . ellie meets an extraterrestrial in a form indistinguishable from ted arroway , who explains his people 's reasons for making contact , and tells her of their ongoing project to alter the properties of the universe by accumulating enough mass in cygnus a to counter the effects of entropy . he also tells her that the wormhole system was built by unknown precursors , and hints at the discovery of artificial messages in transcendental numbers like π . ellie is reunited with the other four travellers who have also met simulations of their loved ones . she captures video evidence of the encounter before the dodecahedron takes them back to earth . upon returning , the passengers discover that what seemed like many hours took no time at all from earth 's perspective . they also find that all of their video footage has been erased , presumably by magnetic fields in the wormholes . after seeing that hadden is apparently dead and that the transmission has somehow been stopped without a 26 later measurements from the hipparcos satellite have reestablished the distance to vega at 25 light years . -year delay , government officials accuse the travellers of an international conspiracy . they blackmail ellie and her fellow travellers into silence until more evidence can be found . palmer joss becomes one of the few people willing to believe her story that she can only justify on faith . acting on the suggestion of '' ted '' , ellie works on a program to compute the digits of π to heretofore-unprecedented lengths . ellie 's mother dies before this project delivers its first result . a final letter from her informs ellie that john staughton , not ted arroway , is ellie 's biological father . when ellie looks at what the computer has found , she sees a circle rasterized from 0s and 1s that appear after 10 20 places in the base 11 representation of π . this not only provides evidence of her journey , but suggests that intelligence is behind the universe itself . publication history . reading science fiction and fantasy as a child inspired carl sagan to become an astronomer . as an adult he preferred realistic stories that helped readers understand real science and history , like robert heinlein 's '' —and he built a crooked house— '' and l . sprague de camp 's lest darkness fall . in 1978 sagan predicted that because of science fiction , '' i know many young people who would , of course , be interested , but in no way astounded , were we to receive a message tomorrow from an extraterrestrial civilization '' . in 1981 , simon & schuster gave sagan a 2 million advance on the novel . at the time , '' the advance was the largest ever made for a book that had not yet been written . '' davidson 1999 . the first printing was 265,000 copies . in the first two years it sold 1,700,000 copies . it was a main selection of book-of-the-month-club . spence sagan 's friend , the physicist kip thorne , gave sagan ideas on the nature of wormholes when sagan was developing the outline of the novel . sagan named the novel 's protagonist , eleanor arroway , after two people : eleanor roosevelt , a '' personal hero '' of sagan 's wife , ann druyan , and voltaire , whose last name was arouet . the novel won the locus award for best first novel in 1986 . see also . communication with extraterrestrial intelligence fermi paradox his master 's voice . references . sources . davidson , keay . carl sagan : a life . new york : john wiley & sons , 1999 . sagan , carl . contact . new york : simon and schuster , 1985 . . external links . larry klaes ' in-depth analysis of the film and novel