1981 in music

specific locations . 1981 in british music 1981 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1981 in country music 1981 in heavy metal music 1981 in hip hop music 1981 in jazz . events . january–april . january – nearly a year after the suicide of ian curtis , the surviving members of joy division plus gillian gilbert , now under the name new order , release their debut single '' ceremony '' ; the single and its b-side , '' in a lonely place '' , are both re-recordings of songs originally written and performed by curtis . the single 's release marks the band 's first public use of the '' new order '' moniker , which they would retain for the remainder of their career . 10 january – a revival of the gilbert and sullivan operetta the pirates of penzance opens at broadway 's uris theatre , starring linda ronstadt and rex smith . 18 january – wendy o . williams of plasmatics is arrested in milwaukee for simulating masturbation with a sledgehammer on stage . in a scuffle with the police williams is pinned to the floor and receives a cut above the eye requiring twelve stitches . 24 january – aerosmith lead singer steven tyler is injured in a motorcycle crash that leaves him hospitalized for two months . 9 february – phil collins releases his first solo album , face value ; while the album would end up a smash success , collins would remain a member of genesis until 1995 . 12 february – rush release the highly regarded album moving pictures which eventually becomes the band 's sixth platinum album . 14 february – billy idol leaves the band generation x to begin a solo career . 25 february – the 23rd annual grammy awards are presented in new york , hosted by paul simon . christopher cross , with his self-titled debut album and its single '' sailing '' , becomes the first artist to win all four general field awards in a single ceremony , controversially beating pink floyd 's the wall for album of the year . 14 march – suffering from bleeding ulcers , eric clapton is admitted to united hospital in saint paul , minnesota , usa . clapton 's 60-city tour of the us is cancelled , and he remains in hospital for a month . 27 march – ozzy osbourne bites the head off a dove at a cbs record label gathering in los angeles . 1 april – the go-go 's sign to irs records . 4 april – british pop group bucks fizz wins the 26th eurovision song contest , held at the royal dublin society , dublin , with the song '' making your mind up '' . 11 april – van halen 's lead guitarist eddie van halen marries actress valerie bertinelli . 18 april – yes announce that they are breaking up . ( they would reunite frequently in years to come ) . 20 april – the mamas & the papas ' john phillips is sentenced to five years in jail after pleading guilty to drug possession charges . phillips ' sentence would be suspended after thirty days in exchange for 250 hours of community service . 22 april – eric clapton is taken to the hospital suffering from bruised ribs and a lacerated shin , following a car accident in seattle . 27 april – ringo starr and barbara bach marry , in london , england . may–august . 2 may – british vocalist sheena easton hits no . 1 in the us with '' morning train ( 9 to 5 ) '' following a swift rise to fame as the result of a reality tv show . 14 may – diana ross signs with rca records ( emi internationally ) , leaving motown records , her label of two decades . the 20,000,000 deal is the most lucrative recording contract in history at that time . 15 may – a riot breaks out at the ritz rock club in new york when public image ltd plays behind a videoscreen while completely different music plays over the club 's speakers . 4 june – u2 appears on the tomorrow show with tom snyder , their first u.s . television appearance . 5 june – the tv series night flight , a variety show featuring music documentaries and videos , is premiered on the usa network . 6 june – kerrang ! magazine publishes its first issue . angus young of ac/dc is on the cover . 30 june – jerry lee lewis is rushed to hospital in memphis for emergency surgery for a tear in his stomach . despite being given less than a 50 % chance of survival , he eventually pulls through . 1 august mtv broadcasts for the first time on cable television in the united states , playing music videos 24 hours a day . first to air is '' video killed the radio star '' by the buggles . the success of stars on 45 leads to a short-lived medley craze . the most successful imitator of the stars on 45 format is , rather unexpectedly , the royal philharmonic orchestra , whose '' hooked on classics ( parts 1 & 2 ) '' reaches number two in the charts . 23 august – the violent femmes are discovered by members of the pretenders busking outside a milwaukee venue and are invited to play a 10-minute acoustic set as a second opening act in the pretenders ' show that night . september–december . 11 september – iron maiden fires lead singer paul di'anno . 19 september – simon & garfunkel perform a free reunion concert in new york city 's central park attended by over 500,000 fans . 25 september – the rolling stones open their us tour in philadelphia , pennsylvania . 26 september – iron maiden hires samson lead singer bruce bruce aka bruce dickinson to replace paul di'anno . dickinson will finish off the last 7 dates of the killer world tour . 26 october – iron maiden plays its first show with bruce dickinson as the new lead singer in bologna , italy . 27 october – the british phonographic industry takes out newspaper ads unveiling its new slogan : '' home taping is killing music '' . the ads advocate a levy on blank cassette tapes . 31 october – punk band fear makes a memorable appearance on saturday night live . a group of fans storm the stage and damage tv equipment while moshing , resulting in the show cutting to commercial . 18 november – while sitting in tom 's restaurant in new york city , suzanne vega composes the song '' tom 's diner '' . 18 december – an estimated 35 million people around the world watch a live satellite transmission of a rod stewart concert at the los angeles forum . it is the first broadcast of its kind since elvis presley 's '' aloha from hawaii '' special in 1973 . 31 december – the tenth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by four tops , rick springfield , barry manilow , alabama and rick james . also in 1981 . the organ at the famous heinävesi church in finland is renewed , using locks from the original organ . alice cooper drastically changes his appearance , leaving behind his trademark make-up and donning a military uniform . synthpop enjoys mainstream popularity in the uk , with groups such as ultravox , depeche mode , orchestral manoeuvres in the dark and the human league releasing hit singles and albums . menudo 's golden era ( 1981–1985 ) begins in latin america , parts of europe and asia . brad whitford leaves aerosmith and is replaced by rick dufay . hal willner '' invents '' the modern tribute album with amacord nino rota . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1981 . bands disbanded . amon düül ii bay city rollers the buzzcocks ( they reform in 1989 ) city boy cluster ( they reform in 1989 ) generation x klaatu the knack ( reformed in 1991 , onwards ) luv ' ( they reform in 1989 , 1993 and 2005 ) mfsb raydio rockpile sam & dave the slits starland vocal band state of alert steely dan ( they reform in 1993 ) throbbing gristle toots & the maytals ( they reform in the early 90s ) wings ( band ) . albums released . january–march . . chronological table of us and uk number one hit singles . us number one singles and artist ( weeks at number one ) '' ( just like ) starting over '' – john lennon ( 4 weeks ) '' the tide is high '' – blondie ( 1 ) '' celebration '' – kool & the gang ( 2 ) '' 9 to 5 '' – dolly parton ( 2 ) '' i love a rainy night '' – eddie rabbitt ( 2 ) '' keep on loving you '' – reo speedwagon ( 1 ) '' rapture '' – blondie ( 2 ) '' kiss on my list '' – hall & oates ( 3 ) '' morning train ( 9 to 5 ) '' – sheena easton ( 2 ) '' bette davis eyes '' – kim carnes ( 9 ) '' stars on 45 medley '' – stars on 45 ( 1 ) '' the one that you love '' – air supply ( 1 ) '' jessie 's girl '' – rick springfield ( 2 ) '' endless love '' – diana ross & lionel richie ( 9 ) '' arthur 's theme ( best that you can do ) '' – christopher cross ( 3 ) '' private eyes '' – hall & oates ( 2 ) '' physical '' – olivia newton-john ( 6 ) uk number one singles and artist ( weeks at number one ) '' there 's no-one quite like grandma '' – st winifred 's school choir ( 1 ) '' imagine '' – john lennon ( 4 ) '' woman '' – john lennon ( 2 ) '' shaddup you face '' – joe dolce ( 3 ) '' jealous guy '' – roxy music ( 2 ) '' this ole house '' – shakin ' stevens ( 3 ) '' making your mind up '' – bucks fizz ( 3 ) '' stand and deliver '' – adam and the ants ( 5 ) '' being with you '' – smokey robinson ( 2 ) '' one day in your life '' – michael jackson ( 2 ) '' ghost town '' – the specials ( 3 ) '' green door '' - shakin ' stevens ( 4 ) '' japanese boy '' – aneka ( 1 ) '' tainted love '' – soft cell ( 2 ) '' prince charming '' – adam and the ants ( 4 ) '' it 's my party '' – dave stewart ( the keyboardist ) & barbara gaskin ( 4 ) '' every little thing she does is magic '' – the police ( 1 ) '' under pressure '' – queen & david bowie ( 2 ) '' begin the beguine '' – julio iglesias ( 1 ) '' do n't you want me '' – the human league ( 3 ) . chronological table of us and uk number one hit albums . us number one album and artist ( weeks at number one ) double fantasy – john lennon and yoko ono ( 7 ) hi infidelity – reo speedwagon ( 15 ) paradise theatre – styx ( 3 ) mistaken identity – kim carnes ( 4 ) long distance voyager – the moody blues ( 3 ) precious time – pat benatar ( 1 ) 4 – foreigner ( 7 ) bella donna – stevie nicks ( 1 ) escape – journey ( 1 ) tattoo you – the rolling stones ( 9 ) for those about to rock we salute you – ac/dc ( 1 ) uk number one album and artist ( weeks at number one ) super trouper – abba ( 3 ) kings of the wild frontier – adam and the ants ( 12 ) double fantasy – john lennon & yoko ono ( 2 ) face value – phil collins ( 3 ) stars on 45- stars on 45 / starsound ( 5 ) no sleep 'til hammersmith – motörhead ( 1 ) disco daze and disco nites – various artists ( 1 ) love songs – cliff richard ( 5 ) the official bbc album of the royal wedding – various artists ( 2 ) time – electric light orchestra ( 2 ) dead ringer – meat loaf ( 2 ) abacab – genesis ( 2 ) ghost in the machine – the police ( 3 ) dare – the human league ( 1 ) shaky – shakin ' stevens ( 1 ) greatest hits – queen ( 4 ) chart hits '81 – various artists ( 1 ) the visitors – abba ( 3 ) . significant singles . published popular music . '' 9 to 5 '' w.m . dolly parton from the film nine to five '' all those years ago '' w.m . george harrison '' allentown '' w.m . billy joel '' allergies '' w.m . paul simon '' america '' w.m . neil diamond from the film the jazz singer '' and i am telling you i 'm not going '' w . tom eyen m . henry krieger from the musical dreamgirls '' arthur 's theme '' w.m . carole bayer sager , burt bacharach , christopher cross & peter allen from the film arthur '' at this moment '' w.m . billy vera '' baby , come to me '' w.m . rod temperton '' being with you '' w.m . smokey robinson '' believe it or not ( theme from the greatest american hero ) '' w . stephen geyer m . mike post '' the best of times '' w.m . dennis deyoung '' bette davis eyes '' w . donna weiss m . jackie deshannon '' black limousine '' w.m . mick jagger , keith richards and ronnie wood '' bruce '' w.m . rick springfield '' chariots of fire '' w . jon anderson m . vangelis '' dynasty theme song '' m . bill conti '' the first time it happens '' w.m . joe raposo , from the film the great muppet caper '' good thing going ( going gone ) '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . stephen sondheim '' hill street blues theme song '' m . mike post '' key largo '' & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; w.m . bertie higgins & sonny limbo '' memory w . trevor nunn & t . s . eliot m . andrew lloyd webber . introduced by elaine paige in the musical cats . '' one of the girls '' w . fred ebb m . john kander introduced by lauren bacall in the musical woman of the year . classical music . milton babbitt don , for piano four-hands ars combinatoria , for small orchestra rob du bois string quartet no . 3 sonata for solo viola george crumb – gnomic variations for piano peter maxwell davies – piano sonata joël-françois durand – string trio morton feldman bass clarinet and percussion , for bass clarinet , cymbals and gongs triadic memories , for piano for aaron copland , for violin lorenzo ferrero balletto arioso ii variazioni sulla notte , for guitar cristóbal halffter fantasia sobre una sonoridad de g . f . haendel , for string orchestra ricercare , for organ bengt hambraeus – voluntary on a swedish hymn tune from dalecarlia wojciech kilar – exodus , a vocal-symphonic poem for mixed choir and orchestra george lloyd – tenth symphony ( for brass ) tome mančev symphonic poem , for large orchestra , op . 16 dance , for piano and percussion , op . 19 the year 1014 , for mixed chorus , op . 20 march of the bicyclists , for children 's chorus miroslav miletić sonatina for violin and guitar sonata for viola and piano three popular songs from dalmatia for voice and guitar steve reich – tehillim roger sessions – concerto for orchestra ( recorded by seiji ozawa and the boston symphony orchestra , and for which the composer receives the pulitzer prize for music ) robert simpson quintet for clarinet and strings symphony no . 8 stanislaw skrowaczewski – clarinet concerto alfred schnittke symphony no . 3 minnesang , for 52 voices string quartet no . 2 karlheinz stockhausen klavierstück xiii traum-formel , for basset horn . opera . lorenzo ferrero – la figlia del mago conrad susa and richard street – black river karlheinz stockhausen – donnerstag aus licht ( march 15 , la scala , milan , but without act 3 , due to a choir strike ; first full performance on april 3 ) . jazz . musical theater . barnum – london production opened at the london palladium on june 11 and ran for 655 performances bring back birdie – broadway production cats ( andrew lloyd webber ) – london production opened at the new london theatre on may 11 and ran for 8949 performances dreamgirls – broadway production opened on december 20 at the imperial theatre and ran for 1522 performances march of the falsettoes – off-broadway production merrily we roll along – broadway production opened at the alvin theatre on november 16 and ran for 16 performances the pirates of penzance – broadway revival song and dance – london production woman of the year – broadway production opened at the palace theatre on march 29 and ran for 770 performances . musical films . aakkramanam american pop the great muppet caper heavy metal lili marleen nandu pennies from heaven shock treatment . births . january 5 – carmen monarcha , brazilian operatic soprano january 7 – ania , polish singer-songwriter and composer january 15 howie day , american singer-songwriter pitbull , cuban-american rapper january 19 – thaila zucchi , british singer and actress ( allstars ) january 21 – andy lee , south korean singer and actor ( shinhwa ) january 22 – willa ford , american pop singer-songwriter , model , musician and actress january 25 – alicia keys , american singer-songwriter , record producer , pianist , actress and activist january 29 – jonny lang , american blues artist january 31 – justin timberlake , american singer ( nsync , britney spears , jessica biel , jc chasez ) february 1 – jay r sillona , filipino singer february 5 – zameer rizvi , singer/songwriter , composer and record producer february 9 tom hiddleston , english actor , film producer and musician ( taylor swift ) the rev , american musician ( avenged sevenfold ) ( d . 2009 ) february 11 – kelly rowland american singer-songwriter , member of destiny 's child february 12 – lisa hannigan , irish singer-songwriter , musician and voice actress . february 15 matt hoopes , american musician , guitarist and singer-songwriter , ( relient k ) olivia , american singer-songwriter and actress february 17 – paris hilton , american singer-songwriter , dj , youtuber and writer february 18 – kamasi washington , american crossover jazz saxophonist february 19 – beth ditto , american singer-songwriter , author , entrepreneur ( gossip ) february 26 – sharon van etten , american singer-songwriter and actress february 27 – josh groban , american crossover singer-songwriter march 3 tobias forge , swedish musician kim yoo-jin , south korean singer and actress march 7 – anna leese , new zealand operatic soprano march 9 – chad gilbert , american musician/singer/songwriter member of new found glory march 11 russell lissack ( bloc party ) letoya luckett ( destiny 's child ) march 26 anaïs mitchell , american singer-songwriter , producer and musician ( rachel ries , jefferson hamer , ani difranco , justin vernon , greg brown and ben knox miller ) jay sean , british singer-songwriter march 29 - megan hilty , american singer april 1 theresa sokyrka , canadian idol 2 runner-up hannah spearritt , english singer and actress ( s club 7 ) april 5 – mariqueen maandig , a filipino american musician and singer-songwriter . ( how to destroy angels , west indian girl , trent reznor ) april 6 – aidonia , jamaican dancehall artist april 8 – gummy , korean singer april 10 – laura bell bundy , american actress and singer april 29 – tom smith ( editors ) april 30 – justin vernon , american multi-instrumentalist , singer-songwriter and producer ( bon iver ) may 3 farrah franklin , american singer-songwriter , actress ( destiny 's child ) josh tillman , american singer-songwriter , guitarist , drummer and record producer may 5 jesse colburn , canadian guitarist and songwriter craig david , british singer-songwriter , rapper and record producer may 12 – hannah ild , estonian singer-songwriter and pianist may 20 sean conlon , english pop singer ( 5ive ) rachel platten , american singer-songwriter may 21 – stig van eijk , singer , composer and lyricist may 23 dessa , american rapper , singer , spoken word artist , writer and record executive pierre lapointe , canadian singer-songwriter and keyboard player gwenno saunders , welsh singer and dancer ( the pipettes ) may 30 – devendra banhart , venezuelan american singer-songwriter and visual artist june 1 – brandi carlile , american folk rock and americana singer-songwriter june 2 brandon jenner , indie pop musician ( brandon & leah ) catherine manoukian , canadian violinist june 7 – dave catching , american guitarist , songwriter and producer ( earthlings ? and mondo generator ) june 8 – alex band ( the calling ) june 15 – billy martin ( guitarist ) , american guitarist june 20 – alisan porter , american singer , winner of season 10 of the voice ( us ) june 21 – brandon flowers , american singer/songwriter , musician , multi-instrumentalist , advocate , member of ( the killers ) june 23 mikey bustos , filipino-canadian singer and entertainer antony costa ( blue ) june 28 michael crafter , australian singer-songwriter ( confession , i killed the prom queen , carpathian and bury your dead ) savage ( aka demetrius savelio ) new zealand born samoan rapper july 1 – clemency burton-hill , english classical music broadcast presenter july 3 – hayley holt , new zealand snowboarder , host and ballroom dancer july 6 – emily west , american singer-songwriter and guitarist july 7 – synyster gates , american musician ( avenged sevenfold ) july 8 – dagmar oja , estonian singer july 12 – rebecca hunter , ( allstars ) july 20 – lowkey , american rapper and producer july 21 paloma faith , english singer-songwriter blake lewis , american idol 6 runner-up claudette ortiz , american singer and model ( city high ) july 22 – anthony santos , american singer-songwriter and composer july 31 – m . shadows , american singer-songwriter and musician ( avenged sevenfold ) august 1 – vaiko eplik , estonian singer-songwriter , guitarist and producer august 6 – leslie odom jr . , american singer and actor august 8 vanessa amorosi , australian singer-songwriter , musician , guitarist and rock star ( dave stewart ) bradley mcintosh ( s club 7 ) august 11 – sandi thom , scottish singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist august 28 – iracema trevisan ( css ( band ) ) september 4 beyoncé , american singer-songwriter , dancer and actress ( destiny 's child , jay-z , kelly rowland , mathew knowles , tina knowles ) lacey sturm , american singer-songwriter ( flyleaf ) september 7 – do , dutch singer september 14 – ashley roberts american singer-songwriter , dancer , choreographer , actress , model , presenter and television personality ( the pussycat dolls ) september 18 – . jesse frasure , american music publisher , record producer , songwriter and dj september 25 – perfume genius , american indie edm musician , singer-songwriter and artist september 26 – christina milian , american singer-songwriter , dancer and actress september 29 – suzanne shaw , english singer ( hear'say ) and actress october 1 – jamelia , british singer october 5 – breakbot , producer and dj october 13 doveman , american singer , pianist and producer kele okereke , kele , english musician ( bloc party ) october 15 – nick white ( tilly and the wall ) october 25 – josh henderson , american actor , singer and model october 31 – frank iero , american rock guitarist ( my chemical romance ) november 1 tommy karevik , swedish metal vocalist ( kamelot , seventh wonder , ayreon ) latavia roberson ( destiny 's child ) november 7 – krystal harris , american singer-songwriter november 16 – kate miller-heidke , australian crossover singer-songwriter , stage actress and actress november 17 – sarah harding , english singer-songwriter , dancer , model and actress ( girls aloud ) november 20 scott hutchison , scottish singer-songwriter , guitarist and artist ( d . 2018 ) kimberley walsh , english singer-songwriter ( girls aloud ) november 22 ben adams , english pop singer-songwriter ( a1 ) jenny owen youngs , american singer-songwriter november 26 – natasha bedingfield , english singer-songwriter november 30 – mavado , jamaican deejay and singer-songwriter december 2 – britney spears , american singer-songwriter , dancer , performer , musician , clothes designer , author , activist and advocate december 11 – zacky vengeance , heavy metal rhythm guitarist and backing vocalist ( avenged sevenfold ) december 13 gary innes , scottish accordionist , shinty player and broadcaster amy lee , american singer-songwriter , musician and multi instrumentalist ( evanescence ) december 16 - krysten ritter , american musician and actress december 21 – lynda thomas , mexican musician , singer-songwriter , eurodance and alternative rock musician december 23 – beth , spanish singer and actress december 28 – frank turner , english punk and folk singer-songwriter . deaths . january 1 – hephzibah menuhin , pianist and human rights campaigner , 60 january 4 – ruth lowe , pianist and songwriter , 66 january 23 – samuel barber , composer , 70 january 25 – adele astaire , us dancer , actress and singer , 84 february 1 frank merrick , pianist geirr tveitt , norwegian composer , 72 ernst pepping , composer , 79 february 9 – bill haley , rock and roll pioneer , 55 ( heart attack ) february 15 mike bloomfield , blues guitarist , 37 ( accidental drug overdose ) karl richter , german organist and conductor , 54 february 19 – olive gilbert , actress and singer , 82 february 21 – ron grainer , electronic music pioneer and composer , 58 february 26 – howard hanson , composer , 84 april 5 bob hite , vocalist ( canned heat ) , 38 ( heart attack ) maurice zbriger , violinist , composer and conductor april 7 – kit lambert , former manager and producer of the who , 45 ( fell downstairs ) april 8 – burt shevelove , librettist , 66 april 14 – ivan galamian , violin teacher , 78 april 28 – steve currie , bassist of t.rex , 33 ( car crash ) may 11 – bob marley , reggae musician , 36 ( cancer ) may 25 – roy brown , blues singer , 55 may 28 – mary lou williams , jazz pianist , 71 july 1 – rushton moreve , us bass player and songwriter ( steppenwolf ) , 32 july 16 – harry chapin , us singer-songwriter , 38 ( car crash ) august 18 – robert russell bennett , composer and arranger , 87 august 26 – lee hays , folk singer , 67 september 2 – tadeusz baird , composer , 53 september 8 – master venu , film composer , 65 september 14 – furry lewis , country blues guitarist and songwriter , 88 september 15 – chick bullock , us singer , 72 september 22 – henry warren , film songwriter , 87 october 2 – hazel scott , classical pianist and singer , 61 october 5 – sven gyldmark , film composer , 77 october 13 – marius casadesus , violinist and composer , 88 october 15 – elsie randolph , english actress , dancer and singer , 77 october 29 – georges brassens , singer-songwriter , 60 november 27 – lotte lenya , actress and singer , wife of kurt weill , 83 december 13 – cornelius cardew , avant-garde composer , 45 ( road accident ) december 27 – hoagy carmichael , pianist , singer and songwriter , 82 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1981 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1981 . charts . list of no . 1 hits . list of billboard hot 100 number-one singles of 1981 . see also . timeline of musical events . references .