1991 in literature

events . february – sisters vanessa redgrave ( olga ) and lynn redgrave ( masha ) make their first and only joint appearance on stage , with niece jemma redgrave as irina , in the title rôles of chekhov 's three sisters at the queen 's theatre , london . july 11 – hitoshi igarashi ( born 1947 ) , japanese translator of salman rushdie 's 1988 novel the satanic verses , is stabbed to death at the university of tsukuba during the satanic verses controversy , in accordance with a fatwa against those involved in circulating the book . october – irvine welsh 's first published fiction , the short story '' the first day of the edinbugh festival '' , appears in new writing scotland . it is later incorporated into trainspotting . nws 9:42 . november 4 – an archaeological expedition is launched , eventually resulting in the discovery of a mass grave and identification of the body of the novelist alain-fournier , 77 years after his death as lieutenant henri-alban fournier in world war i . his bones are interred at saint-remy-la-calonne . '' la découverte du corps d ’ alain-fournier et de ses frères d ’ armes '' . accessed 15 february 2015 . . new books . fiction . julia alvarez – how the garcía girls lost their accents martin amis – time 's arrow ( novel ) piers anthony tatham mound question quest virtual mode jeffrey archer – as the crow flies beryl bainbridge – the birthday boys clive barker – imajica pat barker – regeneration julian barnes – talking it over louis begley – wartime lies louis de bernières – señor vivo and the coca lord a . s . byatt – possession : a romance agatha christie ( d . 1976 ) – problem at pollensa bay and other stories tom clancy – the sum of all fears mary higgins clark – loves music , loves to dance hugh cook – the werewolf and the wormlord paul cornell – timewyrm : revelation bernard cornwell – stormchild douglas coupland – generation x : tales for an accelerated culture l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp – the pixilated peeress don delillo – mao ii ( 1992 pen/faulkner award for fiction ) terrance dicks – timewyrm : exodus assia djebar – far from medina ( loin de médine ) stephen r . donaldson the real story forbidden knowledge roddy doyle – the van kaori ekuni ( 江國 香織 ) – kirakira hikaru ( twinkle , twinkle ) bret easton ellis – american psycho joy fielding – see jane run stephen fry – the liar diana gabaldon – outlander neil gaiman the sandman : preludes & nocturnes ( graphic novel ; volume 1 in the sandman series ) the sandman : dream country ( graphic novel ; volume 3 in the sandman series ) john gardner – the man from barbarossa david gates – jernigan ann granger – say it with poison john grisham – the firm josephine hart – damage elisabeth harvor – our lady of all distances ( 11 stories ; revision of women and children , 1973 ) mark jacobson – gojiro ( the lampshade : a holocaust detective story from buchenwald to new orleans ) stephen king – needful things john le carré – the secret pilgrim leslie marmon silko – almanac of the dead penelope lively – city of the mind morgan llywelyn – druids james a . michener – mexico rohinton mistry – such a long journey timothy mo – the redundancy of courage cees nooteboom – the following story ben okri – the famished road ( 1991 booker prize ) leonardo padura fuentes – pasado perfecto ( translated as havana blue ) john peel – timewyrm : genesys tito perdue – lee ellis peters – the summer of the danes marge piercy – he , she and it terry pratchett reaper man witches abroad jean raspail – sire alexandra ripley – scarlett j . jill robinson – saltwater trees nigel robinson – timewyrm : apocalypse bernice rubens – a solitary grief norman rush – mating ( 1991 national book award for fiction ) josé saramago – the gospel according to jesus christ ( o evangelho segundo jesus cristo ) michael shaara ( posthumously ) – for love of the game sidney sheldon – the doomsday conspiracy jane smiley – a thousand acres ( 1991 national book critics circle award for fiction ; 1992 pulitzer prize for fiction ) danielle steel – heartbeat james b . stewart – den of thieves michael swanwick – gravity 's angels antonio tabucchi – requiem : a hallucination amy tan – the kitchen god 's wife andrew vachss – sacrifice bernard werber – empire of the ants ( les fourmis ) tim winton – cloudstreet helen zahavi – dirty weekend timothy zahn – heir to the empire haifa zangana – through the vast halls of memory roger zelazny – prince of chaos . children and young people . chester aaron ( with willi glasauer ) – im wettlauf mit der zeit ( in a race against time ) arnold adoff – in for winter , out for spring chris van allsburg – the wretched stone avi – nothing but the truth : a documentary novel margaret barbalet ( illustrated by jane tanner ) & ndash ; the wolf berlie doherty – dear nobody sarah ellis – pick-up sticks jostein gaarder – sophie 's world ( sofies verden ) , english translation 1995 sonia levitin – the man who kept his heart in a bucket andre norton ( with martin h . greenberg and braldt bralds ) – catfantastic ii martin waddell – farmer duck jacqueline wilson – the story of tracy beaker ( first in the tracy beaker series of six books ) g . clifton wisler – red cap . drama . ariel dorfman – death and the maiden tony kushner – angels in america : a gay fantasia on national themes ( first part premières ) mustapha matura – the coup philip ridley – the pitchfork disney neil simon – lost in yonkers george tabori – goldberg variations timberlake wertenbaker – three birds alighting on a field . poetry . . non-fiction . dionne brand – no burden to carry : narratives of black working women in ontario marjorie chibnall – empress matilda henry steele commager – churchill 's history of the english-speaking peoples jung chang ( 張戎 ) – wild swans : three daughters of china françoise dunand – mummies : a voyage through eternity koenraad elst – ayodhya and after : issues before hindu society dave foreman – confessions of an eco-warrior robert hart – forest gardening : rediscovering nature and community in a post-industrial age albert hourani – a history of the arab peoples anne hugon – the exploration of africa : from cairo to the cape alan macfarlane – the diary of ralph josselin , 1616–1683 madonna – sex robert k . massie – dreadnought : britain , germany , and the coming of the great war taslima nasrin – jabo na keno ? jabo p.j . o'rourke – parliament of whores thomas pakenham – the scramble for africa william pokhlyobkin – a history of vodka john richardson – a life of picasso simon schama – dead certainties art spiegelman – maus ( graphic biography/autobiography ) georges tate – l'orient des croisades marie wadden – nitassinan : the innu struggle to reclaim their homeland nitassinan : the innu struggle to reclaim their homeland . douglas & mcintyre . retrieved 2012-11-19 . naomi wolf – the beauty myth : how images of beauty are used against women zhang chengzhi – history of the soul . births . sally rooney , irish fiction writer . deaths . january 22 – robert choquette , canadian novelist and poet ( born 1905 ) january 23 – northrop frye , canadian literary critic ( born 1912 ) january 29 – yasushi inoue , japanese novelist ( born 1907 ) february 24 – john daly , american journalist and game show host ( born 1914 ) march 14 – margery sharp , english novelist and children 's writer ( born 1905 ) march 22 – paul engle , american poet and novelist ( born 1908 ) april 3 – graham greene , english novelist ( born 1904 ) april 4 – max frisch , swiss playwright and novelist ( born 1911 ) april 12 – james schuyler , american poet ( born 1923 ) april 15 – dante milano , brazilian modernist poet ( born 1899 ) may 3 – jerzy kosinski , polish-american novelist ( born 1933 ; suicide ) may 31 – angus wilson , english novelist ( born 1913 ) june 24 – sumner locke elliott , australian-american author and playwright ( born 1917 ) july 24 – isaac bashevis singer , polish-born jewish-american novelist ( born 1902 ) august 1 – yusuf idris , egyptian writer ( born 1927 ) august 17 – terence kilmartin , irish journalist and translator ( born 1922 ) september 4 – peggy ramsay , british theatrical agent ( born 1908 ) september 24 – dr . seuss ( theodor seuss geisel ) , american children 's writer ( born 1904 ) september 27 – roy fuller , english poet ( born 1912 ) october 7 – natalia ginzburg , italian writer ( born 1916 ) october 11 – steven '' jesse '' bernstein , american performance poet ( born 1950 ; suicide ) october 12 – arkady strugatsky , russian science fiction writer ( born 1925 ) october 16 – leon levițchi , romanian translator ( born 1918 ) october 27 – george barker , english poet ( born 1913 ) november 29 – frank yerby , african american historical novelist ( born 1916 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : nadine gordimer camões prize : josé craveirinha . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : andrew mcgahan , praise c . j . dennis prize for poetry : jennifer maiden , the winter baby kenneth slessor prize for poetry : jennifer maiden , the winter baby mary gilmore prize : jean kent , verandahs miles franklin award : david malouf , the great world . canada . see 1991 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . the edna staebler award is established to honor the best literary work of creative non-fiction by a canadian author who had published their first or second writing within the preceding year . & nbsp ; edna staebler award for creative non-fiction . wilfrid laurier university . retrieved 2012-11-18 . edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : susan mayse , ginger & nbsp ; wilfrid laurier university edna staebler award for creative non-fiction ; previous winners ; 1991 : susan mayse . retrieved 2012-11-18 . arthur ellis award for best true crime : susan mayse , ginger & nbsp ; member profile-susan mayse . the writers union of canada . retrieved 2012-11-18 . . france . prix goncourt : pierre combescot , les filles du calvaire prix décembre : raphaël confiant , eau de café prix médicis : pierre simon , la dérive des sentiments . united kingdom . booker prize : ben okri , the famished road carnegie medal for children 's literature : berlie doherty , dear nobody cholmondeley award : james berry , sujata bhatt , michael hulse , derek mahon eric gregory award : roddy lumsden , glyn maxwell , stephen smith , wayne burrows , jackie kay guardian fiction award : alan judd , the devil 's own work james tait black memorial prize for fiction : iain sinclair , downriver james tait black memorial prize for biography : adrian desmond and james moore , darwin queen 's gold medal for poetry : judith wright 1991 whitbread awards : john richardson , a life of picasso the sunday express book of the year : michael frayn , a landing on the sun . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : julia kasdorf , sleeping preacher aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : john frederick nims american academy of arts and letters gold medals poetry : richard wilbur bernard f . connors prize for poetry : donald hall , the museum of clear ideas compton crook award : michael flynn , in the country of the blind frost medal : donald hall nebula award : michael swanwick , stations of the tide newbery medal for children 's literature : jerry spinelli , maniac magee pulitzer prize for drama : neil simon , lost in yonkers pulitzer prize for fiction : john updike : rabbit at rest pulitzer prize for general non-fiction : edward o . wilson : the ants pulitzer prize for poetry : mona van duyn : near changes whiting awards : : fiction : rebecca goldstein , allegra goodman , john holman , cynthia kadohata , rick rofihe , j anton shammas ( fiction/nonfiction ) : nonfiction : stanley crouch : plays : scott mcpherson : poetry : thylias moss , franz wright . elsewhere . premio nadal : alfredo conde cid , los otros días . references .