1952 in music

specific locations . 1952 in british music 1952 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1952 in country music 1952 in jazz . events . february 26 – popular american singer jo stafford marries bandleader/arranger paul weston . march 1 – sun records records its first release in memphis , tennessee . march 21 – first reported rock and roll riot breaks out at alan freed 's moondog coronation ball in cleveland , ohio . teenage excitement is blamed for the frenzy . august 29 – david tudor gives the premiere of john cage 's 4′33″ , during which the performer does not play , in woodstock , new york . september – bill haley and his saddlemen change their image to become bill haley & his comets . october 7 – first edition of bob horn 's bandstand is broadcast as a local show from station wfil-tv in philadelphia , pennsylvania . it is later renamed american bandstand and syndicated . november 14 – first uk singles chart published by the nme , with al martino 's '' here in my heart '' as number one . date unknown jazz singer ernesto bonino moves from italy to the united states . accordionist john serry , sr . first performs in broadway theatre with shirley booth in the time of the cuckoo . finnish composer aarre merikanto wins the olympic hymn competition . . publications . pierre schaeffer – a la recherche d'une musique concrète ( the search for a concrete music ) , an explanation of his experimental approach to composing . john serry sr . – the syncopated accordionist . library of congress , the syncopated accordionist , serrapica , john ( aka serry , john ) . publisher/editor charles colin , new york , ny , 1952 , . musical groups formed . 76th army band 338th army band ( reactivated ) the duke 's men of yale ( a cappella singing group ) . albums released . anthology of american folk music – various artists as you desire me – jo stafford billie holiday sings – billie holiday bird and diz – charlie parker and dizzy gillespie christmas day in the morning – burl ives christmas with eddie fisher – eddie fisher eddie fisher sings – eddie fisher favorite spirituals – the ames brothers harmony encores – the chordettes home on the range – the ames brothers johnnie ray – johnnie ray i 'm in the mood for love – eddie fisher mr . rhythm sings – frankie laine oscar peterson plays duke ellington – oscar peterson penthouse serenade – nat king cole song favorites by frankie laine – frankie laine tennessee waltz - patti page . us no . 1 hit singles . these singles reached the top of us billboard magazine 's charts in 1952 . 1 the ensemble bruno maderna conducted comprised both faculty and students of the ferienkurse and members of the lendestheater darmstadt . 2 only the first half of spiel was performed at donaueschingen in 1952 . the complete score was only first performed in a radio recording made in july 1973 with the swr symphony orchestra , baden-baden , conducted by the composer . the first public performance of the complete composition was given by the berlin philharmonic on 14 september 1975 , also under the composer 's baton . karlheinz stockhausen , '' spiel für orchester ( 1952 ) '' , in his texte zur musik 1970–1977 4 , selected and compiled by christoph von blumröder , 52–54 , dumont dokumente ( cologne : dumont buchverlag , 1978 ) : 54 . . compositions . jean barraqué piano sonata benjamin britten – canticles ( britten ) , op . 51 john cage 4′33″ carlos chávez symphony no . 4 ( chávez ) george crumb string trio three pastoral pieces luigi dallapiccola quaderno musicale di annalibera , solo piano alberto ginastera piano sonata no . 1 carlos guastavino suite argentina , ballet dmitry kabalevsky piano concerto no . 3 wojciech kilar conjured for baritone and seven instruments quintet for woodwind instruments suite no . 2 for piano sonata no . 1 for piano erich wolfgang korngold symphony otto luening fantasy in space for flute and tape invention in twelve notes for flute and tape low speed for flute and tape frank martin harpsichord concerto bohuslav martinů rhapsody-concerto for viola and orchestra olivier messiaen le merle noir wilhelm peterson-berger canzone for violin and piano sergei prokofiev symphony no . 7 joaquín rodrigo concierto serenata for harp and orchestra edmund rubbra viola concerto dmitri shostakovich string quartet no . 5 karlheinz stockhausen klavierstücke i–iv punkte withdrawn , revised in 1962 schlagtrio spiel igor stravinsky cantata ralph vaughan williams sinfonia antartica ( symphony no . 7 ) heitor villa-lobos piano concerto no . 4 symphony no . 9 . opera . franco alfano – sakùntala ( revision of his 1921 opera la leggenda di sakùntala ) leonard bernstein – trouble in tahiti raymond chevreuille – atta troll camargo guarnieri – pedro malazarte ( comic opera in one act , libretto by mario de andrade , premiered in may at the theatro municipal in rio de janeiro ) . jazz . musical theatre . bet your life london production opened at the hippodrome on february 18 and ran for 362 performances curtain going up broadway production the globe revue london revue opened on july 10 at the globe theatre love from judy london production opened at the saville theatre on september 25 and ran for 594 performances new faces of 1952 broadway production pal joey ( richard rodgers and lorenz hart ) – broadway revival of original 1940 production ring out the bells london revue opened at the victoria palace theatre on november 12 three wishes for jamie broadway production opened at the mark hellinger theatre on march 21 and moved to the plymouth theatre on may 27 for a total run of 92 performances two 's company broadway production wish you were here broadway production . musical films . aaron slick from punkin crick starring alan young , dinah shore , robert merrill and adele jergens . directed by claude binyon . affair in trinidad starring rita hayworth and glenn ford april in paris starring doris day and ray bolger because you 're mine starring mario lanza and doretta morrow bloodhounds of broadway starring mitzi gaynor , scott brady and mitzi green everything i have is yours starring marge champion , gower champion and monica lewis hans christian andersen starring danny kaye and jane wyman just for you starring bing crosby and jane wyman the las vegas story starring jane russell , victor mature and hoagy carmichael lovely to look at starring kathryn grayson , red skelton , howard keel , marge champion , gower champion and ann miller meet danny wilson starring frank sinatra and shelley winters the merry widow starring lana turner , fernando lamas and una merkel road to bali starring bing crosby , bob hope and dorothy lamour she 's working her way through college starring virginia mayo and ronald reagan singin ' in the rain starring gene kelly , donald o'connor and debbie reynolds skirts ahoy ! starring esther williams , joan evans , vivian blaine and keefe brasselle , and featuring billy eckstine , the demarco sisters , debbie reynolds and bobby van . son of paleface starring bob hope , jane russell , roy rogers and trigger where 's charley ? starring ray bolger and allyn mclerie with a song in my heart starring susan hayward and rory calhoun . births . january 2 – graeme strachan , australian singer-songwriter ( d . 2001 ) january 15 – melvyn gale , cellist ( electric light orchestra ) january 17 – ryuichi sakamoto , japanese musician and composer january 20 ian hill , heavy metal bass guitarist ( judas priest ) paul stanley , rock guitarist and singer ( kiss ) january 21 – cyril and libbye hellier , american operatic sopranos january 22 – teddy gentry ( alabama ) january 25 – timothy white , american rock journalist ( died 2002 ) january 29 – tommy ramone ( the ramones ) january 30 – steve bartek ( oingo boingo ) february 1 – jenő jandó ( hungarian pianist ) february 4 – jerry shirley ( humble pie ) february 12 – michael mcdonald ( the doobie brothers ) february 16 – james ingram , american r & b singer , songwriter and producer ( d . 2019 ) february 13 – edward john gagliardi ( foreigner ) february 18 – juice newton , pop and country singer , songwriter and guitarist february 20 halvor haug , norwegian composer matti rantanen , finnish accordionist february 21 – jean-jacques burnel ( the stranglers ) february 23 – brad whitford ( aerosmith ) march 11 – vince giordano , bass saxophonist and band leader for the nighthawks orchestra march 13 – wolfgang rihm , composer march 15 – howard devoto , punk rock singer-songwriter ( buzzcocks , magazine , luxuria , shelleydevoto ) march 22 – jay dee daugherty ( patti smith ) april 2 – leon wilkeson ( lynyrd skynyrd ) april 4 – gary moore , blues guitarist and singer ( died 2011 ) april 13 – rosa passos , brazilian bossa nova singer april 17 – jerry knight , vocalist , bassist , songwriter and producer ( d . 1996 ) may 11 – renaud , composer may 14 – david byrne , singer-songwriter ( talking heads ) may 18 – george strait , country singer , actor and music producer may 19 – barbara joyce lomas ( b . t . express ) may 23 – dillie keane , cabaret performer may 30 – zoltán kocsis , composer and pianist ( died 2016 ) june 5 – nicko mcbrain ( iron maiden , trust , etc . ) june 7 – royce campbell , american guitarist , composer and producer june 11 – donnie van zant rock guitarist and vocalist ( 38 special ) june 12 junior brown , country guitarist and singer oliver knussen , composer ( d . 2018 ) june 16 – gino vannelli , canadian singer , songwriter , musician and composer june 25 – tim finn , new zealand singer-songwriter july 1 dan aykroyd , actor ( the blues brothers ) timothy j . tobias , american pianist and composer ( d . 2006 ) july 2 – johnny colla ( huey lewis & the news ) july 3 – laura branigan american singer ( gloria ) and actress ( d . 2004 ) july 12 – philip taylor kramer , american bass player ( iron butterfly ) ( d . 1995 ) july 14 – bob casale , american guitarist , keyboard player and producer ( devo ) ( d . 2014 ) july 15 – david pack , frontman , vocalist and guitarist with rock group ambrosia july 16 – stewart copeland , drummer ( the police ) july 17 nicolette larson , singer ( died 1997 ) phoebe snow , singer-songwriter ( died 2011 ) july 19 – allen collins , american guitarist and songwriter ( lynyrd skynyrd , the rossington-collins band and allen collins band ) ( d . 1990 ) july 22 john rutsey , canadian drummer ( rush ) ( d . 2008 ) janis siegel , american singer ( the manhattan transfer ) july 28 – glenn a . baker , australian music journalist july 31 – reinhard goebel , german early music conductor and violinist august 4 – moya brennan , irish folk harpist and singer ( clannad ) august 6 – pat macdonald , american new wave musician ( timbuk 3 ) august 16 – gianna rolandi , american soprano august 20 – john hiatt , guitarist , pianist and singer august 21 – joe strummer , singer and songwriter ( the clash ) ( d . 2002 ) august 26 – billy rush , asbury jukes august 27 – laurie wisefield , guitarist for wishbone ash september 4 – martin chambers , the pretenders september 9 – dave stewart , english musician , songwriter and record producer , eurythmics september 12 gerry beckley , rock singer-songwriter ( america ) neil peart , rock drummer & songwriter ( rush ) ( d . 2020 ) september 13 – randy jones , singer ( village people ) september 18 – dee dee ramone , bassist ( ramones ) ( d . 2002 ) september 19 – nile rodgers , american record producer , songwriter , musician , composer , arranger and guitarist ( the honeydrippers , chic ) september 22 – oliver mtukudzi ( '' tuku '' ) , zimbabwean afro jazz singer-guitarist ( d . 2019 ) september 30 – john lombardo , american musician ( 10,000 maniacs , john & mary ) october 21 – miroslav žbirka , slovak singer-songwriter november 2 maxine nightingale , singer alan winstanley , producer november 11 – paul cowsill ( the cowsills ) november 14 – johnny a . , guitarist and songwriter november 20 – semyon bychkov , conductor november 27 – bappi lahiri , indian film composer december 3 – don barnes ( 38 special ) december 23 – hans abrahamsen , danish composer december 27 – david knopfler ( dire straits ) . deaths . january 9 – midge williams , singer january 14 – artur kapp , estonian composer ( b . 1878 ) january 16 – rené voisin , trumpeter january 20 – arthur farwell , composer and conductor february 13 – alfred einstein , musicologist march 17 – percy wenrich , ragtime composer march 22 – uncle dave macon , musician april 23 – elisabeth schumann , operatic soprano may 23 – georg schumann , german composer ( b . 1866 ) may 15 – italo montemezzi , composer june 9 – adolf busch , violinist and composer june 13 – emma eames , operatic soprano june 14 – john kirby , jazz musician june 25 – luke jordan , blues musician july 2 – henriëtte hilda bosmans , dutch composer and pianist ( b . 1895 ) july 10 – rued langgaard , danish composer and organist ( b . 1893 ) september 6 – gertrude lawrence , english actress , singer , dancer september 16 – vesta tilley , music hall entertainer september 18 – frances alda , operatic soprano september 19 – nat ayer , composer october 25 – sergei bortkiewicz , pianist and composer october 26 – hattie mcdaniel november 1 – dixie lee , singer , dancer and actress , wife of bing crosby november 4 – max adler , violinist november 17 – charles penrose , music hall performer december 25 – bernardino molinari , arranger and conductor ( born 1880 ) december 26 – paul breisach , conductor december 28 – fletcher henderson , jazz musician december 30 willie brown , blues musician nakayama shimpei , songwriter date unknown tryphosa bates-batcheller , singer georgette harvey , actress and singer . references .