Fred Phelps

people targeted by phelps . beginning in the early 1990s , phelps targeted several individuals and groups in the public eye for criticism by the westboro baptist church . prominent examples include president ronald reagan , princess diana , supreme court chief justice william rehnquist , national football league star reggie white , sonny bono , comedian george carlin , the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints , atheists , muslims , murdered college student matthew shepard , children 's television host fred rogers , australian actor heath ledger , comedy central 's jon stewart and stephen colbert , political commentator bill o'reilly , film critic roger ebert , catholics , australians , sweden , the irish , and us soldiers killed in iraq . he also targeted the joseph estabrook elementary school in lexington , massachusetts , center of the david parker controversy . in 2006 , they planned a protest at the funeral for the five girls murdered during the west nickel mines school shooting in pennsylvania , but called it off , opting to spread their messages on a local radio station instead . in 2007 he stated that he would target jerry falwell 's funeral . phelps ' daughter , shirley phelps-roper , has appeared on fox news channel , defending the wbc and attacking homosexuality . she and her children have also appeared on the howard stern radio show attempting to promote their agenda and church . phelps ' followers have repeatedly protested the university of kansas school of law 's graduation ceremonies . in august 2007 , in the wake of the minneapolis i-35w bridge collapse , phelps and his congregation stated that they would protest at the funerals of the victims . in a statement , the church said that minneapolis is the '' land of the sodomite damned '' . black , eric '' fred phelps is coming '' , minnesota monitor , august 7 , 2007 . . political activities . anti-gay . in the movie hatemongers , members of the westboro baptist church state their children were being '' accosted '' by homosexuals in gage park , about from the phelps ' home ( and a mile ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) northwest of the westboro church ) . shirley phelps-roper says that , in the late 1980s , fred phelps claimed to have witnessed a homosexual attempting to lure her then five-year-old son joshua into some shrubbery . after several complaints to the local government about the large amount of homosexual sex occurring in the park , with no resulting action , the phelpses put up signs warning of homosexual activity . this resulted in much negative attention for the family . when the phelpses called on local churches to speak against the activity in gage park , the churches also lashed out against the phelps family , leading to the family protesting homosexuality on a regular basis . in 2005 , phelps and his family , along with several other local congregations , held a signature drive to bring about a vote to repeal two city ordinances that added sexual orientation to a definition of hate crimes and banned the city itself from workplace discrimination based on sexual orientation . enough signatures were collected to bring the measure to a vote . topeka voters defeated the repeal measure on march 1 , 2005 , by a 53–47 % margin . in the same election , phelps ' granddaughter jael was an unsuccessful candidate for the topeka city council , seeking to replace tiffany muller , the first openly gay member of the council . . electoral politics . phelps ran in kansas democratic party primaries five times , but never won . these included races for governor in 1990 , 1994 , and 1998 , receiving about 15 percent of the vote in 1998 . in the 1992 democratic party primary for u.s . senate , phelps received 31 percent of the vote . phelps ran for mayor of topeka in 1993 and 1997 . phelps supported al gore in the 1988 democratic party presidential primary election . in his 1984 senate race , gore had opposed a '' gay bill of rights '' and stated that homosexuality was not something that '' society should affirm '' , a position gore had publicly changed by 2000 as his official position . phelps stated that he supported gore because of these earlier comments . in 1996 phelps opposed clinton 's ( and gore 's ) re-election because of the administration 's support for gay rights ; the westboro congregation picketed a 1997 inaugural ball . . saddam hussein . in 1997 , phelps wrote a letter to iraqi president saddam hussein , praising his regime for being '' the only muslim state that allows the gospel of our lord jesus christ to be freely and openly preached on the streets '' . . arrests and traveling restrictions . united states . in 1994 , phelps was convicted of disorderly conduct for verbal harassment , and received two suspended 30-day jail sentences . phelps ' 1995 conviction for assault and battery carried a five-year prison sentence , with a mandatory 18 months to be served before he became eligible for parole . phelps fought to be allowed to remain free until his appeals process went through . days away from being arrested and sent to prison , a judge ruled that phelps had been denied a speedy trial and that he was not required to serve any time . . united kingdom . on february 18 , 2009 , two days before the westboro baptist church 's first uk picket , the united kingdom home office announced that fred phelps and shirley phelps-roper would be refused entry and that '' other church members could also be flagged and stopped if they tried to enter britain '' . in may 2009 , he and his daughter shirley were placed on the home office 's '' name and shame '' list of people barred from entering the uk for '' fostering hatred which might lead to inter-community violence '' . . in the media . in 1993 , phelps appeared on a first-season episode of the talk show ricki lake , alleging that homosexuals and '' anyone who carries the aids virus '' deserved to die . when phelps and his son-in-law charles hockenbarger ( married to phelps ’ daughter rachel ) became increasingly belligerent , lake ordered the phelps family to leave the studio . during a commercial break , the two were forced off the set and escorted out of the building by security . '' respect earns ricki lake success on tv '' from baltimore sun ( december 6 , 1993 ) after phelps died , lake twitter that when he had been on the show , he had told her that she worshipped her own rectum — a remark that led her to take action off-stage to have phelps removed from the set . twitter message from lake ( march 20 , 2014 ) the phelps family was the subject of the 2007 tv program the most hated family in america , presented on the bbc by louis theroux . four years after his original documentary , theroux produced a follow-up program america 's most hated family in crisis , which was prompted by news of family members leaving the church . phelps ' son nate has broken ranks with the family and in an interview with peter w . klein on the canadian program the standard , he characterized his father as abusive and warned the phelps family could turn violent . writing in response to phelps ' death in 2014 , theroux described phelps as '' an angry bigot who thrived on conflict '' , and expressed the view that his death would not lead to any '' huge changes '' in the church , as he saw it as operating with the dynamics of a large family rather than a cult . theroux returned for a third documentary in 2019 , titled surviving america 's most hated family . kevin smith produced a horror film titled red state featuring a religious fundamentalist villain inspired by phelps . phelps appeared in a union in wait , a 2001 sundance channel documentary film about same-sex marriage , directed by ryan butler after phelps picketed wake forest baptist church at wake forest university over a proposed same-sex union ceremony . excommunication and death . fred phelps preached his final sunday sermon on september 1 , 2013 . five weeks later , sermons resumed from various members . on march 15 , 2014 , nathan phelps , phelps ' estranged son , reported that phelps was in very poor health and was receiving hospice care . he said that phelps had been excommunicated from the church in august 2013 , and then moved into a house where he '' basically stopped eating and drinking '' . his statements were supported by his brother , mark . church spokesman steve drain declined to answer questions about phelps ' excommunication , and denied that the church had a single leader . the church 's official website said that membership status is private and did not confirm or deny the excommunication . phelps died of natural causes shortly before midnight on march 19 , 2014 at the age of 84 . his daughter , shirley , stated that a funeral for her father would not be held because the church does not '' worship the dead '' . according to nathan phelps , fred phelps ' body was immediately cremated and no information about the disposition of his ashes has been released . phelps had been reportedly suffering from some form of dementia in his final year , and started behaving very irrationally . this led to church members believing that god had condemned him . it has been claimed that phelps '' had a softening of heart at the end of his life , '' according to accounts published in a memoir written by phelps ' granddaughter megan phelps-roper , and reporting from the new yorker citing former members of the church . this includes an incident in 2013 , in which phelps is said to have stepped outside the church and called over to members of planting peace , a nonprofit that bought a house on the other street and painted it with an lgbt rainbow , saying : '' you 're good people ! '' in an interview with npr , megan phelps-roper said this outburst was '' the proximate cause '' of phelps being excommunicated , a claim that the church has denied . according to phelps ' grandson and former church member zach phelps-roper , phelps ' actions were regarded as '' rank blasphemy '' by the church members . . electoral history . democratic primary for governor of kansas , 1990 joan finney : 81,250 ( 47.18 % ) john carlin : 79,406 ( 46.11 % ) fred phelps : 11,572 ( 6.72 % ) democratic primary for united states senate , kansas 1992 gloria o'dell : 111,015 ( 69.20 % ) fred phelps : 49,416 ( 30.80 % ) democratic primary for governor of kansas , 1994 jim slattery : 84,389 ( 53.02 % ) joan wagnon : 42,115 ( 26.46 % ) james francisco : 16,048 ( 10.08 % ) leslie kitchenmaster : 11,253 ( 7.07 % ) fred phelps : 5,349 ( 3.36 % ) democratic primary for governor of kansas , 1998 tom sawyer : 88,248 ( 85.28 % ) fred phelps : 15,233 ( 14.72 % ) see for all election statistics . see also . christianity and homosexuality the bible and homosexuality . references . external links . phelps ’ life turned from brilliance to hatred from the topeka capital-journal : for external links related to westboro baptist church and not phelps specifically , see this section . ; biographical information