Chapel

history . the earliest christian places of worship were not dedicated buildings but rather a dedicated room within a building , such as a room in an individual 's home . here one or two people could pray without being part of a communion/congregation . people who like to use chapels may find it peaceful and relaxing to be away from the stress of life , without other people moving around them . the word '' chapel '' , like the associated word '' chaplain '' , is ultimately derived from latin . more specifically , the word '' chapel '' is derived from a relic of martin of tours : traditional stories about martin relate that while he was still a soldier , he cut his military cloak in half to give part to a beggar in need . the other half he wore over his shoulders as a '' small cape '' . the beggar , the stories claim , was christ in disguise , and martin experienced a conversion of heart , becoming first a monk , then abbot , then bishop . this cape came into the possession of the franks kings , and they kept the relic with them as they did battle . the tent which kept the cape was called the capella and the priests who said daily mass in the tent were known as the capellani . from these words , via old french , we get the names '' chapel '' and '' chaplain '' . the word also appears in the irish language in the middle ages , as welsh people came with the norman and old english invaders to the island of ireland . while the traditional irish word for church was eaglais ( derived from ecclesia ) , a new word , séipéal ( from cappella ) , came into usage . in british history , '' chapel '' or '' meeting house '' were formerly the standard designations for church buildings belonging to independent or nonconformist religious societies and their members . they were particularly associated with the pre-eminence of independent religious practice in rural regions of england and wales , the northern industrial towns of the late 18th and 19th centuries , and centres of population close to but outside the city of london . as a result , '' chapel '' is sometimes used as an adjective in the uk to describe the members of such churches : for example in the sentence '' i 'm chapel . '' . types of chapel . a bridge chapel is a small place of christian worship , built either on , or immediately adjacent to , a road bridge ; they were commonly established during pre-reformation mediaeval era in europe . a castle chapel , in european architecture , is a chapel built within a castle . a parecclesion or parakklesion is a type of side chapel found in byzantine architecture . a capilla posa ( posa chapel ) is an architectural feature of the monastery-ensembles of mexico in the 16th century , consisting of four vaulted quadrangular buildings located at the ends of the atrium outside them . a capilla abierta ( open chapel ) is one of the most distinct mexican church construction forms . mostly built in the 16th century during the early colonial period . a proprietary chapel is one that originally belonged to a private individual . in the 19th century they were common , often being built to cope with urbanisation . frequently they were established by evangelical philanthropists with a vision of spreading christianity in cities whose needs could no longer be met by the parishes . some functioned more privately , with a wealthy person building a chapel so that they could invite their favorite preachers . they are anomalies in the english ecclesiastical law , having no parish area , but being permitted to have an anglican clergyman licensed there . historically many anglican churches were proprietary chapels . over the years they have often been converted into normal parishes . a court chapel is a chapel as a musical ensemble associated with a royal or noble court . most of these are royal ( court ) chapels , but when the ruler of the court is not a king , the more generic '' court chapel '' is used , for instance for an imperial court . modern usage . while the usage of the word '' chapel '' is not exclusively limited to christian terminology , it is most often found in that context . nonetheless , the word 's meaning can vary by denomination , and non-denominational chapels ( sometimes called '' meditation rooms '' ) can be found in many hospitals , airports , and even the united nations headquarters . chapels can also be found for worship in judaism . the word '' chapel '' is in particularly common usage in the united kingdom , and especially in wales , for nonconformist places of worship ; and in scotland and ireland for roman catholic churches . in the uk , due to the rise in nonconformist chapels during the late 18th and early 19th centuries , by the time of the 1851 census , more people attended the independent chapels than attended the state religion 's anglican churches . in roman catholic church canon law , a chapel , technically called an '' oratory '' , is a building or part thereof dedicated to the celebration of services , particularly the mass , which is not a parish church . this may be a private chapel , for the use of one person or a select group ( a bishop 's private chapel , or the chapel of a convent , for instance ) ; a semi-public oratory , which is partially available to the general public ( a seminary chapel that welcomes visitors to services , for instance ) ; or a public oratory ( for instance , a hospital or university chapel ) . chapels that are built as part of a larger church are holy areas set aside for some specific use or purpose : for instance , many cathedrals and large churches have a '' lady chapel '' in the apse , dedicated to the virgin mary ; parish churches may have such a '' lady chapel '' in a side aisle or a '' chapel of reservation '' or '' blessed sacrament chapel '' where the consecrated bread of the eucharist is kept in reserve between services , for the purpose of taking holy communion to the sick and housebound and , in some christian traditions , for devotional purposes . common uses of the word chapel today include : side-chapel – a chapel within a cathedral or larger church building . lady chapel – these are really a form of side chapel , but have been included separately as they are extremely prevalent in the roman catholic church and the anglican communion . they are dedicated to the veneration of the blessed virgin mary . ambassador 's chapel – originally created to allow ambassadors from catholic countries to worship whilst on duty in protestant countries . bishop 's chapel – in anglican and roman catholic canon law , bishops have the right to have a chapel in their own home , even when travelling ( such personal chapels may be granted only as a favor to other priests ) chapel of rest – not a place of worship as such , but a comfortably decorated room in a funeral director 's premises , where family and friends can view the deceased before the funeral . chapel of ease – constructed in large parishes to allow parishioners easy access to a church or chapel . multifaith space – found within hospitals , airports and universities , etc . ; often converted from being exclusively christian . summer chapel – a small church in a resort area that functions only during the summer when vacationers are present . wayside chapel or country chapel – small chapels in the countryside military chapel – u.s . military bases often have chapels designated for use by varying denominations . as no specific denomination or faith is the '' owner , '' it is commonly referred to as a chapel instead of a church , mosque , or synagogue . service members can often receive services for nondenominational christian , roman catholic , islamic , and jewish faiths , as well as information for other services in the local area . wedding chapel – a venue for weddings . funeral chapel – a venue for funerals at a funeral home , cemetery or crematorium . the first airport chapel was created in 1951 in boston for airport workers but grew to include travelers . it was originally catholic , but chapels today are often multifaith . . notable chapels . gallery . image : telleri kabel.jpg teller chapel in tartu , estonia image : little chapel op guernsey.jpg the little chapel , guernsey image : st-sixte 1x.jpg chapelle saint-sixte d'eygalières , bouches-du-rhône , provence , france image : stdimitrioschapelionthebeach.jpg st . dimitrius chapel on the beach of olympiaki akti , greece image : kent umc chapel.jpg methodist chapel in kent , ohio , united states image : confederate memorial chapel interior ( 8371750859 ) . jpg confederate memorial chapel , richmond , virginia , united states image : vassar chapel interior.jpg vassar chapel interior , vassar college , poughkeepsie , new york file : heinz memorial chapel , interior.jpg interior of heinz chapel , university of pittsburgh image : heiligendamm waldkapelle 2010-05-17 043.jpg forest chapel in heiligendamm , bad doberan , mecklenburg-vorpommern , germany image : chapelle sainte-anne , varennes.jpg processional chapel in varennes , quebec image : turvey abbey , chapel interior - geograph.org.uk - 1199808.jpg turvey abbey , chapel interior image : little chapel steinfurt-borghorst at night.jpg open chapel in steinfurt , germany image : eton college chapel - august 5 , 2007.jpg eton college chapel in eton college , england image : avon old farms school - chapel interior.jpg avon old farms school - the chapel file : chapel in the wood , strawberry hill 01.jpg chapel in the wood , strawberry hill house , near london image : armenian cathedral deir ez zor.jpg chapel in the armenian cathedral deir ez zor image:0901 kaplica gotycka police zpl.jpg gothic chapel ( 15th century ) in the chrobry square , police , poland file : guards chapel , wellington barracks - east end - geograph.org.uk - 351924.jpg guards chapel , wellington barracks , london , largely rebuilt after bombing in 1944 image : la cappella degli scrovegni.jpg cappella degli scrovegni in padua , italy image : mirochòwò - kaplica z 1740 roku.jpg chapel in mirachowo , kashubia ( bd . 1740 ) image:17 03 180 chapel.jpg chapel at callaway gardens in holiday resort file : schlosskapelle burgmuseum alte burg meersburg-1.jpg german castle chapel image:17 22 185 chapel.jpg memorial chapel at lake junaluska image : palacio da alvorada chapel.jpg the modern presidential chapel ( left ) of the palácio da alvorada , the official residence of the president of brazil file : crematorium chapel - geograph.org.uk - 455822.jpg thumb funeral chapel at woodlands crematorium , scarborough , england . see also . castle chapel chapel ( music ) church ( building ) meeting house sacri monti corpse road railroad chapel car capilla abierta capilla posa . references . external links . russian chapels photo gallery