Robert Stroud

early life and arrest . stroud was born in seattle , the eldest child of elizabeth jane ( née mccartney 1860–1938 ) and benjamin franklin stroud . his mother had two daughters from a previous marriage . his father was an abusive alcoholic , and stroud ran away from home at the age of 13 . by the time he was 18 , stroud had made his way to cordova , alaska , where he met 36-year-old kitty o'brien , a prostitute and dance-hall entertainer , for whom he pimped in juneau . on january 18 , 1909 , while he was away at work , an acquaintance , barman f . k . '' charlie '' von dahmer , allegedly failed to pay o'brien for her services and beat her , tearing a locket from her neck that contained a picture of her daughter . upon discovering the incident , stroud confronted von dahmer , and a struggle resulted in the latter 's death from a gunshot wound . stroud went to the police station , and surrendered himself and the gun . according to police reports , stroud knocked von dahmer unconscious and then shot him at point-blank range . stroud 's mother retained a lawyer , but he was found guilty of manslaughter on august 23 , 1909 , and sentenced to 12 years in the federal penitentiary on puget sound 's mcneil island . as alaska was then a united states territory without its own judiciary , stroud 's case was handled in the federal system . prison life . known as prisoner 1853 , larsen , lawrence h . ( 1991 ) . '' the last days of robert f . stroud the birdman of alcatraz '' . prologue : the journal of the national archives , volume 23 . washington , d.c . : national archives and records service , general services administration . p . 160 . stroud was one of the most violent prisoners at mcneil island , frequently feuding with fellow inmates and staff , and was also prone to many different physical ailments . stroud reportedly stabbed a fellow prisoner who reported him for stealing food from the kitchen . he also assaulted a hospital orderly who reported him to prison administration for attempting to obtain morphine through threats and intimidation . he also reportedly stabbed another inmate who was involved in the attempt to smuggle the narcotics . on september 5 , 1912 , stroud was sentenced to an additional six months for the attacks , and was transferred from mcneil island to the federal penitentiary in leavenworth , kansas . on march 26 , 1916 , stroud was reprimanded by cafeteria guard andrew f . turner for a minor rule violation that would have annulled stroud 's visitation privilege to meet his younger brother , whom he had not seen in 8 years . with a 6-inch shiv , stroud stabbed turner through the heart . stroud was convicted of first-degree murder for the stabbing and sentenced to death by hanging by the judge , a sentence that was overturned by the court of appeals . he was convicted in a second trial on may 28 , 1917 , but after receiving a life sentence , the solicitor general john w . davis voluntarily submitted a '' confessed error '' because he wanted stroud to receive the death penalty . stroud was tried a third time in may 1918 , and on june 28 , he was again sentenced to death by hanging . stroud 's mother appealed to president woodrow wilson and the execution was halted on april 15 , 1920 , eight days before it was to be carried out . stroud 's sentence was commuted to life imprisonment . leavenworth 's warden , t . w . morgan , strongly opposed the decision given stroud 's reputation for violence . morgan persuaded the president to stipulate that since stroud was originally sentenced to await his death sentence in solitary confinement , those conditions should prevail until the halted execution could be carried out . president wilson 's attorney general , a . mitchell palmer , saw to it that stroud would spend the rest of his life in solitary confinement . the birdman of leavenworth . while at leavenworth in 1920 , stroud found a nest with three injured sparrows in the prison yard , and raised them to adulthood . prisoners were sometimes allowed to buy canaries , and stroud had started to add to his collection to occupy his time raising and caring for his birds , which he could sell for supplies and to help support his mother . according to stroud , he used a '' razor blade and nail for tools '' and made his first bird cage out of wooden crates . soon thereafter , leavenworth 's administration changed , and william biddle took over as warden . impressed with the possibility of presenting leavenworth as a progressive rehabilitation penitentiary , biddle furnished stroud with cages , chemicals , and stationery to conduct his ornithological activities . visitors were shown stroud 's aviary , and many purchased his canaries . over the years , he raised nearly 300 canaries in his cells , and wrote two books , the 60,000-word treatise diseases of canaries ( 1933 ) , which was smuggled out of leavenworth , and a later edition , stroud 's digest on the diseases of birds ( 1943 ) , with updated , specific information . he made several important contributions to avian pathology , most notably a cure for the hemorrhagic sepsis family of diseases . he gained respect and also some level of sympathy in the bird-loving field . stroud 's activities created problems for the prison management . according to regulations , each letter sent or received at the prison had to be read , copied , and approved . stroud was so involved in his business that this alone required a full-time prison secretary . additionally , most of the time , his birds were permitted to fly freely within his cells , and because of the great number of birds he kept , his cell was filthy . in 1931 , an attempt to force stroud to discontinue his business and get rid of his birds failed after stroud and one of his mail correspondents , a bird researcher from indiana named della mae jones , made his story known to newspapers and magazines . a massive letter campaign and a 50,000-signature petition sent to president herbert hoover resulted in stroud being permitted to keep his birds , and despite prison overcrowding , he was even given a second cell to house them . however , his letter-writing privileges were greatly curtailed . jones and stroud grew so close that she moved to kansas in 1931 , and started a business with him , selling his avian medicines . prison officials , fed up with stroud 's activities and their attendant publicity , intensified their efforts to transfer him out of leavenworth . stroud discovered a kansas law that forbade the transfer of prisoners married in kansas . to this end , he married jones by proxy , which infuriated the prison 's administrators , who would not allow him to correspond with his wife . prison officials were not the only ones perturbed with stroud 's marriage ; his mother was also incensed . they had a close relationship , but elizabeth stroud strongly disapproved of the marriage to jones , believing women were nothing but trouble for her son . whereas previously she had been a strong advocate for her son , helping him with legal battles , she now argued against his application for parole , and became a major obstacle in his attempts to be released from the prison system . she moved away from leavenworth and refused any further contact with him . she died in 1937 . in 1933 , stroud advertised in a publication that he had not received any royalties from the sales of diseases of canaries . in retaliation , the publisher complained to the warden , and , as a result , proceedings were initiated to transfer stroud to alcatraz , where he would not be permitted to keep his birds . in the end stroud was able to keep both his birds and canary-selling business at leavenworth . stroud mostly avoided trouble for several more years , until it came to light that some of the equipment stroud had requested for his lab was in fact being used as a home-made distillery to manufacture alcohol . officials finally had the wedge they needed to drive stroud out . citing his '' dangerous tendencies '' and longstanding concerns about the sanitary conditions of his cell , they initiated proceedings to send him to alcatraz . alcatraz . on december 19 , 1942 , stroud was transferred to alcatraz federal penitentiary , and became inmate 594 . he reportedly was not informed in advance that he was to leave leavenworth and his beloved birds , and was given just 10 minutes ' notice of his departure . his birds and equipment were sent to his brother as alcatraz 's strict policies meant that he was unable to continue his avocation . he spent six years in segregation and another 11 confined to the hospital wing at the penitentiary . in 1943 , he was assessed by psychiatrist romney m . ritchey , who diagnosed him as a psychopath , with an i.q . of 112 ( although his initial report in 1942 based on leavenworth states that he had an i.q . of 116 ) . while there , he wrote two manuscripts : bobbie , an autobiography , and looking outward . a judge ruled that stroud had the right to write and keep such manuscripts , but upheld the warden 's decision to ban their publication . after stroud 's death , the transcripts were delivered to his lawyer , richard english . rumors of stroud 's homosexuality were noted at alcatraz . according to donald hurley , whose father was a guard at alcatraz , '' whenever stroud was around anyone , which was seldom , he was watched very closely , as prison officials were very aware of his overt homosexual tendencies . '' in an interview with hurley for his book , a former inmate heard stroud was always in 'dog block ' ( solitary confinement ) or later in the hospital because he was a 'wolf ' ( aggressive homosexual ) who had a bad temper . '' in february 1963 stroud met and talked with actor burt lancaster , who portrayed him in the birdman of alcatraz . stroud never got to see the film or read the book it was based on but did share on one of the problems that prevented parole , that he was an '' admitted homosexual . '' lancaster quoted stroud as saying , '' let 's face it , i am 73 years old . does that answer your question about whether i would be a dangerous homosexual ? '' during his 17-year term at alcatraz , stroud was allowed access to the prison library , and began studying law . occasionally , he was permitted to play chess with one of the guards . stroud began petitioning the government that his long prison term amounted to cruel and unusual punishment . in 1959 , with his health failing , stroud was transferred to the medical center for federal prisoners in springfield , missouri . however , his attempts to be released were unsuccessful . death . on november 21 , 1963 , robert stroud died at the springfield medical center at the age of 73 , having been incarcerated for the last 54 years of his life , of which 42 were spent in solitary confinement . legacy . stroud is considered to be one of the most notorious criminals in american history . robert niemi states that stroud had a '' superior intellect , '' and became a '' first-rate ornithologist and author , '' but was an '' extremely dangerous and menacing psychopath , disliked and distrusted by his jailers and fellow inmates . '' however , by his last years , stroud 's behavior had improved and he was viewed more favorably ; judge becker considered stroud to be modest , no longer a danger to society , and as having a genuine love for birds . given his level of notoriety , the crimes he committed were unremarkable , especially as the assaults he committed had a clear cause . carl sifakais considers stroud to have been a '' brilliant self-taught expert on birds , and possibly the best-known example of self-improvement and rehabilitation in the u.s . prison . '' because of stroud 's contributions to the field of ornithology , he gained a large following of thousands of bird breeders and poultry raisers who demanded his release , and for many years a '' committee to release robert f . stroud '' campaigned to have stroud released from prison . however , because stroud had killed a federal officer , his punishment in solitary confinement remained intact . in 1963 , richard m . english , a young lawyer who had campaigned for john f . kennedy in california , took to the cause of securing stroud 's release . he met with former president harry s . truman to enlist support , but truman declined . he also met with senior kennedy-administration officials who were studying the subject . english took the last photo of stroud , in which he is shown with a green visor . the warden of the prison attempted to have english prosecuted for bringing something into the prison he did not take out : unexposed film . the authorities declined to take any action . upon stroud 's death , his personal property , including original manuscripts , was delivered to english , as his last legal representative , who later turned over some of the possessions to the audubon society . stroud became the subject of a 1955 book by thomas e . gaddis , birdman of alcatraz . gaddis , who strongly advocated rehabilitation in the prisons , portrayed stroud in favorable light . this was adapted by guy trosper for the 1962 film of the same name , directed by john frankenheimer . it starred burt lancaster as stroud , karl malden as a fictionalized and renamed warden , thelma ritter as stroud 's mother and betty field as his wife , renamed stella johnson in the film . however , former inmates of alcatraz say that the real stroud was far more sinister , dangerous and unpleasant than the fictionalized version portrayed in the book and film . one said '' he was a vicious killer . i think burt lancaster owes us all an apology . '' '' alumni ' revisit the rock , article on sfgate.com , online home of the san francisco chronicle art carney played stroud in the 1980 tv movie alcatraz : the whole shocking story , and dennis farina played stroud in the 1987 tv movie six against the rock , a dramatization of the battle of alcatraz of 1946 . in music , stroud has been the subject of the instrumental '' birdman of alcatraz '' from rick wakeman 's criminal record ( 1977 ) , a concept album about criminality , and the song '' the birdman '' by our lady peace is also about him . several video games such as galerians and team fortress 2 pay homage to him .