Intracytoplasmic sperm injection

round spermatid injection ( rosi ) . round spermatid injection ( rosi ) is a technique of assisted reproduction whereby a round spermatid is injected into oocyte cytoplasm in order to achieve fertilization . this technique can be used to enable genetic fatherhood to some men who have no spermatozoa in the ejaculate ( azoospermia ) and in whom spermatozoa can not be obtained surgically from the testicles . this condition is called non-obstructive or secretory azoospermia , as opposed to obstructive azoospermia , in which complete sperm production does occur in the testicles , and potentially fertilizing spermatozoa can be obtained by testicular sperm extraction ( tese ) and used for icsi . in cases of nonobstructive ( secretory ) azoospermia , on the other hand , testicular sperm production is blocked at different stages of the process of sperm formation ( spermatogenesis ) . in those men in whom spermatogenesis is blocked at the stage of round spermatids , in which meiosis has already been completed , these round cells can successfully fertilize oocytes after being injected into their cytoplasm . . tesarik j , rolet f , brami c , sedbon e , thorel j , tibi c , thébault a . spermatid injection into human oocytes . ii . clinical application in the treatment of infertility due to non-obstructive azoospermia . hum reprod 1996 ; 11:780-783 before the development of the rosi technique , men with the arrest of spermatogenesis at the round spermatid stage could only have children with the use of donor spermatozoa . even though many technical aspects of rosi are similar to those of icsi , there are also significant differences between both techniques . in the first place , as compared to spermatozoa , round spermatids do not possess easily perceptible morphological characteristics and are immotile . consequently , the distinction between round spermatids and other round cells of similar size , such as leukocytes , is not an easy task . moreover , the distinction between living round spermatids , to be used in rosi , and dead round spermatids , to be discarded , needs specific methods and skills , not required in the case of icsi where sperm cell viability can be easily evaluated on the basis of sperm motility in most cases . the microinjection procedure for rosi also differs slightly from that of icsi , since additional stimuli are needed to ensure proper oocyte activation after spermatid injection . if all requirements for round spermatid selection and injection are successfully met , the injected oocytes develop to early embryos and can be transferred to the mother 's uterus to produce pregnancy . the first successful pregnancies and births with the use of rosi were achieved in 1995 by jan tesarik and his team . the clinical potential of rosi in the treatment of male infertility due to the total absence of spermatozoa has been corroborated recently by a publication reporting on the postnatal development of 90 babies born in japan and 17 in spain . tanaka a , suzuki k , nagayoshi m , tanaka a , takemoto y , watanabe s , takeda s , irahara m , kuji n , yamagata z , yanagimachi r . ninety babies born after round spermatid injection into oocytes : survey of their development from fertilization up to 2 years old . fertil steril 2018 ; 110:443-451 . comment by tesarik j , mendoza c , mendoza-tesarik r . based on the evaluation of the babies born , no abnormalities attributable to the rosi technique have been identified . . indications . this procedure is most commonly used to overcome male infertility problems , although it may also be used where eggs can not easily be penetrated by sperm , and occasionally in addition to sperm donation . it can be used in teratozoospermia , because once the egg is fertilized , abnormal sperm morphology does not appear to influence blastocyst development or blastocyst morphology . even with severe teratozoospermia , microscopy can still detect the few sperm cells that have a '' normal '' morphology , allowing for optimal success rate . additionally , we resort to icsi in cases of azoospermia ( when there are no spermatozoa ejaculated but they can be found in testis ) , when we possess valious spermatozoa ( the name given to sperm samples taken to preservate fertility afer chemotherapy ) or after previous irruptions in ivf cycles . sperm selection . before performing icsi , sperm in vitro selection and capacitation has to be done . apart from the most common techniques of in vitro sperm capacitation ( swim-up , density gradients , filtration and simple wash ) , some new techniques are incredible useful and better than the previous ones . one of these new techniques are microfluidic chips , like zymot tm icsi chip . zymot tm icsi chip is a device that selects the best spermatozoa for the icsi technique . this chip reproduces the conditions of the vagina , in order to select the spermatozoa as the vagina would do . the advantages in relation with other techniques revolve around sperm quality , as the selected ones have better motility , morphology , little dna fragmentation and less quantity of reactive oxygen species ( ros ) . the procedure is quite simple and fast , since you only have to add some sorting solution , the semen sample and light mineral oil in the inlet ports of the device , which are connected to the outlet ports by a microchannel . the spermatozoa will then move along a channel to get to the other side and those ones are the best . the incubation lasts for 30 minutes and the indicated temperature is 37°c . it is especially indicated for patients with a huge rate of dna fragmentation . however , it should not be used in cases of severe oligozoospermia , since it may be difficult to recover the spermatozoa for performing icsi . this chip is easy , simple and fast . moreover , each chip is used only once , assuring cleanliness and avoiding contamination from other samples . when comparing it to the centrifugation methods , this chip eliminates the sperm-damaging procedures associated with swim-up and gradient centrifugation and allows a better monitoring of temperatures during the process . another way to perform the selection is the macs technique , which consists in tiny magnetic particles linked to an antibody ( annexin v ) which recognices the spermatozoa that are going to die . thanks to this fact , once the semen sample is passed through a column with a magnetic field , apoptotic respermatozoa are retained in the column while the healthy ones are easily obtained at the bottom of it . picsi is another option and it consists in putting the semen sample over a hyaluronic acid hydrogel . immature spermatozoa do not bind to the acid , while mature do . what is more , these selected spermatozoa have been studied and they have less dna fragmentation . the property exploited in this case is the ability to bind the hyaluronic acid around the egg cell . sperms selected by hyaluronic acid has about no effect on whether a live birth results , but may reduce miscarriage . . history . the first child born from a gamete micromanipulation ( technique in which special tools and inverted microscopes are used that help embryologists to choose and pick an individual sperm for icsi ivf ) was a singapore-born child in april 1989 . the technique was developed by gianpiero palermo at the vrije universiteit brussel , in the center for reproductive medicine headed by paul devroey and andre van steirteghem . actually , the discovery was made by a mistake . the procedure itself was first performed in 1987 , though it only went to the pronuclear stage . the first activated embryo by icsi was produced in 1990 , but the first successful birth by icsi took place on january 14 , 1992 after an april 1991 conception . sharpe et al comment on the success of icsi since 1992 saying , '' thus , the woman carries the treatment burden for male infertility , a fairly unique scenario in medical practice . icsi ’ s success has effectively diverted attention from identifying what causes male infertility and focused research onto the female , to optimize the provision of eggs and a receptive endometrium , on which icsi ’ s success depends . '' . procedure . icsi is generally performed following a transvaginal oocyte retrieval procedure to extract one or several oocytes from a woman . in icsi ivf , the male partner or a donor provides a sperm sample on the same day when the eggs are collected . the sample is checked in the lab , and if no sperm is present , doctors will extract sperm from the epididymis or testicle . the extraction of sperm from epididymis is also known as percutaneous epididymal sperm aspiration ( pesa ) and extraction of sperm from testicle is also known as testicular sperm aspiration ( tesa ) . depending on the total amount of spermatozoa in the semen sample , either low or high , it can be just washed or capacitated via swim-up or gradients , respectively . the procedure is done under a microscope using multiple micromanipulation devices ( micromanipulator , microinjectors and micropipettes ) . a holding pipette stabilizes the mature oocyte with gentle suction applied by a microinjector . from the opposite side a thin , hollow glass micropipette is used to collect a single sperm , having immobilised it by cutting its tail with the point of the micropipette . the oocyte is pierced through the oolemma and the sperm is directed into the inner part of the oocyte ( cytoplasm ) . the sperm is then released into the oocyte . the pictured oocyte has an extruded polar body at about 12 o'clock indicating its maturity . the polar body is positioned at the 12 or 6 o'clock position , to ensure that the inserted micropipette does not disrupt the spindle inside the egg . after the procedure , the oocyte will be placed into cell culture and checked on the following day for signs of fertilization . in contrast , in natural fertilization sperm compete and when the first sperm penetrates the oolemma , the oolemma hardens to block the entry of any other sperm . concern has been raised that in icsi this sperm selection process is bypassed and the sperm is selected by the embryologist without any specific testing . however , in mid-2006 the fda cleared a device that allows embryologists to select mature sperm for icsi based on sperm binding to hyaluronan , the main constituent of the gel layer ( cumulus oophorus ) surrounding the oocyte . the device provides microscopic droplets of hyaluronan hydrogel attached to the culture dish . the embryologist places the prepared sperm on the microdot , selects and captures sperm that bind to the dot . basic research on the maturation of sperm shows that hyaluronan-binding sperm are more mature and show fewer dna strand breaks and significantly lower levels of aneuploidy than the sperm population from which they were selected . a brand name for one such sperm selection device is picsi . a recent clinical trial showed a sharp reduction in miscarriage with embryos derived from picsi sperm selection . k.c . worrilow , et al . '' use of hyaluronan in the selection of sperm for intracytoplasmic sperm injection ( icsi ) : significant improvement in clinical outcomes- multicenter , double-blinded and randomized controlled trial . '' human reproduction 28 ( 2 ) :306-14 ( 2013 ) 'washed ' or 'unwashed ' sperm may be used in the process . live birth rate are significantly higher with progesterone to luteal support in icsi cycles . also , addition of a gnrh agonist has been estimated to increase success rates . ultra-high magnification sperm injection ( imsi ) has no evidence of increased live birth or miscarriage rates compared to standard icsi . a new variation of the standard icsi-procedure called piezo-icsi uses small axial mechanical pulses ( piezo-pulses ) to lower stress to the cytoskeleton during zona pellucida and oolemma breakage . sakkas d . , presentation '' new styles of icsi '' during eshre-workshop may 18 , 2019 gent/belgium '' top quality in micromanipulation : everything you always wanted to know about icsi and embryo biopsy '' the procedure includes specialized piezo actuators , microcapillaries , and filling medium to transfer mechanical pulses to the cell membranes . costa-borges n , mestres e , vanrell i , garcía m , calderón g , stobrawa s : intracytoplasmic sperm injection ( icsi ) in the mouse with the eppendorf piezoxpert® : how to increase oocyte survival rates after injection the piezo technique itself was for example established for animal icsi and animal es cell transfer . assisted zona hatching ( ah ) . people who have experienced repeatedly failed implantation , or whose experimental embryo has a thick zona pellucida ( covering ) around the embryo , have ideal candidates for assisted zona hatching . the procedure involves creating a hole in the zona to improve the chances of normal implantation of the embryo in the uterus . preimplantation genetic diagnosis ( pgd ) . pgd is a process in which one or two cells from an embryo on day 3 or day 5 are extracted and the cells genetically analyzed . couples who are at a high risk of having abnormal number of chromosomes or who have an history of single gene defects or chromosome defects are ideal candidates for this procedure . it is used to diagnose a large number of genetic defects at present . success or failure factors . one of the areas in which sperm injection can be useful is vasectomy reversal . however , potential factors that may influence pregnancy rates ( and live birth rates ) in icsi include level of dna fragmentation as measured e.g . by comet assay , advanced maternal age and semen quality . it is uncertain whether icsi improves live birth rates or reduces the risk of miscarriage compared with ultra‐high magnification ( imsi ) sperm selection . a systematic meta-analysis of 24 estimates of dna damage based on a variety of techniques concluded that sperm dna damage negatively affects clinical pregnancy following icsi . . complications . there is some suggestion that birth defects are increased with the use of ivf in general , and icsi specifically , though different studies show contradictory results . in a summary position paper , the practice committee of the american society of reproductive medicine has said it considers icsi safe and effective therapy for male factor infertility , but may carry an increased risk for the transmission of selected genetic abnormalities to offspring , either through the procedure itself or through the increased inherent risk of such abnormalities in parents undergoing the procedure . there is not enough evidence to say that icsi procedures are safe in females with hepatitis b in regard to vertical transmission to the offspring , since the puncture of the oocyte can potentially avail for vertical transmission to the offspring . . follow-up on fetus . in addition to regular prenatal care , prenatal aneuploidy screening based on maternal age , nuchal translucency scan and biomarkers is appropriate . however , biomarkers seem to be altered for pregnancies resulting from icsi , causing a higher false-positive rate . correction factors have been developed and should be used when screening for down syndrome in singleton pregnancies after icsi , but in twin pregnancies such correction factors have not been fully elucidated . in vanishing twin pregnancies with a second gestational sac with a dead fetus , first trimester screening should be based solely on the maternal age and the nuchal translucency scan as biomarkers are significantly altered in these cases .