1959 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1959 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : black orpheus ( orfeu negro ) , directed by marcel camus , france golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : il generale della rovere ( general della rovere ) , directed by roberto rossellini , italy / france : la grande guerra ( the great war ) , directed by mario monicelli , italy / france golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : les cousins ( the cousins ) , directed by claude chabrol , france . 1959 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1959 2 january kaagaz ke phool ( india ) 6 january the captain 's table 13 january guns , girls and gangsters 16 january anari ( india ) 22 january room at the top ( britain ) the tiger of eschnapur ( west germany ) 25 january the law ( italy ) 28 january the trap 29 january sleeping beauty february 1959 11 february the hanging tree 12 february the black orchid 15 february no name on the bullet ride lonesome 17 february house on haunted hill 19 february the journey 22 february model for murder 24 february make mine a million ( britain ) 26 february city of fear march 1959 3 march the giant behemoth a stranger in my arms 4 march up periscope 5 march carry on nurse ( britain ) 6 march breakout 8 march too many crooks ( britain ) 10 march carlton-browne of the f.o . ( britain ) 11 march les cousins ( france ) 12 march the 39 steps 18 march the diary of anne frank the sad horse 19 march green mansions the shaggy dog 20 march alias jesse james 25 march al capone tiger bay ( britain ) 29 march honeymoon ( britain/spain ) some like it hot . april–june . april 1959 1 april compulsion warlock 4 april rio bravo 6 april the sound and the fury 8 april thunder in the sun 10 april gidget 14 april the fugitive kind 16 april court martial ( west germany ) 21 april sapphire ( britain ) 23 april count your blessings the world , the flesh and the devil 25 april a home for tanya ( ussr ) westbound 29 april the mating game 30 april imitation of life may 1959 1 may the world of apu ( india ) 2 may the sign of leo ( france ) 4 may the 400 blows ( france ) the hound of the baskervilles ( britain ) 8 may these thousand hills 9 may there will be no leave today ( ussr ) 12 may face of a fugitive good morning ( japan ) 14 may serious charge ( britain ) 19 may the young philadelphians 21 may ask any girl shake hands with the devil ( u.s./ireland ) 27 may the wild and the innocent woman obsessed 29 may the man in the net pork chop hill june 1959 4 june nazarín ( mexico ) 10 june hiroshima mon amour ( france/japan ) 12 june black orpheus ( brazil/france/italy ) the horse soldiers 16 june do n't give up the ship john paul jones ten seconds to hell 17 june the hangman middle of the night 18 june the five pennies say one for me teenagers from outer space this happy feeling 24 june porgy and bess 25 june the killer shrews 26 june darby o'gill and the little people with donald in mathmagic land released with it . this earth is mine 27 june letter never sent ( ussr ) . july–september . july 1959 1 july north by northwest 2 july anatomy of a murder 3 july the beat generation the heart of a man return of the fly 5 july the big circus 8 july tarzan 's greatest adventure 11 july yesterday 's enemy 14 july the legend of tom dooley 15 july a hole in the head 16 july the alligator people 17 july the mouse that roared ( britain ) 18 july the nun 's story 20 july day of the outlaw 22 july plan 9 from outer space 24 july holiday for lovers 29 july the angry hills last train from gun hill the tingler 30 july blue denim august 1959 4 august the big fisherman 5 august it happened to jane 6 august the 30 foot bride of candy rock the scapegoat ( britain ) 9 august the bat 11 august the big operator 13 august i 'm all right jack ( britain ) 19 august but not for me it started with a kiss 20 august the devil 's disciple ( u.s./britain ) 22 august fate of a man ( ussr ) 24 august sampo ( u.s.s.r./finland ) september 1959 3 september carry on teacher ( britain ) 4 september the blue angel 9 september les liaisons dangereuses ( france ) 10 september the great st . louis bank robbery 11 september that kind of woman 12 september battle beyond the sun ( ussr ) 15 september look back in anger ( britain ) 16 september jet storm ( britain ) 18 september dil deke dekho ( india ) 24 september killers of kilimanjaro 25 september the great war ( italy ) the mummy ( britain ) 26 september general della rovere ( italy ) . october–december . october 1959 3 october a bucket of blood girls town 6 october pillow talk 7 october 4d man career north west frontier 8 october the nightingale 's prayer ( egypt ) 9 october the best of everything 15 october odds against tomorrow the roots of heaven 16 october two men in manhattan ( france ) 18 october the crimson kimono 21 october the fbi story they came to cordura the wonderful country 22 october the bridge ( west germany ) the last angry man 23 october libel ( britain ) 25 october the birth of japan ( japan ) 27 october solomon and sheba 30 october paigham ( india ) the wasp woman november 1959 2 november edge of eternity 3 november fires on the plain ( japan ) 4 november jet over the atlantic 6 november the wreck of the mary deare ( u.s./britain ) 10 november happy anniversary third man on the mountain' 11 november the facts of murder ( italy ) shadows yellowstone kelly 12 november the miracle the soldiers of pancho villa ( mexico ) 13 november estate violenta ( italy/france ) 14 november bad girls do n't cry ( italy ) insan jaag utha ( india ) 17 november beloved infidel 18 november ben-hur a summer place 22 november timbuktu 23 november the angry red planet 29 november the atomic submarine 30 november the man who could cheat death ( britain ) december 1959 1 december ballad of a soldier ( ussr ) the rookie 5 december republic of sin ( france/mexico ) operation petticoat 7 december never so few 11 december expresso bongo ( britain ) li ' l abner sos pacific ( britain ) 12 december hannibal ( italy ) terror is a man ( u.s./philippines ) 15 december follow a star ( britain ) 16 december blessings of the land ( philippines ) the gazebo journey to the center of the earth pickpocket ( france ) the shakedown 17 december on the beach 18 december we are altogether crazy ( denmark ) 20 december a dog 's best friend suddenly , last summer 21 december tommy the toreador ( britain ) 25 december magic boy ( japan ) 26 december battle in outer space ( japan ) 28 december come dance with me ( france/italy ) 30 december our man in havana ( britain ) 31 december the adventures of buratino ( ussr ) . notable films released in 1959 . united states unless stated . . 4d man , starring robert lansing and lee meriwether the 30 foot bride of candy rock , starring lou costello and dorothy provine the 39 steps , starring kenneth more – ( britain ) the 400 blows ( les quatre cents coups ) , directed by françois truffaut , starring jean-pierre léaud – ( france ) . a . the adventures of buratino ( priklyucheniya buratino ) – ( ussr ) al capone , starring rod steiger alias jesse james , starring bob hope the alligator people , starring beverly garland anari , starring raj kapoor – ( india ) anatomy of a murder , directed by otto preminger , starring james stewart , lee remick , ben gazzara , eve arden , arthur o'connell , kathryn grant , george c . scott the angry hills , starring robert mitchum and gia scala the angry red planet ( aka invasion of mars ) , starring gerald mohr argument about basia ( awantura o basię ) – ( poland ) . b . bad girls do n't cry ( la notte brava ) , starring rosanna schiaffino – ( italy ) ballad of a soldier ( ballada o soldate ) , directed by grigory chukhray – ( u.s.s.r . ) the bat , starring vincent price and agnes moorehead battle beyond the sun – ( u.s.s.r . ) battle in outer space , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) the battle of the sexes , starring peter sellers – ( britain ) the beat generation , starring steve cochran and mamie van doren beloved infidel , starring gregory peck and deborah kerr ben-hur , directed by william wyler , starring charlton heston , stephen boyd , jack hawkins – winner of 11 academy awards and 4 golden globes the best of everything , starring hope lange , diane baker , suzy parker , stephen boyd , joan crawford the big circus , starring victor mature , rhonda fleming , red buttons , gilbert roland , kathryn grant the big fisherman , starring howard keel the big operator , starring mickey rooney , steve cochran , mamie van doren the birth of japan ( nippon tanjō ) , starring toshiro mifune – ( japan ) black orpheus , directed by marcel camus – winner of palme d'or , golden globe , oscar and bafta – ( brazil/france/italy ) blessings of the land ( biyaya ng lupa ) , starring rosa rosal – ( philippines ) breakout , starring hazel court the bridge ( die brücke ) , directed by bernhard wicki – ( west germany ) a bucket of blood , directed by roger corman but not for me , directed by walter lang , starring clark gable , carroll baker , lee j . cobb . c . the captain 's table , starring john gregson and peggy cummins – ( britain ) career , starring dean martin , shirley maclaine , anthony franciosa carlton-browne of the f.o . , starring peter sellers , terry-thomas , john le mesurier – ( britain ) carry on nurse , starring shirley eaton and kenneth connor – ( britain ) carry on teacher , starring kenneth connor and leslie phillips – ( britain ) the chasers ( jakten ) – ( norway ) city of fear , score by jerry goldsmith come dance with me , starring brigitte bardot – ( france/italy ) compulsion , starring orson welles , bradford dillman , dean stockwell , diane varsi , e . g . marshall court martial ( kriegsgericht ) – ( west germany ) les cousins , directed by claude chabrol – ( france ) the crimson kimono , directed by samuel fuller , starring james shigeta . d . danger within , starring richard todd , bernard lee , richard attenborough – ( britain ) darby o'gill and the little people , starring sean connery date with death , starring gerald mohr day of the outlaw , starring robert ryan , tina louise , burl ives the death ship ( das totenschiff ) , starring horst buchholz – ( west germany ) destiny of a man ( sudba cheloveka ) , directed by sergei bondarchuk – ( u.s.s.r . ) the devil 's disciple , starring laurence olivier , burt lancaster , kirk douglas – ( u.s./britain ) the diary of anne frank , directed by george stevens , starring millie perkins , joseph schildkraut , shelley winters , richard beymer , diane baker , ed wynn dil deke dekho , starring shammi kapoor – ( india ) donald in mathmagic land ( short subject ) do n't give up the ship , starring jerry lewis dust on the brain ( støv på hjernen ) – ( norway ) . e–f . expresso bongo , starring laurence harvey and cliff richard – ( britain ) the fbi story , starring james stewart face of a fugitive , starring fred macmurray the facts of murder ( un maledetto imbroglio ) , directed by and starring pietro germi with claudia cardinale – ( italy ) la fièvre monte à el pao ( fever mounts at el pao ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( france/mexico ) fires on the plain ( nobi ) , directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) the five pennies , starring danny kaye floating weeds ( ukikusa ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) follow a star , starring norman wisdom , ron moody , hattie jacques – ( britain ) the fugitive kind , directed by sidney lumet , starring marlon brando , anna magnani , joanne woodward . g . the gazebo , starring glenn ford , debbie reynolds , carl reiner il generale della rovere , directed by roberto rossellini , starring vittorio de sica – ( italy ) the giant behemoth , starring gene evans and andré morell gidget , starring sandra dee girls town , starring mamie van doren good morning ( ohayō ) , directed by yasujirō ozu – ( japan ) la grande guerra ( the great war ) , directed by mario monicelli , starring alberto sordi and vittorio gassman – ( italy ) the gunfight at dodge city , starring joel mccrea guns , girls and gangsters , directed by edward l . cahn . h . the hanging tree , directed by delmer daves , starring gary cooper , karl malden , george c . scott the hangman , starring robert taylor and tina louise hannibal , starring victor mature and rita gam happy anniversary , starring david niven and mitzi gaynor the heart of a man , starring frankie vaughan and anne heywood – ( britain ) hiroshima mon amour , directed by alain resnais – ( france/japan ) a hole in the head , starring frank sinatra , edward g . robinson , carolyn jones , eddie hodges holiday for lovers , starring jane wyman , clifton webb , jill st . john a home for tanya ( otchiy dom ) – ( ussr ) honeymoon ( luna de miel ) , directed by michael powell – ( britain/spain ) the horse soldiers , starring john wayne , william holden , constance towers the hound of the baskervilles , starring peter cushing and christopher lee – ( britain ) house on haunted hill , starring vincent price . i . i 'm all right jack , directed by the boulting brothers , starring peter sellers and ian carmichael – ( britain ) imitation of life , directed by douglas sirk , starring lana turner , john gavin , sandra dee , susan kohner , juanita moore the immoral mr . teas , directed by russ meyer the indian tomb , directed by fritz lang – ( west germany ) insan jaag utha , starring madhubala – ( india ) it happened to jane , starring doris day , jack lemmon , ernie kovacs it started with a kiss , starring debbie reynolds and glenn ford . j . the jazz singer , a television film starring jerry lewis jet over the atlantic , starring guy madison and virginia mayo jet storm , starring richard attenborough , stanley baker , diane cilento , mai zetterling – ( britain ) john paul jones , starring robert stack the journey , starring yul brynner and deborah kerr journey to the center of the earth , starring james mason and pat boone . k–l . kaagaz ke phool ( paper flowers ) , directed by and starring guru dutt – ( india ) kapò , directed by gillo pontecorvo , starring susan strasberg – ( italy/france/yugoslavia ) killers of kilimanjaro , starring robert taylor , anthony newley , anne aubrey the last angry man , starring paul muni last train from gun hill , starring kirk douglas , anthony quinn , carolyn jones , earl holliman the law ( la legge ) , starring gina lollobrigida and yves montand – ( italy ) el lazarillo de tormes , winner of golden bear – ( spain ) le signe du lion , directed by éric rohmer – ( france ) the legend of tom dooley , starring michael landon les liaisons dangereuses , directed by roger vadim , starring jeanne moreau – ( france ) letter never sent ( neotpravlennoye pismo ) – ( ussr ) libel , directed by anthony asquith , starring dirk bogarde and olivia de havilland – ( britain ) li ' l abner , directed by melvin frank , starring peter palmer , leslie parrish , stella stevens , julie newmar , stubby kaye look back in anger , directed by tony richardson , starring richard burton and claire bloom – ( britain ) . m . magic boy ( shōnen sarutobi sasuke ) – japanese animated film maigret et l'affaire saint-fiacre , directed by jean delannoy , starring jean gabin – ( france ) make mine a million , directed by lance comfort and starring arthur askey and sid james – ( britain ) the man in the net , directed by michael curtiz , starring alan ladd and carolyn jones the man who could cheat death , starring anton diffring and hazel court model for murder , starring keith andes and hazel court the master and his servants ( herren og hans tjenere ) – ( norway ) a midsummer night 's dream ( sen noci svatojánské ) , an animated puppet film by jiří trnka – ( czechoslovakia ) the miracle , starring carroll baker and roger moore mise éire – ( ireland ) the mouse that roared , starring peter sellers and jean seberg – ( britain ) the mummy , starring peter cushing and christopher lee – ( britain ) my second brother , directed by shōhei imamura – ( japan ) . n . nazarín , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) never so few , starring frank sinatra , gina lollobrigida , peter lawford , steve mcqueen night train ( pociąg ) – ( poland ) the nightingale 's prayer ( doaa al-karawan ) – ( egypt ) no name on the bullet , starring audie murphy north by northwest , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring cary grant , eva marie saint , james mason north west frontier , aka flame over india , starring kenneth more and lauren bacall – ( britain ) the nun 's story , directed by fred zinnemann , starring audrey hepburn . o . odd obsession ( kagi ) , directed by kon ichikawa – ( japan ) odds against tomorrow , starring harry belafonte and robert ryan on the beach , directed by stanley kramer , starring gregory peck , ava gardner , fred astaire , anthony perkins operation petticoat , starring cary grant and tony curtis our man in havana , directed by carol reed , starring alec guinness , maureen o'hara , noël coward , ernie kovacs – ( britain ) the overcoat ( shinel ) – ( ussr ) . p . paigham , directed by s . s . vasan , starring dilip kumar , vyjayanthimala , raaj kumar , b . saroja devi – ( india ) pickpocket , directed by robert bresson – ( france ) pillow talk , starring doris day and rock hudson el pisito ( the little apartment ) , directed bt marco ferreri – ( spain ) plan 9 from outer space , directed by ed wood , starring tor johnson , vampira , bela lugosi porgy and bess , a musical directed by otto preminger , starring dorothy dandridge and sidney poitier , music by george and ira gershwin pork chop hill , starring gregory peck . q–r . the rest is silence ( der rest ist schweigen ) , starring hardy krüger – ( west germany ) ride lonesome , starring randolph scott rio bravo , directed by howard hawks , starring john wayne , dean martin , ricky nelson , walter brennan , angie dickinson the rookie , starring julie newmar , tommy noonan , peter marshall room at the top , directed by jack clayton , starring simone signoret and laurence harvey – ( britain ) the roots of heaven , directed by john huston , starring errol flynn , trevor howard , juliette gréco , eddie albert , orson welles . s . sampo ( the day the earth froze ) – ( u.s.s.r./finland ) sapphire , directed by basil dearden – ( britain ) say one for me , starring bing crosby , debbie reynolds and robert wagner the scapegoat , starring alec guinness and bette davis – ( britain ) serious charge , starring anthony quayle – ( britain ) shadows , directed by john cassavetes the shaggy dog , starring fred macmurray , jean hagen and tommy kirk the shakedown , starring donald pleasence and hazel court shake hands with the devil , starring james cagney – ( u.s./ireland ) sleeping beauty , animated film produced by walt disney the soldiers of pancho villa ( la cucaracha ) , starring maría félix and dolores del río – ( mexico ) solomon and sheba , starring yul brynner and gina lollobrigida some like it hot , directed by billy wilder , starring marilyn monroe , tony curtis and jack lemmon sos pacific , starring richard attenborough – ( britain ) the sound and the fury , starring yul brynner and joanne woodward stars ( sterne ) , directed by konrad wolf – ( east germany/bulgaria ) a stranger in my arms , starring jeff chandler , june allyson , mary astor and sandra dee suddenly , last summer , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring elizabeth taylor , montgomery clift and katharine hepburn a summer place , starring troy donahue and sandra dee . t . tarzan 's greatest adventure , directed by john guillermin , starring gordon scott , anthony quayle , sean connery telegrame – ( romania ) ten seconds to hell , directed by robert aldrich , starring jack palance terror is a man , starring francis lederer – ( u.s./philippines ) that kind of woman , directed by sidney lumet , starring sophia loren and tab hunter there will be no leave today ( segodnya uvolneniya ne budet ) , directed by andrei tarkovsky – ( ussr ) these thousand hills , starring richard egan , don murray , lee remick they came to cordura , starring gary cooper , rita hayworth , van heflin , richard conte , dick york , tab hunter third man on the mountain , starring michael rennie tiger bay , starring john mills and hayley mills – ( britain ) the tiger of eschnapur , directed by fritz lang – ( west germany ) the tingler , starring vincent price tommy the toreador , starring tommy steele – ( britain ) too many crooks , starring terry-thomas and george cole – ( britain ) train without a timetable ( vlak bez voznog reda ) – ( yugoslavia ) the trap , starring richard widmark , lee j . cobb , earl holliman , tina louise two men in manhattan ( deux hommes dans manhattan ) , directed by jean-pierre melville – ( france ) . u–v . up periscope , starring james garner and edmond o'brien il vedovo ( the widower ) , directed by dino risi , starring alberto sordi – ( italy ) la vida alrededor ( life around us ) – ( spain ) violent summer ( estate violenta ) , starring jean-louis trintignant – ( italy/france ) . w–x . warlock , directed by edward dmytryk , starring henry fonda , richard widmark and anthony quinn the wasp woman , starring susan cabot we are altogether crazy ( vi er allesammen tossede ) – ( denmark ) westbound , starring randolph scott and virginia mayo when the woman butts in ( kam čert nemůže ) – ( czechoslovakia ) the wild and the innocent , starring audie murphy , joanne dru , sandra dee woman obsessed , starring susan hayward the wonderful country , starring robert mitchum and julie london the world , the flesh and the devil , starring harry belafonte and inger stevens the world of apu ( apur sansar ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) the wreck of the mary deare , starring gary cooper and charlton heston – ( britain/u.s . ) . y–z . yellowstone kelly , starring clint walker and edd byrnes yesterday 's enemy , directed by val guest , starring stanley baker – ( britain ) the young philadelphians , starring paul newman , barbara rush , brian keith , alexis smith , robert vaughn zorro , the avenger . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) . births . january 5 – clancy brown , american actor and voice actor january 17 – momoe yamaguchi , japanese former actress and singer january 22 – linda blair , american actress february 2 – laine mägi , estonian actress and dancer february 4 – pamelyn ferdin , american actress february 22 – kyle maclachlan , american actor march 5 – darío grandinetti , argentinian actor march 6 – tom arnold , american actor and comedian march 7 – donna murphy , american actress and singer march 8 – aidan quinn , irish-american actor march 15 – renny harlin , finnish director and producer march 18 luc besson , french director and producer irene cara , american actress and singer march 22 – matthew modine , american actor march 23 – catherine keener , american actress april 3 – david hyde pierce , american actor april 4 - phil morris , american actor and voice actor april 15 – emma thompson , english actress april 17 – sean bean , english actor april 20 – clint howard , american actor may 12 - ving rhames , american actor may 16 – mare winningham , american actress may 19 - jim ward , american voice actor , radio personality and camera operator may 29 – rupert everett , english actor june 11 – hugh laurie , english actor june 22 – wayne federman , american actor and comedian june 30 – vincent d'onofrio , american actor july 16 - bob joles , american voice actor and musician july 26 – kevin spacey , american actor july 29 – sanjay dutt , indian actor august 10 – rosanna arquette , american actress august 14 – marcia gay harden , american actress august 29 – rebecca de mornay , american actress september 14 – haviland morris , american actress september 23 jason alexander , american actor elizabeth pena , american actress , writer , panelist and musician ( died 2014 ) october 3 – greg proops , american actor , stand-up comedian , voice artist and television host october 10 - julia sweeney , american actress , comedian and author october 21 – ken watanabe , japanese actor october 23 – weird al yankovic , american singer , songwriter , musician , record producer , satirist , actor , music video director , and author november 10 - mackenzie phillips , american actress and singer november 14 – paul mcgann , english actor november 19 – allison janney , american actress november 20 – sean young , american actress november 28 – judd nelson , american actor december 13 – johnny whitaker , american actor december 29 – patricia clarkson , american actress december 30 - tracey ullman , british-american actress , comedian , singer , writer , producer and director december 31 – val kilmer , american actor . deaths . january 21 cecil b . demille , 77 , american director and producer , the ten commandments , the greatest show on earth carl switzer , 31 , american singer and actor , our gang february 1 – madame sul-te-wan , 85 , american actress , king of the zombies , in old chicago february 4 – una o'connor , 78 , irish actress , witness for the prosecution , the adventures of robin hood february 5 – gwili andre , 51 , danish actress , secrets of the french police , no other woman february 20 – george archainbaud , 68 , french director , thirteen women , girls of the big house february 22 – helen parrish , 34 , american actress , too many blondes , x marks the spot march 2 – eric blore , 71 , british actor , top hat , the lady eve , the adventures of ichabod and mr . toad march 3 – lou costello , 52 , american comedian and actor , half of abbott and costello comedy team , africa screams , abbott and costello meet frankenstein march 26 – raymond chandler , 70 , american author and screenwriter , the big sleep , double indemnity march 27 – grant withers , 54 , american actor , my darling clementine , fort apache april 12 – james gleason , 76 , american actor , here comes mr . jordan , the bishop 's wife april 17 – cecil cunningham , 70 , american actress , the awful truth , monkey business april 18 – irving cummings , 70 , american director , louisiana purchase , the dolly sisters may 3 – troy sanders , 57 , american score arranger and composer , white christmas , going my way june 2 – lyda borelli , 75 , italian actress , malombra , the moth june 4 – charles vidor , 58 , hungarian director , gilda , love me or leave me june 16 – george reeves , 45 , american actor , gone with the wind , so proudly we hail ! june 18 – ethel barrymore , 79 , american actress , portrait of jennie , the spiral staircase august 6 – preston sturges , 60 , american writer , director , sullivan 's travels , the lady eve september 6 edmund gwenn , 81 , british actor , miracle on 34th street , mister 880 kay kendall , 32 , british actress , genevieve , les girls september 11 – paul douglas , 52 , american actor , a letter to three wives , it happens every spring september 13 – adrian , 56 , american costume designer , the wizard of oz , the women september 14 – wayne morris , 45 , american actor , kid galahad , paths of glory september 25 – helen broderick , 68 , american actress , top hat , swing time september 30 – taylor holmes , 81 , american actor , kiss of death , sleeping beauty october 3 – william bishop , 41 , american actor , harriet craig , top gun october 7 – mario lanza , 38 , american singer and actor , the great caruso , winged victory october 14 – errol flynn , 50 , australian actor , the adventures of robin hood , captain blood october 21 – olive blakeney , 60 , american actress , leave it to blanche , do n't get me wrong october 23 – gerda lundequist , 88 , swedish actress , gosta berlings saga october 30 – noel francis , 53 , american actress , blonde crazy , i am a fugitive from a chain gang november 7 – victor mclaglen , 72 , british actor , the quiet man , gunga din november 20 – sylvia lopez , 26 , french actress , hercules unchained , son of the red corsair november 21 – max baer , 50 , american boxer and actor , the prizefighter and the lady , the harder they fall november 25 – gérard philipe , 36 , french actor , fan-fan the tulip , beauties of the night december 1 – jose nepomuceno , 66 , filipino filmmaker and producer , country maiden , the three humbugs december 22 – gilda gray , 58 , american actress , aloma of the south seas , cabaret december 24 – edmund goulding , 68 , american director , grand hotel , the razor 's edge . film debuts . seymour cassel – shadows james coburn – ride lonesome mia farrow – john paul jones don francks – ivy league killers ( the fast ones ) george hamilton – crime and punishment u.s.a . richard harris – shake hands with the devil shirley knight – five gates to hell martin landau – pork chop hill millie perkins – the diary of anne frank michael j . pollard – it happened to jane jason robards – the journey martin scorsese – vesuvius vi george c . scott – the hanging tree steven spielberg – the last gunfight stella stevens – say one for me billy dee williams – the last angry man . references .