Nocturnal emission

composition . due to the difficulty in collecting ejaculate produced during nocturnal emissions , relatively few studies have examined its composition . in the largest study , which included nocturnal emission samples from 10 men with idiopathic anejaculation , the semen concentration was equivalent to samples obtained from the same men by vibroejaculation , although the proportions of sperm which were mobile and which were of normal morphology were higher in the nocturnal emission specimens . . frequency . in a detailed study , men and women reported that approximately 8 % of their everyday dreams contain some form of sexual-related activity . four percent of sex dreams among both men and women resulted in orgasms . . in males . the frequency of nocturnal emissions is highly variable . some reported that it is due to being sexually inactive for a period of 1–2 weeks , with no engagement in either intercourse or masturbation . some males have experienced large numbers of nocturnal emissions as teenagers , while others have never experienced one . in the u.s . , 83 % of men experience nocturnal emissions at some time in their life . for males who have experienced nocturnal emissions , the mean frequency ranges from 0.36 times per week ( about once every three weeks ) for single 15-year-old males to 0.18 times per week ( about once every five-and-a-half weeks ) for 40-year-old single males . for married males , the mean ranges from 0.23 times per week ( about once per month ) for 19-year-old married males to 0.15 times per week ( about once every two months ) for 50-year-old married males . in some parts of the world , nocturnal emissions are more common . for example , in indonesia surveys have shown that 97 % of men experience nocturnal emissions by the age of 24 . some males have the emissions only at a certain age , while others have them throughout their lives following puberty . the frequency with which one has nocturnal emissions has not been conclusively linked to frequency of masturbation . alfred kinsey found there may be '' some correlation between the frequencies of masturbation and the frequencies of nocturnal emissions . in general the males who have the highest frequencies of nocturnal emissions may have somewhat lower rates of masturbation . '' one factor that can affect the number of nocturnal emissions males have is whether they take testosterone-based drugs . in a 1998 study by finkelstein et al , the number of boys reporting nocturnal emissions drastically increased as their testosterone doses were increased , from 17 % of subjects with no treatment to 90 % of subjects at a high dose . thirteen percent of males experience their first ejaculation as a result of a nocturnal emission . kinsey found that males experiencing their first ejaculation through a nocturnal emission were older than those experiencing their first ejaculation by means of masturbation . the study indicates that such a first ejaculation resulting from a nocturnal emission was delayed a year or more from what would have been developmentally possible for such males through physical stimulation . . in females . the frequency of nocturnal emissions is variable , just as with males . in 1953 , sex researcher alfred kinsey found that nearly 40 % of the women he interviewed have had one or more nocturnal orgasms or wet dreams . those who reported experiencing these said that they usually had them several times a year and that they first occurred as early as thirteen , and usually by the age of 21 . kinsey defined female nocturnal orgasm as sexual arousal during sleep that awakens one to perceive the experience of orgasm . research published by barbara l wells in the 1986 journal of sex research indicates that as many as 85 % of women have experienced nocturnal orgasm by the age of 21 . this research was based on women waking up with/during orgasm . studies have found that more males have more frequent spontaneous nocturnal sexual experiences than females . female wet dreams may be more difficult to identify with certainty than male wet dreams because ejaculation is usually associated with male orgasm while vaginal lubrication may not indicate orgasm . . lucid dreaming . sexual activity is a commonly reported theme of lucid dreams . garfield , 1979 ; laberge , 1985 laberge , greenleaf , and kedzierski ( 1983 ) undertook a pilot study to determine the extent to which subjectively experienced sexual activity during rem lucid dreaming would be reflected in physiological responses : . cultural views . there are numerous cultural and religious views on nocturnal emissions . below is a limited summary of some perspectives . antiquity . in ancient rome nocturnal emission was perceived as quite natural , as noted by lucretius in his de rerum natura ( translated here by william ellery leonard ) : the first of these is part of a passage stating similar regulations about sexual intercourse and menstruation . leviticus 12 makes similar regulations about childbirth . a third passage relates more specifically to kohen , requiring any '' of the offspring of aaron who has . a discharge '' , among other causes of ritual defilement , to abstain from eating holy offerings until after a ritual immersion in a mikveh and until the subsequent night-fall . in judaism , the tikkun haklali , also known as '' the general remedy , '' is a set of ten psalms designed in 1805 by rebbe nachman , whose recital is intended to serve as repentance for nocturnal emissions . patristic christian . saint augustine held that male nocturnal emissions , unlike masturbation , did not pollute the conscience of a man , because they were not voluntary carnal acts , and were therefore not to be considered a sin . this view is confirmed by the protestant theologian philip schaff . s.23 . islamic . a wet dream , ihtilam ) is not a sin in islam . moreover , whereas a person fasting ( in ramadan or otherwise ) would normally be considered to have broken their fast by ejaculating on purpose ( during either masturbation or intercourse ) , nocturnal emission is not such a cause . however , they are still required to bathe prior to undergoing some rituals in the religion . muslim scholars consider ejaculation something that makes one temporarily ritually impure , a condition known as junub ; meaning that a muslim who has had an orgasm or ejaculated must have a ghusl ( consisting of ablution followed by bathing the entire body so that not a single hair remains dry on the whole body — may also require one to rub the body according to maliki , dalk in arabic — while showering ) before they can read any verse of the qur'an or perform the salat . informal supplications and prayers ( du ' a ) do not require such a bath . medieval . in european folklore , nocturnal emissions were believed to be caused by a succubus copulating with the individual at night , an event associated with sleep paralysis and possibly night terrors . see also . nocturnal penile tumescence nocturnal clitoral tumescence sleep sex somnophilia nocturnal enuresis . references . . external links . nightfall treatment at ayurved research foundation