Arson

etymology . the term derives from law french arsoun ( late 13th century ) , from old french , from late latin '' a burning , '' from the verb ardere , '' to burn . '' the old english term was bærnet , lit . '' burning '' ; and edward coke has indictment of burning ( 1640 ) . arsonist is from 1864 . dictionary.com . online etymology dictionary . douglas harper , historian . ( accessed : january 27 , 2008 ) . english common law . historically , the common law crime of arson had four elements : the malicious burning of the dwelling of another ; malicious : for purposes of common law arson , '' malicious '' refers to action creating a great risk of a burning . ; burning : at common law charring to any part of dwelling was sufficient to satisfy this element . no significant amount of damage to the dwelling was required . any injury or damage to the structure caused by exposure to heat or flame is sufficient . ; of the dwelling : 'dwelling ' refers to a place of residence . the destruction of an unoccupied building was not considered arson : '' . since arson protected habitation , the burning of an unoccupied house did not constitute arson . '' at common law a structure did not become a residence until the first occupants had moved in , and ceased to be a dwelling if the occupants abandoned the premises with no intention of resuming their residency . boyce & perkins , criminal law , 3rd ed . ( 1992 ) at 280 , 281 . dwelling includes structures and outbuildings within the curtilage . boyce & perkins , criminal law , 3rd ed . ( 1992 ) at 281 . dwellings were not limited to houses . a barn could be the subject of arson if occupied as a dwelling . ; of another : burning one 's own dwelling does not constitute common law arson , even if the purpose was to collect insurance , because '' it was generally assumed in early england that one had the legal right to destroy his own property in any manner he chose '' . moreover , for purposes of common law arson , possession or occupancy rather than title determines whose dwelling the structure is . thus a tenant who sets fire to his rented house would not be guilty of common law arson , while the landlord who set fire to a rented dwelling house would be guilty . degrees . many u.s . state legal systems and the legal systems of several other countries divide arson into degrees , depending sometimes on the value of the property but more commonly on its use and whether the crime was committed in the day or night . first-degree arson – burning an occupied structure such as a school or a place where people are normally present second-degree arson – burning an unoccupied building such as an empty barn or an unoccupied house or other structure in order to claim insurance on such property third-degree arson – burning an abandoned building or an abandoned area , such as a field , forest or woods . many statutes vary the degree of the crime according to the criminal intent of the accused . some us states use other degrees of arson , such as '' fourth '' and '' fifth '' degree , while some states do not categorize arson by any degree . for example , in the state of tennessee , arson is categorized as '' arson '' and '' aggravated arson '' . united states . in the united states , the common law elements of arson are often varied in different jurisdictions . for example , the element of '' dwelling '' is no longer required in most states , and arson occurs by the burning of any real property without consent or with unlawful intent . see u.s . v . miller ' , 246 fed.appx . 369 ( c.a.6 ( tenn . ) 2007 ) ; u.s . v . velasquez-reyes , 427 f.3d 1227 , 1230–1231 and n . 2 ( 9th cir.2005 ) . arson is prosecuted with attention to degree of severity in the alleged offense . first degree arson see u.s . v . miller , 246 fed.appx . 369 ( c.a.6 ( tenn . ) 2007 ) generally occurs when people are harmed or killed in the course of the fire , while second degree arson occurs when significant destruction of property occurs . while usually a felony , arson may also be prosecuted as a misdemeanor , '' mischief '' , or '' destruction of property . '' burglary also occurs , if the arson involved a '' breaking and entering '' . 3 charles e . torcia , wharton 's criminal law § 326 ( 14th ed . 1980 ) a person may be sentenced to death if arson occurred as a method of homicide , as was the case in california of esperanza fire and in texas of cameron todd willingham . in new york , arson is charged in five degrees . arson in the first degree is a class a-1 felony and requires the intent to burn the building with a person inside using an explosive incendiary device . it has a maximum sentence of 25 years to life . in california , a conviction for arson of property that is not one 's own is a felony punishable by up to three years in state prison . aggravated arson , which carries the most severe punishment for arson , is punishable by 10 years to life in state prison . raymond lee oyler was ultimately convicted of murder and sentenced to death for esperanza fire that led to the deaths of five u.s . forest service firefighters ; he was the first u.s . citizen to receive such a conviction and penalty for wildfire arson . some states , such as california , prosecute the lesser offense of '' reckless burning '' when the fire is set recklessly as opposed to wilfully and maliciously . the study of the causes is the subject of fire investigation . england , wales , and hong kong . in english law , arson was a common law offence ( except for the offence of arson in royal dockyards ) . dealing with the criminal destruction of buildings by fire . the common law offence was abolished by s.11 ( 1 ) of the criminal damage act 1971 . the 1971 act makes no distinction as to mode of destruction except that s.1 ( 3 ) requires that if the destruction is by fire , the offence is charged as arson ; s.4 of the act provides a maximum penalty of life imprisonment for conviction under s.1 whether or not the offence is charged as arson . in hong kong , the common law offence was abolished by s 67 of the crimes ordinance ( part viii of which , as amended by crimes ( amendment ) ordinance 1972 , legco.gov.hk mirrored the english criminal damage act 1971 ) . hklii.hk like the english counterparts , 63 of the 1972 ordinance provides a maximum penalty of life imprisonment , and s 60 ( 3 ) of the ordinance requires that if the damage is by fire the offence should be charged as arson . scotland . while scotland has no offence known as arson statutorily defined in their legal system , there are many offences that are used to charge those with acts that would normally constitute arson in other nations . events constituting arson in english law might be dealt with as one or more of a variety of offences such as wilful fire-raising , culpable and reckless conduct , vandalism or other offences depending on the circumstances of the event . the more serious offences ( in particular wilful fire-raising and culpable and reckless conduct ) can incur a sentence of life imprisonment . see also . arson in royal dockyards fire investigation firefighter arson herostratus incendiary weapons insurance fraud john leonard orr john magno margaret clark pyromania reckless burning molotov cocktail . references . further reading . white , j . & dalby , j . t . , 2000 . arson . in d . mercer , t . mason , m . mckeown , g . mccann ( eds ) forensic mental health care . edinburgh : churchill livingston . external links . how to combat arson an actual arson investigation report