Gavrila Derzhavin

education . as members of the nobility , albeit minor , the derzhavins were required to educate their children , but options were limited given their poverty and the few educational institutions in russia at the time . male members of the nobility were expected to enter government roles as civil servants or military officers at age 20 . nobility unable to send their children to one of the three educational institutions were given a waiver to educate their children at home , but the children were given examinations at 7 , 12 and 16 to inspect their progress . known as ganyushka , gavrilo 's education began at age 3 when he was taught to read and write by local churchmen ( as his mother was essentially illiterate ) . when he was 8 , the family was sent to orenburg near present-day kazakhstan . the russian empire , eager to extend its reach , sent convicts to orenburg to construct the city . a german named joseph rose opened a co-ed school to instruct the children of the nobility . rose , in addition to being a criminal , had no formal education and was only able to instruct the children in the german language , which was then the most desirable language among the enlightened class in russia . when gavrila was 10 , the derzhavins moved back to their estates in kazan after two years in orenburg . in the fall of 1753 , he made his first trip to moscow . roman derzhavin , who was suffering from consumption , needed to formally apply for retirement in moscow , and then planned to continue to saint petersburg to register his son for future enlistment as required . however , he was delayed in moscow until early january ; by the time he received his discharge , he had no money to continue the journey to saint petersburg . they were forced to return to kazan , where his father died later that year . his father owned half the land in sokury , which gavrila inherited along with other estates in laishevsky . however , they provided very little income and the neighbors continued to encroach on their lands , flooding their estates or simply seizing land for themselves . his mother , a penniless widow with no powerful relatives , was unable to get any redress in the courts and was snubbed by judges . derzhavin later wrote that his '' mother 's suffering from injustice remained eternally etched on his heart . '' nevertheless , his mother was able to hire two tutors to teach her sons geometry and arithmetic . in 1758 , a new school opened in kazan , saving his mother the difficulty of sending him to saint petersburg . the grammar school offered instruction in latin , french , german , and arithmetic , as well as dancing , fencing and music . the instruction quality was still poor overall , with no textbooks . the school also offered opportunities for the students to perform tragedies by molière and alexander sumarokov . derzhavin eventually excelled in geometry and was informed he would be joining the corps of engineers in saint petersburg . however , a bureaucratic mistake led to him being made a private in the preobrazhensky regiment , the bodyguards of the royal family . . career . in saint petersburg , derzhavin rose from the ranks as a common soldier to the highest offices of state under catherine the great . he first impressed his commanders during pugachev 's rebellion . politically astute , his career advanced when he left the military service for civil service . he rose to the position of governor of olonets ( 1784 ) and tambov ( 1785 ) , personal secretary to the empress ( 1791 ) , president of the college of commerce ( 1794 ) , and finally the minister of justice ( 1802 ) . he was dismissed from his post in 1803 and spent much of the rest of his life in the country estate at zvanka near novgorod , writing idylls and anacreon . at his saint petersburg house , he held monthly meetings of the conservative lovers of the russian word society . he died in 1816 and was buried in the khutyn monastery near zvanka , reburied by the soviets in the novgorod kremlin , and then reinterred at khutyn . works . derzhavin is best remembered for his odes , dedicated to the empress and other courtiers . he paid little attention to the prevailing system of genres , and many a time would fill an ode with elegiac , humorous , or satiric contents . in his grand ode to the empress , for instance , he mentions searching for fleas in his wife 's hair and compares his own poetry with lemonade . unlike other classicist poets , derzhavin found delight in carefully chosen details , such as a colour of wallpaper in his bedroom or a poetic inventory of his daily meal . he believed that french was a language of harmony but that russian was a language of conflict . although he relished harmonious alliterations , sometimes he deliberately instrumented his verse with cacophonous effect . derzhavin 's major odes were the impeccable '' on the death of prince meschersky '' ( 1779 ) ; the playful '' ode to felica '' ( 1782 ) ; the lofty '' god '' ( 1785 ) , which was translated into many european languages ; '' waterfall '' ( 1794 ) , occasioned by the death of prince potemkin ; and '' bullfinch '' ( 1800 ) , a poignant elegy on the death of his friend suvorov . he also provided lyrics for the first russian national anthem , grom pobedy , razdavajsya ! in 1800 , derzhavin wrote the political work opinion in response to a request by emperor paul i to investigate recent famines in mogilev governorate . in the opinion , derzhavin blamed belorussian famines on the '' mercenary trades '' of jews , who exploited peasants through leaseholding of estates and distilling of alcohol , as well as the indifference of the local magnates who allowed this exploitation to occur . in response to these issues , derzhavin proposed a series of reforms to substantially restrict the freedoms of the magnates , abolish the jewish qahal , end the autonomy of the russian jewish community , and resettle russian jews in colonies along the black sea . the opinion became an influential source of information during the early reign of alexander i , who eventually implemented several of derzhavin 's suggested reforms in the 1804 statute concerning the organization of the jews . aleksandr sozhenitsyn in his book - two hundred years together : history of the jews in russia , disputed the allegation of antisemitism taken from the jewish encyclopedia responding : . influence . according to d.s . mirsky , '' derzhavin 's poetry is a universe of amazing richness ; its only drawback was that the great poet was of no use either as a master or as an example . he did nothing to raise the level of literary taste or to improve the literary language , and as for his poetical flights , it was obviously impossible to follow him into those giddy spheres . '' d.s . mirsky . a history of russian literature . northwestern university press , 1999 . page 53 . nevertheless , nikolai nekrasov professed to follow derzhavin rather than pushkin , and derzhavin 's line of broken rhythms was continued by marina tsvetaeva in the 20th century . the name of gavrila derzhavin was assigned to tambov state university . . memorable lines . gde stol byl yastv , tam grob stoit ( где стол был яств , там гроб стоит . english : where used to be a table full of viands , a coffin now stands ) i 'm a czar - i 'm a slave - i 'm a worm - i 'm a god ( я - царь , я - раб , я - червь , я - бог , ya tsar , - ya rab , - ya cherv , - ya bog ) …heart of a lion , wings of an eagle are no longer with us ! – how can we fight ? ( львиного сердца , крыльев орлиных нет теперь с нами . что воевать ? ) . lines found at derzhavin 's table after his death . image : pushkin derzhavin.jpg thumb 300px 16-year-old pushkin reciting his poem before old derzhavin in the tsarskoye selo lyceum ( 1911 painting by ilya repin ) . : the current of time 's river : will carry off all human deeds : and sink into oblivion : all peoples , kingdoms and their kings . : and if there 's something that remains : through sounds of horn and lyre , : it too will disappear into the maw of time : and not avoid the common pyre . . notes . further reading . y . k . grot . life of derzhavin . spb , 1883 - great biography by a first-rank scholar khodasevich . derzhavin . berlin , 1931 - a literary masterpiece in its own right . ( published in english as derzhavin by university of wisconsin press in 2007 ) his memoir zapiski has been reprinted by oriental research partners ( newtonville , ma ) in 1973 with a new introduction by prof . richard wortman , university of chicago . external links . collection of poems by gavrila derzhavin ( english translations ) illustrated timeline acrostic - how mighty time strives like a river ( english translation ) luba golburt , '' derzhavin 's monuments : sculpture , poetry , and the materiality of history '' , toronto slavic quarterly 13 , summer 2005 , retrieved 23 october 2006 .