V.

plot summary . the novel alternates between episodes featuring benny , stencil and other members of the whole sick crew ( including profane 's sidekick pig bodine ) in 1956 ( with a few minor flashbacks ) , and a generation-spanning plot that comprises stencil 's attempts to unravel the clues he believes will lead him to '' v . '' ( or to the various incarnations thereof ) . each of these '' stencilised '' chapters is set at a different moment of historical crisis ; the framing narrative involving stencil , '' v . '' , and the diary of stencil 's british spy/diplomat father threads the sequences together . the novel 's two storylines increasingly converge in the last chapters ( the intersecting lines forming a v-shape , as it were ) , as stencil hires benny to travel with him to malta . chapter one : '' in which benny profane , a schlemihl and human yo-yo , gets to an apocheir '' . the opening chapter is set in norfolk , virginia christmas eve , 1955 . benny profane , a recently discharged seaman , is at a local sailor bar called the '' sailor 's grave '' in which every waitress is named beatrice and the beer taps are rubber model breasts that the sailors suck on . here profane meets ploy , a short violent sailor , his musician friend dewey gland , and the maltese barmaid paola hod . bar owner mrs . buffo begins to play a rendition of it came upon the midnight clear to celebrate christmas only to be immediately assaulted by ploy and the rest of the intoxicated sailors . the disorder triggers a raid by the military police . pig bodine , paola , dewey gland and profane escape the chaos to pig 's apartment . chapter two : '' the whole sick crew '' . the chapter opens with rachel owlglass confronting the plastic surgeon shale schoenmaker whom she accuses of manipulating her friend and roommate esther havitz into debt through repeated rhinoplasty . schoenmaker responds by entering into a monologue on the nature of jewish women and the nature of appearance . section ii is set during a party at rachel 's apartment attended by the '' sick crew '' , paola , esther , and debb . this section introduces the character herbert stencil , a troubled man who is obsessed with his father 's mysterious death in malta ( even more mysterious as sidney stencil , herbert 's father , was a british secret agent ) and the identity of '' v '' , a woman mentioned in his journal . chapter three : '' in which stencil , a quick-change artist , does eight impersonations '' . this chapter , set among the british community in egypt toward the end of the 19th century , consists of an introduction and a series of eight relatively short sections , each of them from the point of view of a different person . the eight sections come together to tell a story of murder and intrigue , intersecting the life of a young woman , victoria wren , the first incarnation of v . the title is a hint as to how this chapter is to be understood : stencil imagines each of the eight viewpoints as he reconstructs & mdash ; we do not know on how much knowledge and how much conjecture & mdash ; this episode . this chapter is a reworking of pynchon 's short story '' under the rose '' , which was first published in 1961 and is collected in slow learner ( 1984 ) . in the slow learner introduction , pynchon admits he took the details of the setting ( '' right down to the names of the diplomatic corps '' ) from karl baedeker 's 1899 travel guide for egypt . stencil 's reconstruction follows the same basic conflict as '' under the rose '' , but it gives the non-european characters much more personality . chapter four : in which esther gets a nose job . section i details the history of shale schoenmaker , m.d . and how he began his career as a plastic surgeon . during world war i he eagerly enlists in the a.e.f . hoping to become a pilot but , is instead given a position as an engineer . while serving he witnesses evan godolphin , a handsome pilot whom he idealized , become horribly disfigured during an air raid . a month later schoenmaker visits godolphin in the hospital while he is recovering from reconstructive surgery , discovering that an incompetent surgeon , halidom , treated him using the archaic method that would inevitably lead to further disfigurement by infection . this event traumatizes schoenmaker , causing him to now see it as his mission to help people like godolphin , a conviction that slowly decays over time . stencil comes across schoenmaker in his search for v . and refers esther to him for her nose job . at a follow-up appointment esther and schoenmaker become lovers . chapter five : in which stencil nearly goes west with an alligator . only marginally part of the stencil/v . material , this chapter follows benny and others , as benny has a job hunting sewer alligator under manhattan . it figures in the stencil/v . story in that there is a rat named '' veronica '' who figures in a subplot about a mad priest — father linus fairing , s.j . — some decades back , living in the sewers and preaching to the rats ; we hear from him in the form of his diary . stencil himself makes a brief appearance toward the end of the chapter . chapter six : in which profane returns to street level . the chapter follows profane , geronimo , angel , and his sister josephine '' fina '' into the city over several nights of drinking . fina and profane 's relationship develops amid concerns over her status within a local mercenary street gang known as the playboys , who see her as a spiritual figurehead . the chapter ends amid a massive brawl , nearby which fina is found lying naked and smiling . chapter seven : she hangs on the western wall . in florence in 1899 , victoria appears again , briefly , but so does the place name '' vheissu '' , which may or may not stand for vesuvius , venezuela , a crude interpretation of wie heißt du , translating into who are you in the german language , or even ( one character jokes ) venus . the chapter also revolves around an attempted burglary of botticelli 's the birth of venus by hugh godolphin through the venezuelan consulate . chapter eight : in which rachel gets her yo-yo back , roony sings a song , and stencil calls on bloody chiclitz . the chapter begins with benny profane , freshly unemployed after being laid-off from sewer-alligator hunting , in search of a job in manhattan . after briefly contemplating the nature of money on a park bench , he , by chance , looks at an advertisement issued by the time/space employment agency . once arriving at the agency he finds , much to his annoyance , that the secretary is his former lover rachel owlglass . in section iv stencil continues his investigation of the perplexing '' v . '' ( whom he now believes is either victoria or the rat veronica ) meeting up with a yoyodyne engineer kurt mondaugen . chapter nine : mondaugen 's story . kurt mondaugen , who will appear again in gravity 's rainbow , is the central character in a story set in south west africa ( now namibia ) partly during a siege in 1922 at which one vera meroving is present , but most notably in 1904 , during the herero wars , when south west africa was a german colony . chapter ten : in which various sets of young people get together . mcclintic sphere , an alto sax player in a jazz band , returns home to his boarding house in harlem . the previous week , spent playing primarily for condescending , snobby ivy league students , has left him exhausted , and he relaxes in his room with a prostitute named ruby . benny , meanwhile , finally gets a job at anthroresearch associates , where he 's introduced to shroud , a synthetic humanoid with whom he holds imaginary conversations . pig bodine and roony winsome get into a fight , based on roony 's suspicion that pig is involved with his ( roony 's ) wife , mafia . meanwhile , mafia aggressively pursues sex with benny , who declines . schoenmaker and esther get into a few arguments because he says he wants to bring out her inner beauty by performing more plastic surgery on her . the chapter finishes out with the whole sick crew hanging out in various places : sheridan square , the rusty spoon , slab in front of his cheese danish no . 35 canvas . stencil , looking for rachel at her apartment , comes upon paola who gives him the confessions of fausto maijstral . chapter eleven : confessions of fausto maijstral . fausto maijstral , maltese civilian suffering under the german bombardment and working to clear the rubble during world war ii writes a long letter to his daughter paola , who figures in the benny profane story ; the letter comes into stencil 's hands . the letter includes copious quotations from fausto 's diary . besides the place name valletta , v . figures in the story as an old — or possibly not-so-old — woman crushed by a beam of a fallen building . chapter twelve : in which things are not so amusing . roony and mafia continue fighting , so roony meets up with mcclintic at the v-note , and they travel to lenox , massachusetts . returning to matilda 's boardinghouse , they meet up with ruby , who roony recognizes as being a member of the crew in disguise . esther tells slab she is pregnant . he wants to send her to cuba to get an abortion , and raises the money by announcing his intentions and asking for money at a party the crew is throwing in an abandoned warehouse . roony 's attempts to deal with his wife then take a dark turn , but he is saved by pig . at an airport , esther and slab attempt to catch esther a flight to cuba , but meet some resistance . paola , traveling with mcclintic , reveals her true identity to him . he delivers the line , '' keep cool , but care , '' considered the novel 's central theme , as they drive off into the berkshires . chapter thirteen : in which the yo-yo string is revealed as a state of mind . benny loses his job at anthroresearch associates by sleeping in and not being at work to notify the attendant technician that several calamities have occurred in the lab . rachel nudges him to get a new job , and says that she will find one for him herself . an amusing story unfolds about benny and pig during their scaffold days . benny , unable and unwilling to get work , instead takes a self-described vacation and chooses to spend his spare time at the rusty spoon . he gets drunk with stencil , who relates the entirety his knowledge of v . as it stands to this point in the novel . valletta being the last place on stencil 's journey to find information about v . , he asks benny to accompany him and paola to the island . benny and stencil commit a robbery in perilous circumstances , and then , in late september , they embark for malta with paola on board the susanna squaducci . chapter fourteen : v . in love . in this chapter v . is entranced by a young ballerina , mélanie l'heuremaudit . the story centers on a riotous ballet performance , almost certainly modeled in part on the premiere of igor stravinsky 's the rite of spring . the performance centers on a virgin sacrifice by impalement . the young ballerina fails to wear her protective equipment and actually dies by impalement in the course of the performance ; everyone assumes her death throes simply to be an uncharacteristically emotional performance . chapter fifteen : sahha . benny and pig bodine have one last adventure with two girls , flip and flop , as they all get drunk and wander around washington d.c . there are two going away parties for benny , and the chapter ends with benny , stencil , and paola leaving for malta aboard the susanna squaducci as the crew looks on and says goodbye . chapter sixteen : valletta . image : kilroyschematic.svg thumb right '' kilroy '' schematic . technically , a band-pass filter . as the royal navy mass on malta in the early stages of the suez crisis , stencil arrives with benny in tow , searching for fausto maijstral . ( as always , kilroy was here first , and pynchon proposes a novel origin for the face : that kilroy was originally a schematic for part of a band-pass filter . ) . epilogue . the last chapter is a flashback to valletta when stencil , sr . was still alive . after world war i he is sent to malta to observe the various crises going on involving the natives and their desire for independence . he is implored by maijstral 's wife ( who is pregnant with fausto ) to relieve him of his duties as a double agent because she fears for his life . stencil , sr . meets veronica manganese or v and implicitly has sex with her ( she is now largely made up of artificial limbs ) . it is revealed they had trysted in florence after the riots . he finds out that maijstral is having an affair with her as well . linus fairing is also working as a double agent for stencil , and when he leaves for america , having tired of the life of a spy , stencil 's purpose for being in malta is null . v releases stencil from her auspices and maijstral as well . stencil sails off into the mediterranean and a waterspout blows the ship up into the air , then down into the depths , not too dissimilar from the conclusion of another american masterpiece , moby-dick , also a sailor 's story . characters . major characters . benny profane – the protagonist and a self-proclaimed human yo-yo rachel owlglass – an upper-class woman from the affluent five towns on the south shore of long island herbert stencil – a troubled englishman who is obsessed with the identity of '' v . '' a woman who is mentioned in his father 's journal written shortly before he disappeared in malta . stencil speaks almost exclusively in the narration . minor characters . clayton '' bloody '' chiclitz , the founder of yoyodyne inc . angel – puerto rican sewer alligator hunter and friend of profane fina – angel 's sister , she acts as a saint to the playboy gang , often quelling disputes between them and other gangs over territory . in chapter six it is heavily implied that she is raped by the same gang . geronimo slab melvin raoul debb sensay brad roony winsome mafia winsome paola maijstral – maltese immigrant who profane estimates to be roughly sixteen . sometime during world war ii , paola marries pappy hod to gain entrance to the united states . esther harvitz – rachel 's jewish roommate whom rachel financially supports . mcclintic sphere ferguson mixolydian – an '' irish armenian jew '' and the '' laziest living being in nueva york '' . ferguson is so lethargic that the only activity that he takes part in excluding television is once a week '' to fiddle around at the kitchen sink with dry cells , retorts , alembics , salts solutions . '' shale schoenmaker , m.d . – a jewish plastic surgeon who specializes in rhinoplasty . schoenmaker decides to become a plastic surgeon during world war i while working as an engineer in the aviation section . during this time he witnesses pilot evan godolphin become disfigured after a mission in which his plane was heavily damaged . dudley eigenvalue , d.d.s , -- stencil 's dentist and '' psychodontist '' in whom he confides . eigenvalue also possesses a prized pair of titanium dentures in a museum display case in his offices . ploy – an engineer on the mine sweeper impulsive . standing five feet tall in boots , ploy has an extremely violent temperament , oftentimes attempting to start fights with the largest sailors . ten months before the beginning of the first chapter ploy 's teeth are removed by the navy , being replaced by a pair of dentures . ploy entertains himself by biting barmaids at the sailor 's grave on the buttocks . pig bodine – a perverted member of the sick crew . prior to joining the crew , bodine was enlisted on the u.s.s . scaffold where he operated a pornographic lending library and would write fetish erotica using the ship telegraph . bodine 's knees have the odd ability to lock in place allowing him to effectively sleep while standing , much to the astonishment of the navy physicians . kurt mondaugen – an engineer who works at yoyodyne who is interviewed by stencil . analysis and reception . time wrote '' in this sort of book , there is no total to arrive at . nothing makes any waking sense . but it makes a powerful , deeply disturbing dream sense . nothing in the book seems to have been thrown in arbitrarily , merely to confuse , as is the case when inept authors work at illusion . pynchon appears to be indulging in the fine , pre-freudian luxury of dreams dreamt for the dreaming . the book sails with majesty through caverns measureless to man . what does it mean ? who , finally , is v . ? few books haunt the waking or the sleeping mind , but this is one . who , indeed ? '' time magazine : a myth of alligators , review of thomas pynchon 's v . , friday , mar . 15 , 1963 tony tanner considered the novel an exploration of the plots individuals ascribe onto the ambivalent universe they have no choice but to confront , during a 20th-century period in which genuine communication between individuals has been eroded and in which ambiguous societal forces are at work ( intentionally or inadvertently ) towards a state of entropy ; '' shroud asks , 'has it occurred to you there may be no more standards for crazy or sane , now that it 's started ? ' and benny answers , 'what , for christ 's sake ? ' what the 'it ' is that has started ( if there is an 'it ' ) , what common process links remote imperialist incidents with contemporary automation , tourism , hitler , and the whole sick crew ( if there is any linking common process ) —this is what the whole book is about . '' writing in the new york times , george plimpton called pynchon '' a young writer of staggering promise '' , lauding his '' vigorous and imaginative style '' , '' robust humor '' and '' tremendous reservoir of information '' . new york times : books , pynchon 's v . , may 18 , 1997 in 1964 , the novel was awarded a william faulkner foundation award for best debut novel . there is an interesting connection to so many doors , a 1951 crime novel written by oakley hall , an author pynchon for whom has expressed admiration . in that novel a character named vasilia baird is murdered and it is revealed that many suspects knew her only as '' v . '' . editions . in 2012 it emerged that there were multiple versions of v . in circulation . this was due to the fact that pynchon 's final modifications were made after the first edition was printed and thus were only implemented in the british , or jonathan cape , edition and the bantam paperback . the fact was forgotten soon after in the u.s . , so most us editions , including the newly released ebook , follow the first printing and are therefore unauthorized versions of the text , while the british editions , which follow the first edition printed by jonathan cape , contain pynchon 's final revisions . . references to v . in other works . the line '' yesterday 's headlines blown by the wind '' in english rock band radiohead 's 2003 song '' scatterbrain '' was inspired by a passage from the novel . mimi and richard fariña 's 1965 debut album , celebrations for a grey day , includes an instrumental entitled '' v . '' which is linked directly to the novel in the liner notes . steven moore , '' pynchon on record , '' pynchon notes no . 10 ( october 1982 ) , p . 56 . a suite of songs on the 1969 album volume two by soft machine is titled '' esther 's nose job '' , referring to chapter 4 : '' in which esther gets a nose job . '' the suite was written by keyboardist mike ratledge ; marcus o'dair notes that v . '' was a major influence for ratledge at the time '' ( different every time : the authorised biography of robert wyatt serpent 's tail , 2014 , p . 107 ) . the english band benny profane took their name from pynchon 's character . larkin , colin : '' the guinness who 's who of indie and new wave music '' , 1992 , guinness , the insect trust 's 1970 album hoboken saturday night includes the song '' eyes of a new york woman '' , with lyrics taken from the novel . the same lyrics form the basis of a different song , '' v . in love '' , from the album colour out of space by favorite color . '' music inspired by the novels of thomas pynchon '' alan moore ’ s v for vendetta includes the title character v quoting and reading from pynchon ’ s book . some aspects of paul thomas anderson 's the master ( 2012 ) are based on v . , such as the protagonist being a discharged sailor and his connection with a cult-like group of individuals . references . bibliography . grant , j . kerry . a companion to v . athens : university of georgia press , 2001 . simonetti , paolo and umberto rossi ( eds . ) . dream tonight of peacock 's tails : essays on the fiftieth anniversary of thomas pynchon 's v . newcastle upon tyne : cambridge scholars publishing , 2015 . external links . v . wiki pynchonwiki.com v . cover art over time thomaspynchon.com