Diodotus I

background and satrapy . the region of bactria , which encompassed the oxus river in modern afghanistan and tajikistan , was conquered by alexander the great between 329 and 327 bc and he settled a number of his veterans in the region . in the wars which followed alexander 's death in 323 bc , the region was largely left to its own devices , but it was incorporated in the seleucid empire by seleucus i between 308 and 305 bc , along with the rest of the territories that alexander had conquered in iran and central asia . seleucus entrusted the region to his son and co-regent , antiochus i , around 295 bc . between 295 and 281 bc , antiochus i established firm seleucid control over the region . the region was divided into a number of satrapy ( provinces ) , of which bactria was one . antiochus founded or refounded a number of cities on the greek model in the region and he opened a number of mints to produce coinage on the attic weight standard . after antiochus i succeeded his father as ruler of the seleucid empire in 281 bc , he entrusted the east to his own son , antiochus ii who remained in this position until he in turn succeeded to the throne in 261 bc . diodotus ' place and date of birth are not attested . he probably became seleucid satrap ( governor ) of bactria during antiochus ii 's period in charge of the east , thus about a generation after the original establishment of seleucid control over the region . the babylonian astronomical diaries record that an unnamed bactrian satrap sent a herd of twenty war elephants to babylon at the beginning of 273 bc to join the seleucid forces fighting against ptolemaic egypt in the first syrian war . astronomical diaries i , p . 345 , no . –273b ‘ rev . 30 ’ - 32 ’ this satrap may have been diodotus , or a predecessor . first proposed by . expresses great scepticism . archaeological evidence for the period comes largely from excavations of the city of ai-khanoum , where this period saw the expansion of irrigation networks , the construction and expansion of civic buildings , and some military activity , probably raiding by nomads from the central asian steppe . as satrap , diodotus was probably involved in these matters , though the specifics are not recoverable . . secession from the seleucid realm . at some point , diodotus seceded from the seleucid empire , establishing his realm as an independent kingdom , known in modern scholarship as the graeco-bactrian kingdom . the event is mentioned briefly by the roman historian justin : the date of this event is unclear . the literary evidence is as follows : justin says that the rebellion occurred 'around the same time ' as the parni conquest of parthia from the seleucid realm , but his dating of this event is confused—he places it in 256 bc , but during the reign of seleucus ii ( 246-225 bc ) . justin , epitome of pompeius trogus 41.4 strabo further claims that arsaces , the leader of the parni , had been based in bactria before the conquest . he says that diodotus drove arsaces out of bactria and maintained hostilities against the parni . strabo 11.9.3 ammianus marcellinus places the parthian rebellion in the reign of a seleucus ( ii ? ) . ammianus marcellinus 23.6.2-3 arrian 's lost parthian history seems to have claimed that the seleucid satrap who was overthrown by the parthians was appointed to that position by antiochus ii . arrian fgrh f30a appian states that the parthian rebellion took place in 246 bc , during the third syrian war , in the wake of ptolemy iii 's conquest of seleucid syria and babylon . appian syriaca 65 the adulis inscription set up by ptolemy iii to celebrate this event claims that bactria was among ptolemy 's conquests , which is hyperbole but might indicate that bactria had been part of the seleucid empire up to this point . different scholars have argued for a 'high chronology ' which places diodotus ' independence around 255 bc in the reign of antiochus ii , or a 'low chronology ' which dates the secession around 245 bc at the beginning of the reign of seleucus ii . several scholars have expressed pessimism about the possibility of resolving this debate with the available evidence . frank holt argues that the secession should be seen as a gradual process in which diodotus and other eastern seleucid satraps aggregated ever more autonomy , rather than a single event . in his opinion , the process probably began in the 250s bc and was completed in the reign of seleucus ii . the archaeological evidence reveals no signs of discontinuity or destruction in this period . the transition from seleucid rule to independence thus seems to have been accomplished peacefully . before diodotus came to power , there was already a mint in bactria—based at ai-khanoum or at bactra , which minted royal coinage in the name of the seleucid sovereign , with the reigning seleucid king 's portrait on the obverse and an image of apollo , the seleucid patron deity , sitting on an omphalus . as satrap , diodotus continued to issue these coins , in the name of antiochus ii . this included gold staters , silver tetradrachms , drachms , and hemidrachms , and some bronze coins . none of them seem to have been issued in great quantity . probably while he was still satrap , diodotus introduced a new coinage , which consisted of a large number of silver tetradrachms and , later , a small number of gold staters . these coins have the head of a male figure on the obverse , presumably diodotus himself , shown wearing the diadem—a band of cloth wrapped around the head , with two strips hanging down the back , which had been the standard symbol of hellenistic kingship since the time of alexander the great . the image seems to gradually age over time , suggesting that it was intended as a realistic portrait of diodotus . the reverse of these coins abandoned the seleucid god apollo in favour of a depiction of zeus preparing to throw his thunderbolt . the choice of zeus may have been intended as a reference to diodotus himself whose name meant 'gift of zeus ' in greek . alternatively , it may look back to early coinage struck by seleucus i , from which the reverse image is taken . the legend on the reverse of these coins still reads ( 'of king antiochus ' ) . the coinage thus clearly proclaimed diodotus ' authority , but retained some ambiguity about the extent of his independence from the seleucids . towards the end of this series , diodotus added a small wreath on the reverse to the left of zeus . the wreath was a greek symbol of victory—frank holt suggests that it commemorated a victory over the parthians and that this victory was also the source of diodotus ' epithet soter ( savour ) . other hellenistic kings , such as antiochus i soter and attalus i soter of pergamum took this title to commemorate victories over existential barbarian threats . diodotus may have done the same . this may further have been the occasion of diodotus i 's assumption of the royal title of king ( basileus ) —as a similar victory was for attalus i . the date at which this coinage began is not clear . frank holt suggests it was around 250 bc . the coinage seems to have been minted simultaneously at two mints—one with a more aged portrait ( 'series a ' ) and the other with a younger portrait ( 'series c and e ' ) . the mint of 'series a & c ' is generally identified with the ai-khanoum/bactra mint , that of 'series e ' has not been localised . holt proposes that the younger portrait depicts diodotus ii , perhaps junior co-regent with diodotus i . after a break , both mints produce coins with the younger portrait and with the legend now reading ( 'of diodotus ' , series d and f ) . holt suggests that this break marks the death of diodotus i and accession of diodotus ii . a few tetradrachm coins depicting diodotus i in a more 'idealising ' guise were issued late in diodotus ii 's reign ( 'series b ' ) . diodotus appears also on coins struck in his memory by the later graeco-bactrian kings agathocles and antimachus . these coins imitate the original design of the tetradrachms issued by diodotus i , but with a legend on the obverse identifying the king as ( 'of diodotus soter ' ) . diodotus also issued a bronze coinage ( 'series g ' ) . this coinage consisted of two denominations : a 'double ' ( c . 8.4 grammes , 20-24 millimetres in diameter ) and a 'single ' ( 4.2 g , 14–18 & nbsp ; mm ) —possibly worth 1/48th of a silver drachm . all denominations bore the head of hermes wearing a petasus hat on the obverse , and two caducei ( winged staffs , an attribute of hermes ) crossing one another on the reverse , with a legend reading ( 'of king antiochus ' ) . there is a similar break to the silver and gold coins , after which the bronzes are issued with the legend ( 'of diodotus ' , 'series h ' ) . these bronze coins were found in very large numbers in the excavations of ai-khanoum . . marriage and issue . the only attested relative of diodotus i is his son and successor , diodotus ii , whose mother is unknown . w . w . tarn proposed that diodotus i had married a daughter of antiochus ii and his wife laodice i around 246 bc , as his second wife . he placed her birth around 266 bc and called her 'apama ' . tarn further proposed that the marriage produced a daughter , born around c . 250 bc , who subsequently married euthydemus i and was involved in his murder of diodotus ii and usurpation of the throne . there is no actual evidence at all for either of these marriages or even for the existence of 'apama ' and her daughter . . references . bibliography . . external links . coins of diodotus