American Gods

plot summary . shadow is an ex-convict who is released from prison three days early when his wife laura is killed in a car accident . shadow is devastated by her death , and is distraught to learn that she died alongside his best friend robbie , with whom she had been having an affair . he takes a job as a bodyguard for a mysterious con man , mr . wednesday , and travels with him across america , visiting wednesday 's acquaintances . shadow learns that wednesday is an incarnation of odin the all-father , and that he is recruiting american manifestations of the old gods , whose powers have waned as their believers have decreased in number , to participate in a battle against the new american gods – manifestations of modern life and technology , such as the internet , media , and modern means of transport . shadow meets a leprechaun named mad sweeney , who gives shadow a magical gold coin after shadow beats him in a fight . shadow later tosses the coin into his wife 's grave at her funeral , inadvertently bringing her back from the dead as a semi-living revenant . the new gods abduct shadow ( utilizing a group of shadowy men in black , led by the mysterious mr . world ) , but laura rescues him , killing several men in black in the process . wednesday hides shadow , first with mr . ibis ( thoth ) and mr . jacquel ( anubis ) , who run a funeral parlor in cairo , illinois , and then in the wisconsin community of lakeside . they are pursued all the while by the men in black , particularly mr . town , who blames shadow for the death of his friends . the new gods seek to parley with wednesday , but murder him at the meeting . this act galvanizes the old gods , and they rally to face their enemies in battle at rock city . while retrieving wednesday 's body , shadow is surprised to discover his old prison cellmate and mentor , low key lyesmith , is working as a driver for the new gods . shadow is bound by his contract with wednesday to hold his vigil by re-enacting odin 's time hanging from a '' world tree '' while pierced by a spear for nine days . during these nine days , he is visited by horus , who has become mad from living too long as a hawk . shadow dies and visits the land of the dead , where he is judged by anubis . shadow learns that he is wednesday 's ( odin 's ) son , conceived as part of the deity 's plans . during this time , mr . town arrives at the world tree , ordered by mr . world to cut a branch from it . horus finds ēostre and convinces her to bring shadow back to life . shadow realizes mr . world is actually low key ( loki ) lyesmith , and that odin and loki have been working a '' two-man con '' . they orchestrated shadow 's birth , his meeting of loki in disguise in prison , and even laura 's death . loki had arranged for odin 's murder , thus making the battle between the new and old gods a sacrifice to odin , restoring odin 's power , while also allowing loki to feed on the chaos of the battle . laura chooses to hitchhike to rock city and meets mr . town , who does not realize who she is , and they agree to travel together . during their travels , laura learns who mr . town is and , once they arrive at their destination , kills him and takes the branch he took from the world tree . she then meets with loki and manages to stab him with the world tree branch , which turns into a spear as she stabs . shadow arrives at rock city and confronts loki , now gravely wounded , and the ghost of odin , who reveal their plans . shadow travels to the site of the battle and explains that both sides have nothing to gain and everything to lose , with odin and loki as the only true winners . shadow tells them the united states is a bad place for gods , and he recommends they return home . the gods depart , loki dies , and odin 's ghost fades . laura asks shadow to take the coin from her , which he does , and she finally dies . in iceland , shadow meets another incarnation of odin ( created by the belief of the original settlers of iceland ) , who is much closer than wednesday to the odin of mythology . shadow accuses odin of wednesday 's actions , but odin retorts : '' he was me , yes . but i am not him . '' shadow gives wednesday 's glass eye to odin , which odin places in a leather bag as a keepsake . shadow performs a simple sleight-of-hand coin trick , which delights odin , who asks for a repeat performance . shadow then performs a small piece of real magic , pulling a golden coin from nowhere , before walking away from the god and out into the world . characters . '' shadow '' moon – an ex-convict who becomes the reluctant bodyguard and errand boy of mr . wednesday ( odin ) . laura moon – shadow 's wife , who dies in a car crash at the beginning of the novel , a few days before shadow is due to be released from prison . samantha '' sam '' black crow – a hitchhiking college student whom shadow meets during his journey . chad mulligan – a kind-hearted chief of police in the town of lakeside . old gods . mr . wednesday – an aspect of odin , the old norse god of knowledge and wisdom . low-key lyesmith – loki , the old norse god of mischief and trickery . chernobog – the slavic god of darkness and twin brother to belobog , the god of light . the zorya sisters – relatives of czernobog , sisters who represent the morning star ( zorya utrennyaya ) , the evening star ( zorya vechernyaya ) , and the midnight star ( zorya polunochnaya ) . in slavic lore , they are servants of dažbog who guard and watch over the doomsday hound , simargl . simargl is said to be chained to the star polaris in the constellation ursa minor ( the '' little bear '' ) and , according to legend , if the chain ever breaks the hound will devour the world . mr . nancy – anansi , a trickster spider god from ghanaian folklore . he often makes fun of people for their stupidity , a recurring aspect of his personality in his old stories . mr . ibis – thoth , the ancient egyptian god of knowledge and writing . he runs a funeral parlor with mr . jacquel in cairo , illinois . he often writes short biographies of people who brought folkloric beings with them to america . mr . jacquel – anubis , the ancient egyptian god of the dead and mummification . he is an expert at preparing bodies for the wake at funerals . bast – bastet , the ancient egyptian cat goddess . often appears as a small house cat and heals shadow 's bruises and aches after he has been beaten . horus – the ancient egyptian god of the sky . easter – ēostre , the germanic goddess of the dawn . mad sweeney – suibhne , a king from an old irish story . though not portrayed as such in his story , he calls himself a '' leprechaun '' despite his description as being nearly 7-feet-tall . sweeney is foul-mouthed and a frequent drinker . whiskey jack – wisakedjak , a trickster figure of algonquian mythology . he lives near a lakota reservation in the badlands with john chapman , where he is mistaken for iktomi , a trickster of their culture . john chapman – johnny appleseed , described as a '' culture hero '' rather than a god . he loathes paul bunyan ( who he incorrectly describes as an advertising ploy ) for diverting belief away from him . elvis - alvíss , a dwarf in norse mythology . eshu and mawu - the gods worshipped by slaves coming to america . gwydion – gwydion , a trickster god of welsh mythology . hinzelmann – hinzelmann , a kobold who was formerly revered as a tribal god by ancient germanic tribes . he protects the town of lakeside in the guise of an old man . bilquis – the ancient queen of sheba , who endures by absorbing her sexual partners , turning them into worshippers mama-ji – kali , the hindu goddess of time and destruction . the jinn – an ifrit taxi-driver that swaps lives with an omani businessman after a sexual encounter . the land - a buffalo-headed man with fire for eyes , the personification of the land as worshipped by native americans , who appears to shadow in his dreams to give him guidance . bearded man - a character similar to jesus speaks to shadow in a dream sequence while he is hanging from the world tree . shadow states that compared to the other old gods he still has a lot of influence . however , the bearded man worries that his teachings have been applied to everything , and as a result also apply to nothing . gaiman has removed and replaced this section of the book numerous times . the elephant god - ganesha , the hindu god of new beginnings ; appears to shadow during the world tree dream sequences . shadow eventually realizes ganesha 's role is to remove obstacles , and that his cryptic message to 'look in the trunk ' is in fact a clue to the location of alison mcgovern 's body . the forgettable god - an unknown god whom mr . wednesday meets in las vegas along with shadow , whose name slipped from shadow 's mind whenever mr . wednesday said it . he has a liking for soma , a vedic ritual drink . gaiman has never confirmed the identity of this god . new gods . technical boy – new god of technology and the internet , personified as an adult-sized fat child . media – new goddess of television and pop culture . she often communicates by hijacking whatever is showing on television , for example communicating with shadow via lucy ricardo from i love lucy and the cast of cheers . the black hats – mister road , mister town , mister wood and mister stone represent beliefs in conspiracy theories , taking the form of men in black . they work as spooks for the new gods . the intangibles – new gods of the modern stock market , they are a personification of the '' invisible hand of the market '' . mr . world – leader of the blackhats and the new god of globalization . other new gods mentioned include those of automobiles , locomotives , heavier-than-air flight , cosmetic surgery and various drugs . influences . the novel 's dedication reads '' for absent friends – kathy acker and roger zelazny and all points in between '' . the discworld novel small gods explores a similar origin of deities ( tulpa ) . while gaiman says that he did not read the book by terry pratchett , he thought they shared a worldview due to their same geographic origins and , more importantly , their daily phone conversations . he had also sought advice from pratchett on resolving plot elements of american gods . according to gaiman , american gods is not based on diana wynne jones 's eight days of luke , '' although they bear an odd relationship , like second cousins once removed or something '' . when working on the structure of a story linking gods and days of the week , he realised that this idea had already been used in eight days of luke . he abandoned the story , but later used the idea when writing american gods to depict wednesday and shadow meeting on the god 's namesake day . of the john james novel votan , gaiman stated : “ i think probably the best book ever done about the norse was a book that i couldn ’ t allow myself to read between coming up with the idea of american gods and finishing it . after it was published , i actually sat down and allowed myself to read it for the first time in 15 years , and discovered it was just as good as i thought it was ” . in his introduction to fritz_leiber the knight and knave of swords gaiman acknowledges leiber 's portrayal of odin and loki had '' definitely smudged into '' and informed his take on the characters . gaiman , neil the knight and knave of swords : the adventures of fafhrd and the gray mouser asin : b001ebhemg . website tie-in . while gaiman was writing american gods , his publishers set up a promotional web site featuring a weblog in which gaiman described the day-to-day process of writing , revising , publishing , and promoting the novel . after the novel was published , the website evolved into a more general official neil gaiman web site . gaiman regularly adds to the weblog , describing his daily life and the writing , revising , publishing , or promoting of his current projects . on 28 february 2008 , gaiman announced on his journal that for one month the complete text of american gods would be available to the public on his publisher 's website . . reception . the book won the 2002 hugo , nebula , locus , sfx magazine and bram stoker awards , all for best novel , and likewise received nominations for the 2001 bsfa award , as well as the 2002 world fantasy , international horror guild and mythopoeic , and british fantasy awards . it won the 2003 geffen award . in may 2010 , american gods was selected in an online poll to be the first '' one book one twitter '' book . . publishing history . the book was published in 2001 by headline in the united kingdom and by william morrow in the united states . a special tenth anniversary edition , which includes the '' author 's preferred text '' and 12,000 additional words , was published in june 2011 by william morrow . the tenth anniversary text is identical to the signed and numbered limited edition released in 2003 by hill house publishers , and to the edition from headline , gaiman 's publisher in the uk since 2005 . retrieved on 13 june 2009 . the tenth anniversary edition marked the first time the author 's preferred text had been available in wide release outside the uk . two audio versions of the book were produced and published by harper audio : an unabridged version of the original published edition , read by george guidall , was released in 2001 . a full cast audiobook version of the tenth anniversary edition , including the author 's preferred text and 12,000 additional words , was released in 2011 . a comic book series , american gods : shadows , was published by dark horse comics starting in march 2017 . a book of the same name , collecting issues 1 through 9 of the comic book series , was published by dark horse books in february 2018 . in march 2017 , the folio society published a special collector 's edition of american gods , with many corrections to the author 's preferred text version . gaiman described this edition as 'the cleanest text there has ever been ' of the novel . . in other media . comics . dark horse comics publishes a series of comic books based on the novel . television . starz developed a television series from the novel with bryan fuller and michael green . the series debuted in april 2017 . at the end of season 1 , fuller stepped down as showrunner and was replaced by jesse alexander . the two had previously worked together on star trek : discovery and hannibal . . related works . gaiman 's next novel , anansi boys ( 2005 ) , was conceived before american gods and shares a character , mr . nancy ( anansi , the spider god of african legend ) . in an interview with mtv news published on 22 june 2011 , gaiman said that he had plans for a direct sequel to american gods . gaiman had plans for a sequel even while writing the first book and has said that he is likely to focus on the new gods in the sequel . in addition to the planned sequel , gaiman has written two short story sequels featuring shadow moon . '' the monarch of the glen '' , a novella first published in legends ii , takes place in scotland two years after american gods . the second short story , '' black dog '' , was collected in gaiman 's trigger warning . it takes place a year later in derbyshire 's peak district . gaiman said that he had one final standalone story that would take shadow to london before he returns to the us & the start of american gods 2 . translations . amerikāņu dievi ( latvian ) , ameerika jumalad ( estonian ) , amerykańscy bogowie ( polish ) , zei americani ( romanian ) , אלים אמריקאים ( elim amerikaim ) ( hebrew ) american gods ( italian ) , deuses americanos ( portuguese ) , američtí bohové ( czech ) , americkí bohovia ( slovak ) , unohdetut jumalat ( '' forgotten gods '' ) ( finnish ) , amerikai istenek ( hungarian ) , american gods ( spanish ) , američki bogovi ( croatian ) , ameriški bogovi ( slovenian ) , aмерички богови ( serbian ) , американские боги ( russian ) , amerikos dievai ( lithuanian ) , amerikan tanrıları ( turkish ) , american gods ( german ) , amerikanska gudar ( swedish ) , amerikanske guder ( norwegian ) , amerikanske guder ( danish ) , 美國眾神 ( traditional chinese ) , , 美国众神 ( simplified chinese ) , , ο πόλεμος των θεών ( o polemos ton theon , '' the war of the gods '' ) ( greek ) american gods ( french ) , американски богове ( bulgarian ) , 신들의 전쟁 ( 상 ) , 신들의 전쟁 ( 하 ) ( korean ) , , amerikaanse goden ( dutch ) , , ამერიკელი ღმერთები ( georgian ) アメリカン・ゴッズ ( japanese ) , , американские боги ( russian ) , , американські боги ( ukrainian ) , อเมริกัน ก็อดส์ ( thailand ) , . references . . external links . the first five chapters of american gods , released by harpercollins '' only the gods are real '' , a listing of all the gods and mythical beings featured in american gods