Prefect

ancient rome . praefectus , often with a further qualification , was the formal title of many , fairly low to high-ranking , military or civil officials in the roman empire , whose authority was not embodied in their person ( as it was with elected magistrates ) but conferred by delegation from a higher authority . they did have some authority in their prefecture such as controlling prisons and in civil administration . praetorian prefects . the praetorian prefect ( praefectus praetorio ) began as the military commander of a general 's guard company in the field , then grew in importance as the praetorian guard became a potential kingmaker during the empire . from the emperor diocletian 's tetrarchy ( c . 300 ) they became the administrators of the four praetorian prefectures , the government level above the ( newly created ) dioceses and ( multiplied ) provinces . police and civil prefects . praefectus urbi , or praefectus urbanus : city prefect , in charge of the administration of rome . praefectus vigilum : commander of the vigiles ( firemen and police ) . praefectus aerarii : nobles appointed guardians of the state treasury . aerarium militare : prefect of the military treasury . praefectus annonae : official charged with the supervision of the grain supply to the city of rome . military prefects . praefectus alae : commander of a cavalry unit . praefectus castrorum : camp commandant . praefectus cohortus : commander of a cohort ( constituent unit of a legion , or analogous unit ) . praefectus classis : fleet commander . praefectus equitatus : cavalry commander . praefectus equitum : cavalry commander . praefectus fabrum : officer in charge of fabri , i.e . well-trained engineers and artisans . praefectus legionis : equestrian legionary commander . praefectus legionis agens vice legati : equestrian acting legionary commander . praefectus orae maritimae : official in charge with the control and defense of an important sector of sea coast . praefectus socium ( sociorum ) : roman officer appointed to a command function in an ala sociorum ( unit recruited among the socii , italic peoples of a privileged status within the empire ) . for some auxiliary troops , specific titles could even refer to their peoples : praefectus laetorum ( germanic , notably in gaul ) praefectus sarmatarum gentilium ( from the steppes , notably in italy ) . prefects as provincial governors . roman provinces were usually ruled by high-rank officials . less important provinces though were entrusted to prefects , military men who would otherwise only govern parts of larger provinces . the most famous example is pontius pilate , who governed judaea at a time when it was administered as an annex of syria . as egypt was a special imperial domain , a rich and strategic granary , where the emperor enjoyed an almost pharaoh position unlike any other province or diocese , its head was styled uniquely praefectus augustalis , indicating that he governed in the personal name of the emperor , the '' augustus '' . septimius severus , after conquering mesopotamia , introduced the same system there too . after the mid-1st century , as a result of the pax romana , the governorship was gradually shifted from the military prefects to civilian fiscal officials called procurators , egypt remaining the exception . . religious prefects . praefectus urbi : a prefect of the republican era who guarded the city during the annual sacrifice of the feriae latinae on mount alban in which the consuls participated . his former title was '' custos urbi '' ( '' guardian of the city '' ) . . feudal times . especially in medieval latin , præfectus was used to refer to various officers—administrative , military , judicial , etc.—usually alongside a more precise term in the vernacular ( such as burggraf , which literally means count of the castle in the german language ) . ecclesiastical . the term is used by the roman catholic church , which based much of its canon law terminology on roman law , in several different ways . the roman curia has the nine prefects of all the congregations as well as the two of the papal household and of the economic affairs of the holy see . the title also attaches to the heads of some pontifical council ( central departments of the curia ) , who are principally titled president , but in addition there is sometimes an additional ex officio position as a prefect . for example , the president of the pontifical council for interreligious dialogue is also the prefect of the commission for religious relations with muslims . traditionally these curial officials are cardinals , hence often called '' cardinal-prefect '' or '' cardinal-president '' . there was a custom that those who were not cardinals when they were appointed were titled '' pro-prefect '' or '' pro-president '' . then these officials would be appointed prefect or president after their elevation to the sacred college . however , since 1998 , this custom has fallen into disuse . a prefect apostolic is a cleric ( sometimes a titular bishop , but normally a priest ) in charge of an apostolic prefecture , a type of roman catholic territorial jurisdiction fulfilling the functions of a diocese , usually in a missionary area or in a country that is anti-religious , such as the people 's republic of china , but that is not yet given the status of regular diocese . it is usually destined to become one in time . academic . in the context of schools , a prefect is a pupil who has been given certain responsibilities in the school , similar to the responsibilities given to a hall monitor or safety patrol members . in some british , irish and commonwealth schools ( especially but not exclusively independent schools ) , prefects , usually students in fifth to seventh years ( depending on how many years the school in question has ) , have considerable power ; in some cases they effectively run the school outside the classroom . they were once allowed to administer school corporal punishment in some schools ( now abolished in the uk and several other countries ) . they usually answer to a senior prefect known as the head of school ( though in canada , head of school is more often seen as a gender-neutral term for headmaster or headmistress ) or head prefect or head boy or head girl or senior prefect . larger schools may have a hierarchical structure with a team of prefects , a team of senior prefects , and a head boy and girl . the head prefect may also be the school captain if that is an appointed position in the school . however , due to health and safety laws the staff have tended to become stricter about what responsibilities prefects may hold , for fear of being held responsible in case of litigation . this system is also practised in hong kong , a former british colony . today , prefect roles in the u.k . are largely perfunctory and are mostly used to reward the better students in the year groups that qualify for prefect roles . duties tend to be limited to door monitoring during recess and representing the school at various extra-curricular events . in india , pakistan , sri lanka , singapore and malaysia , prefects are student leaders in primary and secondary schools , often along the lines of other commonwealth schools , but with superior powers . the prefect systems in these countries have changed little from when they were under the british , as the present governments have seen them as effective . in bangladesh , prefects are the leaders in army based educational institutions namely cadet colleges . in mexico , prefects ( in spanish , is an adult head of a grade of a school , a us equivalent would be a dean . in sweden , a prefect is the head of a university department . in jesuit and other catholic schools this title was given formerly to members of the faculty , a prefect of discipline in charge of student attendance , general order and such , and a prefect of studies in charge of academic issues . many college preparatory boarding schools utilize the position of prefect as a high student leadership position . modern sub-national administration . in albania a prefect ( prefekti ) is the state 's representative in a region ( qark ) . his agency is called the prefektura . albania has 12 prefects in 12 prefectures , appointed by the prime minister of albania and the government . in france the préfet ( prefect ) is a top ranking public servant who belongs to the so-called corps préfectoral . the function was created on 17 february 1800 by napoléon bonaparte after his successful coup d'état of 9 november 1799 which made him head of state with the title premier consul . the prefect 's role at that time ( until the reform of the function in the 1980s ) was to be the top representative of the central government as well as the chief administrator in a département ( which can be compared to a county in most english-speaking nations ) . his agency services as well as his circumscription ( territory in which he is in charge ) are called préfecture . sub-prefects ( sous-préfets , sous-préfecture ) operate as assistants in the arrondissements ( subdivisions of a département ) under his authority and control . in the 1980s , under the presidency of françois mitterrand ( 1981–1995 ) , a fundamental change in the role of the prefect ( and sub-prefect ) took place . the previously extremely centralized french ( fifth ) republic was gradually decentralized by the creation of the regions and the devolution of central state powers towards the régions , départements and communes ( municipalities ) . new elected authorities were created ( e.g . the conseils régionaux ) in order to administer the subdivisional entities ( collectivités territoriales ) of the nation ( law from 2 march 1982 ) . the changes have gradually altered the function of the prefect . he is still the supreme representative of the state in a département , but has lost his omnipotent function of chief administrator . instead , he has acquired the roles of chief controller ( not a title ) of regional , departemental and communal public accounts and of chief inspector ( not a title ) of good ( i.e . law-abiding ) governance of the authorities of the respective territorial entities . le petit larousse 2013 pp873 and 1420 a préfet maritime is a french admiral ( amiral ) who is commissioned to be the chief commander of a zone maritime ( i.e . a section of the french territorial waters and the respective shores ) . in paris , the préfet de police ( prefect of police ) is the head of the city 's police under the direct authority of the ministre de l'intérieur ( minister of the interior ) , which makes him unique as usually in french towns and cities the chief of the local police is subordinated to the maire ( mayor ) , who is the local representative of the minister in police matters . in italy , a prefect ( prefetto ) is a high-ranking public servant who belongs to the so-called corpo prefettizio and is the state 's representative in a province . his office is called prefettura – ufficio territoriale del governo . the prefects have political responsibility and coordinate the local head of the state police ( questore ) , who has technical responsibility , to enforce laws when public safety is threatened . similar offices already existed under various names before the italian unification ( 1861 ) ( e.g . , in the kingdom of two sicilies it was named '' intendente '' ) ; in northern italy , it was imported from france during the napoleonic occupation ( 1802 ) . its current form dates back to 1861 , when the government of bettino ricasoli extended the kingdom of sardinia 's administrative system to the entire country . in the early years the job entailed a more vigorous and vigilant application of central state authority , by enforcing regulations and dispositions in the fields of education , public works , public health , and the nomination of mayors and provincial deputies . he also plays the role of intermediary between the government and municipalities and other local governments . in some spanish-speaking states in latin america , following a french-type model introduced in spain itself , prefects were installed as governors ; remarkably , in some republics ( like peru ) two levels were constructed from the french model : a prefecture and a department , the one being only part of the other . in greece a prefect ( nomarhis , νομάρχης ) used to be the elected head of one of the 54 prefectures ( nomarhies , νομαρχίες ) , which were second-level administrative divisions , between the first-level peripheries ( periferies , περιφέρειες ) and the third-level municipalities ( demoi , δήμοι ) , until their abolition with the kallikratis plan in 2010 . the prefectural elections ( popular ballot ) would be held every four years along with the municipal elections . the last prefectural elections in greece were held in october 2006 . in romania , a prefect ( prefect ) is the appointed governmental representative in a county ( județ ) and in the municipality of bucharest , in an agency called prefectură . the prefect 's role is to represent the national government at local level , acting as a liaison and facilitating the implementation of national development plans and governing programmes at local level . in québec , a prefect ( préfet ) is the head of a regional county municipality . in brazil , a prefect ( prefeito ) is the elected head of the executive branch in a municipality . larger cities , such as são paulo , rio de janeiro , curitiba , etc . , also have sub-prefects , appointed to their offices by the elected prefect . in georgia , the nation in the caucasus region , a prefect ( პრეფექტი ) was the head of the executive branch in a municipality , appointed by the president of georgia from 1990 to 1992 . in iran , a prefect ( بخشدار ) is responsible for the administration of a sector in iran 's political and administrative system . police . the prefect of police ( préfet de police ) is the officer in charge of co-ordinating police forces in paris ( see above under '' france '' ) . the local police in japan are divided among prefectures too . see also . pauly-wissowa praefectus palatii préfet . references . external links . catholic hierarchy