Data link layer

function . the data link provides for the transfer of data frames between hosts connected to the physical link . within the semantics of the osi network architecture , the protocols of the data link layer respond to service requests from the network layer , and perform their function by issuing service requests to the physical layer . that transfer can be reliable or unreliable ; many data link protocols do not have acknowledgments of successful frame reception and acceptance , and some data link protocols might not even perform any check for transmission errors . in those cases , higher-level protocols must provide flow control , error checking , acknowledgments , and retransmission . the frame header contains the source and destination addresses that indicate which device originated the frame and which device is expected to receive and process it . in contrast to the hierarchical and routable addresses of the network layer , layer 2 addresses are flat , meaning that no part of the address can be used to identify the logical or physical group to which the address belongs . in some networks , such as ieee 802 local area networks , the data link layer is described in more detail with media access control ( mac ) and logical link control ( llc ) sublayers ; this means that the ieee 802.2 llc protocol can be used with all of the ieee 802 mac layers , such as ethernet , token ring , ieee 802.11 , etc . , as well as with some non-802 mac layers such as fddi . other data-link-layer protocols , such as hdlc , are specified to include both sublayers , although some other protocols , such as cisco hdlc , use hdlc 's low-level framing as a mac layer in combination with a different llc layer . in the itu-t g.hn standard , which provides a way to create a high-speed ( up to 1 gigabit/s ) local area network using existing home wiring ( power lines , phone lines and coaxial cables ) , the data link layer is divided into three sub-layers ( application protocol convergence , logical link control and media access control ) . sublayers . the data link layer has two sublayers : logical link control ( llc ) and media access control ( mac ) . . logical link control sublayer . the uppermost sublayer , llc , multiplexes protocols running at the top of the data link layer , and optionally provides flow control , acknowledgment , and error notification . the llc provides addressing and control of the data link . it specifies which mechanisms are to be used for addressing stations over the transmission medium and for controlling the data exchanged between the originator and recipient machines . media access control sublayer . mac may refer to the sublayer that determines who is allowed to access the media at any one time ( e.g . csma/cd ) . other times it refers to a frame structure delivered based on mac addresses inside . there are generally two forms of media access control : distributed and centralized . both of these may be compared to communication between people . in a network made up of people speaking , i.e . a conversation , they will each pause a random amount of time and then attempt to speak again , effectively establishing a long and elaborate game of saying '' no , you first '' . the media access control sublayer also performs frame synchronization , which determines the start and end of each frame of data in the transmission bitstream . it entails one of several methods : timing-based detection , character counting , byte stuffing , and bit stuffing . the time-based approach expects a specified amount of time between frames . character counting tracks the count of remaining characters in the frame header . this method , however , is easily disturbed if this field is corrupted . byte stuffing precedes the frame with a special byte sequence such as dle stx and succeeds it with dle etx . appearances of dle ( byte value 0x10 ) have to be escaped with another dle . the start and stop marks are detected at the receiver and removed as well as the inserted dle characters . similarly , bit stuffing replaces these start and end marks with flags consisting of a special bit pattern ( e.g . a 0 , six 1 bits and a 0 ) . occurrences of this bit pattern in the data to be transmitted are avoided by inserting a bit . to use the example where the flag is 01111110 , a 0 is inserted after 5 consecutive 1 's in the data stream . the flags and the inserted 0 's are removed at the receiving end . this makes for arbitrary long frames and easy synchronization for the recipient . the stuffed bit is added even if the following data bit is 0 , which could not be mistaken for a sync sequence , so that the receiver can unambiguously distinguish stuffed bits from normal bits . services . the services provided by the data link layer are : encapsulation of network layer data packets into frames frame synchronization in the logical link control ( llc ) sublayer : error control ( automatic repeat request , arq ) , in addition to arq provided by some transport-layer protocols , to forward error correction ( fec ) techniques provided on the physical layer , and to error-detection and packet canceling provided at all layers , including the network layer . data-link-layer error control ( i.e . retransmission of erroneous packets ) is provided in wireless networks and v.42 telephone network modems , but not in lan protocols such as ethernet , since bit errors are so uncommon in short wires . in that case , only error detection and canceling of erroneous packets are provided . flow control , in addition to the one provided on the transport layer . data-link-layer flow control is not used in lan protocols such as ethernet , but in modems and wireless networks . in the medium access control ( mac ) sublayer : multiple access methods for channel-access control , for example csma/cd protocols for collision detection and re-transmission in ethernet bus networks and hub networks , or the csma/ca protocol for collision avoidance in wireless networks . physical addressing ( mac addressing ) lan switching ( packet switching ) , including mac filtering , spanning tree protocol ( stp ) and shortest path bridging ( spb ) data packet queuing or scheduling store-and-forward switching or cut-through switching quality of service ( qos ) control virtual lans ( vlan ) . error detection and correction . in addition to framing , the data link layer may also perform mechanisms to detect and recover from transmission errors . for a receiver to detect transmission errors , the sender must add redundant information as an error detection code to the frame sent . when the receiver obtains a frame with an error detection code it recomputes it and verifies whether the received error detection code matches the computed error detection code . an error detection code can be defined as a function that computes the ( amount of redundant bits ) corresponding to each string of total number of bits . the simplest error detection code is the parity bit , which allows a receiver to detect transmission errors that have affected a single bit among the transmitted bits . if there are multiple flipped bits then the checking method might not be able to unveil this on the receiver side . more advanced methods than parity error detection do exist providing higher grades of quality and features . a simple example of how this works using metadata is transmitting the word '' hello '' , by encoding each letter as its position in the alphabet . thus , the letter a is coded as 1 , b as 2 , and so on as shown in the table on the right . adding up the resulting numbers yields 8 & nbsp ; + 5 & nbsp ; + 12 & nbsp ; + 12 & nbsp ; + 15 & nbsp ; 52 , and 5 & nbsp ; + 2 & nbsp ; 7 calculates the metadata . finally , the '' 8 5 12 12 15 7 '' numbers sequence is transmitted , which the receiver will see on its end if there are no transmission errors . the receiver knows that the last number received is the error-detecting metadata and that all data before is the message , so the receiver can recalculate the above math and if the metadata matches it can be concluded that the data has been received error-free . though , if the receiver sees something like a '' 7 5 12 12 15 7 '' sequence ( first element altered by some error ) , it can run the check by calculating 7 & nbsp ; + 5 & nbsp ; + 12 & nbsp ; + 12 & nbsp ; + 15 & nbsp ; 51 and 5 & nbsp ; + 1 & nbsp ; 6 , and discard the received data as defective since 6 does not equal 7 . more sophisticated error detection and correction algorithms are designed to reduce the risk that multiple transmission errors in the data would cancel each other out and go undetected . an algorithm that can even detect if the correct bytes are received but out of order is the cyclic redundancy check or crc . this algorithm is often used in the data link layer . protocol examples . arcnet atm cisco discovery protocol ( cdp ) controller area network ( can ) econet ethernet ethernet automatic protection switching ( eaps ) fiber distributed data interface ( fddi ) frame relay high-level data link control ( hdlc ) ieee 802.2 ( provides llc functions to ieee 802 mac layers ) ieee 802.11 wireless lan i²c lattisnet link layer discovery protocol ( lldp ) localtalk mil-std-1553 multiprotocol label switching ( mpls ) nortel discovery protocol ( ndp ) point-to-point protocol ( ppp ) profibus spacewire serial line internet protocol ( slip ) ( obsolete ) split multi-link trunking ( smlt ) ieee 802.1aq - shortest path bridging spanning tree protocol starlan token ring udld ( udld ) uni/o 1-wire and most forms of serial communication . relation to the tcp/ip model . in the internet protocol suite ( tcp/ip ) , osi 's data link layer functionality is contained within its lowest layer , the link layer . the tcp/ip link layer has the operating scope of the link a host is connected to , and only concerns itself with hardware issues to the point of obtaining hardware ( mac ) addresses for locating hosts on the link and transmitting data frames onto the link . the link-layer functionality was described in rfc 1122 and is defined differently than the data link layer of osi , and encompasses all methods that affect the local link . the tcp/ip model is not a top-down comprehensive design reference for networks . it was formulated for the purpose of illustrating the logical groups and scopes of functions needed in the design of the suite of internetworking protocols of tcp/ip , as needed for the operation of the internet . in general , direct or strict comparisons of the osi and tcp/ip models should be avoided , because the layering in tcp/ip is not a principal design criterion and in general , considered to be '' harmful '' ( rfc 3439 ) . in particular , tcp/ip does not dictate a strict hierarchical sequence of encapsulation requirements , as is attributed to osi protocols . see also . odi ndis sana-ii – standard amiga networking architecture , version 2 . references . . external links . datalink layer simulation , written in c datalink layer , part 2 : error detection and correction de : osi-modell schicht 2 – sicherungsschicht