USS Kearsarge (1861)

hunting confederate raiders . kearsarge was built at portsmouth navy yard in kittery , maine , under the 1861 american civil war emergency shipbuilding program . the new steam sloop-of-war was launched on 11 september 1861 ; she was sponsored by mrs . mcfarland , the wife of the editor of the concord statement , and was commissioned on 24 january 1862 , with captain charles w . pickering in command . soon after , she was hunting for confederate raiders in european waters . kearsarge departed portsmouth on 5 february 1862 for the coast of spain . she then sailed to gibraltar to join the blockade of confederate raider , forcing the ship 's abandonment there in december of 1862 . however , sumters commanding captain , raphael semmes , having returned to england for reassignment , was soon recommissioning off the azores , in international waters , the newly built british sloop enrica as . from there , alabama went on to become one of the most successful commerce raiders in naval history . from cádiz in november of 1862 until march 1863 kearsarge prepared for her engagement with alabama ; she searched for the raider , ranging along the coast of northern europe all the way to the canaries , madeira , and the outer hebrides . in early may 1864 , she hit the ground near oostende . she was then repaired in the dry dock of vlissingen , netherlands till 10 may . on 14 june 1864 , kearsarge arrived at cherbourg and found alabama in port . the raider had returned there for much needed repairs after a very long , multiple ocean cruise at the expense of 65 union merchant ships . kearsarge took up station at the harbor 's entrance to await semmes ' next move . battle of cherbourg . on 19 june , alabama stood out of cherbourg harbor for her last action . mindful of french neutrality , kearsarges new commanding officer , capt . john a . winslow , took the sloop-of-war clear of territorial waters , then turned to meet the confederate cruiser . the battle quickly turned against alabama , due to her poor gunnery and to the quality of her long-stored ( and deteriorated ) powder , fuses , and shells . unknown at the time to captain semmes aboard the confederate raider , kearsarge had been given added protection for her vital machinery , by chain cable , mounted in three separate vertical tiers , along the port and starboard of her midsection . this hull armor had been installed more than a year before ( in just three days ) , while kearsarge was in port at the azores . it was made using of single-link iron chain , and covered hull spaces long by deep . this was stopped up and down in three layers to eye-bolts with marlines , and secured by iron dogs , then concealed behind deal-boards , painted black to match the upper hulls color . this chain cladding was placed along kearsarges port and starboard midsection down to her waterline , for protection of her engines and boilers , when the upper portions of the cruiser 's coal bunkers were empty . this armor belt was hit twice during the fight : first , in the starboard gangway by one of alabamas 32-pounder shells , which cut the chain armor , denting the hull planking underneath , and by a second shell of the same warhead-rating exploded , breaking a link of the chain , and tearing away a portion of the deal-board covering . even if the shells had been delivered by alabamas more powerful 100-pounder blakely pivot rifle , the impacts were more than above the waterline and would therefore have missed her vital machinery . one hour after she fired her first salvo , alabama had been reduced to a sinking wreck by kearsarges more accurate gunnery , and by its powerful dahlgren smoothbore pivot guns . alabama went down by the stern shortly after semmes struck his colors , threw his sword into the sea to avoid its capture , and sent one of his two remaining longboats to kearsarge with a message of surrender , and a rescue appeal for his surviving crew . kearsarge finally sent ship 's boats for the majority of alabamas survivors , but semmes and 41 others were instead rescued by the nearby british yacht deerhound , and escaped to the united kingdom . the battle between kearsarge and alabama is commemorated by the united states navy with a battle star on the civil war campaign streamer . in addition , 17 of kearsarges crew received the medal of honor for valor during this action : michael aheam john f . bickford william s . bond james haley mark g . ham george h . harrison john hayes james h . lee charles moore joachim pease thomas perry william b . poole charles a . read george e . read james saunders william smith robert strahan the medals were awarded on 31 december 1864 . home for repairs . kearsarge then sailed along the french coast in an unsuccessful search for the commerce raider , then proceeded to the caribbean before turning northward for boston , massachusetts , where she was decommissioned for repairs on 26 november . she was recommissioned four months later on 1 april 1865 and sailed for the coast of spain on 14 april in an attempt to intercept . the confederate ram eluded federal warships and surrendered to spanish authorities at havana , cuba on 19 may . after cruising the mediterranean sea and the english channel south to monrovia , liberia , kearsarge was decommissioned on 14 august 1866 in the boston navy yard . post war service . kearsarge was recommissioned on 16 january 1868 and sailed on 12 february to serve in the south pacific , operating out of valparaíso , chile . on 22 august , she landed provisions for destitute earthquake victims in peru . she continued to watch over american commercial interests along the coast of south america until 17 april 1869 . then she sailed to watch over american interests among the marquesas , society islands , navigators islands , and fiji . she also called at ports in new south wales and new zealand before returning to callao , peru on 31 october . she resumed duties on the south pacific station until 21 july 1870 , then cruised to the hawaiian islands before being decommissioned in the mare island navy yard on 11 october 1870 . kearsarge was recommissioned on 8 december 1873 and departed on 4 march 1874 for yokohama , japan , arriving there on 11 may . she cruised on asiatic station for three years , protecting american citizens and commerce in china , japan , and the philippines . from 4 september to 13 december , she carried professor asaph hall 's scientific party from nagasaki , japan , to vladivostok , russia , to observe the transit of venus . she departed nagasaki on 3 september 1877 , and via the suez canal , she visited mediterranean ports before returning to boston on 30 december . she was decommissioned at portsmouth , new hampshire on 15 january 1878 . kearsarge was recommissioned on 15 may 1879 for four years of duty in the north atlantic ranging from newfoundland to the caribbean sea and the coast of panama . the warship took part in dedication ceremonies for the brooklyn bridge on may 24 , 1883 . she departed new york on 21 august 1883 to cruise for three years in the mediterranean , then northern european waters , and finally along the west coast of africa . she returned to portsmouth on 12 november and was decommissioned in the portsmouth navy yard on 1 december 1886 . wrecked . kearsarge was recommissioned on 2 november 1888 and largely spent her remaining years protecting american interests in the west indies , off venezuela , and along the central americas . in october 1889 she carried famed abolitionist frederick douglass to haiti , where douglass was to be minister and consul general . david w . blight , frederick douglass , prophet of freedom new york : simon & schuster , 2018 , p . 694 on president harrison 's orders , she sailed to navassa island in 1891 to investigate labor conditions there . she departed haiti on 20 january 1894 for bluefields , nicaragua , but she wrecked on a reef off roncador cay on 2 february . her officers and crew made it safely ashore . congress appropriated 45,000 to tow kearsarge home , but a salvage team of the boston towboat company found that she could not be refloated . some artifacts were saved from the ship , including the ship 's bible . the salvaged items , along with a damaged section of her stern post with an unexploded shell from css alabama still embedded in it , are now stored or on display at the washington navy yard . according to the us naval academy museum , after the battle with alabama the shell was removed and the stern post was replaced . kearsarge was struck from the naval vessel register in 1894 . popular culture . liverpool writer jimmy mcgovern 's 2007 play , king cotton , culminates with the battle between kearsarge and alabama . it premiered at the lowry . clive cussler , an american adventure novelist and marine archaeologist , wrote the 2001 novel valhalla rising , in which kearsarge is attacked by a nautilus ( verne ) and run aground , causing her wreck . harry turtledove , american alternate history novelist , wrote the 1992 novel the guns of the south in which time-traveling south african white nationalists successfully re-arm the confederate states army with ak-47 assault rifles in early 1864 , thus enabling the confederacy to rout union forces in every land campaign of the year . when washington is captured by the army of northern virginia , abraham lincoln reluctantly concedes the confederacy 's independence . the war is implied to end in mid-june , as uss kearsarge is mentioned as having been waiting for css alabama to emerge from the french port city of cherbourg when word of the war 's end reached europe . in this alternate scenario , the uss kearsarge never met the css alabama in battle . instead , each warship sailed for its home country . see also . new hampshire historical marker no . 243 : mount kearsarge and the u.s.s . kearsarge . references . secretary of the navy , '' sinking of the alabama—destruction of the alabama by the kearsarge , '' 1864 annual report in the library at the naval historical center , washington , d.c . , navy yard . troyer , byron l . yesterday 's indiana , e . a . seemann publishing , inc . , miami , 1975 , . marvel , william , the alabama & the kearsarge , university of north carolina press , 1996 , . roberts , arthur c . , m . d . , '' reconstructing uss kearsarge , 1864 , '' silver springs , md , vol . 44 , 4 ; vol . 45 , s 1 , 2 , and 3 , nautical research journal , 1999–2000 , . external links . uss kearsarge ( 1862–1894 )