1965 in music

specific locations . 1965 in british music 1965 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1965 in country music 1965 in jazz . events . january 4 – fender musical instruments corporation is sold to cbs for 13 & nbsp ; million . january 12 – hullabaloo premieres on nbc . the first show includes performances by the new christy minstrels , comedian woody allen , actress joey heatherton and a segment from london in which brian epstein introduces the zombies and gerry & the pacemakers . january 17 – the rolling stones drummer charlie watts ' book ode to a high flying bird , a tribute to jazz great charlie parker , is published . january 21 the animals ' show at new york 's apollo theater is canceled after the u.s . immigration department forces the group to leave the theater . the rolling stones and roy orbison travel to sydney to begin their australian tour . january 23 – '' downtown '' hits 1 in the us singles chart , making petula clark the first british female vocalist to reach the coveted position since the arrival of the beatles . january 24 – the animals appear a second time on the ed sullivan show . january 27 – paul simon broadcasts on bbc'five to ten show , discussing and playing 13 songs , 12 of which would appear on his may-recorded and august-released uk-only solo album , the paul simon song book . february 6 – donovan performs the first of three performances on the british television program ready , steady , go ! this presents him to a widespread audience for the first time . february 12 – nme reports the beatles will star in a film adaptation of richard condon 's novel a talent for loving . the story is about a horse race that takes place in the old west . the film is never made . february 19 - rod stewart with the soul agents perform their first important concert in london club london borough of harrow february 24 – the beatles begin filming their second film , help ! march 6 – the temptations ' '' my girl '' , written by smokey robinson and ronald white , from motown records , reaches number 1 . march 18 – the rolling stones members mick jagger , brian jones , and bill wyman are fined five pounds for urinating on the wall of a london petrol station . the band had asked to use the restroom , but it was out of order . march 20 – the 10th eurovision song contest in naples , italy , is won by 17-year-old france gall , representing luxembourg , with the serge gainsbourg-composed '' poupée de cire , poupée de son '' . march 21 – the supremes have their fourth number-one single , '' stop ! in the name of love '' , written by h-d-h . april 11 – the new musical express poll winners ' concert takes place featuring performances by the beatles , the animals , the rolling stones , freddie and the dreamers , the kinks , the searchers , herman 's hermits , the anita kerr singers , the moody blues , wayne fontana and the mindbenders , donovan , them , cilla black , dusty springfield and tom jones . april 13 – the 7th annual grammy awards are held in beverly hills . joão gilberto and stan getz each win the most awards with four , the latter winning record of the year with astrud gilberto for the song '' the girl from ipanema '' and the pair collectively winning album of the year for getz/gilberto . louis armstrong 's '' hello , dolly ! '' wins song of the year , while the beatles win best new artist . april 21 – the beach boys appear on shindig ! performing their most recent hit , '' do you wan na dance ? '' april 26 – leopold stokowski conducts the first complete performance of charles ives ' symphony no . 4 , more than ten years after the composer 's death . may 5 – alan price leaves the animals , to be replaced temporarily by mick gallagher and permanently by dave rowberry . may 6 keith richards and mick jagger begin work on '' satisfaction '' in their clearwater , florida , hotel room . richards comes up with the classic guitar riff while playing around with his brand new gibson '' fuzz box '' . the symphony of the new world , the first racially integrated orchestra in the united states , plays its first concert , under its founding conductor benjamin steinberg in carnegie hall , new york city . may 8 – the british commonwealth comes closer than it ever has , or will , to a clean sweep of the us hot 100 's top 10 , lacking only a hit at number 2 instead of '' count me in '' by the american group gary lewis & the playboys . may 9 – bob dylan performs the first of two concerts at london 's royal albert hall , concluding his tour of europe . audience members include the beatles , and donovan . may 30 – the animals appear a third time on the ed sullivan show . june producer tom wilson , ( simon & garfunkel ) records a heavy backing band onto the song '' the sound of silence '' , without the knowledge of paul simon , for release on a 45 rpm single , and the b-side , '' we 've got a groovey thing goin ' '' . the single will eventually reach number 1 on the billboard hot 100 on new year 's day 1966 . the us music press popularize the term '' folk rock '' , which has been in print at least since the november 2 , 1963 , issue of billboard magazine , in which '' devil 's waitin ' '' by the glencoves was said to have a '' wide open folk-rock sound . '' the term was also used of '' twins '' by kingtones ( march 7 , 1964 ) , the men ( july 25 , 1964 ) , and even of hoyt axton . people outside the trade begin to take notice of the term in june , 1965 . june 6 – the supremes have their fifth consecutive number-one single , '' back in my arms again , written by h-d-h , from motown records . july 5 – maria callas gives her last operatic performance , as tosca at the royal opera house , covent garden . july 9 – the release of the tamil musical film aayirathil oruvan marks the end of the composing partnership between t . k . ramamoorthy and m . s . viswanathan . july 25 – electric dylan controversy : bob dylan , playing a second day at the newport folk festival , is booed for playing an electric set with the paul butterfield blues band . joan baez and donovan also play sets . august 6 the small faces release '' whatcha gon na do about it '' , their first single . the beatles release the soundtrack to their second movie help ! august 14 – the husband-and-wife american pop duo sonny & cher earn their first number one hit i got you babe . it peaks at that position in the united states , united kingdom , canada and new zealand . august 15 – the beatles play at shea stadium , the first rock concert to be held in a venue of this size . the concert also sets new world records for attendance ( 55,600+ ) and for revenue . august 27 – the beatles visit elvis presley at his home in bel-air . it is the only time the band and the singer meet . september 30 – donovan appears on shindig ! in the u.s . and plays buffy sainte-marie 's '' universal soldier '' . october 15 – guitarist jimi hendrix signs a three-year recording contract with ed chaplin , receiving 1 and 1 % royalty on records with curtis knight . the agreement will later cause continuous litigation problems with hendrix and other record labels . october 17 – the animals appear a fourth time on the ed sullivan show . october 26 – the beatles are appointed british honours system ( mbe ) by the queen . since it is unusual at this time for popular musicians to be appointed as mbes , a number of previous recipients complain and protest . november 5 – the who release their iconic single '' my generation '' in the uk . this song contains the famous line : '' i hope i die before i get old '' november 14 – the supremes have their sixth number-one record , '' i hear a symphony '' , for motown records . november 26 – arlo guthrie is arrested in great barrington , massachusetts , for the crime of littering , perpetrated the day before ( thanksgiving ) in the nearby town of stockbridge . the resultant events and adventure will be immortalized in the song '' alice 's restaurant '' . december 3 the beatles release their album rubber soul , along with the double a-sided single '' day tripper / we can work it out '' . george harrison 's performance on the sitar on the track '' norwegian wood '' leads to his becoming a pupil of ravi shankar . the who release their debut album my generation . undated rockfield studios ( near rockfield , monmouthshire in wales ) becomes the world 's first residential recording studio . toho college of music is established in kawagoe , saitama , japan . michael tippett is invited as guest composer to the music festival in aspen , colorado . the visit leads to major changes in his style . new bands . see : category : musical groups established in 1965 . bands disbanded . paul & paula . albums released . january . . compositions . gilbert biberian – greek suite for guitar carlos chávez – soli iii for bassoon , trumpet , timpani , viola , and orchestra george crumb madrigals , books i for soprano , vibraphone , and double bass madrigals , books ii for soprano , flute/alto flute/piccolo , and percussion mario davidovsky – inflexions for chamber ensemble henri dutilleux – résonances for piano roberto gerhard – concerto for orchestra vittorio giannini – symphony no . 5 wojciech kilar – springfield sonnet for orchestra jan klusák rejdovák for bass clarinet , viola and double bass sonata for string and wind instruments fantaisie lyrique györgy ligeti – requiem for soprano and mezzo soprano solo , mixed chorus and orchestra ( 1963–65 ) henri pousseur votre faust satellite works for piano with soprano ad libitum votre faust satellite works for piano , soprano ad libitum , and two-channel tape karlheinz stockhausen – mikrophonie ii eduard tubin – sonata for viola and piano . opera . jack beeson – lizzie borden , march 25 , new york city opera ned rorem – miss julie , november 4 , new york city opera . jazz . musical theater . baker street broadway production opened at the broadway theatre and ran for 311 performances carousel ( rodgers & hammerstein ) – broadway revival charlie girl & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; & nbsp ; london production opened at the adelphi theatre on december 15 . do i hear a waltz ? ( richard rodgers and stephen sondheim ) – broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre and ran for 220 performances drat ! the cat ! – broadway production opened at the martin beck theatre and ran for 8 performances flora the red menace ( music : john kander lyrics : fred ebb ) broadway production opened on may 11 and ran for 87 performances . starring liza minnelli . half a sixpence – broadway production opened at the broadhurst theatre and ran for 511 performances hello , dolly ! ( jerry herman ) – london production man of la mancha ( joe darion and mitch leigh ) – broadway production opened at the martin beck theatre and ran for 2,328 performances . the show won five tony awards on a clear day you can see forever – broadway production pickwick – broadway production opened at the 46th street theatre and ran for 56 performances the roar of the greasepaint – the smell of the crowd – broadway production opened at the schubert theatre and ran for 231 performances twang ! ( music , lyrics and book : lionel bart ) london production opened at the shaftesbury theatre on december 20 . musical films . bangaru panjaram , telugu musical drama funny things happen down under , australia/new zealand co-production starring olivia newton-john help ! , directed by richard lester , starring the beatles inside the forbidden city , hong kong musical opera film janwar , hindi film malangi , pakistani film in punjabi , with music by master abdullah malangi 1965 film samba , brazilian-spanish co-production starring sara montiel , marc michel and fosco giachetti the sound of music directed by robert wise , starring julie andrews and christopher plummer waqt , hindi film when the boys meet the girls , starring connie francis . births . january 4 beth gibbons , english singer-songwriter , british vocalist ( portishead and rustin man ) david glasper , british vocalist breathe january 7 – john ondrasik ( or five for fighting ) , american singer-songwriter and pianist january 9 – haddaway , trinidadian-german singer , songwriter and musician january 12 – rob zombie , american musician , filmmaker and screenwriter and heavy metal musician ( white zombie ) january 14 – slick rick , english rapper january 15 – adam jones , american guitarist and songwriter ( tool and electric sheep ) january 20 greg k . ( the offspring ) heather small , british soul singer ( m people ) january 22 steven adler ( guns n ' roses ) dj jazzy jeff , american rapper and actor january 25 – toni halliday , lead singer and bass guitarist of curve and photofitz january 26 – siavash shams , iranian singer february 9 – stephin merritt from the magnetic fields february 18 – dr . dre , american rapper , record producer , and entrepreneur february 20 – inna zhelannaya , russian singer-songwriter february 25 – brian baker of minor threat , the meatmen and bad religion february 27 – frank peter zimmermann , german violinist march 4 andrew collins , british radio dj and journalist westbam ( maximillian lenz ) , german dj march 12 – liza umarova , chechen singer and actress march 23 – marti pellow , scottish vocalist ( wet wet wet ) march 24 – patrick scales , british-german electric bass guitar player april 1 – robert steadman , english composer april 3 – nazia hassan , pakistani pop singer ( d . 2000 ) april 6 – black francis , vocalist , songwriter , and guitarist ( pixies ) april 12 – pinchers , reggae/dancehall artist april 15 – linda perry , american singer-songwriter and record producer . april 18 – vinnie moore , guitarist april 19 suge knight , american record producer natalie dessay , french soprano april 23 – tommy decarlo , vocalist ( boston ) april 25 – eric avery ( jane 's addiction ) may 7 – chris o'connor , vocalist and guitarist ( primitive radio gods ) may 13 – tasmin little , english violinist may 16 – krist novoselic , croatian-american bassist nirvana may 17 – trent reznor , american singer , songwriter , musician , record producer , and film score composer ( nine inch nails ) may 22 – catie curtis , american singer-songwriter may 28 – chris ballew , american rock musician ( the presidents of the united states of america ) may 31 – lisa i'anson , british dj june 5 – tyler bates , american musician , music producer , and composer for films , television , and video games ( zack snyder , sucker punch , marilyn manson , marius de vries , guardians of the galaxy ) june 7 jean-pierre françois , french footballer and singer christine roque , french singer june 10 jimmy chamberlin ( the smashing pumpkins ) joey santiago ( pixies ) june 19 – sean marshall , american child actor and singer june 28 – sonny strait , american voice actor and singer july 4 – jo whiley , british radio dj july 5 – eyran katsenelenbogen , israeli jazz pianist july 9 courtney love , american singer , songwriter , actress , and visual artist . ( hole ) frank bello ( anthrax ) july 13 akina nakamori , japanese pop singer eileen ivers , american fiddler ( cherish the ladies ) july 19 – evelyn glennie , scottish percussionist july 23 rob dickinson , english singer-songwriter and guitarist ( catherine wheel ) slash , guitarist ( guns n ' roses , velvet revolver ) july 28 – daniela mercury , brazilian singer august 6 ravi coltrane , american saxophonist yuki kajiura , japanese composer august 18 – koji kikkawa , japanese singer august 19 – johan botha , south african operatic tenor august 28 – shania twain , canadian country-pop singer-songwriter and performer september 1 – craig mclachlan , australian actor and singer september 3 – todd lewis , ( toadies ) september 7 – angela gheorghiu , romanian soprano september 11 – moby , american musician september 12 – norwood fisher , fishbone september 13 – zak starkey , drummer , son of ringo starr september 16 – stephen shareaux , american singer-songwriter ( kik tracee and zen from mars ) september 23 – marco blaauw , trumpeter ( musikfabrik ) september 26 – cindy herron , american singer ( en vogue ) october 8 – c.j . ramone , bassist ( ramones ) october 14 – constantine koukias , australian composer october 18 – curtis stigers , american jazz musician and singer october 20 – jil caplan , french singer and songwriter october 22 – john wesley harding , singer october 26 aaron kwok , hong kong singer and actor sakari oramo , finnish conductor october 30 – gavin rossdale , english musician ( gwen stefani ) november 4 pata , japanese rock guitarist ( x japan ) jeff scott soto , american musician wayne static , american rock singer ( static-x ) november 9 – bryn terfel , welsh bass-baritone november 10 – jonas åkerlund , swedish music video director and drummer november 20 – yoshiki hayashi , japanese rock composer , piano and drummer ( x japan ) november 21 björk , icelandic singer , songwriter , musician , businesswomen , record producer , and dj gabrielle glaser ( luscious jackson ) november 18 – tim delaughter , american singer-songwriter ( tripping daisy and the polyphonic spree ) november 22 – sen dog ( cypress hill ) november 25 – tim armstrong , american singer and musician ( rancid ) december 5 – john rzeznik , american rock singer ( the goo goo dolls ) december 23 – bobby schayer ( bad religion ) december 29 – dexter holland , american rock singer ( the offspring ) date unknown kepa junkera , basque accordionist and composer joakim sundström , swedish sound editor , sound designer and musician . deaths . january 13 – leo funtek , violinist , conductor and arranger , 79 january 14 – jeanette macdonald , singer and actress , 61 january 20 – alan freed , dj who first used the phrase rock and roll , 43 january 21 – reino helismaa , singer-songwriter february 2 – charles w . harrison , ballad singer , 86 february 7 – viggo brodersen , pianist and composer , 85 february 14 – désiré-émile inghelbrecht , conductor and composer , 84 february 15 – nat king cole , singer and pianist , 45 february 25 – leo sirota , pianist march 2 – ján valašťan dolinský , composer march 4 – asadata dafora , drummer march 8 – tadd dameron , jazz pianist and composer , 48 march 22 – harry tierney , musical theatre composer march 29 – zlatko baloković , violinist , 70 april 7 – david hellström , songwriter , 81 april 12 – la belle otero , dancer and courtesan april 26 – michael bohnen , operatic bass-baritone and actor , 77 may 1 – spike jones , comedy musician , 53 may 14 – joe sanders , jazz pianist , singer and bandleader , 68 june 18 – george melachrino , english conductor , singer and composer july 8 – willie dennis , jazz trombonist , 39 july 14 – spencer williams , pianist , singer and composer july 17 – frank ryan , tenor , 65 september 4 – albert schweitzer , missionary , musician , and author on bach september 8 – dorothy dandridge , actress and singer , 42 september 9 – julián carrillo , mexican composer , conductor , violinist and music theorist , 90 september 10 – bobby jordan , actor and musician , 42 september 15 – steve brown , jazz musician september 25 – nikolai sokoloff , violinist and conductor , 79 october 17 – cléo de mérode , dancer october 21 – bill black , us musician , 39 october 25 – hans knappertsbusch , german conductor , 77 october 27 – peter la farge , folk singer-songwriter , 34 november 6 edgard varèse , french composer , 81 clarence williams , jazz musician and composer , 67 november 18 – lou black , banjo player , 64 november 19 – joe falcon , cajun accordionist , 65 november 21 cecil brower , jazz violinist , 50 ( perforated ulcer ) naoum blinder , violinist and teacher born in the ukraine , 76 ( if born july 19 , 1889 per some sources ) november 25 – dame myra hess , pianist , 75 december 3 – hank d'amico , jazz and swing musician december 10 – henry cowell , composer december 11 – rafael hernández marín , composer , 73 december 16 – tito schipa , tenor , 76 december 20 – charlie burse , blues musician , 64 date unknown – craig campbell , operatic tenor , 77 . awards . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1965 . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1965 . see also . hot 100 no . 1 hits of 1965 . references .