United Kingdom cabinet committee

committee procedure . committee membership is limited to ministers , but non-ministers may attend in some cases . cabinet committee membership lists ( 6 november 2012 ) in particular , the national security council is routinely attended by senior military , intelligence and security officials . members of the prime minister 's office - including the prime minister themselves - may attend any committee . the prime minister 's attendance does not mean that they will chair the committee , despite being the most senior cabinet member present , though they may choose to do so . in the cameron–clegg coalition , each cabinet committee included members of both the conservative party and the liberal democrats . furthermore , the general pattern was for committees to have a chair and a deputy chair , one from each party . there was a coalition committee , and an operational working group , to handle appeals over coalition disputes and to plan future policy . cabinet committee membership lists ( 17 february 2012 ) former committees with non-ministers as full members include the economic advisory council , whose membership was made up of a combination of ministers and experts in economics . the committee of imperial defence , a parallel cabinet for military policy which existed from 1904 until 1939 , included ministers , heads of the armed services , and civil servants . between 1997 and 2001 , there was a lib-lab pact which included senior liberal democrats as well as labour ministers . until 1992 , the list of cabinet committees , their membership , and their terms of reference were secret , with rare exceptions . during the second world war , details of the war cabinet structure were communicated to parliament ; hc deb 04 june 1940 vol 361 cols 768-771 winston churchill had previously announced a standing committee on national expenditure in his 1925 budget statement . hc deb 28 april 1925 vol 183 cols 58-60 the existence and membership of the defence and overseas policy committee was announced in 1963 , coinciding with the amalgamation of the service ministries into a single ministry of defence . command paper 2097 ( 1963 ) . central organisation for defence . margaret thatcher confirmed the continuing existence of this committee in the house of commons in 1979 , along with standing committees for economic strategy , home and social affairs , and legislation . hc deb 24 may 1979 vol 967 c179w the secrecy was due to the concern that public knowledge of cabinet procedure would lead to a loss of faith in collective responsibility ( if it became known that only a subset of the cabinet had been involved in making a given decision ) and undue pressure being put on committee chairs once their specific policy responsibilities became known . whether decisions were made by the entire cabinet , or by a committee , is not revealed at present . cabinet committees are shadowed by '' official committees '' made up of civil servants from the relevant departments . official committees follow a thirty year rule with respect to their existence and membership . . committees with special functions . most committees exist for the coordination of policy in some specific area . some committees , however , have a special role in managing government business , and accordingly have different procedures . the public expenditure committee ( pex ) plays a central role in the allocation of government money to departments . it originated in 1981 under the informal title of '' star chamber '' as an ad hoc committee ( misc 62 ) which could handle appeals over spending disputes , rather than having these be dealt with by the full cabinet . an appeal to cabinet was still possible , but this right was rarely exercised . the original name refers to the star chamber court noted for its secret , arbitrary and brutal decisions . the committee was made permanent under john major , under the name '' edx '' , and placed under the chairmanship of the chancellor of the exchequer . from 1998 to 2010 the same committee ( by then called '' px '' , and later '' psx '' ) also monitored departments ' fulfillment of public service agreement . while such agreements are no longer used , the committee retains its role in examining departmental expenditure , and will advise cabinet on the allocation each department is to receive . the legislation committee allocates time for government bills to be considered in parliament , coordinates the writing and handling of these bills in general , and is responsible for the queen 's speech . previously , there had been two committees , one for considering future legislation and another to deal with bills during their passage through parliament . departments who wish to make new primary legislation must apply to the committee for a slot in the legislative programme , as well as obtaining clearance from the relevant policy committee . guide to making legislation , economic and domestic affairs secretariat , cabinet office in an emergency , the national security council ( threats , hazards , resilience and contingencies ) subcommittee can meet in an operational configuration . this arrangement was previously named as the civil contingencies committee . in this case , the chair is taken by the minister for whichever government department is the '' lead '' for the emergency in question . ad hoc committees . during the post-second world war period , in addition to standing committees , there were ad hoc committees that were convened to handle a single issue . these were normally short-lived . each was given a prefix of gen or misc and a number . gen 183 , for example , was the committee on subversive activities . between 1945 and 1964 , gen ( for general ) committees were sequentially numbered from 1 to 881 in order of formation . . cabinet papers . committee minutes and papers follow the same secrecy rules as for the full cabinet . documents are generally handled on a need-to-know basis , and so may not be available to ministers who do not serve on the relevant committee . some materials may be classified as being available exclusively to the named members of the committee , and particularly sensitive papers may be kept in a secure room and read only under supervision . papers may be distributed physically or electronically ( via the government secure intranet ) . cabinet document officers ' handbook ( 73kb pdf ) notes taken at meetings for the purpose of preparing the official minutes are destroyed once the minutes have been written . hl deb 03 february 1994 vol 551 cc103–4 wa the minutes do not generally link points made in discussion to the specific people who made them . future governments may not be permitted to see the cabinet papers of their predecessors , if there has been a change of party . access in this case requires the approval of the former prime minister , or of the leader of the opposition . the few exceptions relate to papers of an expressly non-political nature , such as legal advice or international agreements . retired ministers wishing to write their memoirs are given access to papers from their tenure , but are usually not allowed to borrow them from the cabinet office archive . current committees . this excludes committees which did not have at least one meeting ( several of these existed solely as a means for documents to be circulated among the members ) . the 1939-45 figures do not include the joint intelligence committee , joint planning staff , or the combined chiefs of staff . see also . cabinet office lord president 's committee gen 75 committee . references . external links . cabinet office - cabinet committees