Cucumber

description . the cucumber is a creeping vine that roots in the ground and grows up trellises or other supporting frames , wrapping around supports with thin , spiraling tendrils . the plant may also root in a soilless medium , whereby it will sprawl along the ground in lieu of a supporting structure . the vine has large leaves that form a canopy over the fruits . the fruit of typical cultivars of cucumber is roughly cylindrical , but elongated with tapered ends , and may be as large as long and in diameter . cucumber fruits consist of 95 % water ( see nutrition table ) . in botany terms , the cucumber is classified as a pepo , a type of berry ( botany ) with a hard outer rind and no internal divisions . however , much like tomato and squashes , it is often perceived , prepared , and eaten as a vegetable . file : cucumber vine in new jersey.jpg alt a tendril emerges from cucumber vines to facilitate climbing a tendril emerges from cucumber vines to facilitate climbing file : flower of cucumis sativus.jpg flower of cucumis sativus file : pollen of cucumis sativus.jpg pollen grains of cucumis sativus file : cucumbers growing on a string lattice structure.jpg alt a string lattice supports vine growth a string lattice supports vine growth file : cucumber hanging on the vine.jpg alt a bulb-shaped cucumber hanging on the vine a bulb-shaped cucumber hanging on the vine file : organic gardener holding a fresh salad cucumber.jpg alt organic gardener holding a fresh salad cucumber organic gardener holding a fresh salad cucumber . flowering and pollination . a few cultivars of cucumber are parthenocarpy , the blossom of which create seedless fruit without pollination , which degrades the eating quality of these cultivar . in the united states , these are usually grown in greenhouses , where bee are excluded . in europe , they are grown outdoors in some regions , where bees are likewise excluded . most cucumber cultivars , however , are seeded and require pollination . for this purpose , thousands of honey beehive are annually carried to cucumber fields just before bloom . cucumbers may also be pollinated via bumblebees and several other bee species . most cucumbers that require pollination are self-incompatible , thus requiring the pollen of another plant in order to form seed and fruit . some self-compatible cultivars exist that are related to the 'lemon ' cultivar . symptoms of inadequate pollination include fruit abortion and misshapen fruit . partially-pollinated flowers may develop fruit that are green and develop normally near the stem end , but are pale yellow and withered at the blossom end . traditional cultivars produce male blossoms first , then female , in about equivalent numbers . newer gynoecious hybrid cultivars produce almost all female blossoms . they may have a pollenizer cultivar interplanted , and the number of beehives per unit area is increased , but temperature changes induce male flowers even on these plants , which may be sufficient for pollination to occur . . nutrition , aroma , and taste . in a serving , raw cucumber ( with peel ) is 95 % water , provides of food energy , and supplies low content of essential nutrients , as it is notable only for vitamin k at 16 % of the daily value ( table ) . depending on variety , cucumbers may have a mild melon aroma and flavor , in part resulting from unsaturated aldehydes , such as , and the cis- and trans- isomer of 2-nonenal . the slightly bitter taste of cucumber rind results from cucurbitacins . in 2009 , an international team of researchers announced they had sequenced the cucumber genome . . varieties . in general agriculture , cucumbers are classified into three main cultivar groups : slicing , pickled , and seedless fruit . slicing . cucumbers grown to eat fresh are called slicing cucumbers . the main varieties of slicers mature on vine with large leaves that provide shading . they are mainly eaten in the unripe green form , as the ripe yellow form normally becomes bitter and sour . smaller slicing cucumbers can also be pickled . slicers grown commercially for the north american market are generally longer , smoother , more uniform in color , and have much tougher skin . in contrast , those in other countries , often called european cucumber , are smaller and have thinner , more delicate skin , often with fewer seeds , thus being sold in plastic skin for protection . this variety may also be called a telegraph cucumber , particularly in australasia . cucumber – 5+ a day , new zealand retrieved 18 may 2018 . pickling . pickling with brine , sugar , vinegar , and spices creates various flavored products from cucumbers and other foods . although any cucumber can be pickled , commercial pickles are made from cucumbers specially bred for uniformity of length-to-diameter ratio and lack of voids in the flesh . those cucumbers intended for pickling , called picklers , grow to about long and wide . compared to slicers , picklers tend to be shorter , thicker , less-regularly shaped , and have bumpy skin with tiny white or black-dotted spines . color can vary from creamy yellow to pale or dark green . gherkin . , the west indian gherkin , a closely related species . . burpless . burpless cucumbers are sweeter and have a thinner skin than other varieties of cucumber . they are reputed to be easy to digest and to have a pleasant taste . they can grow as long as , are nearly seedless , and have a delicate skin . most commonly grown in greenhouses , these parthenocarpic cucumbers are often found in grocery store , shrink wrap in plastic . they are marketed as either burpless or seedless , as the seeds and skin of other varieties of cucumbers are said to give some people gas . . other . several other cultivars are sold commercially : lebanese cucumbers are small , smooth-skinned and mild , yet with a distinct flavor and aroma . like the english cucumber , lebanese cucumbers are nearly seedless . east asian cucumbers are mild , slender , deep green , and have a bumpy , ridged skin . they can be used for slicing , salads , pickling , etc . , and are available year-round . they are usually burpless as well . persian cucumbers , which are mini , seedless , and slightly sweet , are available from canada during the summer , and all year-round in the us . easy to cut and peel , they are long , on average . they are commonly eaten chopped up in plain yogurt with mint , or sliced thin and long with salt and lemon . their vines are parthenocarpy , requiring no pollinator for fruit set . beit alpha cucumbers are small , sweet parthenocarpic cucumbers adapted to the arid of the middle east . apple cucumbers are short , round cucumbers grown in new zealand and parts of europe , known for their light yellow-green color and mildly-sweet flavor . when mature , the fruit may grow tiny spines , and contains numerous edible green seeds . the fruit is usually eaten raw , with skin . apple cucumbers . wairarapa eco farms . wefs.co.nz schälgurkens , after peeling their thick skins , are braised or fried , often with ground meat or dill . eaten in germany , they are often known by the term schmorgurken ' kheera cucumber is a cucumber available in different parts of india . it has light to dark green color , thin skin , moisture-rich flesh with tiny edible seeds inside , and is enjoyed best in salads , sandwiches , or as a juice . it has high water content . dosakaya or kekiri ( cucumis melo conomon ) is a smooth-skinned , relatively-hard melon ( popular in south india and sri lanka ) that becomes orange or yellow in colour when matured , and is mistaken to be from the same species . cultivation history . cultivated for at least 3,000 years , the cucumber originated from india , where a great many varieties have been observed , along with its closest living relative , cucumis hystrix . asian news international . 21 july 2010 . '' cucumber , melon 's common ancestor originated in asia . '' newstrack india . retrieved on 4 june 2020 . it was probably introduced to other parts of europe by the greeks or romans . records of cucumber cultivation appear in france in the 9th century , england in the 14th century , and in north america by the mid-16th century . doijode , s . d . 2001 . seed storage of horticultural crops . haworth press . p . 281 . . roman empire . according to pliny the elder , the emperor tiberius had the cucumber on his table daily during summer and winter . in order to have it available for his table every day of the year , the romans reportedly used artificial methods of growing ( similar to the greenhouse ) , whereby mirrorstone refers to pliny 's lapis specularis , believed to have been sheet mica : pliny the elder . 77–79 ad 1855 . '' vegetables of a cartilaginous nature—cucumbers . pepones . '' ch . 23 in the natural history xix , translated by j . bostock and h . t . riley . london : taylor & francis . – via perseus under philologic , also available via perseus project . reportedly , they were also cultivated in specularia , cucumber houses glazed with oiled cloth . pliny describes the italian fruit as very small , probably like a gherkin . he also describes the preparation of a medication known as elaterium . however , some scholars believe that he was instead referring to ecballium elaterium , known in pre-linnean times as cucumis silvestris or cucumis asininus ( 'wild cucumber ' or 'donkey cucumber ' ) , a species different from the common cucumber . pliny the elder , natural history xx . iii . pliny also writes about several other varieties of cucumber , including the cultivated cucumber , pliny the elder , natural history xx . iv– v . and remedies from the different types ( 9 from the cultivated ; 5 from the '' anguine ; '' and 26 from the '' wild '' ) . the romans are reported to have used cucumbers to treat scorpion bites and bad eyesight , and to scare away mice . wives wishing for children wore them around their waists . they were also carried by midwives , and thrown away when the child was born . middle ages . charlemagne had cucumbers grown in his gardens in the 8th/9th century . they were reportedly introduced into england in the early 14th century , lost , then reintroduced approximately 250 years later . the spaniards ( through the italian christopher columbus ) brought cucumbers to haiti in 1494 . in 1535 , jacques cartier , a french explorer , found '' very great cucumbers '' grown on the site of what is now montreal . early-modern age . throughout the 16th century , european trappers , traders , bison hunters , and explorers bartered for the products of american indian agriculture . the tribes of the great plains and the rocky mountains learned from the spanish how to grow european crops . the farmers on the great plains included the mandan and abenaki . they obtained cucumbers and watermelons from the spanish , and added them to the crops they were already growing , including several varieties of corn and beans , pumpkins , squash , and gourd plants . the iroquois were also growing them when the first europeans visited them . in 1630 , the reverend francis higginson produced a book called new-englands plantation in which , describing a garden on conant ’ s island in boston harbor known as the governor ’ s garden , he states : francis higginson . 1630 1906 . new-englands plantation . salem , ma : essex book and print club . p . 5 . the countrie aboundeth naturally with store of roots of great and good to eat . our turnips , parsnips , and carrots are here both bigger and sweeter than is ordinary to be found in england . here are store of pompions , cowcumbers , and other things of that nature which i know not… in new england prospect ( 1633 , england ) , william wood published observations he made in 1629 in america : wood , william . ( 1634 ) . '' of the hearbes , fruites , woods , waters and mineralls '' , pp . 13–18 in new england prospect . london . . age of enlightenment and later . in the later 17th century , a prejudice developed against uncooked vegetables and fruits . a number of articles in contemporary health publications stated that uncooked plants brought on summer diseases and should be forbidden to children . the cucumber kept this reputation for an inordinate period of time , '' fit only for consumption by cows , '' which some believe is why it gained the name , cowcumber . a copper etching made by maddalena bouchard between 1772 and 1793 shows this plant to have smaller , almost bean-shaped fruits , and small yellow flowers . the small form of the cucumber is figured in herbal of the 16th century , however stating that '' if hung in a tube while in blossom , the cucumber will grow to a most surprising length . '' samuel pepys wrote in his diary on 22 august 1663 : saturday 22 august 1663 ( pepys ' diary ) . pepysdiary.com . retrieved on 25 november 2012 . '' this day sir w . batten tells me that mr . newburne is dead of eating cowcumbers , of which the other day i heard of another , i think . '' in the greenstone door , william satchell notes that '' te moanaroa was dead – of a surfeit of cucumbers , '' having eaten four of the '' prickly '' melons . ( chapter xx , '' the storm cloud '' ) . modern era . in may 2011 , cucumbers infected with e . coli were claimed to have caused the deaths of at least ten people , leading to some retailers withdrawing cucumbers from sale in germany , austria and the czech republic . the cucumbers were initially thought to have come from spain . however , subsequent testing failed to show contamination in imported spanish cucumbers , which led to the spanish government demanding compensation for spanish farmers who had been forced to destroy huge quantities of cucumbers . after the outbreak , the world health organization stated that it was a completely new strain of the bacterium involved . in 2016 , world production of cucumbers and gherkins was 80.6 million tonnes , led by china with nearly 77 % of the total . . gallery . file : cucumis sativus 0002.jpg cucumis sativus flower file : an indian yellow cucumber.jpg an indian yellow cucumber file : komkommer ( cucumis sativus 'gele tros ' ) . jpg komkommer ( cucumis sativus 'gele tros ' ) file : hmong cucumber.jpg a varietal grown by the hmong people with textured skin and large seeds file : lemon cucumber j1.jpg lemon cucumber file : kurkkuja.jpg a scandinavian cucumber in slices file : cucumber grated.jpg grated cucumber file : mizeria.jpg dish with cucumber cut pieces ( mizeria )