Carsten Niebuhr

early life and education . niebuhr was born in lüdingworth ( now a part of cuxhaven , lower saxony ) in what was then bremen-verden . his father barthold niebuhr ( 1704-1749 ) was a successful farmer and owned his own property . carsten and his sister were educated at home by a local school teacher , then he attended the latin school in otterndorf , near cuxhaven . originally niebuhr had intended to become a surveyor , but in 1757 he went to the georgia augusta university of göttingen , at this time germany 's most progressive institution of higher education . niebuhr was probably a strong student because in 1760 johann david michaelis ( 1717-1791 ) recommended him as a participant in the royal danish arabia expedition ( 1761-1767 ) , mounted by frederick v of denmark ( 1722-1766 ) . for a year and a half before the expedition niebuhr studied mathematics , cartography and navigational astronomy under tobias mayer ( 1723-1762 ) , one of the premier astronomers of the 18th century , and the author of the lunar distance method for determining longitude . niebuhr 's observations during the arabia expedition proved the accuracy and the practicality of this method for use by mariners at sea . expeditions . the expedition sailed in january 1761 via marseilles and malta to istanbul and alexandria . then the members of the expedition visited cairo and sinai , before traversing the red sea via jiddah to yemen , which was their main destination . in mocha , on 25 may 1763 , the expedition 's philologist , frederik christian von haven , died , and on 11 july 1763 , on the way to sanaʽa , the capital of yemen , its naturalist peter forsskål also died . in sanaʽa the remaining members of the expedition had an audience with the imam of yemen al-mahdi abbas ( 1719-1775 ) , but suffered from the climate and returned to mocha . niebuhr seems to have preserved his own life and restored his health by adopting native dress and eating native food . from mocha the expedition continued to bombay , the expedition 's artist georg wilhelm baurenfeind died on the 29th of august and the expedition 's servant lars berggren on the following day ; both were buried at sea . the surgeon christian c . kramer ( 1732-1763 ) also died , soon after landing in bombay . niebuhr was the only surviving member . he stayed in bombay for fourteen months and then returned home by way of muscat , bushire , shiraz and persepolis . his copies of the cuneiform inscriptions at persepolis proved to be a key turning-point in the decipherment of cuneiform , and the birth of assyriology . ; see also the fold-out plate ( tabelle xxxi ) after p . 152 . from p . 150 : '' ich will auf der tabelle xxxi , noch eine , oder vielmehr vier inschriften h , i , k , l beyfügen , die ich etwa in der mitte an der hauptmauer nach süden , alle neben einander , angetroffen habe . der stein worauf sie stehen , ist 26 fuß lang , und 6 fuß hoch , und dieser ist ganz damit bedeckt . man kann also daraus die größe der buchstaben beurtheilen . auch hier sind drey verschiedene alphabete . '' ( i want to include in plate xxxi another , or rather four inscriptions h , i , k , l , which i found approximately in the middle of the main wall to the south in the ruined palace at persepolis , all side by side . the stone on which they appear , is 26 feet long and 6 feet high , and it 's completely covered with them . one can thus judge therefrom the size of the letters . also here , there are three different alphabets . ) his transcriptions were especially useful to grotefend , who made the first correct decirpherments of old persian cuneiform : file : niebuhr inscription 1.jpg niebuhr inscription 1 . now known to mean '' darius the great king , king of kings , king of countries , son of hystaspes , an achaemenian , who built this palace '' . file : niebuhr inscription 2.jpg niebuhr inscription 2 . now known to mean '' xerxes the great king , king of kings , son of darius the king , an achaemenian '' . he also visited the ruins of babylon ( making many important sketches ) , baghdad , mosul and aleppo . he seems also to have visited the behistun inscription in around 1764 . after a visit to cyprus he made a tour through palestine , crossed the taurus mountains to bursa , reached constantinople in february 1767 and finally arrived in copenhagen in the following november . niebuhr 's production during the expedition is indeed impressive . it includes small-scale maps and charts of yemen , the red sea , the persian gulf and oman , and other larger scale maps covering the nile delta , the gulf of suez and the regions surrounding various port cities he visited , including mocha and surat . he completed 28 town plans of significant historical value because of their uniqueness for that period . in summary , niebuhr 's maps , charts and plans constitute the greatest single addition to the cartography of the region that was produced through field research and published in the 18th century . lawrence j . baack undying curiosity . carsten niebuhr and the royal danish expedition to arabia ( 1761-1767 ) . stuttgart , 2014 . family and later career . in 1773 niebuhr married christiane sophia blumenberg , the daughter of the crown physician , and for some years he held a post in the danish military service , which enabled him to remain in copenhagen . in 1776 he was elected a foreign member of the royal swedish academy of sciences . in 1778 he accepted a position in the civil service of danish holstein , and went to reside at meldorf ( ditmarschen ) . in 1806 he was promoted to etatsrat , and in 1809 was made a knight of the order of the dannebrog , one of denmark-norway 's most valued honours for service . writing and research . niebuhr 's first book , beschreibung von arabien , was published in copenhagen in 1772 , the danish government providing subsidies for the engraving and printing of its numerous illustrations . this was followed in 1774 and 1778 by the first two volumes of niebuhr 's reisebeschreibung nach arabien und andern umliegender ländern . these works ( particularly the one published in 1778 ) , and most specifically the accurate copies of the cuneiform inscriptions found at persepolis , were to prove to be extremely important to the decipherment of cuneiform writing . before niebuhr 's publication , cuneiform inscriptions were often thought to be merely decorations and embellishments , and no accurate decipherments or translations had been made up to that point . niebuhr demonstrated that the three trilingual inscriptions found at persepolis were in fact three distinct forms of cuneiform writing ( which he termed class i , class ii , and class iii ) to be read from left to right . his accurate copies of the trilingual inscriptions gave orientalists the key to finally crack the cuneiform code , leading to the discovery of old persian , akkadian , and sumerian . kramer , samuel noah . the sumerians : their history , culture and character . university of chicago press , 1963 the third volume of the reisebeschreibung , also based on materials from the expedition , was not published till 1837 , long after niebuhr 's death , under the editorship of his daughter and his assistant , johan nicolaus gloyer . niebuhr also contributed papers on the interior of africa , the political and military condition of the ottoman empire , and other subjects to a german periodical , the deutsches museum . in addition , he edited and published the work of his friend peter forsskål , the naturalist on the arabian expedition , under the titles descriptiones animalium , flora aegyptiaco-arabica and icones rerum naturalium ( copenhagen , 1775 and 1776 ) . french and dutch translations of niebuhr 's narratives were published during his lifetime , and a condensed english translation of his own three volumes , prepared by robert heron , was published in edinburgh in 1792 , under the title '' travels through arabia '' . a facsimile edition of this translation , as by '' m . niebuhr '' , was published in two volumes by the libraire du liban , beirut ( undated ) . the government funds covered only a fraction of the printing costs for niebuhr 's first book , and probably a similar or smaller proportion of the costs for the other two volumes . to ensure that the volumes were published , niebuhr had to pay over 80 % of the costs himself . in all , niebuhr devoted ten years of his life , the years 1768-1778 , to the publication of six volumes of findings from the expedition . he had virtually no help from the academics who had conceived and shaped the expedition in göttingen and copenhagen . it was only niebuhr 's determination to publish the findings of the expedition that ensured that the danish arabia expedition would produce results that would benefit the world of scholarship . lawrence j . baack undying curiosity . carsten niebuhr and the royal danish expedition to arabia ( 1761-1767 ) . stuttgart , 2014 . death and legacy . niebuhr died in meldorf in 1815 . johann wolfgang von goethe ( 1749-1832 ) highly prized niebuhr 's works . in 1811 he wrote to niebuhr 's son , barthold georg niebuhr , that '' you carry a name which i have learned to honour since my youth . '' carsten niebuhrs gade , a street in the port area of copenhagen , is named for him . works . niebuhr , carsten . beschreibung von arabien . aus eigenen beobachtungen und im lande selbst gesammleten nachrichten . copenhagen , 1772 . niebuhr , carsten . reisebeschreibung nach arabien und andern umliegender ländern . 2 & nbsp ; vols . copenhagen , 1774-1778 . niebuhr , carsten . '' über längen-beobachtungen im orient u.s.w . aus einem schreiben des königl . dänischen geheimer justiz-raths carsten niebuhr '' . monatliche correspondenz zur beförderung der erd- und himmels-kunde 4 ( 1801 ) , pp . 240–253 . niebuhr , carsten . biographische nachrichten aus tobias mayer 's jugendjahren aus einem schreiben des königlich dänischen justiz-raths c . niebuhr , monatliche correspondenz zur beförderung der erd-und himmels-kunde 8 ( 1803 ) , pp . 45–56 , and 9 ( 1804 ) , pp . 487–491 . niebuhr , carsten . reisebescheibung nach arabien und andern umliegenden ländern . vol . 3 . carsten niebuhr reisen durch syrien und palästina , nach cypern , und durch kleinasien und die türkei nach deutschland und dännemark , edited by j . n.gloyer and j . olshausen . hamburg , 1837 . niebuhr , carsten . rejsebeskrivele fra arabien or andre omkringliggende lande , translated by hans christian fink , with an introduction by michhael harbsmeier . 2 vols . , copenhagen , 2003 . niebuhr , carsten . beskrivelse af arabien ud fra egne iagttagelser og i landet selv samlede efterretinger , translated by hans christian fink , with an introduction by niels peter lemche . copenhagen , 2009 . references . bibliography . lawrence j . baack a practical skill that was without equal : carsten niebuhr and the navigational astronomy of the arabian journey , 1761-1767 . the mariner 's mirror , 99.2 ( 2013 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 138–152 . lawrence j . baack undying curiosity . carsten niebuhr and the royal danish expedition to arabia ( 1761-1767 ) . stuttgart , 2014 . carsten niebuhr ( 1733-1815 ) und seine zeit , edited by josef wiesehöfer and stephan conermann . stuttgart , 2002 . early scientific expeditions and local encounters . new perspectives on carsten niebuhr and 'the arabian journey ' . proceedings of a symposium on the occasion of the 250th anniversary of the royal danish expedition to arabia felix , edited by ib friis , michael harbsmeier and jørgen bæk simonsen . copenhagen , 2013 . eck , reimer . tobias mayer , johann david michaelis , carsten niebuhr und die göttingen methode der längenbestimmung . mitteilungen gauss-gesellschaft e . v . göttingen , 22 ( 1986 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 73–81 . thorkild hansen . arabia felix , translated by james and kathleen mcfarlane . new york , 1963 . hopkins , i.w.j . the maps of carsten niebuhr : 200 years after , the cartographic journal 4 ( 1967 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 115–118 . barthold georg niebuhr . carsten niebuhrs leben , kleine historische und philologische schriften . bonn , 1828 . barthold georg niebuhr . vorträge über alte geschichte an der universität zu bonn gehalten , edited m . niebuhr . vol . 1 . berlin , 1847 . rasmussen , stig t . , ed . den arabiske rejse 1761-1767 . en dansk ekspedition set i verdenskabshistorisk perspektiv . copenhagen , 1990 . rasmussen , stig t . , ed . carsten niebuhr und die arabische reise 1761-1767 . ausstellung der königlichen bibliothek kopenhagen in zusammenbang mit dem kultusministerium des landes schleswig-holstein . heide , 1986 . hansen , anne haslund . niebuhr 's museum . artefacts and souvenirs from the royal danish expedition to arabia 1761-1767 . copenhagen , 2016 . vermeulen , han f . , 'anthropology and the orient : c . niebuhr and the danish- german arabia expedition . in : han f . vermeulen : before boas . the genesis of ethnography and ethnology in the german enlightenment . lincoln & london , university of nebraska press , 2016 . external links . beschreibung von arabien text and illustrations at the university of göttingen travels in arabia from 1892 , featuring carsten neibuhr