Norman Wisdom

early life . norman joseph wisdom was born in st mary 's hospital , paddington , west london . his parents were frederick , a chauffeur , and maud wisdom ( née targett ) , a dressmaker who often worked for west end theatres , and had made a dress for queen mary . do n't laugh at me , p . 1 the couple married in marylebone on 15 july 1912 . wisdom had an elder brother , frederick thomas '' fred '' wisdom ( 13 december 1912 – 1 july 1971 ) . the family lived at 91 fernhead road , maida vale , london w9 , where they slept in one room . he and his brother were brought up in extreme poverty and were frequently hit by their father . after a period in a foster care in deal , kent , wisdom ran away when he was 11 but returned to become an errand boy in a grocery store on leaving school at 13 . having been kicked out of his home by his father and become homeless , norman wisdom : my story , bbc two , 15 october 2010 in 1929 he walked ( by his own account ) to cardiff , wales , where he became a cabin boy in the merchant navy . he later also worked as a waiter . . military service . wisdom first enlisted into the king 's own royal regiment ( lancaster ) , but his mother had him discharged as he was under age . he later re-enlisted as a drummer boy in the 10th royal hussars of the british army . in 1930 , he was posted to lucknow , in the united provinces of british india , as a bandsman . there he rode horses , became the flyweight boxing champion of the british indian army and learned to play the trumpet and clarinet . at the outbreak of the second world war , wisdom was sent to work in a communications centre in a command bunker in london , where he connected telephone calls from war leaders to the prime minister . he met winston churchill on several occasions when asked for updates on incoming calls . wisdom then joined the royal corps of signals , and performed a similar military function at the unit headquarters in cheltenham , gloucestershire . whilst performing a shadow boxing routine in an army gym , wisdom discovered he had a talent for entertainment , and began to develop his skills as a musician and performance art . in 1940 aged 25 , at a naafi entertainment night , during a dance routine , wisdom stepped down from his position in the orchestra pit , and started shadow boxing . hearing his colleagues and officers giggling , he broke into a duck waddle , followed by a series of facial expressions . he later described the reaction as : '' they were in hysterics . all the officers were falling about laughing . '' wisdom later said this was where he first patented his persona as '' the successful failure '' . over the next few years , until he was demobilized in 1945 , his routine included his characteristic singing and the trip-up-and-stumble . after wisdom appeared at a charity concert at cheltenham town hall , actor rex harrison came backstage and urged him to become a professional entertainer . . comic entertainer . after being demobilised wisdom worked as a private hire car driver . having improved his diction in the army , he also took a job as a night telephone operator . wisdom made his debut as a professional entertainer at the age of 31 ; his rise to the top was phenomenally fast . initially the double act to the magician david nixon , he had already adopted the costume that would remain his trademark : tweed flat cap askew , with peak turned up ; a suit at least two sizes too tight ; a crumpled collar and a mangled tie . the character that went with this costume — known as the gump — was to dominate wisdom 's film career . a west end theatre star within two years , he honed his performance skills mainly between theatres in london and brighton : wisdom made his tv debut in 1948 and was soon commanding enormous audiences and had a small film role in a date with a dream released in the same year . starring film roles for the rank organisation . wisdom made a series of low-budget star-vehicle comedies for the rank organisation , beginning with trouble in store ( 1953 ) . this film earned him a bafta award for most promising newcomer to film in 1954 . it was the second most popular film at the british box-office in 1954 and exhibitors voted him the tenth biggest star at the british box office the same year . his films ' cheerful , unpretentious appeal make them the direct descendants of those made a generation earlier by george formby . never highly thought of by the critics , they were very popular with domestic audiences and wisdom 's films were among britain 's biggest box-office successes of their day . they were also successful in some unlikely overseas markets , helping rank stay afloat financially when their more expensive film projects were unsuccessful . the films usually involved the gump character , usually called norman , in a manual occupation in which he is barely competent and in a junior position to a straight man , often played by edward chapman ( as mr grimsdale ) or jerry desmonde . they benefited from wisdom 's capacity for physical slapstick comedy and his skill at creating a sense of the character 's helplessness . the series often contained a romantic subplot ; the gump 's inevitable awkwardness with women is a characteristic shared with the earlier formby vehicles . his innocent incompetence still made him endearing to the heroine . wisdom 's second film as star , one good turn ( 1955 ) , was the seventh most popular movie of 1955 in britain . he made a cameo in as long as they 're happy ( 1955 ) , then returned in man of the moment ( 1955 ) . he was the 6th most popular star of 1955 . wisdom was a window cleaner in up in the world ( 1956 ) and worked in a jewellery store in just my luck ( 1957 ) . the box office receipts of these last few films had declined from previous wisdom films but the square peg ( 1959 ) , an army comedy , reversed the trend and was one of the year 's biggest hits . the film was the 7th most popular movie at the british box office in 1959 . less successful was follow a star ( 1959 ) . there was a crooked man ( 1960 ) was an attempt to change wisdom 's image away from rank organisation . the bulldog breed ( 1960 ) was more conventional . the film also starred a young michael caine who later recalled he did not enjoy working with wisdom because he '' was n't very nice to support-part actors '' . wisdom remained the 10th biggest star at the british box office . wisdom was in the girl on the boat ( 1961 ) from a novel by p . g . wodehouse , a second film away from the rank formula . on the beat ( 1962 ) as a car cleaner and a stitch in time ( 1963 ) , in which he was cast as an apprentice butcher , returned him to the regular format . the early bird ( 1965 ) , his first colour film , had wisdom as a milkman . after a cameo in the sandwich man ( 1966 ) , wisdom starred in press for time ( 1966 ) , the last film in this sequence of starring vehicles . wisdom was still voted the 5th most popular star at the british box office . whilst wisdom 's stage performances often involved musical numbers , he wrote only a few of them . he has seven songs attributed to him in the ascap database , which are : '' beware '' , '' do n't laugh at me ( 'cause i 'm a fool ) '' , '' falling in love '' , '' follow a star '' , '' i love you '' , '' please opportunity '' , and '' up in the world '' . . later career . in 1966 , wisdom spent a short period in the united states to star in a broadway production of the jimmy van heusen and sammy cahn musical comedy walking happy . his performance was nominated for a tony award . this led to wisdom 's being cast in his first hollywood movie , the night they raided minsky 's ( 1968 ) . back in england he tried to change his image slightly in what 's good for the goose ( 1969 ) , which featured a topless scene , but it was financially unsuccessful . wisdom was one of several actors initially considered for the role of frank spencer in some mothers do 'ave 'em . however , he turned the role down and it eventually went to michael crawford . the creator of the series raymond allen later stated '' norman wisdom was offered the role but turned it down because he did n't find it funny '' . on 31 december 1976 , wisdom performed his theme song '' do n't laugh at me ( 'cause i 'm a fool ) '' on bbc1 's a jubilee of music , celebrating british pop music for queen elizabeth ii 's impending silver jubilee . wisdom had performed in front of the queen at many royal command performances , the first being in 1952 . he also completed his first american film as a vaudeville comic in the night they raided minsky 's . after a typical performance on the ed sullivan show , further us opportunities were denied him when he had to return to london after his second wife left him . his subsequent career was largely confined to television , and he toured the world with a successful cabaret act . he won critical acclaim in 1981 for his dramatic role of a dying cancer patient in the television play going gently . after touring south africa , zimbabwe and australia with some success , his appearances in britain became more infrequent . he spent much of the 1980s in seclusion on the isle of man . wisdom 's career revived in the 1990s , helped by the young comedian lee evans , whose act was often compared to wisdom 's work . his films for rank were playing to new audiences via television screenings , with young fans in the united kingdom and abroad . the high point of this new popularity was the knighthood he was awarded , for services to entertainment , in the 2000 new year 's honours list . during the ceremony , once he had received his knighthood , he walked away and again performed his trademark trip , at which the queen smiled and laughed . from 1995 until 2004 he appeared in the recurring role of billy ingleton in the long-running bbc comedy last of the summer wine . the role was originally a one-off appearance , but proved so popular that he returned as the character on a number of occasions . in 1996 , he received a special achievement award from the london film critics . wisdom was a guest on a this is your life special in 2000 for actor and director todd carty . he appeared as a half-time guest at the england vs albania 2002 world cup qualifier at st james ' park , newcastle upon tyne , and scored a penalty at the leazes end . in 2002 wisdom filmed a cameo role as a butler in a low-budget horror film . in 2004 , he made an appearance on coronation street , playing fitness fanatic pensioner ernie crabbe . in 2007 he came out of retirement to take a role in a short film called expresso . . popularity in albania . wisdom was a well-known performer in albania , where he was one of the few western actors whose films were allowed in the country under enver hoxha . according to hoxha 's dialectical materialism viewpoint , proletarian norman 's ultimately victorious struggles against capitalism , personified by mr grimsdale and the effete aristocratic characters played by jerry desmonde , were a communist parable on the class war . he was known as mr pitkin after the character from his films . in 1995 , he visited the post-stalinist country where , to his surprise , he was greeted by many appreciative fans , including the then president , sali berisha . during this trip , wisdom was filmed by newsnight as he visited a children 's project funded by childhope uk . on a visit in 2001 , which coincided with the england football team playing albania in the city of tirana , his appearance at the training ground overshadowed that of david beckham . he appeared on the pitch before the start of the albania v england match wearing a half-albanian and half-english football shirt . he was well received by the crowd , especially when he performed one of his trademark trips on his way out to the centre circle . in 1995 wisdom was made an honorary citizen of tirana . in his book and tv series one hit wonderland , tony hawks united with wisdom and , along with tim rice , released a single , '' big in albania '' , in an attempt to enter the albanian pop charts . it reached number 18 on the top albania radio chart . . retirement . in october 2004 , wisdom announced he would retire from the entertainment industry on his 90th birthday ( 4 february 2005 ) . he announced that he intended to spend more time with his family , playing golf and driving around the isle of man , where he was living . in 2007 , wisdom returned to acting in a short film directed by kevin powis , expresso . the film , which wisdom later announced ( reported bbc/itv news ) was to be officially his last film role , is set during one day in a coffee shop and was funded by the uk film council and screenwm . shot in january , it premièred at the cannes film festival on 27 may 2007 . it was later adopted by the uk charity macmillan and released on dvd in aid of the charity . in the film , wisdom plays a vicar plagued by a fly in a café . producer nigel martin davey gave him only a visual role so that he would not have to remember any lines , but on the day , wisdom was alert and had his performance changed to add more laughs . . personal life . wisdom was married twice . his first wife was doreen brett , whom he married in 1941 . by 1944 they had separated when doreen gave birth to a son , michael ( born 1944 ) , fathered by albert gerald hardwick , a telephone engineer . the marriage was dissolved in 1946 . he married his second wife , freda isobel simpson , in 1947 ; they had two children : nicholas ( born 1953 , who later played first-class cricket for sussex ) and jacqueline ( born 1954 ) . the couple divorced in 1969 , with wisdom granted full custody of the children . freda wisdom died in brighton in 1992 . popular in the isle of man , he lived for 27 years in a house in andreas named ballalough ( manx for '' lake farm '' , also a humorous corruption of the english '' belly laugh '' ) . he supported various charities and charitable works , including orphanages in albania . in 2005 , wisdom starred in a video for the manx girl group twisted angels , for their single '' la '' , in support of the local charity project 21 . during the 1960s , he was involved in a famous legal case ( wisdom v chamberlain , 1968 ) in which he was pursued by the inland revenue for tax on profits made from the sale of silver bullion he had bought when concerned about the further devaluation of sterling . he contended that it was an investment , but the court held that it had been a trading venture and was duly chargeable to income tax . . interests . wisdom was a lifelong supporter and a former board member of football team brighton & hove albion . he also liked everton and newcastle united . he enjoyed golf , and was a member of the grand order of water rats . he was an honorary member of the winkle club , a charity in hastings , east sussex . a lover of cars , his collection included a 1956 bentley s1 bentley continental , which he first bought in 1961 , and then again in the late 1980s . in 1969 , he purchased , after the divorce from freda simpson , a shelby cobra 427 , csx3206 , in new york , which he kept until 1986 , when it was sold to another car enthusiast in brighton , uk . until his age and declining mental health meant he failed a department of transport fitness-to-drive test , he owned and drove a 1987 rolls-royce silver spirit and a jaguar s-type , which were sold in september 2005 . in 1963 , he bought a new motor yacht . the long hull and superstructure were built in spain for £80,000 , before being towed to shoreham-by-sea , west sussex , for fitting out . after three years of extensive works and sea trials , she was named m/y conquest and valued at £1.25 million by insurers . it was available for charter at £6,000 a month but wisdom later sold it , saying that he was '' no sailor '' . . allegations of inappropriate behaviour . actress fenella fielding , who worked with wisdom on his 1959 film follow a star , said he was '' not a very pleasant man . always making a pass – hand up your skirt first thing in the morning . not exactly a lovely way to start a day 's filming . '' lynda bellingham , who worked with wisdom on a little bit of wisdom , recalled a comedy sketch where '' for ten minutes i stood there while he basically touched me up and you could n't say anything because he was the master of comedy . '' singer tina charles , who had a number one with '' i love to love '' in 1976 , alleged that wisdom molested her in his dressing room when she was 16 . . health decline . in mid-2006 , after he suffered an irregular heart rhythm , wisdom was flown by helicopter to hospital in liverpool and was fitted with a heart pacemaker . wisdom was in the abbotswood nursing home in ballasalla , where he had been resident from 12 july 2007 . on the release of expresso to dvd in the same month , bbc news confirmed that wisdom lived in a care home , because of his suffering from vascular dementia . it was also reported that he had granted his children power of attorney over his affairs and , having sold off his flat in epsom , surrey , they were now in the process of selling his isle of man home to raise money to fund his longer-term care . on 16 january 2008 , bbc2 aired wonderland : the secret life of norman wisdom aged 92 and 3/4 . the documentary highlighted the dilemma of coping with an ageing parent . his family said that wisdom 's memory loss had become so severe that he no longer recognised himself in his films . death . in the six months prior to his death , wisdom suffered a series of strokes , causing a decline in his physical and mental health . he died on 4 october 2010 at abbotswood nursing home on the isle of man at the age of 95 . his funeral took place on 22 october 2010 in douglas , isle of man , and all of the island were invited . his trademark cloth cap was placed on the coffin in the church . the funeral was attended by a large number of showbusiness personalities and , at wisdom 's request , moira anderson sang '' who can i turn to '' , which was specially arranged for the occasion by gordon cree . wisdom 's body was buried at kirk bride churchyard , bride , isle of man . . tributes and other references . norman wisdom was the subject of this is your life on two occasions , in december 1957 when he was surprised by eamonn andrews at the playhouse theatre , manchester , and in february 1987 , when andrews surprised him at st margaret 's tavern twickenham , on his 72nd birthday . in 2007 , a norman wisdom-themed bar opened at the sefton hotel , douglas , called sir norman 's . it has stills from his many films on the walls and tv screens playing some clips of his old films . the bronze statue of wisdom , which used to be on a bench outside douglas town hall , has been moved to the steps leading into the hotel bar on harris promenade . wisdom featured on the bbc radio 4 series desert island discs in august 2000 . of the eight songs he chose , four were performed by wisdom himself ( including his favourite , 'do n't laugh at me 'cos i 'm a fool ' ) , while a fifth was a duet with joyce grenfell . the 2011 film my week with marilyn features impersonator glenn michael ford playing norman wisdom in a background scene . a wetherspoon pub in deal , kent , where wisdom ran away from the children 's home , was named the sir norman wisdom in his honour when it opened in march 2013 . in 2015 wisdom of a fool , a new one-man play based on the life of norman wisdom opened at the capitol theatre , horsham , in wisdom 's centenary year , on 17 september . a uk tour began at guildford 's yvonne arnaud theatre in 2016 and continues into 2018 . . filmography . a date with a dream ( 1948 ) - shadow boxer wit and wisdom ( 1948–1950 , tv series ) trouble in store ( 1953 ) - norman one good turn ( 1955 ) - norman as long as they 're happy ( 1955 ) - norman - cameo appearance ( uncredited ) man of the moment ( 1955 ) - norman up in the world ( 1956 ) - norman just my luck ( 1957 ) - norman hackett the square peg ( 1958 ) - norman pitkin / general schreiber follow a star ( 1959 ) - norman truscott there was a crooked man ( 1960 ) - davy cooper the bulldog breed ( 1960 ) - norman puckle the girl on the boat ( 1961 ) - sam marlowe on the beat ( 1962 ) - norman pitkin / giulio napolitani a stitch in time ( 1963 ) - norman pitkin the early bird ( 1965 ) - norman pitkin the sandwich man ( 1966 ) - boxing vicar press for time ( 1966 ) - norman shields / emily , his mother / wilfred , his grandfather androcles and the lion ( 1967 , tv movie ) - androcles the night they raided minsky 's ( 1968 ) - chick williams what 's good for the goose ( 1969 ) - timothy bartlett norman ( 1970 , tv series ) - norman wilkins music hall ( 1970 , tv ) nobody is norman wisdom ( 1973 , tv series ) - nobody a little bit of wisdom ( 1974 , tv series ) - norman bbc playhouse ( 1981 , tv series ) - bernard flood bbc bergerac ( 1983 , tv series ) - vincent the 1950s : music , memories & milestones ( 1988 , tv ) double x : the name of the game ( double x , run rabbit run ) ( 1992 ) - arthur clutten last of the summer wine ( 1995–2004 , tv series ) - billy ingleton / man carrying gnome where on earth is . katy manning ( 1998 , documentary ) - self casualty ( 1998 , tv series ) - mr . cole junfans attic ( 2001 ) dalziel and pascoe ( 2002 , tv series ) - bernie marks the last detective ( 2003 , tv series ) - lofty brock between the sheets ( 2003 , tv mini-series ) - maurice hardy coronation street ( 2004 , tv series ) - ernie crabbe five children and it ( 2004 ) - nesbitt expresso ( 2007 , short ) - the vicar ( buzz ) wonderland : the secret life of norman wisdom aged 92 and 3/4 ( 2008 , tv series ) - ( his last appearance ) . box office ranking . for a number of years british exhibitors voted wisdom one of the most popular stars in the country . 1954 – 10th most popular star ( 3rd most popular british star ) 1955 – 6th most popular star ( 3rd most popular british star ) 1956 – 5th biggest british star 1957 – 9th most popular star ( 5th most popular british star ) 1958 – 7th most popular british star 1959 – 3rd most popular british star 1963 – 10th most popular star 1966 – 5th most popular star . audio recordings . i would like to put on record jingle jangle the very best of norman wisdom androcles and the lion where 's charley ? wisdom of a fool nobody 's fool follow a star 1957 original chart hits follow a star/give me a night in june happy ending/the wisdom of a fool big in albania – one hit wonderland they did n't believe me . books . lucky little devil : norman wisdom on the island he 's made his home ( 2004 ) do n't laugh at me , cos i 'm a fool ( 1992 ) ( two volumes of autobiography ) trouble in store ( 1991 ) . references . external links . pathe news clips of wisdom from the 1950s obituary : sir norman wisdom bbc retrieved 4 october 2010 nick wisdom recalls his father 's appearance on this is your life wisdom of norman norman wisdom tribute at british classic comedy norman wisdom at bfi screenonline wisdom a new feature film screenplay about his life and adventures