Quincunx

historical origins of the name . the quincunx was originally a coin issued by the roman republic c . & nbsp ; 211 & ndash ; 200 bc , whose value was five twelfths ( quinque and uncia ) of an as , the roman standard bronze coin . on the roman quincunx coins , the value was sometimes indicated by a pattern of five dots or pellets . however , these dots were not always arranged in a quincunx pattern . the oxford english dictionary dates the first appearances of the latin word in english as 1545 and 1574 ( '' in the sense 'five-twelfths of a pound or as ; i.e . 100 old pence ) . the first citation for a geometric meaning , as '' a pattern used for planting trees '' , dates from 1606 . the oed also cites a 1647 reference to the german astronomer kepler for an astronomical/astrological meaning , an angle of 5/12 of a whole circle . states that the word refers to the pattern of trees in an orchard , but then uses it more abstractly for a version of the orchard-planting problem involving patterns of points and lines in the plane ( for which the quincunx pattern provides the optimal solution for five points ) . . . examples . quincunx patterns occur in many contexts : in heraldry , groups of five elements ( charges ) are often arranged in a quincunx pattern , called in saltire in heraldic terminology . the flag of the solomon islands features this pattern , with its five stars representing the five main island groups in the solomon islands . another instance of this pattern occurred in the flag of the 19th-century republic of yucatán , where it signified the five departments into which the republic was divided . quincunxes are used in modern computer graphics as a pattern for multisample anti-aliasing . quincunx antialiasing samples scenes at the corners and centers of each pixel . these five sample points , in the shape of a quincunx , are combined to produce each displayed pixel . however , samples at the corner points are shared with adjacent pixels , so the number of samples needed is only twice the number of displayed pixels . . in numerical analysis , the quincunx pattern describes the two-dimensional five-point stencil , a sampling pattern used to derive finite difference approximations to derivatives . . in architecture , a quincuncial plan , also defined as a '' cross-in-square '' , is the plan of an edifice composed of nine bays . the central and the four angular ones are covered with domes or groin vaults so that the pattern of these domes forms a quincunx ; the other four bays are surmounted by barrel vaults . r . krautheimer , early christian and byzantine architecture , 1965 in khmer architecture , the towers of a temple , such as angkor wat , are sometimes arranged in a quincunx to represent the five peaks of mount meru . angkor wat : image of the day a quincunx is one of the quintessential designs of cosmatesque inlay stonework . . a quincuncial map is a conformal map projection that maps the poles of the sphere to the centre and four corners of a square , thus forming a quincunx . the points on each face of a unit cell of a face-centred cubic lattice form a quincunx . the quincunx as a tattoo is known as the five dots tattoo . it has been variously interpreted as a fertility symbol , . a reminder of sayings on how to treat women or police , a recognition symbol among the romani people , . a group of close friends , . standing alone in the world , . or time spent in prison ( with the outer four dots representing the prison walls and the inner dot representing the prisoner ) . . thomas edison , whose many inventions included an electric pen which later became the basis of a tattooing machine created by samuel o'reilly , had this pattern tattooed on his forearm . . the first two stages of the saturn v super heavy-lift rocket had engines in a quincunx arrangement . . a baseball diamond forms a quincunx with the four bases and the pitcher 's mound . . see in particular p . & nbsp ; 62 . early african american scientist benjamin banneker describes a dream in which he is asked to measure the shape of the soul after death . the answer is '' quincunx '' . research locates his ancestry in senegal , where the quincunx is a common religious symbol . . literary symbolism . various literary works use or refer to the quincunx pattern for its symbol : the english physician sir thomas browne in his philosophical discourse the garden of cyrus ( 1658 ) elaborates upon evidence of the quincunx pattern in art , nature and mystically as evidence of '' the wisdom of god '' . although browne wrote about quincunx in its geometric meaning , he may have been influenced by english astrology , as the quincunx ( astrology ) ( unrelated to the pattern ) was introduced by the astronomer kepler in 1604 . james joyce uses the term in '' grace '' , a short story in dubliners of 1914 , to describe the seating arrangement of five men in a church service . lobner ; for additional work on this instance of the quincunx pattern , see . argues that in this context the pattern serves as a symbol both of the wounds of christ and of the greek cross . lawrence durrell 's novel sequence the avignon quintet is arranged in the form of a quincunx , according to the author ; the final novel in the sequence is called quinx , the plot of which includes the discovery of a quincunx of stones . . the quincunx is the title of a lengthy and elaborate novel by charles palliser set in 19th-century england , published in 1989 ; the pattern appears in the text as a heraldry device , and is also reflected in the structure of the book . . in the first chapter of the rings of saturn , w . g . sebald 's narrator cites browne 's writing on the quincunx . the quincunx in turn becomes a model for the way in which the rest of the novel unfolds . . séamus heaney describes ireland 's historical provinces as together forming a quincunx , as the irish word for province cúige ( literally : '' fifth part '' ) also explicates . the five provinces of ireland were ulster ( north ) , leinster ( east ) , connacht ( west ) , munster ( south ) and meath ( center , and now a county within leinster ) . more specifically , in his essay frontiers of writing , heaney creates an image of five towers forming a quincunx pattern within ireland , one tower for each of the five provinces , each having literary significance . . . the poland historian feliks koneczny used the term 'quincunx ' to describe five categories of human life which define civilization , these categories including truth and good on the spiritual side , well-being and health on the physical side and beauty encompassing both sides .