1944 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1944 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . 1944 film releases . january–march . january 1944 7 january standing room only 11 january career girl 14 january ali baba and the forty thieves 28 january lifeboat phantom lady february 1944 3 february none shall escape the fighting sullivans 5 february captain america 10 february lady in the dark 11 february the bridge of san luis rey 22 february snow white and the seven dwarfs ( re-issue ) march 1944 2 march the curse of the cat people 10 march a guy named joe 17 march knickerbocker holiday 22 march cover girl 23 march the heavenly body . april–june . april 1944 9 april rosie the riveter ( film ) 17 april the lady and the monster 25 april pin up girl and the angels sing 26 april the hitler gang may 1944 5 may follow the boys 8 may time flies – ( gb ) 13 may cowboy and the senorita 27 may the tiger woman june 1944 1 june address unknown 8 june days of glory . july–september . july 1944 2 july the hairy ape 6 july double indemnity 7 july the mummy 's ghost 8 july johnny does n't live here any more 12 july the invisible man 's revenge 14 july summer storm 20 july since you went away 22 july the adventures of mark twain 24 july the seventh cross august 1944 12 august mr . skeffington 17 august cry of the werewolf the soul of a monster 23 august marriage is a private affair 30 august till we meet again september 1944 2 september our hearts were young and gay 9 september crime by night 12 september strangers in the night 23 september arsenic and old lace . october–december . october 1944 17 october fiddlers three – ( gb ) none but the lonely heart november 1944 1 november something for the boys 3 november the woman in the window 10 november enemy of women 11 november bluebeard 28 november meet me in st . louis december 1944 1 december house of frankenstein 5 december blonde fever 6 december nothing but trouble 18 december dangerous passage 22 december winged victory the mummy 's curse 23 december lake placid serenade 24 december michael d . gambone , the greatest generation comes home : the veteran in american society , texas a & m university press , 2005 p 152 i 'll be seeing you 29 december tomorrow , the world ! . notable films released in 1944 . united states unless stated . a . the adventures of mark twain , starring fredric march ali baba and the forty thieves , starring maria montez and jon hall and now tomorrow , starring alan ladd and loretta young and the angels sing , starring fred macmurray and dorothy lamour army ( 陸軍 , rikugun ) , directed by keisuke kinoshita , starring chishū ryū and kinuyo tanaka – ( japan ) arsenic and old lace , directed by frank capra , starring cary grant , priscilla lane , raymond massey , peter lorre ; filmed in 1941 but not released until 1944 . b . bathing beauty , starring esther williams and red skelton between two worlds , starring john garfield , eleanor parker and sydney greenstreet the black pirate ( el corsario negro ) , starring pedro armendariz – ( mexico ) the bridge of san luis rey , starring lynn bari buffalo bill , starring joel mccrea and maureen o'hara rossassa fel qalb ( rossassa fel qalb ) – ( egypt ) . c . candlelight in algeria , starring james mason – ( gb ) ca n't help singing , starring deanna durbin a canterbury tale , written and directed by powell and pressburger , starring eric portman – ( gb ) the canterville ghost , starring charles laughton , robert young and margaret o'brien casanova brown , starring gary cooper champagne charlie , directed by alberto cavalcanti , starring tommy trinder and stanley holloway – ( gb ) the children are watching us ( i bambini ci guardano ) , directed by vittorio de sica – ( italy ) christmas holiday , starring gene kelly the climax , starring susanna foster and boris karloff cobra woman , starring maria montez the conspirators , starring paul henreid and hedy lamarr cover girl , starring rita hayworth and gene kelly cowboy and the senorita , starring roy rogers and dale evans crime by night , starring jane wyman cry of the werewolf , starring nina foch the curse of the cat people , starring simone simon . d . days of glory , starring gregory peck do n't take it to heart , directed by jeffrey dell , starring richard greene – ( gb ) double indemnity , directed by billy wilder , starring fred macmurray , barbara stanwyck and edward g . robinson dragon seed , starring katharine hepburn dream of the red chamber ( hong lou meng ) – ( china ) . e-f . enemy of women , starring paul andor experiment perilous , starring hedy lamarr and george brent fanny by gaslight , directed by anthony asquith , starring phyllis calvert , james mason , stewart granger – ( gb ) fiddlers three , starring tommy trinder ( gb ) the fighting seabees , starring john wayne and susan hayward the fighting sullivans , directed by lloyd bacon , starring anne baxter and thomas mitchell for those in peril , directed by charles crichton – ( gb ) frenchman 's creek , starring joan fontaine and basil rathbone die feuerzangenbowle ( the punch bowl ) – ( germany ) . g . gaslight , starring ingrid bergman , charles boyer and joseph cotten going my way , directed by leo mccarey , starring bing crosby and barry fitzgerald – winner of 7 oscars the great moment , starring joel mccrea and betty field greenwich village , starring carmen miranda and don ameche opfergang ( opfergang ) – ( germany ) . h . hail the conquering hero , written and directed by preston sturges , starring eddie bracken and ella raines the halfway house , directed by basil dearden , starring mervyn johns and glynis johns the heavenly body , starring william powell and hedy lamarr to have and have not , directed by howard hawks , starring humphrey bogart and lauren bacall henry v , directed by and starring laurence olivier – ( gb ) the hitler gang , starring robert watson hollywood canteen , starring joan leslie home in indiana , starring walter brennan the hour before the dawn , starring veronica lake house of frankenstein , starring boris karloff and lon chaney jr . i . i 'll be seeing you , starring ginger rogers and shirley temple in our time , starring ida lupino and paul henreid in society , starring bud abbott and lou costello it happened tomorrow , starring dick powell ivan the terrible ( ivan grozniy ) , by director sergei eisenstein , starring nikolai cherkasov – ( u.s.s.r . ) . j-k . janie , directed by michael curtiz , starring joyce reynolds jwar bhata – ( india ) the keys of the kingdom , starring gregory peck , cedric hardwicke , vincent price and roddy mcdowall knickerbocker holiday , starring nelson eddy kismet , starring ronald colman and marlene dietrich . l . lady in the dark , starring ginger rogers and ray milland lady , let 's dance , ice skating musical starring belita and comedy ice team frick and frack lake placid serenade , starring vera ralston laura , directed by otto preminger , starring gene tierney , dana andrews , clifton webb and vincent price lifeboat , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring tallulah bankhead , john hodiak , william bendix , walter slezak , henry hull and hume cronyn the lodger , starring merle oberon and george sanders lost in a harem , starring bud abbott and lou costello . m . man from frisco directed by robert florey , starring michael o'shea and anne shirley marie-louise directed by leopold lindtberg and an uncredited franz schnyder the mask of dimitrios , starring peter lorre , sydney greenstreet and zachary scott meet me in st . louis , directed by vincente minnelli , starring judy garland meet the people , starring lucille ball melody of murder ( mordets melodi ) – ( denmark ) memphis belle : a story of a flying fortress , a documentary by william wyler ministry of fear , starring ray milland the miracle of morgan 's creek , directed by preston sturges , starring eddie bracken and betty hutton mr . skeffington , starring bette davis and claude rains mrs . parkington , starring greer garson the mummy 's curse , starring lon chaney jr . the mummy 's ghost , starring lon chaney jr . murder , my sweet ( aka farewell my lovely ) , directed by edward dmytryk , starring dick powell and claire trevor music for millions , starring margaret o'brien . n . el clavo ( el clavo ) – ( spain ) national velvet , starring elizabeth taylor and mickey rooney none but the lonely heart , starring cary grant and ethel barrymore none shall escape , starring alexander knox . o-p . on approval , starring clive brook and googie withers – ( gb ) once upon a time , starring cary grant , ted donaldson , janet blair our hearts were young and gay , starring gail russell and diana lynn pardon my rhythm , starring gloria jean passage to marseille , starring humphrey bogart , claude rains , peter lorre and sydney greenstreet the pearl of death , a sherlock holmes mystery starring basil rathbone and nigel bruce phantom lady , starring franchot tone and ella raines pin up girl , starring betty grable port of freedom ( große freiheit nr . 7 ) – ( germany ) besættelse ( besættelse ) – ( denmark ) the princess and the pirate , starring bob hope and virginia mayo the purple heart , starring dana andrews , richard conte and farley granger . q-r . rainbow ( raduga ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) rationing , starring wallace beery and marjorie main the rats of tobruk ( aka the fighting rats of tobruk ) , starring peter finch and chips rafferty – ( australia ) the respectable ladies of pardubice ( počestné paní pardubické ) , directed by martin frič – ( czechoslovakia ) . s . the scarlet claw , a sherlock holmes mystery starring basil rathbone and nigel bruce the seventh cross , directed by fred zinnemann , starring spencer tracy since you went away , starring claudette colbert , jennifer jones and shirley temple something for the boys starring carmen miranda , michael o'shea and vivian blaine song of russia , starring robert taylor the soul of a monster , starring george macready the spider woman , a sherlock holmes mystery featuring gale sondergaard storm over lisbon , starring vera ralston the story of dr . wassell , starring gary cooper sunday dinner for a soldier , starring anne baxter and john hodiak the suspect , starring charles laughton . t-v . tall in the saddle , starring john wayne thirty seconds over tokyo , starring spencer tracy and van johnson this happy breed , directed by david lean , starring john mills and celia johnson – ( gb ) the three caballeros , a walt disney animated film starring donald duck and dora luz ( released in south america in 1944 , but was released in 1945 in the u.s . ) time flies , starring tommy handley ( gb ) torment ( hets ) , directed by alf sjoberg – ( sweden ) the tower of the seven hunchbacks ( la torre de los siete jorobados ) – ( spain ) tunisian victory , directed by frank capra , hugh stewart and john huston – ( us/gb ) two thousand women , starring flora robson and phyllis calvert – ( gb ) the uninvited , starring ray milland up in arms , starring danny kaye and dinah shore . w-z . the way ahead ( immortal battalion ) , directed by carol reed , starring david niven and stanley holloway – ( gb ) weird woman , starring lon chaney , jr . and anne gwynne when strangers marry , starring dean jagger , kim hunter , robert mitchum the white cliffs of dover , starring irene dunne wilson , a biopic of president woodrow wilson , starring alexander knox and charles coburn wing and a prayer , directed by henry hathaway , starring dana andrews and don ameche the woman in the window , directed by fritz lang , starring edward g . robinson and joan bennett the yellow rose of texas , starring roy rogers and dale evans . serials . black arrow captain america , starring dick purcell the desert hawk , starring gilbert roland and charles middleton the great alaskan mystery haunted harbor , starring kane richmond mystery of the river boat raiders of ghost city the tiger woman , starring linda stirling zorro 's black whip , starring linda stirling . short film series . our gang ( 1922-1944 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) . animated short film series . mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) scrappy ( 1931–1941 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) donald duck ( 1934–1956 ) goofy ( 1939–1955 ) andy panda ( 1939–1949 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–1949 ) swing symphonies ( 1941–1945 ) the fox and the crow ( 1941–1950 ) red hot riding hood ( 1943–1949 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) screwball squirrel ( 1944–1946 ) sylvester the cat ( 1944–1966 ) . births . january 5 – franco ferrini , italian screenwriter january 9 – harun farocki , german filmmaker ( died 2014 ) january 20 – margaret avery , american actress january 23 – rutger hauer , dutch actor ( died 2019 ) february 3 – trisha noble , australian singer and actress february 13 – stockard channing , american actress february 14 – alan parker , english director , producer and screenwriter ( died 2020 ) february 22 – jonathan demme , american director , producer and screenwriter ( died 2017 ) february 29 – dennis farina , american actor ( died 2013 ) march 5 – peter weibel , ukrainian-born austrian experimental filmmaker march 24 - r . lee ermey , american film , television and voice actor ( died 2018 ) march 26 – diana ross , american singer and actress april 4 - craig t . nelson , american actor april 6 – anita pallenberg , italian-born actress and model ( died 2017 ) april 13 – charles burnett , american director april 29 – michael angelis , english actor ( died 2020 ) april 30 – jill clayburgh , american actress ( died 2010 ) may 4 – russi taylor , american voice actress ( died 2019 ) may 5 – john rhys-davies , english actor may 10 – jim abrahams , american director , producer and screenwriter may 14 – george lucas , american director , producer and screenwriter may 16 – danny trejo , american actor and voice actor may 19 – peter mayhew , english actor ( died 2019 ) may 25 – frank oz , english director and puppeteer may 26 – andre stojka , american voice actor and singer may 28 – sondra locke , american actress ( died 2018 ) june 23 – ingrīda andriņa , latvian actress ( died 2015 ) june 29 – gary busey , american actor july 1 – wahid hamed , egyptian screenwriter ( died 2021 ) july 2 – viiu härm , estonian actress july 8 – jeffrey tambor , american actor july 30 – yoon jeong-hee , south korean actress july 31 – geraldine chaplin , american actress august 7 – john glover , american actor august 9 – sam elliott , american actor august 11 – ian mcdiarmid , scottish actor august 21 – peter weir , australian director , producer and screenwriter september 13 – jacqueline bisset , english actress september 25 – michael douglas , american actor and producer october 8 – dale dye , american actor , technical advisor , radio personality and writer october 10 – lii tedre , estonian actress november 17 – danny devito , american actor , comedian , producer and director november 21 – harold ramis , american actor , director and screenwriter ( died 2014 ) december 5 – jeroen krabbe , dutch actor and director december 17 – bernard hill , english actor . deaths . march 14 – merta sterling , american actress ( born 1883 ) july 14 – emil fjellström , swedish actor ( born 1884 ) july 20 – mildred harris , american actress ( born 1901 ) september 24 – hugo thimig , austrian actor ( born 1854 ) december 9 – laird cregar , american actor ( born 1913 ) december 13 – lupe vélez , mexican actress ( born 1908 ) december 15 – glenn miller , american musician , actor ( born 1904 ) . film debuts . lauren bacall – to have and have not red buttons – winged victory stan freberg – swooner crooner gloria grahame – blonde fever judy holiday – greenwich village shashi kapoor – meena angela lansbury – gaslight janis paige – bathing beauty gregory peck – days of glory jane powell – song of the open road zachary scott – the mask of dimitrios jean simmons – give us the moon