Ishi

biography . early life . in 1865 , ishi and his family were attacked in the three knolls massacre , in which 40 of their tribesmen were killed . although 33 yahi survived to escape , cattlemen killed about half of the survivors . the last survivors , including ishi and his family , went into hiding for the next 44 years . their tribe was popularly believed to be extinct . ishi : a real-life last of the mohicans , mohican press prior to the california gold rush of 1848–1855 , the yahi population numbered 404 in california , but the total yana in the larger region numbered 2,997 . the gold rush brought tens of thousands of miners and settlers to northern california , putting pressure on native populations . gold mining damaged water supplies and killed fish ; the deer left the area . the settlers brought new infectious diseases such as smallpox and measles . the northern yana group became extinct while the central and southern groups ( who later became part of redding rancheria ) and yahi populations dropped dramatically . searching for food , they came into conflict with settlers , who set bounties of 50 cents per scalp and 5 dollars per head on the natives . in 1865 , the settlers attacked the yahi while they were still asleep . richard burrill wrote , in ishi rediscovered : '' in 1865 , near the yahi ’ s special place , black rock , the waters of mill creek turned red at the three knolls massacre . 'sixteen ' or 'seventeen ' indian fighters killed about forty yahi , as part of a retaliatory attack for two white women and a man killed at the workman ’ s household on lower concow creek near oroville . eleven of the indian fighters that day were robert a . anderson , hiram good , sim moak , hardy thomasson , jack houser , henry curtis , his brother frank curtis , as well as tom gore , bill matthews , and william merithew . w . j . seagraves visited the site , too , but some time after the battle had been fought . robert anderson wrote , '' into the stream they leaped , but few got out alive . instead many dead bodies floated down the rapid current . '' one captive indian woman named mariah from big meadows ( lake almanor today ) , was one of those who did escape . the three knolls massacre is also described in theodora kroeber ’ s ishi in two worlds . since then more has been learned . it is estimated that with this massacre , ishi 's entire cultural group , the yana/yahi , may have been reduced to about sixty individuals . from 1859 to 1911 , ishi 's remote band became more and more infiltrated by non-yahi indian representatives , such as wintun , nomlaki , and pit river individuals . in 1879 , the federal government started indian boarding schools in california . some men from the reservations became renegades in the hills . volunteers among the settlers and military troops carried out additional campaigns against the northern california indian tribes during that period . burrill , richard ( 2001 ) . ishi rediscovered . barron 's art guides , anthro company , 2001 . in late 1908 , a group of surveyors came across the camp inhabited by two men , a middle-aged woman , and an elderly woman . these were ishi , his uncle , his younger sister , and his mother , respectively . the former three fled while the latter hid herself in blankets to avoid detection , as she was sick and unable to flee . the surveyors ransacked the camp , and ishi 's mother died soon after his return . his sister and uncle never returned . . captured into european american society . after the 1908 encounter , ishi spent three more years alone in the wilderness . starving and with nowhere to go , ishi , at around the age of 50 , was found sunset circa 7:00 p.m . — 7:30 p.m . by floyd hefner , son of the next-door dairy owner ( who was in town ) , who was '' hanging out '' , and who went to harness the horses to the wagon for the ride back to oroville , for the workers and meat deliveries , later , after sheriff j.b . webber arrived , the sheriff directed adolph kessler , a nineteen-year-old slaughterhouse worker , to handcuffed ishi , who smiled and complied on august 29 , 1911 , at the charles ward slaughterhouse back corral near oroville , california , after forest fires in the area . the '' wild man '' caught the imagination and attention of thousands of onlookers and curiosity seekers . university of california , berkeley anthropology professors read about him and '' brought him '' to the affiliated colleges museum ( 1903—1931 ) , in an old law school building on the university of california , san francisco on mount sutro , san francisco . studied by the university , ishi also worked as a janitor and lived at the museum for most of the remaining five years of his life . in october 1911 , ishi , sam batwi , t . t . waterman , and a . l . kroeber , went to the orpheum circuit in san francisco to see lily lena ( alice mary ann mathilda archer , born 1877 ) on may 13 , 1914 , ishi , t.t . waterman , a.l . kroeber , dr . saxton pope , and saxton pope jr . , 11-years-old , took southern pacific ’ s cascade limited overnight train , from the oakland mole and pier to vina , california , on a trek in the homelands of the ishi wilderness , researching and mapping for the university of california , fleeing on may 30 , 1914 during the lassen peak 1914–1921 . t.t . waterman and a.l . kroeber , director of the museum , studied ishi closely over the years and interviewed him at length in an effort to reconstruct yahi culture . he described family units , naming patterns , and the ceremonies that he knew . much tradition had already been lost when he was growing up , as there were few older survivors in his group . he identified material items and showed the techniques by which they were made . in february 1915 , during the panama–pacific international exposition , ishi was filmed in the mount sutro with grace darling for hearst-selig news pictorial , no . 30 in june 1915 , for three months , ishi lived in berkeley with the anthropologist thomas talbot waterman and his family . in the summer of 1915 , ishi was interviewed on his native yana language , which was recorded and studied by the linguist edward sapir , who had previously done work on the northern dialects . these wax cylinders have had their sound recovered by carl haber 's and vitaliy fadeyev 's optical irene technology . . thomas talbot waterman ( 1885-1936 ) . thomas talbot waterman ( 23 april 1885 - 6 january 1936 ) was born in hamilton , missouri , and raised in fresno , california . waterman married grace godwin in 1910 , later , ruth dulaney in 1927 , fathering helen maria and thomas talbot jr . waterman matriculated university of california , berkeley in hebrew , later at columbia university , new york completed a ph.d . in anthropology . waterman brought ishi , from oroville , california , to the affiliated colleges museum . ; publications ( incomplete ) religious practices of the diegueño indians ( 1910 ) waterman , t.t . , 1922 . the geographical names used by the indians of the pacific coast . american geographical society 12 ( 2 ) :175-194 yurok geography ( university of california publications in american archaeology and ethnology ; berkeley , ca : university of california press , 1920 ) source book in anthropology , ( 1920 , with a . l . kroeber ) notes on california folklore ( 1908 , with e . sapir , a . l . kroeber , and philip stedman sparkman ) the yana indians ( 1908 ) the phonetic elements of the northern paiute language ( berkeley : university press , 1911 ) native houses of western north america . death . lacking acquired immunity to the diseases common among european americans , ishi was often ill . he was treated by saxton pope , a professor of medicine at ucsf . pope became close friends with ishi , and learned from him how to make bows and arrows in the yahi way . he and ishi often hunted together . ishi died of tuberculosis on march 25 , 1916 . it is said his last words were '' you stay . i go . '' his friends at the university tried to prevent an autopsy on ishi 's body , since yahi tradition called for the body to remain intact . however , the doctors at the university of california medical school performed an autopsy before waterman could prevent it . ishi 's brain was preserved and his body cremated . his friends placed grave goods with his remains before cremation : '' one of his bows , five arrows , a basket of acorn meal , a boxfull of shell bead money , a purse full of tobacco , three rings , and some obsidian flakes . '' ishi 's remains were interred at olivet memorial park in colma , california , near san francisco . '' ishi 's hiding place '' , butte county , a history of american indians in california : historic sites , national park service , 2004 , accessed november 5 , 2010 kroeber put ishi 's preserved brain in a deerskin-wrapped pueblo indian pottery jar and sent it to the smithsonian institution in 1917 . it was held there until august 10 , 2000 , when the smithsonian repatriated it to the descendants of the redding rancheria and pit river tribes . this was in accordance with the national museum of the american indian act of 1989 ( nmai ) . according to robert fri , director of the national museum of natural history , '' contrary to commonly-held belief , ishi was not the last of his kind . in carrying out the repatriation process , we learned that as a yahi–yana indian his closest living descendants are the yana people of northern california . '' his remains were also returned from colma , and the tribal members intended to bury them in a secret place . . possible multi-ethnicity . image : ishi 1914.jpg thumb left upright ishi with fire drill , 1914 , mount sutro steven shackley of uc berkeley learned in 1994 of a paper by jerald johnson , who noted morphological evidence that ishi 's facial features and height were more typical of the wintu and maidu . he theorized that under pressure of diminishing populations , members of groups that were once enemies may have intermarried to survive . johnson also referred to oral histories of the wintu and maidu that told of the tribes ' intermarrying with the yahi . the theory is still debated , and this remains unresolved . in 1996 , shackley announced work based on a study of ishi 's projectile points and those of the northern tribes . he had found that points made by ishi were not typical of those recovered from historical yahi sites . because ishi 's production was more typical of points of the nomlaki or wintu tribes , and markedly dissimilar to those of yahi , shackley suggested that ishi may have been of mixed ancestry , and related to and raised among members of another of the tribes . he based his conclusion on a study of the points made by ishi , compared to others held by the museum from the yahi , nomlaki and wintu cultures . among ishi 's techniques was the use of what is known as an ishi stick , used to run long pressure flakes . this is known to be a traditional technique of the nomlaki and wintu tribes . shackley suggests that ishi may have learned the skill directly from a male relative of one of those tribes . these people lived in small bands , close to the yahi . they were traditional competitors and enemies of the yahi . . similar case . ishi 's story has been compared to that of ota benga , an mbuti pygmy from congo . his family had died and were not given a mourning ritual . he was taken from his home and culture . during one period , he was displayed as a zoo exhibit . ota shot himself in the heart on march 20 , 1916 , five days before ishi 's death . . legacy and honors . the last yahi indian historical landmark , oro quincy highway & oak avenue , oroville , ca 95966 ishi is revered by flintknappers as probably one of the last two native stone tool makers in north america . his techniques are widely imitated by knappers . ethnographic accounts of his toolmaking are considered to be the rosetta stone of lithic technology . kroeber and waterman 's 148 wax cylinder recordings ( totaling 5 hours and 41 minutes ) of ishi speaking , singing , and telling stories in the yahi language were selected by the library of congress as a 2010 addition to the national recording registry . this is an annual selection of recordings that are '' culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant '' . writer and critic gerald vizenor led a campaign to have the courtyard in dwinelle hall at the university of california , berkeley renamed as '' ishi court '' . the ishi wilderness area in northeastern california , believed to be the ancestral grounds of his tribe , is named in his honor . ishi giant , an exceptionally large giant sequoia discovered by naturalist dwight m . willard in 1993 , is named in his honor . ishi was the subject of a portrait relief sculpture by thomas marsh in his 1990 work , called to rise , featuring twenty of such panels of noteworthy san franciscans , on the facade of the 25-story highrise at 235 pine street , san francisco . anthropologists at the university of california , berkeley wrote a letter in 1999 apologizing for ishi 's treatment . . representation in popular culture . films . ishi : the last of his tribe ( airdate december 20 , 1978 ) , with eloy casados in the title role , was telecast on nbc . the film was written by christopher trumbo . the last of his tribe ( 1992 ) , with graham greene as ishi , was produced as a tv movie . ishi : the last yahi ( 1992 ) , is an award-winning documentary film by jed riffe . ishi : the last yahi ( 1992 ) documentary synopsis in search of history : ishi , the last of his kind ( 1998 ) , television documentary about him . . literature . daughter-in-law of '' one-eyed '' jack apperson , who in 1908 , sacked ishi ’ s yahi village anthropologist theodora kroeber wrote about ishi in two books : a mass-market , second-hand account of ishi 's life story , published in 1961 , after the death of her husband alfred , who had worked with ishi , but had refused to write or talk about him . ishi : last of his tribe . illus . ruth robbins . ( 1964 ) . parnassus press , berkeley , california . a juvenile fiction version of his life . ishi the last yahi : a documentary history ( 1981 ) , edited by robert heizer and theodora kroeber , contains additional scholarly materials lawrence holcomb wrote a novel , the last yahi : a novel about ishi ( 2000 ) . othmar franz lang 's young adult novel , meine spur löscht der fluss ( 1978 ) , is a fictional account in german . . stage productions . ishi ( 2008 ) , a play written and directed by john fisher , was performed from july 3–27 , 2008 at theatre rhinoceros in san francisco . the san francisco chronicle review said the work '' is a fierce dramatic indictment of the ugliest side of california history . '' . music . depicted in the video for '' blue train lines , '' a song by mount kimbie and king krule . the video follows the story of the two anthropologists falling out . one proceeds to sell all of ishi 's possessions on ebay . comics . osamu tezuka : the story of ishi the primitive man , ( first appeared in weekly-shonen-sunday , shogakkan in japan , issue of oct . 20th 1975 , total 44 pages ) . further reading . ishi in oroville , eight days and seven nights , august 28 to september 4 , 1911 . '' all ten original sketch maps and daily field note records.from the bancroft library . '' a report prepared at the request of senator john l . burton to the california research bureau that focused on four examples of early state of california laws and policies that significantly impacted the california indians ’ way of life . includes essays by native americans . includes discussion about ishi recounts the author 's quest to find the remains of ishi . ( in 2000 , ishi 's brain was returned to the closest related tribes , who placed it with his cremated remains . ) ( 2012 ) . see also . ishi wilderness , yahi tribe lands , now a wilderness area located in the lassen national forest uncontacted peoples man of the hole . references . external links . richard burrill . '' synopsis of ishi 's life '' , ishi facts website '' a compromise between science and sentiment : a report on ishi 's treatment at the university of california , 1911–1916 '' , university of california , san francisco ( photos of ishi and tools made )