Factory

history . max weber considered production during ancient times as never warranting classification as factories , with methods of production and the contemporary economic situation incomparable to modern or even pre-modern developments of industry . in ancient times , the earliest production limited to the household , developed into a separate endeavor independent to the place of inhabitation with production at that time only beginning to be characteristic of industry , termed as '' unfree shop industry '' , a situation caused especially under the reign of the egyptian pharaoh , with slave employment and no differentiation of skills within the slave group comparable to modern definitions as division of labour . john r . love – antiquity and capitalism : max weber and the sociological foundations of roman civilization routledge , 25 april 1991 retrieved 12 july 2012 ( secondary ) jg douglas , n douglas – ancient households of the americas : conceptualizing what households do o'reilly media , inc . , 15 april 2012 retrieved 12 july 2012 m weber – general economic history transaction publishers , 1981 retrieved 12 july 2012 according to translations of demosthenes and herodotus , naucratis was a , or the only , factory in the entirety of ancient egypt . demosthenes , robert whiston – demosthenes , volume 2 whittaker and company , 1868 retrieved 12 july 2012 herodotus , george rawlinson – history of herodotus john murray 1862 retrieved 12 july 2012 ( secondary ) ( e.hughes ed ) oxford companion to philosophy – techne a source of 1983 ( hopkins ) , states the largest factory production in ancient times was of 120 slaves within 4th century bc athens . ( p garnsey , k hopkins , c . r . whittaker ) – trade in the ancient economy university of california press , 1983 retrieved 12 july 2012 an article within the new york times article dated 13 october 2011 states : . discovered at blombos cave , a cave on the south coast of south africa where 100,000-year-old tools and ingredients were found with which early modern humans mixed an ochre-based paint . although the cambridge online dictionary definition of factory states : the first machine is stated by one source to have been traps used to assist with the capturing of animals , corresponding to the machine as a mechanism operating independently or with very little force by interaction from a human , with a capacity for use repeatedly with operation exactly the same on every occasion of functioning . e bautista paz , m ceccarelli , j echávarri otero , jl muñoz sanz – a brief illustrated history of machines and mechanisms springer , 12 may 2010 retrieved 12 july 2012 the wheel was invented c . 3000 bc , the spoked wheel c . 2000 bc . the iron age began approximately 1200–1000 bc . jw humphrey – ancient technology greenwood publishing group , 30 september 2006 retrieved 12 july 2012 wj hamblin – warfare in the ancient near east to 1600 bc : holy warriors at the dawn of history taylor & francis , 12 april 2006 retrieved 12 july 2012 however , other sources define machinery as a means of production . archaeology provides a date for the earliest city as 5000 bc as tell brak ( ur et al . 2006 ) , therefore a date for cooperation and factors of demand , by an increased community size and population to make something like factory level production a conceivable necessity . archaeologist bonnet , unearthed the foundations of numerous workshops in the city of kerma proving that as early as 2000 bc kerma was a large urban capital . grzymski , k . ( 2008 ) . book review : the nubian pharaohs : black kings on the nile . american journal of archaeology , online publications : book review . retrieved from the watermill was first made in the persian empire some time before 350 bc . in the 3rd century bc , philo of byzantium describes a water-driven wheel in his technical treatises . factories producing garum were common in the roman empire . the barbegal aqueduct and mills are an industrial complex from the 2nd century ad found in southern france . by the time of the 4th century ad , there was a water-milling installation with a capacity to grind 28 tons of grain per day , a rate sufficient to meet the needs of 80,000 persons , in the roman empire . tk derry , ( ti williams ed ) – a short history of technology : from the earliest times to a.d . 1900 courier dover publications , 24 march 1993 retrieved 12 july 2012 a pacey – technology in world civilization : a thousand-year history mit press , 1 july 1991 retrieved 12 july 2012 wm sumner – cultural development in the kur river basin , iran : an archaeological analysis of settlement patterns university of pennsylvania . , 1972 retrieved 12 july 2012 the earliest proper factory milling installations appeared in the islamic world from the 8th century onwards . the large population increase in medieval islamic cities , such as baghdad 's 1.5 million population , led to the development of large-scale factory milling installations with higher productivity to feed and support the large growing population . a 10th-century grain-processing factory in the egyptian town of bilbays , for example , produced an estimated 300 tons of grain and flour per day . both watermills and windmills were widely used in the islamic world at the time . adam lucas ( 2006 ) , wind , water , work : ancient and medieval milling technology , p . 65 , brill publishers , the venice arsenal also provides one of the first examples of a factory in the modern sense of the word . founded in 1104 in venice , republic of venice , several hundred years before the industrial revolution , it mass-produced ships on assembly lines using manufactured parts . the venice arsenal apparently produced nearly one ship every day and , at its height , employed 16,000 people . . industrial revolution . one of the earliest factories was john lombe 's derby industrial museum at derby , operational by 1721 . by 1746 , an integrated brass mill was working at warmley near bristol . raw material went in at one end , was smelted into brass and was turned into pans , pins , wire , and other goods . housing was provided for workers on site . josiah wedgwood in staffordshire and matthew boulton at his soho manufactory were other prominent early industrialists , who employed the factory system . the factory system began widespread use somewhat later when cotton spinning was mechanized . richard arkwright is the person credited with inventing the prototype of the modern factory . after he patented his water frame in 1769 , he established cromford mill , in derbyshire , england , significantly expanding the village of cromford to accommodate the migrant workers new to the area . the factory system was a new way of organizing workforce made necessary by the development of machines which were too large to house in a worker 's cottage . working hours were as long as they had been for the farmer , that is , from dawn to dusk , six days per week . overall , this practice essentially reduced skilled and unskilled workers to replaceable commodities . arkwright 's factory was the first successful cotton spinning factory in the world ; it showed unequivocally the way ahead for industry and was widely copied . between 1770 and 1850 mechanized factories supplanted traditional artisan shops as the predominant form of manufacturing institution , because the larger-scale factories enjoyed a significant technological and supervision advantage over the small artisan shops . the earliest factories ( using the factory system ) developed in the cotton and wool textiles industry . later generations of factories included mechanized shoe production and manufacturing of machinery , including machine tools . even more later generations of factories included ones that supplied the railroad industry included rolling mills , foundries and locomotive works , along with agricultural-equipment factories that produced cast-steel plows and reapers . bicycles were mass-produced beginning in the 1880s . the nasmyth , gaskell and company , which began operation in 1836 , was one of the earliest factories to use modern materials handling such as cranes and rail tracks through the buildings for handling heavy items . large scale electrification of factories began around 1900 after the development of the ac motor which was able to run at constant speed depending on the number of poles and the current electrical frequency . at first larger motors were added to line shafts , but as soon as small horsepower motors became widely available , factories switched to unit drive . eliminating line shafts freed factories of layout constraints and allowed factory layout to be more efficient . electrification enabled sequential automation using relay logic . assembly line . henry ford further revolutionized the factory concept in the early 20th century , with the innovation of the mass production . highly specialized laborers situated alongside a series of rolling ramps would build up a product such as ( in ford 's case ) an automobile . this concept dramatically decreased production costs for virtually all manufactured goods and brought about the age of consumerism . in the mid - to late 20th century , industrialized countries introduced next-generation factories with two improvements : advanced statistics methods of quality control , pioneered by the american mathematician w . edwards deming , whom his home country initially ignored . quality control turned japanese factories into world leaders in cost-effectiveness and production quality . industrial robots on the factory floor , introduced in the late 1970s . these computer-controlled welding arms and grippers could perform simple tasks such as attaching a car door quickly and flawlessly 24 hours a day . this too cut costs and improved speed . some speculation as to the future of the factory includes scenarios with rapid prototyping , nanotechnology , and orbital zero-gravity facilities . . historically significant factories . venetian arsenal cromford mill lombe 's mill soho manufactory portsmouth block mills slater mill historic site lowell mills springfield armory harpers ferry armory nasmyth , gaskell and company also called the bridgewater foundry baldwin locomotive works highland park ford plant ford river rouge complex hawthorne works stalingrad tractor plant . siting the factory . before the advent of public transport , factories ' needs for ever-greater concentrations of laborers meant that they typically grew up in an urban setting or fostered their own urbanization . industrial slums developed , and reinforced their own development through the interactions between factories , as when one factory 's output or waste-product became the raw materials of another factory ( preferably nearby ) . canals and railways grew as factories spread , each clustering around sources of cheap energy , available materials and/or mass markets . the exception proved the rule : even greenfield factory sites such as bournville , founded in a rural setting , developed its own housing and profited from convenient communications systems . regulation curbed some of the worst excesses of industrialization 's factory-based society , a series of factory acts leading the way in britain . trams , automobiles and town planning encouraged the separate development of industrial suburbs and residential suburbs , with laborers commuting between them . though factories dominated the industrial era , the growth in the service sector eventually began to dethrone them : the focus of labor in general shifted to central-city office towers or to semi-rural campus-style establishments , and many factories stood deserted in local rust belt . the next blow to the traditional factories came from globalization . manufacturing processes ( or their logical successors , assembly plants ) in the late 20th century re-focussed in many instances on special economic zones in developing countries or on maquiladoras just across the national boundaries of industrialized states . further re-location to the least industrialized nations appears possible as the benefits of outsourcing and the lessons of flexible location apply in the future . governing the factory . much of management theory developed in response to the need to control factory processes . assumptions on the hierarchies of unskilled , semi-skilled and skilled laborers and their supervisors and managers still linger on ; however an example of a more contemporary approach to handle design applicable to manufacturing facilities can be found in socio-technical systems . shadow factories . a shadow factory is one of a number of manufacturing sites built in dispersed locations in times of war to reduce the risk of disruption due to enemy air-raids and often with the dual purpose of increasing manufacturing capacity . before world war ii britain had built many shadow factories . british shadow factories . production of the supermarine spitfire at its parent company 's base at woolston , southampton was vulnerable to enemy attack as a high-profile target and was well within range of luftwaffe bombers . indeed , on 26 september 1940 this facility was completely destroyed by an enemy bombing raid . supermarine had already established a plant at castle bromwich ; this action prompted them to further disperse spitfire production around the country with many premises being requisitioned by the british government . price 1986 , p . 115 . connected to the spitfire was production of its equally important rolls-royce merlin engine , rolls-royce 's main aero engine facility was located at derby , the need for increased output was met by building new factories in crewe and glasgow and using a purpose-built factory of ford of britain in trafford park manchester . pugh 2000 , pp . 192-198 . . gallery . image : herten - zeche ewald 12 ies.jpg zeche ewald in herten , exterior ( 2011 ) image : herten - zeche ewald 14 ies.jpg zeche ewald in herten , interior ( 2011 ) file : fox brothers , coldharbour mill , uffculme - geograph.org.uk - 97156.jpg coldharbour mill textile factory , built in 1799 . file : adolph menzel - eisenwalzwerk - google art project.jpg adolph von menzel : moderne cyklopen file : new lanark buildings 2009.jpg new lanark mill file : workers in the fuse factory woolwich arsenal flickr 4615367952 d40a18ec24 o.jpg workers in the fuse factory , royal arsenal late 1800s file : airacobra p39 assembly loc 02902u.jpg the assembly plant of the bell aircraft corporation at wheatfield , new york , united states , 1944 file : river rouge tool and die8b00276r.jpg interior of the rouge tool & die works , 1944 file : hyundai car assembly line.jpg hyundai 's assembly line ( about 2005 ) file : apmisc-msfc-6870792.jpg alt a large horizontal rocket with usa painted on the side inside of a manufacturing facility first stages of saturn v rockets being manufactured at the nasa michoud rocket factory in the 1960s file : nasa sspf factory panorama.jpg space station modules being manufactured in the space station processing facility file : thyssenkrupp_duisburg_016.jpg a ladle pouring molten steel into a basic oxygen furnace for secondary steelmaking , inside a steel mill factory in germany file : at_boeing's_everett_factory_near_seattle_ ( 9130160595 ) . jpg airplanes being manufactured at the boeing everett factory assembly line . see also . british shadow factories company town factory farm factory system industrial robot industrial railway industrial revolution list of production topics lockout manufacturing plant layout study software factory powerhouse ( instrumental ) . notes . references . needham , joseph ( 1986 ) . science and civilization in china : volume 5 , part 1 . taipei : caves books , ltd . thomas , dublin ( 1995 ) . '' transforming women 's work page : new england lives in the industrial revolution 77 , 118 '' cornell university press . price , alfred . the spitfire story : second edition . london : arms and armour press ltd . , 1986 . pugh , peter . the magic of a name & nbsp ; – the rolls-royce story & nbsp ; – the first 40 years . cambridge , england . icon books ltd , 2000 . thomas , dublin ( 1981 ) . '' women at work : the transformation of work and community in lowell , massachusetts , 1826–1860 : pp . 86–107 '' new york : columbia university press . . further reading . christian , gallope , d ( 1987 ) '' are the classical management functions useful in describing managerial processes ? '' academy of management review . v 12 n 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 38–51 peterson , t ( 2004 ) '' ongoing legacy of r.l . katz : an updated typology of management skills '' , management decision . v 42 n10 , pp . & nbsp ; 1297–1308 mintzberg , h ( 1975 ) '' the manager 's job : folklore and fact '' , harvard business review , v 53 n 4 , july & nbsp ; – august , pp . & nbsp ; 49–61 hales , c ( 1999 ) '' why do managers do what they do ? reconciling evidence and theory in accounts of managerial processes '' , british journal of management , v 10 n4 , pp . & nbsp ; 335–50 mintzberg , h ( 1994 ) '' rounding out the managers job '' , sloan management review , v 36 n 1 pp . & nbsp ; 11–26 . rodrigues , c ( 2001 ) '' fayol 's 14 principles then and now : a plan for managing today 's organizations effectively '' , management decision , v 39 n10 , pp . & nbsp ; 880–89 twomey , d . f . ( 2006 ) '' designed emergence as a path to enterprise '' , emergence , complexity & organization , vol . 8 issue 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 12–23 mcdonald , g ( 2000 ) business ethics : practical proposals for organisations journal of business ethics . v 25 ( 2 ) pp . & nbsp ; 169–85 . external links .