Ecotopia

context . callenbach wove his story using the fiber of technologies , lifestyles , folkways , and attitudes that were common in northern california and the pacific northwest . the '' leading edges '' ( his main ideas for ecotopian values and practices ) were patterns in actual social experimentation taking place in the american west . kirk , andrew g . ( 2007 ) . counterculture green : the whole earth cctalog and american environmentalism . lawrence , kansas : university press of kansas . p.86 . to draw an example , callenbach 's fictional crick school was based on pinel school , an alternative school located outside martinez , california , and attended for a time by his son . callenbach placed the genesis of ecotopia with an article he researched and wrote titled '' the scandal of our sewage '' . wasserman , harvey ( may 25 , 2011 ) '' a green-powered trip to eco-solartopia '' huffington post besides the important social dimensions of the story , he talked publicly about being influenced , during work on the novel , by many streams of thought : scientific discoveries in ecology and conservation biology ; the urban-ecology movement , concerned with a new approach to urban planning ; and the soft-energy movement , championed by amory lovins and others . much of the environmentally benign energy , home building and transportation technology described by the author was based on his reading of research findings published in such journals as scientific american and science . callenbach ’ s concept does not reject high technology ( or any technology ) as long as it does not interfere with the ecotopian social order and serves the overall objectives . members of his fictional society prefer to demonstrate a conscious selectivity toward technology , so that not only human health and sanity might be preserved , but also social and ecological wellbeing . for example , callenbach ’ s story anticipated the development and liberal usage of videoconferencing . during the 1970s when ecotopia was written and published , many prominent counterculture and new left thinkers decried the consumption and overabundance that they perceived as characteristic of post-world war ii america . kirk , andrew g . ( 2007 ) murray , heather . free for all lesbians : lesbian cultural production and consumption in the united states during the 1970s . journal of the history of sexuality 16 , no . 2 ( 2007 ) : 251-68 . the citizens of ecotopia share a common aim : a balance between themselves and nature . they were '' literally sick of bad air , chemicalized food , and lunatic advertising . they turned to politics because it was finally the only route to self-preservation . '' callenbach , ernest ( 1990 ) ecotopia . new york : bantam books . in the mid-20th century as “ firms grew in size and complexity citizens needed to know the market would still serve the interests of those for whom it claimed to exist . ” •hilton , matthew . '' consumers and the state since the second world war . '' american academy of political and social science the annals 611 , no . 66 ( 2007 ) : 66-81 . callenbach ’ s ecotopia targets the fact that many people did not feel that the market or the government were serving them in the way they wanted them to . this book could be interpreted as “ a protest against consumerism and materialism , among other aspects of american life . '' the term '' ecotopian fiction '' , as a subgenre of science fiction and utopian fiction , makes implicit reference to this book . plot summary . the book is set in 1999 ( 25 years in the future from 1974 ) and consists of diary entries and reports of journalist william weston , who is the first american mainstream media reporter to investigate ecotopia , a small country that secession from the united states in 1980 . prior to weston 's reporting , most americans had been barred from entering the new country , which is depicted as being on continual guard against revanchism . the new nation of ecotopia consists of northern california , oregon , and washington ; it is hinted that southern california is a lost cause . the novel takes its form as a narrative from weston 's diary in combination with dispatches that he transmits to his publication , the fictional times-post . at the beginning , weston is skeptically curious about , not yet sympathetic to the ecotopians . he describes details of the ecotopian transportation system and the preferred lifestyle . this includes a wide range of gender roles , sexual norm , and acceptance of non-monogamous relationships . liberal cannabis use is evident . televised passive , mass-media , spectator sports have been displaced in favor of local arts coverage , local participatory sports , and general fitness . a large fraction of young male ecotopians participate voluntarily in a decidedly male ritual of mock warfare using wooden spears but no guns or arrows . the games are not re-enactments . physical injuries , occasionally serious , are considered part of the game . ecotopians on the whole value the benefits to young males over the accidental injuries . ecotopia also tolerates the voluntary separatism of many people of african descent who have , in fact , chosen to live in a mini-nation in the san francisco east bay-area . ecotopian society has favored decentralized and renewable energy production and green building construction . the citizens are technologically creative , while remaining involved with and sensitive to nature . thorough-going education reform is described , along with a highly localized system of universal medical care . ( the narrator discovers that ecotopian healing practices may include sexual stimulation . ) the national defense strategy has focused on developing a highly advanced arms industry , while also allegedly maintaining hidden wmd within major us population centers to discourage conquest and annexation . through weston 's diary we learn of observations he does not include in his columns , such as his personally transformative love affair with an ecotopian woman . the book 's parallel narrative structures allow the reader to see how weston 's internal reflections , as recorded in his diary , are diffracted in his external pronouncements to his readers . despite weston 's initial reservations , throughout the novel ecotopian citizens are characterized as clever , technologically resourceful , emotionally expressive , and even occasionally violent – but also socially responsible , patriotic . they often live in extended families , and tend to live by choice in ethnically separated localities . their economic enterprises are generally employee-owned and -controlled . the current governmental administration is that of a woman-led ( but not exclusively female ) party , and government structures are highly decentralized . the novel concludes with weston 's finding himself enchanted by ecotopian life and deciding to stay in ecotopia as its interpreter to the wider world . values exemplified in the novel . the values embodied by those ecotopians depicted in the novel reflect the values espoused by its author . callenbach said that his ecotopians attach fundamental importance to environmental and social stability within which variety can flourish . they value creativity . they ensure equality for women . they implement the protection and restoration of natural systems . they promote food production in their cities . as well , they treasure personal quality-of-life values , such as health and friendliness , and both meaningful discussion and play . callenbach began writing the novel by depicting the recycling of valuable materials and substances by the society ; he saw a much-expanded role for recycling of all sorts , and this is key to many concepts underpinning ecotopia . . anticipation of emerging realities . worth mentioning is callenbach 's speculation on the roles of tv in his envisioned society . the author espoused the fly on the wall genre of direct political-process broadcasts , deeming them valuable to the citizenry . in some ways anticipating c-span , which would first be broadcast in 1979 , ecotopia mentions that the daily life of the legislature and some of that of the judicial courts is televised in ecotopia . even highly technical debates are televised , addressing the needs and desires of ecotopian viewers . another interesting detail in the story is '' print on demand '' ( pod ) publishing . ecotopian customers could choose selected print media from a jukebox-like device that would then print and bind the book . in the 21st century , pod services that print , bind and ship books for customers who order on-line have become commonplace . impact . the importance of this book is not so much its literary style as in the lively imagination of an alternative and ecologically sound lifestyle on a greater scale , presented more or less realistically . it expressed on paper the dream of an alternative future held by many in the movements of the 1970s and later . even the names of the two characters most reflective of their respective viewpoints – '' will west ( on ) '' , the representative for materialist american culture and '' vera allwen '' ( '' all women + all men '' ) , the president and spokeswoman for ecotopia – suggest the degree to which the author intended the book to be a reflection of what he saw as american ecological and cultural deficiencies . however , in contrast to much of the green movement in contemporary america , with its preference for regulation , callenbach 's ecotopia has relatively laissez-faire economic tendencies , guided by intense moral pressure toward sustainable practices both in private life and in business . in 1981 , callenbach published ecotopia emerging , a multi-strand '' prequel '' suggesting how the sustainable nation of ecotopia could have come into existence . in 1990 , audio renaissance released a partial dramatization of ecotopia on audiocassettes in the form of recordings of a radio network broadcast ( the allied news network replacing the times-post ) . the tape-recorded diaries of william weston were read by the book 's author , ernest callenbach . weston 's reports were read by veteran news reporter edwin newman . in the online earth island journal , ecotopia was reviewed by brian smith , identifying himself as a child not of the 1960s but the 1980s . he read the novel 30 years after it was first published , and said of it : '' i felt great affinity for the details of the world callenbach predicted . even better , i was impressed by how many of his ideas came to pass . '' ecotopia is now required reading in a number of colleges . . reception . don milligan in the british magazine peace news gave ecotopia a negative review , stating '' ecotopia is a shoddy amalgam of swedish social democracy , swiss neutrality , and yugoslav workers ' co-ops cobbled together with the authoritarianism of a blueprint for survival.ecotopia is a flawed vision of a flawed future . '' milligan , don . '' utopia limited '' . peace news 2977 . 25 august 1978 , ( p.14 ) . in marked contrast , ralph nader praised the book , noting that '' none of the happy conditions in ecotopia are beyond the technical or resource reach of our society . '' according to scott timberg , quoting university of nevada environmental-literature professor scott slovic in the new york times , '' 'ecotopia ' the concept became almost immediately absorbed into the popular culture . you hear people talking about the idea of ecotopia , or about the northwest as ecotopia . '' in bolo ’ bolo , p.m . criticizes callenbach by saying : . see also . island—aldous huxley 's novel exploring similar utopian concepts nine nations of north america—joel garreau 's book about a north american secession into nine nations , one of them being ecotopia cascadia ( independence movement ) eco-socialism . references . notes further reading ernest callenbach , '' ecotopia in japan ? , '' in : communities 132 ( fall 2006 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 42–49 . r . frye , '' the economics of ecotopia '' , in : alternative futures 3 ( 1980 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 71–81 . k.t . goldbach , '' utopian music : music history of the future in novels by bellamy , callenbach and huxley '' , in : utopia matters . theory , politics , literature and the arts , ed . f . viera , m . freitas , porto 2005 , pp . & nbsp ; 237–243 . j . hollm : die angloamerikanische ökotopie : literarische entwürfe einer grünen welt . frankfurt am main : lang 1998 . uwe meyer : '' selling an 'ecological religion ' . strategies of persuasion in ernest callenbach 's ecotopia '' . in : m . lotz , m . van der minde , d . weidmann ( hrsg . ) : von platon bis zur global governance . entwürfe für menschliches zusammenleben . marburg 2010 , pp . & nbsp ; 253–280 . h . tschachler , '' despotic reason in arcadia . ernest callenbach 's ecological utopias '' , science-fiction studies 11 ( 1984 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 304–317 . external links . ecotopia foundation profile of an ecologically utopian town in california the ecotopia 2121 project—coordinated by alan marshall conducts ongoing research into future green utopias in urban settings around the world .