Giovanni Battista Piranesi

biography . piranesi was born in venice , in the parish of s . moisè where he was baptised . his father was a stonemason . his brother andrea introduced him to latin literature and classical antiquity , and later he was apprenticed under his uncle , matteo lucchesi , who was a leading architect in magistrato delle acque , the state organization responsible for engineering and restoring historical buildings . from 1740 , he had an opportunity to work in rome as a drawing for marco foscarini , the venetian ambassador of the new pope benedict xiv . he resided in the palazzo venezia and studied under giuseppe vasi , who introduced him to the art of etching and engraving of the city and its monuments . giuseppe vasi found piranesi 's talent was much greater than that of a mere engraver . according to legrand , vasi told piranesi that '' you are too much of a painter , my friend , to be an engraver . '' after his studies with vasi , he collaborated with pupils of the french academy in rome to produce a series of vedute ( views ) of the city ; his first work was prima parte di architettura e prospettive ( 1743 ) , followed in 1745 by varie vedute di roma antica e moderna . from 1743 to 1747 he was mainly in venice where , according to some sources , he often visited giovanni battista tiepolo , a leading artist in venice . it was tiepolo who expanded the restrictive conventions of reproductive , topographical and antiquarian engravings . he then returned to rome , where he opened a workshop in via del corso . in 1748–1774 he created an important series of vedute of the city which established his fame . in the meantime piranesi devoted himself to the measurement of many of the ancient buildings : this led to the publication of le antichità romane de ' tempo della prima repubblica e dei primi imperatori ( '' roman antiquities of the time of the first republic and the first emperors '' ) . in 1761 he became a member of the accademia di san luca and opened a printing house of his own . in 1762 the campo marzio dell'antica roma collection of engravings was printed . image : piranesipyramid.jpg thumb the pyramid of cestius , etching the following year he was commissioned by pope clement xiii to restore the choir of san giovanni in laterano , but the work did not materialize . in 1764 , one of the pope 's nephews , cardinal rezzonico , appointed him to start his only architectural work , the restoration of the church of santa maria del priorato in the villa of the knights of malta , on rome 's aventine hill . he combined classical architecture , trophies and escutcheons with his own particular imaginative genius for the design of the facade of the church and the walls of the adjacent piazza dei cavalieri di malta . in 1767 he was made a order of the golden spur , which enabled him to sign himself '' cavaliere piranesi '' . in 1769 his publication of a series of ingenious and sometimes bizarre designs for chimneypieces , as well as an original range of furniture pieces , established his place as a versatile and resourceful designer . wilton-ely , john . '' the ultimate act of fantasia : to mark the opening of a major piranesi exhibition at cooper-hewitt national design museum , new york , one of its curators , john wilton-ely , discusses the masterpiece that piranesi planned for his own tomb . '' , apollo ( magazine ) , 2007-09-01 . retrieved on 2009-06-01 . in 1776 he created his best known work as a 'restorer ' of ancient sculpture , the piranesi vase , and in 1777–78 he published avanzi degli edifici di pesto ( remains of the edifices of paestum ) . he died in rome in 1778 after a long illness , and was buried in the church he had helped restore , santa maria del priorato . his tomb was designed by giuseppi angelini . the views ( vedute ) . even though the social structure by an aristocracy remained rigid and oppressive , venice revived through the grand tour as the center of intellectual and international exchange in the eighteenth century . the ideas of the enlightenment stimulated theorists and artists all over europe including paris , dresden , and london . new forms of artistic expression emerged : veduta , capriccio , and veduta ideata , topographical view , architectural fantasy , accurate renderings of ancient monuments assembled with imaginary compositions in response to the demand of increased visitors . the developing center of the grand tour was rome . rome became a new meeting place and intellectual capital of europe for the leaders of a new movement in the arts . the city was attracting artists and architects from all over europe beside the grand tourists , dealers and antiquarians . while many came through official institutions such as the french academy , others came to see the new discoveries at herculaneum and pompeii . coffee shops were frequent gathering places , most famously the antico caffè greco , established 1760 . the caffe degli inglesi opened several years later , at the foot of the spanish steps in piazza di spagna , with wall paintings by piranesi . with his own print workshop and museo of antiquities nearby , piranesi was able to cultivate relationships in both places with wealthy buyers on the tour , particularly english . lowe , adam . '' messing about with masterpieces : new work by giambattista piranesi ( 1720-1778 ) , '' art in print vol . 1 no . 1 ( may–june 2011 ) , p . 19 the remains of rome kindled piranesi 's enthusiasm . informed by his experience in venice and his study of the works of marco ricci and particularly giovanni paolo panini , he appreciated not only the engineering of the ancient buildings but also the poetic aspects of the ruins . he was able to faithfully imitate the actual remains ; his invention in catching the roman architecture provided the missing parts . his masterful skill at engraving introduced groups of vases , altars , tombs that were absent in reality ; his manipulations of scale ; and his broad and scientific distribution of light and shade completed the picture , creating a striking effect from the whole view . a number of the views are notable for depicting human figures whose poverty , lameness , apparent drunkenness , and other visible flaws appear to echo the decay of the ruins . this is consistent with a familiar trope of renaissance literature , in which the ruins of rome are lamented as a metaphor for the imperfection and transience of human existence . some of his later work was completed by his children and several pupils . piranesi 's son and coadjutor , francesco , collected and preserved his plates , in which the freer lines of the etching-needle largely supplemented the severity of burin work . twenty-nine folio volumes containing about 2000 prints appeared in paris ( 1835–1837 ) . the late baroque works of claude lorrain , salvatore rosa , and others had featured romantic and fantastic depictions of ruins ; in part as a memento mori or as a reminiscence of a golden age of construction . piranesi 's reproductions of real and recreated roman ruins were a strong influence on neoclassicism . one of the main features of neo-classicism is the attitude towards nature and the uses of the past . neo-classicism was prompted by the discoveries at herculaneum and pompeii . rediscovery and revaluation of greece , egypt , and gothic was also active as well as the various expeditions of unfamiliar roman empire . the view of a golden age was changing from static to mutable , inspired by rousseau and winckelmann in response to the dynamic growth of society . the wider perspective on the past created a new way of expression . artists developed a greater self-consciousness in confronting the limited authority of the ancient world , and there was a growing interest in civilizations and the destiny of nations . piranesi was especially interested in the graeco-roman debate in the 1760s , between followers of winckelmann who thought greek culture and architecture superior to their roman counterparts , and those who ( like piranesi ) believed that the romans had improved upon their greek models . gontar , cybele , neoclassicism , the heilbrunn timeline of art history , metmuseum.org . retrieved 2018-07-02 . his free relationship to the past may be summarized in a phrase of his that become a mantra : '' col sporcar si trova '' ; '' by messing about , one discovers '' . lowe , art in print vol . 1 no . 1 , p . 14-15 . throughout his lifetime , piranesi created numerous prints depicting the eternal city ; these were widely collected by gentlemen on the grand tour . the lobkowicz collections , housed at the lobkowicz palace , contains a group of twenty-six 18th-century engravings of views of modern and ancient rome created by giovanni battista piranesi . the prisons ( carceri ) . the prisons ( carceri d'invenzione or 'imaginary prisons ' ) , is a series of 16 prints produced in first and second states that show enormous subterranean vaults with stairs and mighty machines . the series was started in 1745 . the first state prints were published in 1750 and consisted of 14 etchings , untitled and unnumbered , with a sketch-like look . the original prints were 16 '' x 21 '' . for the second publishing in 1761 , all the etchings were reworked and numbered i–xvi ( 1–16 ) . numbers ii and v were new etchings to the series . numbers i to ix were all done in portrait format ( vertical ) , while x to xvi were landscape format ( horizontal+ ) . in the second publishing , some of the illustrations appear to have been edited to contain ( likely deliberate ) impossible object . . archaeologist . it is important to look at his contribution as an archaeologist , which was acknowledged at the time as he had been elected to the society of antiquaries of london . his influence of technical drawings in antiquarian publications is often overshadowed . he left explanatory notes in the lower margin about the structure and ornament . most ancient monuments in rome were abandoned in fields and gardens . piranesi tried to preserve them with his engravings . to do this , piranesi pushed himself to achieve realism in his work . a third of the monuments in piranesi 's engravings have disappeared , and the stucco and surfacings were often stolen , restored and modified clumsily . piranesi 's precise observational skills allow people to experience the atmosphere in rome in the eighteenth century . piranesi may have recognised his role to disseminate remarkable information through meaningful images . he became the director of the portici museum in 1751 . references . ; attribution . further reading . tafuri , manfredo . ( 1976 ) . architecture and utopia . design and capitalist development . cambridge , ma/london : mit press . tr . barbara luigia la penta . zarucchi , jeanne morgan ( 2012 ) . '' the literary tradition of 'ruins of rome ' and a new consideration of piranesi 's staffage figures , '' journal for eighteenth-century studies , 35:3 , pp . & nbsp ; 359–80 . . external links . ; opere di giovanni battista piranesi ( 1835–1839 ) wikiart.org , collected piranesi works in hi-rez , vedute di roma , carceri , le antichità romane and collection of drawings engraved after guercino . all images from that 29 volumes complete works edition ( english interface with italian and french text ; from general library , university of tokyo ) ; antichita romanae antichita romanae ( 1748 ) ( 914 pages in 17 volumes ; from bnf ) vedute di roma ( hi-res images from '' vedute di roma '' , vol . 17 of '' antichita romanae '' ; digitized by leyden university ) ancient rome ( 1748 ) ( 87 hi-res pics , jpg ) ; carceri prisons of the imagination ( images from the exhibition of the carceri , low-res ) first state of carceri ( 1750 ; 14 sketches in hi-res ; digitized by leyden university ) carceri ( full hi-res album , 16 pics ) animation film as a walkthrough of the carceri ( video 10 min 40 s ) ; other perspectives ( 28 works depicting perspective in architecture ) antichita romane , 4 architectural etchings ( 1756 ) kenneth franzheim ii rare books room , william r . jenkins architecture and art library , university of houston digital library . prints & people : a social history of printed pictures , an exhibition catalog from the metropolitan museum of art ( fully available online as pdf ) , which contains material on giovanni battista piranesi ( see index ) della magnificenza ed architettvra de'romani / de romanorvm magnificentia et architectvra ( rome , 1761 ; digitized by heidelberg university ) osservazioni di gio . battista piranesi sopra la lettre de m . mariette aux auteurs de la gazette littéraire de l'europe ( rome , 1765 ; digitized by heidelberg university ) 137 piranesi etchings in good resolution promenades of an art impressionist – piranesi