Hemorrhoid

internal . internal hemorrhoids originate above the pectinate line . they are covered by columnar epithelium , which lacks pain receptors . they were classified in 1985 into four grades based on the degree of prolapse : grade i : no prolapse , just prominent blood vessels grade ii : prolapse upon bearing down , but spontaneous reduction grade iii : prolapse upon bearing down requiring manual reduction grade iv : prolapse with inability to be manually reduced . external . perianal hematoma occur below the dentate ( or pectinate ) line . they are covered proximally by anoderm and distally by skin , both of which are sensitive to pain and temperature . . differential . many anorectal problems , including fissures , fistulae , abscesses , colorectal cancer , rectal varices , and itching have similar symptoms and may be incorrectly referred to as hemorrhoids . rectal bleeding may also occur owing to colorectal cancer , colitis including inflammatory bowel disease , diverticular disease , and angiodysplasia . if anemia is present , other potential causes should be considered . other conditions that produce an anal mass include skin tags , anal warts , rectal prolapse , polyps , and enlarged anal papillae . anorectal varices due to increased portal hypertension ( blood pressure in the portal venous system ) may present similar to hemorrhoids but are a different condition . portal hypertension does not increase the risk of hemorrhoids . . prevention . a number of preventative measures are recommended , including avoiding straining while attempting to defecate , avoiding constipation and diarrhea either by eating a high-fiber diet and drinking plenty of fluid or by taking fiber supplements , and getting sufficient exercise . spending less time attempting to defecate , avoiding reading while on the toilet , and losing weight for overweight persons and avoiding heavy lifting are also recommended . . management . conservative . conservative treatment typically consists of foods rich in dietary fiber , intake of oral fluids to maintain hydration , nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , sitz baths , and rest . increased fiber intake has been shown to improve outcomes and may be achieved by dietary alterations or the consumption of fibre supplements . evidence for benefits from sitz baths during any point in treatment , however , is lacking . if they are used , they should be limited to 15 minutes at a time . decreasing time spent on the toilet and not straining is also recommended . while many topical agents and suppositories are available for the treatment of hemorrhoids , little evidence supports their use . as such , they are not recommended by the american society of colon and rectal surgeons . steroid-containing agents should not be used for more than 14 days , as they may cause thinning of the skin . most agents include a combination of active ingredients . these may include a barrier cream such as petroleum jelly or zinc oxide , an analgesic agent such as lidocaine , and a vasoconstrictor such as epinephrine . some contain balsam of peru to which certain people may be allergic . flavonoids are of questionable benefit , with potential side effects . symptoms usually resolve following pregnancy ; thus active treatment is often delayed until after delivery . evidence does not support the use of traditional chinese medicine . several professional organizations weakly recommend the use of phlebotonics in the treatment of the symptoms of haemorrhoids grade i to ii , although these drugs are not approved in the united states and in germany , and restricted in spain for the treatment of chronic venous diseases . . procedures . a number of office-based procedures may be performed . while generally safe , rare serious side effects such as sepsis may occur . rubber band ligation is typically recommended as the first-line treatment in those with grade i to iii disease . it is a procedure in which elastic bands are applied onto an internal hemorrhoid at least 1 & nbsp ; cm above the pectinate line to cut off its blood supply . if the band is placed too close to the pectinate line , intense pain results immediately afterwards . the cure rate has been found to be about 87 % with a complication rate of up to 3 % . sclerotherapy involves the injection of a sclerosing agent , such as phenol , into the hemorrhoid . this causes the vein walls to collapse and the hemorrhoids to shrivel up . the success rate four years after treatment is about 70 % . a number of cauterization methods have been shown to be effective for hemorrhoids , but are usually used only when other methods fail . this procedure can be done using electrocautery , infrared radiation , laser surgery , or cryosurgery . infrared cauterization may be an option for grade i or ii disease . in those with grade iii or iv disease , reoccurrence rates are high . . surgery . a number of surgical techniques may be used if conservative management and simple procedures fail . all surgical treatments are associated with some degree of complications including bleeding , infection , anal strictures and urinary retention , due to the close proximity of the rectum to the nerves that supply the bladder . also , a small risk of fecal incontinence occurs , particularly of liquid , with rates reported between 0 % and 28 % . mucosal ectropion is another condition which may occur after hemorrhoidectomy ( often together with anal stenosis ) . this is where the anal mucosa becomes everted from the anus , similar to a very mild form of rectal prolapse . excisional hemorrhoidectomy is a surgical excision of the hemorrhoid used primarily only in severe cases . it is associated with significant postoperative pain and usually requires two to four weeks for recovery . however , the long-term benefit is greater in those with grade iii hemorrhoids as compared to rubber band ligation . it is the recommended treatment in those with a perianal hematoma if carried out within 24–72 hours . evidence to support this is weak , however . glyceryl trinitrate ointment after the procedure helps both with pain and with healing . doppler-guided transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization is a minimally invasive treatment using an ultrasound doppler to accurately locate the arterial blood inflow . these arteries are then '' tied off '' and the prolapsed tissue is sutured back to its normal position . it has a slightly higher recurrence rate , but fewer complications compared to a hemorrhoidectomy . stapled hemorrhoidectomy , also known as stapled hemorrhoidopexy , involves the removal of much of the abnormally enlarged hemorrhoidal tissue , followed by a repositioning of the remaining hemorrhoidal tissue back to its normal anatomical position . it is generally less painful and is associated with faster healing compared to complete removal of hemorrhoids . however , the chance of symptomatic hemorrhoids returning is greater than for conventional hemorroidectomy , so it is typically recommended only for grade ii or iii disease . . epidemiology . it is difficult to determine how common hemorrhoids are as many people with the condition do not see a healthcare provider . however , symptomatic hemorrhoids are thought to affect at least 50 % of the us population at some time during their lives , and around 5 % of the population is affected at any given time . both sexes experience about the same incidence of the condition , with rates peaking between 45 and 65 & nbsp ; years . they are more common in caucasians and those of higher socioeconomic status . long-term outcomes are generally good , though some people may have recurrent symptomatic episodes . only a small proportion of persons end up needing surgery . . history . the first known mention of this disease is from a 1700 bce egyptian papyrus , which advises : '' . thou shouldest give a recipe , an ointment of great protection ; acacia leaves , ground , titurated and cooked together . smear a strip of fine linen there-with and place in the anus , that he recovers immediately . '' in 460 bce , the hippocratic corpus discusses a treatment similar to modern rubber band ligation : '' and hemorrhoids in like manner you may treat by transfixing them with a needle and tying them with very thick and woolen thread , for application , and do not foment until they drop off , and always leave one behind ; and when the patient recovers , let him be put on a course of hellebore . '' hemorrhoids may have been described in the bible , with earlier english translations using the now-obsolete spelling '' emerods '' . celsus ( 25 bce – 14 ce ) described ligation and excision procedures , and discussed the possible complications . galen advocated severing the connection of the arteries to veins , claiming it reduced both pain and the spread of gangrene . the susruta samhita ( 4th–5th century bce ) is similar to the words of hippocrates , but emphasizes wound cleanliness . in the 13th century , european surgeons such as lanfranc of milan , guy de chauliac , henri de mondeville , and john of ardene made great progress and development of the surgical techniques . in medieval times , hemorrhoids were also known as saint fiacre 's curse after a sixth-century saint who developed them following tilling the soil . the first use of the word '' hemorrhoid '' in english occurs in 1398 , derived from the old french '' emorroides '' , from latin hæmorrhoida , hæmorrhoida , charlton t . lewis , charles short , a latin dictionary , on perseus digital library in turn from the greek αἱμορροΐς ( haimorrhois ) , '' liable to discharge blood '' , from αἷμα ( haima ) , '' blood '' αἷμα , henry george liddell , robert scott , a greek-english lexicon , on perseus digital library and ῥόος ( rhoos ) , '' stream , flow , current '' , ῥόος , henry george liddell , robert scott , a greek-english lexicon , on perseus digital library itself from ῥέω ( rheo ) , '' to flow , to stream '' . ῥέω , henry george liddell , robert scott , a greek-english lexicon , on perseus digital library . notable cases . hall-of-fame baseball player george brett was removed from a game in the 1980 world series due to hemorrhoid pain . after undergoing minor surgery , brett returned to play in the next game , quipping , '' my problems are all behind me . '' brett underwent further hemorrhoid surgery the following spring . conservative political commentator glenn beck underwent surgery for hemorrhoids , subsequently describing his unpleasant experience in a widely viewed 2008 youtube video . former u.s . president jimmy carter had surgery for hemorrhoids in 1984 . cricketers matthew hayden and viv richards have also had the condition .