Pauline Viardot

early life . thumb michelle ferdinande pauline garcía sitches was born in paris . her father , manuel , a tenor , was a spain singing teacher , composer and impresario . her godparents were ferdinando paer and princess pauline galitsin , who provided her with her middle names . eric blom ed . , grove 's dictionary of music and musicians , 5th edition , 1954 she was 13 years younger than her sister , maria malibran , a highly acclaimed and famous diva . her father trained her on the piano and also gave her singing lessons . as a little girl , she travelled with her family to london , new york city ( where her father , mother , brother and sister gave the first performance of mozart 's don giovanni in the united states , in the presence of the librettist , lorenzo da ponte ) and mexico . by the age of six she was fluent in spanish , french , english and italian ; later in her career , she sang russian arias so well that she was taken for a native speaker . after her father 's death in 1832 , her mother , soprano joaquina sitchez , took over her singing lessons , and forced her to focus her attention on her voice and away from the piano . she had wanted to become a professional concert pianist . she had taken piano lessons with the young franz liszt and counterpoint and harmony classes with anton reicha , the teacher of liszt and hector berlioz , and friend of ludwig van beethoven . it was with the greatest regret that she abandoned her strong vocation for the piano , which she did only because she did not dare to disobey her mother 's wishes . she remained an outstanding pianist all her life , and often played duets with her friend frédéric chopin , who approved of her arranging some of his mazurkas as songs , and even assisted her in this . liszt , ignaz moscheles , adolphe adam , camille saint-saëns and others have left accounts of her excellent piano playing . after malibran 's death in 1836 , aged 28 , pauline became a professional singer , with a vocal range from c3 to f6 . however , her professional debut as a musician was as a pianist , accompanying her brother-in-law , the violinist charles auguste de bériot . . career . in 1837 , 16-year-old pauline garcía gave her first concert performance in brussels and in 1839 , made her opera debut as desdemona in rossini 's otello in london . this proved to be the surprise of the season . despite her flaws , she had an exquisite technique combined with an astonishing degree of passion . at the age of 17 , she met and was courted by alfred de musset , who had earlier been taken with her sister maria malibran . some sources say he asked for pauline 's hand in marriage , but she declined . however , she remained on good terms with him for many years . her friend george sand ( who later based the heroine of her 1843 novel consuelo on her ) had a role in discouraging her from accepting de musset 's proposal , directing her instead to louis viardot ( 1800-1883 ) . viardot , an author and the director of the théâtre italien and twenty-one years pauline 's senior , was financially secure and would be able to provide pauline with much more stability than de musset . the marriage took place on 18 april 1840 . he was 39 or 40 , she 18 . he was devoted to her and became the manager of her career . her children followed in her musical footsteps . her son paul became a concert violinist , her daughter louise héritte-viardot became a composer and writer , and two other daughters became concert singers . her marriage did not stop the steady stream of infatuated men . the russian novelist ivan turgenev in particular fell passionately in love with her after hearing her rendition of the barber of seville in russia in 1843 . in 1845 , he left russia to follow pauline and eventually installed himself in the viardot household , treated her four children as his own , and adored her until he died . she , in turn , critiqued his work and through her connections and social abilities , presented him in the best light whenever they were in public . the exact status of their relationship is a matter of debate . other men closely linked to her included the composers charles gounod ( she created the title role in his opera sapho ) and hector berlioz ( who initially had her in mind for the role of dido in les troyens , but changed his mind , which led to a cooling of his relations with the viardots ) . renowned for her wide vocal range and her dramatic roles on stage , viardot gave performances that inspired composers such as frédéric chopin , berlioz , camille saint-saëns ( who dedicated samson and delilah to her , and wanted her to sing the title role , but she declined on account of her age ) , and giacomo meyerbeer , for whom she created fidès in le prophète . left she spoke fluent spanish , french , italian , english , german , and russian , and composed songs in a variety of national techniques . her career took her to the best music halls across europe , and from 1843-46 she was permanently attached to the opera in saint petersburg , russia . she spent many happy hours at george sand 's home at nohant , with sand and her lover frédéric chopin . she was given expert advice by chopin on her piano playing , her vocal compositions , and her arrangements of some of his mazurkas as songs . he in turn derived from her some firsthand knowledge about spanish music . in july 1847 , sand 's and chopin 's relationship came to an end . viardot tried to heal the rift and get the two back together , but to no avail . she arranged instrumental works by joseph haydn , franz schubert and johannes brahms as songs . she was the mezzo-soprano in the tuba mirum movement of mozart 's requiem at chopin 's funeral at église de la madeleine in paris on october 30 , 1849 , which she performed together with a soprano , incognito behind a black curtain . frederick niecks , the life of chopin , novello , ewers & co . , london and new york , 1888 , vol . ii , p . 325 ) . she sang the title role of gluck 's opera orfeo ed euridice at théâtre lyrique in paris in november 1859 , directed by hector berlioz , and she sang this role over 150 times . she was well acquainted with jenny lind , the swedish soprano and philanthropist , who had been a student of her brother . a notable remark of hers was made to the english soprano adelaide kemble when they attended the late concert in london by the great italian soprano giuditta pasta , who was clearly past her prime . asked by kemble what she thought of the voice , she replied 'ah ! it is a ruin , but then so is leonardo 's last supper . in 1863 , pauline viardot retired from the stage . she and her family left france due to her husband 's public opposition to napoleon iii and settled in baden-baden , germany . in 1870 , however , johannes brahms persuaded her to sing in the first public performance of his alto rhapsody , at jena . after the fall of napoleon iii later in 1870 , they returned to france , where she taught at the paris conservatory and , until her husband 's death in 1883 , presided over a music salon in the boulevard saint-germain . her students included ada adini , désirée artôt , selma ek , emma engdahl-jägerskiöld , marie hanfstängl , yelizaveta lavrovskaya , felia litvinne , emilie mechelin , aglaja orgeni , mafalda salvatini , raimund von zur-mühlen , and maria wilhelmj . her pupil natalia iretskaya later became the teacher of oda slobodskaya and of lydia lipkowska , who in turn taught virginia zeani . she was also the godmother of artôt 's daughter lola artôt de padilla . in 1877 , her daughter marianne was briefly engaged to gabriel fauré , but she later married composer alphonse duvernoy . on 11 april 1873 she appeared at the théâtre de l'odéon in paris in the first performance of jules massenet 's oratorio marie-magdeleine . huebner , steven ( 1999 ) . french opera at the fin de siècle . wagnerism , nationalism , and style . oxford : oxford university press , p . 30 . from the mid-1840s , until her retirement , she was renowned for her appearances in mozart 's opera don giovanni , an opera with which her family had long been associated ( see '' early life '' above ) . in 1855 , she had purchased mozart 's original manuscript of the opera in london . she preserved it in a shrine in her paris home , where it was visited by many notable people , including rossini , who genuflected , and tchaikovsky , who said he was '' in the presence of divinity '' . it was displayed at the exposition universelle of 1878 , and at the centenary exhibition of don giovannis premiere in 1887 . in 1889 she announced she would donate it to the conservatoire de paris , and this occurred in 1892 . . death . in 1910 , pauline viardot died , aged 88 . her body is interred in the montmartre cemetery , paris , france . the villa viardot in bougival , near paris , was a gift to the viardots by ivan turgenev in 1874 . compositions . viardot began composing when she was young , but it was never her intention to become a composer . her compositions were written mainly as private pieces for her students with the intention of developing their vocal abilities . she did the bulk of her composing after her retirement at baden-baden . however , her works were of professional quality and franz liszt declared that , with pauline viardot , the world had finally found a woman composer of genius . having as a young girl studied with liszt and with the music theorist and composer anton reicha , she was both an outstanding pianist and a complete all-round professional musician . between 1864 and 1874 she wrote three salon operas – trop de femmes ( 1867 ) , l'ogre ( 1868 ) , and le dernier sorcier ( 1869 ) , all to libretti by ivan turgenev – and over fifty lieder . her remaining two salon operas – le conte de fées ( 1879 ) , and cendrillon ( 1904 , when she was 83 ) – were to her own libretti . the operas may be small in scale ; however , they were written for advanced singers and some of the music is difficult . opera trop de femmes ( libretto by ivan turgenev , 1867 ) l'ogre ( turgenev , 1868 ) le dernier sorcier ( turgenev , 1869 ) le conte de fées ( own libretto , 1879 ) cendrillon ( own libretto , 1904 ) image : pauline viardot denkmal baden baden fcm.jpg thumb upright bust of viardot 2004 by birgit stauch in baden-baden choral choeur bohémien choeur des elfes choeur de fileuses la jeune république songs album de mme viardot-garcia ( 1843 ) l'oiseau d'or ( 1843 ) 12 mazurkas for voice and piano – based on frédéric chopin 's works ( 1848 ) duo , 2 solo voices and piano ( 1874 ) 100 songs including 5 gedichte ( 1874 ) 4 lieder ( 1880 ) 5 poésies toscanes-paroles by l . pomey ( 1881 ) 6 mélodies ( 1884 ) airs italiens du xviii siècle ( trans . l . pomey ) ( 1886 ) 6 chansons du xve siècle album russe canti popolari toscani vocal arrangements of instrumental works by johannes brahms , joseph haydn and franz schubert instrumental 2 airs de ballet for piano ( 1885 ) défilé bohémien for piano 4 hands ( 1885 ) introduction et polonaise for piano 4 hands ( 1874 ) marche militaire for 2 flutes and piccolo , 2 oboes , 2 brass choirs ( 1868 ) mazourke for piano ( 1868 ) 6 morceaux for violin and piano ( 1868 ) second album russe for piano ( 1874 ) sonatine for violin and piano ( 1874 ) suite arménienne for piano for four hands source : rachel m . harris , the music salon of pauline viardot . in popular culture . pauline viardot-garcía is a character in alexander chee 's 2016 novel the queen of the night , appearing in her retirement at baden-baden as a teacher and mentor to the fictional narrator . . genealogy . notes . references . april fitzlyon ( 1964 ) . the price of genius : a life of pauline viardot . london : calder . harris , rachel m . ( 2005 ) . the music salon of pauline viardot : featuring her salon opera cendrillon . ph.d . thesis . baton rouge : louisiana state university . electronic copy . kendall-davies , barbara ( 2003 ) . the life and work of pauline viardot-garcia . vol . 1 , the years of fame , 1836–1863 . amersham : cambridge scholars . kendall-davies , barbara ( 2012 ) . the life and work of pauline viardot-garcia . vol . 2 , the years of grace , 1863–1910 . amersham : cambridge scholars . mouchon , jean-pierre ( july 2000 ) . '' correspondance de pauline viardot avec éline biarga , avec photos '' ( '' étude '' , n°14 , juillet-août-septembre 2000 , association internationale de chant lyrique titta ruffo , marseille , france . site : titta-ruffo-international.jimdo.com . steen , michael ( 2007 ) . enchantress of nations . pauline viardot : soprano , muse and lover . thriplow : icon . external links . lettres à madame viardot , by ivan turgenev ( fr ) pauline viardot-garcia papers - guide to the musician 's personal papers and scores in the houghton library at harvard university . pauline viardot-garcia ( includes reviews of early concerts by alfred de musset and george sand ) multimediale präsentation pauline viardot lexikalischer artikel zu pauline viardot bei mugi - '' musik und gender im internet '' . dfg-gefördertes forschungsprojekt '' orte und wege europäischer kulturvermittlung durch musik . die sängerin und komponistin pauline viardot '' musée de la vie romantique , paris , portrait painted by ary scheffer '' pauline viardot . systematisch-bibliographisches werkverzeichnis ( vwv ) '' by christin heitmann