Frances Hodgson Burnett

move to tennessee . after the end of the civil war and the trade it had brought to the area , frances 's uncle lost much of his business and was unable to provide for the newly arrived family . the family went to live in a log cabin during their first winter in new market , outside knoxville . they later moved to a home in knoxville that frances called '' noah 's ark , mt . ararat '' , a name inspired by the house 's location atop an isolated hill . living across from them was the burnett family , and frances became friendly with swan burnett , to whom she introduced books by authors such as charles dickens , sir walter scott and william makepeace thackeray that she had read in england . she may have befriended him because of a childhood injury that left him lame and unable to participate in physical activities . not long after they met , swan left for college in ohio . frances turned to writing to earn money . her first story was published in godey 's lady 's book in 1868 . soon after , she was being published regularly in godey 's lady 's book , scribner 's monthly , peterson 's magazine and harper 's bazaar . she wanted to escape from the family 's poverty and tended to overwork herself , later writing that she had been '' a pen driving machine '' during the early years of her career . for five years she wrote constantly , often not worrying about the quality of her work . once her first story was published , before she was 18 , she spent the rest of her life as a working writer . by 1869 , she had earned enough to move the family into a better home in knoxville . her mother died in 1870 , and within two years two of her sisters and a brother were married . although she remained friends with swan , neither was in a hurry to be married . . marriage . with the income from her writing , she returned to england for an extended visit in 1872 , and then went to paris where , having agreed to marry swan , she ordered an haute couture wedding dress to be made and shipped to tennessee . shortly afterward she returned home and attempted to postpone the wedding until the dress arrived , but swan insisted they marry as soon as possible , and they were married in september 1873 . writing about the dress disappointment to a manchester friend , she said of her new husband : '' men are so shallow & nbsp ; . he does not know the vital importance of the difference between white satin and tulle , and cream-colored brocade '' . within the year she gave birth to her first child , lionel , in september 1874 . also during that year she began work on her first full-length novel , that lass o ' lowrie 's , set in lancashire . the couple wanted to leave knoxville , and her writing income was enough for them to travel to paris , where swan continued his medical training as an eye and ear specialist . the birth of their second son , vivian , forced them to return to the united states . she had wanted her second child to be a girl , and having chosen the name vivien , changed to the masculine spelling for her new son . the family continued to rely on her writing income and to economize she made clothing for her boys , often including many frills . later , burnett continued to make clothing , designing velvet suits with lace collars for her boys , and frilly dresses for herself . she allowed her sons ' hair to grow long , which she then shaped into long curls . . moved to washington , d.c . after two years in paris , the family intended to move to washington , d.c . , where swan , now qualified as a doctor , wanted to start his medical practice . however they were in debt , so frances was forced to live with swan 's parents in new market while he established himself in d.c . early in 1877 , she was offered a contract to have that lass o ' lowrie 's published , which was doing well in its serialization , and at that point , she made her husband her business manager . that lass o ' lowrie 's was published to good reviews , and the rights were sold for a british edition . shortly after the publication of the book , she joined her husband in d.c . , where she established a household and friends . she continued to write , becoming known as a rising young novelist . despite the difficulties of raising a family and settling into a new city , burnett began work on haworth 's , which was published in 1879 , as well as writing a dramatic interpretation of that lass o ' lowrie 's in response to a pirated stage version presented in london . after a visit to boston in 1879 , where she met louisa may alcott , and mary mapes dodge , editor of children 's magazine st . nicholas , burnett began to write children 's fiction . for the next five years , she had published several short works in st . nicholas . burnett continued to write adult fiction as well : louisiana was published in 1880 ; a fair barbarian in 1881 ; and through one administration in 1883 . she wrote the play esmerelda in 1881 while staying at the '' pine gables '' inn near lake lure , north carolina ; it became the longest-running play on broadway in the 19th century . however , as had happened earlier in knoxville , she felt the pressure of maintaining a household , caring for children and a husband , and keeping to her writing schedule , which caused exhaustion and depression . within a few years burnett became well known in washington society and hosted a literary salon on tuesday evenings , often attended by politicians , as well as local literati . swan 's practice grew and had a good reputation , but his income lagged behind hers , so she believed she had to continue writing . unfortunately she was often ill and suffered from the heat of d.c . , which she escaped whenever possible . in the early 1880s she became interested in christian science as well as spiritualism and theosophy . these beliefs would affect her later life as well as being incorporated into her later fiction . she was a devoted mother and took great joy in her two sons . she doted on their appearance , continuing the practice of curling their long hair each day , which became the inspiration for little lord fauntleroy . in 1884 , she began work on little lord fauntleroy , with the serialization beginning in 1885 in st . nicholas , and the publication in book form in 1886 . little lord fauntleroy received good reviews , became a best-seller in the united states , and england was translated into 12 languages and secured burnett 's reputation as a writer . the story features a boy who dresses in elaborate velvet suits and wears his long hair in curls . the central character , cedric , was modeled on burnett 's younger son vivian , and the autobiographical aspects of little lord fauntleroy occasionally led to disparaging remarks from the press . after the publication of little lord fauntleroy , burnett 's reputation as a writer of children 's books was fully established . in 1888 she won a lawsuit in england over the dramatic rights to little lord fauntleroy , establishing a precedent that was incorporated into british copyright law in 1911 . in response to a second incident of pirating her material into a dramatic piece , she wrote the real little lord fauntleroy , which was produced on stage in london and on broadway . the play went on to make her as much money as the book . . return to england . in 1887 burnett traveled to england for queen victoria 's golden jubilee , which became the first of yearly transatlantic trips from the united states to england . accompanied by her sons , she visited tourist attractions such as madame tussaud 's wax museum in london . in her rented rooms she continued the tuesday evening salon and soon attracted visitors , meeting stephen townsend for the first time . despite her busy schedule , she felt ill from the heat and the crowds of tourists , spending protracted periods in bed . with her sons , she moved on to spend the winter in florence , where she wrote the fortunes of philippa fairfax , the only book to be published in england but not in the united states . that winter sara crewe or what happened at miss minchin 's was published in the united states . she would go on to make sara crewe into a stage play , and later rewrite the story into a & nbsp ; little princess . in 1888 , burnett returned to manchester , where she leased a large home off cromwell road , had it decorated , and then turned it over to cousins to run as a boarding house , after which she moved to london , where she again took rooms , enjoyed the london season , and prepared phyllis for production , a stage adaptation of the fortunes of philippa fairfax . when the play ran she was disappointed by the bad reviews and turned to socialize . during this period she began to see more of stephen townsend , whom she had met during the jubilee year . in december 1890 , burnett 's elder son lionel died from consumption in paris , which greatly affected her life and her writing . before his death , she sought a cure from physicians and took him to germany to visit spas . after his death , before she sank into a deep depression , she wrote in a letter to a friend that her writing was insignificant in comparison to having been the mother of two boys , one of whom died . at this time she turned away from her traditional faith in the church of england and embraced spiritualism and christian science . she returned to london , where she sought the distraction of charity work and formed the drury lane boys ' club , hosting an opening in february 1892 . also during this period , she wrote a play with a starring role for stephen townsend in an attempt to begin his acting career . after a two-year absence from her washington , d.c . home , her husband , and her younger son , burnett returned there in march 1892 , where she continued charity work and began writing again . in 1893 , burnett published an autobiography , devoted to her elder son , titled the one i knew best of all . also in that year , she had a set of her books displayed at the chicago world fair . . divorce and move to great maytham hall . burnett returned to london in 1894 ; there she heard the news that her younger son vivian was ill , so she quickly went back to the united states . vivian recovered from his illness , but missed his first term at harvard university . burnett stayed with him until he was well , then returned to london . at this time she began to worry about her finances : she was paying for vivian 's education ; keeping a house in washington d.c . ( swan had moved out of the house to his own apartment ) ; and keeping a home in london . as she had in the past , she turned to writing as a source of income and began to write a lady of quality . a lady of quality , published in 1896 , was to become the first of a series of successful adult historical novels , which was followed in 1899 with in connection with the de willoughby claim ; and in 1901 she had published the making of a marchioness and the methods of lady walderhurst . in 1898 , when vivian graduated from harvard , she divorced swan burnett . officially the cause for the divorce was given to be desertion , but actually , burnett and swan had orchestrated the dissolution of their marriage some years earlier . swan took his own apartment and ceased to live with burnett so that after a period of two years she could plead desertion as a reason for the divorce . the press was critical , calling her a new woman , with the washington post writing that the divorce resulted from burnett 's '' advanced ideas regarding the duties of a wife and the rights of women '' . from the mid-1890s she lived in england at great maytham hall—which had a large garden where she indulged her love for flowers—where she made her home for the next decade , although she continued annual transatlantic trips to the united states . maytham hall resembled a feudal manor house which enchanted burnett . she socialized in the local villages and enjoyed the country life . she filled the house with guests and had stephen townsend move in with her , which the local vicar considered a scandal . in february 1900 she married townsend . . remarriage and later life . the marriage took place in genoa , italy , and the couple went to pegli for their honeymoon , where they endured two weeks of steady rain . burnett 's biographer gretchen gerzina writes of the marriage , '' it was the biggest mistake of her life '' . the press stressed the age difference—townsend was ten years younger than she—and she referred to him as her secretary . biographer ann thwaite doubts he loved her . she claims at that time the 50-year-old burnett was '' stout , rouged and unhealthy '' . thwaite believes townsend needed her to help with his acting career and to support him financially . within months , in a letter to her sister , she admitted the marriage was in trouble . she described townsend as scarcely sane and hysterical . thwaite argues townsend blackmailed her into the marriage : he wanted money from her and he wanted to control her as a husband . unable to bear the thought of continuing to live with townsend at maytham , burnett rented a house in london for the winter of 1900–1901 . there she socialized with friends and wrote . she worked on two books simultaneously : the shuttle , a longer and more complicated book ; and the making of a marchioness , which she wrote in a few weeks and published to good reviews . in the spring of 1901 , when she returned to the country , townsend tried to replace her long-time publisher scribner 's with a publishing house offering a larger advance . in the autumn of 1902 , after a summer of socializing and filling maytham with house-guests , she suffered a physical collapse . she returned to america , and in the winter of 1902 entered a sanatorium . there she told townsend she would no longer live with him , and the marriage ended . she returned to maytham two years later in june 1904 . maytham hall had a series of walled gardens and in the rose garden she wrote several books ; it was there she had the idea for the secret garden , mainly written at the manor house in buile hill park while visiting manchester . in 1905 a & nbsp ; little princess was published , after she had reworked the play into a novel . once again burnett turned to writing to increase her income . she lived an extravagant lifestyle , spending money on expensive clothing . it was reported in 1905 that burnett was a semi-vegetarian . she had eliminated meat almost entirely from her diet . on vegetarianism . the hartford republican ( 24 february 1905 ) . in 1907 , she returned permanently to the united states , having become a citizen in 1905 , and built a home , completed in 1908 , in the plandome park section of plandome manor on long island outside new york city . her son vivian was employed in the publishing business , and at his request , she agreed to be an editor for children 's magazine . over the next several years she had published in children 's magazine several shorter works . in 1911 she had the secret garden published . in her later years she maintained the summer home on long island , and a winter home in bermuda . the lost prince was published in 1915 , and the head of the house of coombe and its sequel , robin , were published in 1922 . burnett lived for the last 17 years of her life in plandome manor , o'connell , pamela licalzi . '' literature ; 'the secret garden ' has deep island roots '' , the new york times , 8 august 2004 . accessed 11 november 2007 . '' mrs . burnett , the author of the secret garden and other enduring children 's classics , lived on a grand estate in plandome the last 17 years of her life . '' where she died on 29 october 1924 , aged 74 . she was buried in roslyn cemetery . her son vivian was buried nearby when he died in 1937 . . reception . during the serialization of little lord fauntleroy in st . nicholas in 1885 , readers looked forward to new installments . the fashions in the book became popular , with velvet fauntleroy suits being sold ; other fauntleroy merchandise included velvet collars , playing cards , and chocolates . sentimental fiction was then the norm , and '' rags to riches '' stories were popular in the united states ; in time , however , little lord fauntleroy lost the popularity that the secret garden has retained . several of burnett 's novels for adults were also very popular in their day , according to the publishers weekly list of bestselling novels in the united states . a lady of quality was second in 1896 , the shuttle was fourth in 1907 and fifth in 1908 , t . & nbsp ; tembarom was tenth in 1913 and sixth in 1914 , and the head of the house of coombe was fourth in 1922 . selected works . source : that lass o ' lowrie 's ( 1877 ) surly tim ( 1877 ) theo : a sprightly love story ( 1877 ) lindsay 's luck ( 1878 ) haworth 's ( 1879 ) miss crespigny ( 1879 ) louisiana ( 1880 ) a fair barbarian ( 1881 ) esmerelda ( 1881 ) , with william gillette through one administration ( 1883 ) little lord fauntleroy ( 1886 ) editha 's burglar : a story for children ( 1888 ) the fortunes of philippa fairfax ( 1888 ) the pretty sister of josé ( 1889 ) the drury lane boys ' club ( 1892 ) the one i knew the best of all : a memory of the mind of a child ( 1893 ) little saint elizabeth , and other stories ( 1893 ) two little pilgrims ' progress . a story of the city beautiful ( 1895 ) a lady of quality ( 1896 ) in connection with the de willoughby claim ( 1899 ) the making of a marchioness ( 1901 ) , reprinted by persephone books the land of the blue flower ( 1904 ) a little princess : being the whole story of sara crewe now told for the first time ( 1905 ) queen silver-bell ( 1906 ) racketty-packetty house ( 1906 ) the shuttle ( 1907 ) , reprinted by persephone books in 2007 the good wolf ( 1908 ) the secret garden ( 1911 ) my robin ( 1912 ) t . tembarom ( 1913 ) the lost prince ( 1915 ) the little hunchback zia ( 1916 ) the white people ( 1917 ) the head of the house of coombe ( 1922 ) robin ( 1922 ) – sequel to the head of the house of coombe