Jeb Bush

business activities . according to fox business , bush earned nearly half of the 29 million he earned between 2007 and when he decided to run for republican presidential nomination in december 2014 , from wall street banks and companies . in april 2007 , bush joined tenet healthcare 's board of directors . koenig , david . jeb bush joins tenet healthcare 's board , usa today , may 10 , 2007 . retrieved june 14 , 2008 . the following august , bush joined investment bank , lehman brothers , as an adviser in its private equity group . bush has also served on the board of innovida , swisher hygiene , and rayonier and has served as an adviser to barclays . bush would later return 270,000 in consultancy fees he had been paid by innovida after they declared bankruptcy . as of 2014 , bush had received more than 2 million from his work for tenet , a company that expected to receive 100 million in new earnings in 2014 because of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) and that '' aggressively encouraged americans to sign up for insurance under the program . '' bush has reportedly objected to the aca at company meetings , but has kept his personal views separate from what is best for tenet . bush owns several international stocks . . 2016 presidential campaign . bush had been considered a potential candidate in the 2016 presidential election since the end of the 2012 election . on october 2 , 2014 , george w . bush said that his brother '' wants to be president '' . kendall breitman , george w . bush : i think jeb wants it . politico , 10/2/14 . on december 16 , 2014 , bush announced via facebook that he would be '' actively exploring '' a 2016 run to become president of the united states and at the end of the year resigned several corporate boards . in february 2015 , bush released several thousand emails from his time as governor online . most of the emails are in the public record under florida 's sunshine laws . however , bush created controversy by releasing some emails that included some personal details such as social security numbers , names , and addresses , as well as the contents of the messages . jeb bush camp blames florida for unredacted emails kendall breitman , politico , february 10 , 2015 bush 's campaign team subsequently redacted the personal information . by extending the exploration mode of his potential candidacy to a six-month period ( his scheduled announcement came one day short of six months into his exploratory phase ) , bush used his time to get acquainted with the press , court donors , and prepare a strategy . in doing this , he navigated several campaign finance laws which limit donations and prohibit coordination with super pacs . frumin , aliyah . '' jeb bush exploits major loophole in campaign finance rule '' , msnbc ( may 2 , 2015 ) . in may 2015 , it was reported that bush had been raising money since january 2015 , estimated to be close to 100 million , for his super pac , right to rise . frumin , aliyah . may 2 , 2015 . jeb bush exploits major loophole in campaign finance rule . msnbc . retrieved : may 3 , 2015 . bush announced his candidacy on june 15 , 2015 , at a multicultural campus of miami dade college . according to reuters , bush characterized himself as a moderate republican who still has conservative principles ; he promised immigration reform , spoke fluent spanish , mentioned his wife 's mexican origins , and criticized hillary clinton . holland , steve . '' jeb bush strikes softer tone at start of white house run '' , reuters ( june 15 , 2015 ) . david yepsen , director of the paul simon public policy institute , said : '' it 's pretty hard for republicans to win the white house if current hispanic voting trends continue . ( bush ) has some unique abilities to appeal to those voters and he 's going to maximize them . '' after a series of poor results in iowa and new hampshire , bush spent his remaining money and campaign effort on the south carolina primary . he placed fourth with under 8 % of the vote . that night , bush suspended his campaign , ending his presidential bid , and subsequently endorsed texas senator ted cruz . lee , m . j . '' donald trump and jeb bush are n't on the same planet '' cnn ( october 9 , 2015 ) . in an analysis of what went wrong , politico argues that : '' his slow , awkward stumble from august through october encapsulates everything that caused the operation viewed as 'jeb ! , inc . ' to fail . bush was on the wrong side of the most galvanizing issues for republican primary voters , he himself was a rusty and maladroit campaigner and his campaign was riven by internal disagreements and a crippling fear that left them paralyzed and unable to react to trump . '' eli stokols , '' inside jeb bush 's 150 million failure his closest aides failed to predict trump and never changed course , guiding a flawed candidate into a corner he could n't escape . '' february 20 , 2016 . in may 2016 , bush announced he would neither vote for trump nor clinton . . political positions . bush has addressed myriad political issues over the course of his career , many of them during his governorship as already described . in conjunction with his 2015 bid for the presidency , he has revisited many issues that he addressed before , as well as discussing many new ones . domestic issues . bush believes abortions should only be legal in the case of rape or incest or if the life of the mother is in danger . he does not support public funding for abortion clinics . bush has questioned the scientific opinion on climate change , while stating '' i think global warming may be real '' , and '' it is not unanimous among scientists that it is disproportionately manmade . what i get a little tired of on the left is this idea that somehow science has decided all this so you ca n't have a view . '' national journal wrote that bush '' does not acknowledge the scientific consensus that human activity drives climate change '' . clare foran , jeb bush is all over the place on climate change : the 2016 hopeful is '' concerned '' about global warming . will he do anything to fight it ? , national journal ( may 22 , 2015 ) . bush supports offshore drilling outside of florida . he says that he supports the keystone xl oil pipeline as well as fracking . according to his spokeswoman , '' as governor he worked to strike a balance between our nation 's energy needs and the economic and environmental interests of florida . he believes states should have a role in decisions that impact their coastline . expanding domestic energy production is key to ensuring america 's energy security . '' bush favors repealing the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca or '' obamacare '' ) and replacing it with a '' market-oriented '' alternative . igor bobic , jeb bush : replace 'monstrosity ' of obamacare , huffington post ( march 8 , 2015 ) . bush has called the current law a '' monstrosity '' that is '' flawed to its core . '' bill glauber , obamacare is flawed , jeb bush says at milwaukee event , journal sentinel ( november 4 , 2015 ) . bush has proposed some sort of state- or local-government funded '' catastrophic illness '' system , in which '' if you have a hardship that goes way beyond your means of paying for it , . the government is there or an entity is there to help you deal with that . '' after the u.s . supreme court upheld the aca in king v . burwell in june 2015 , bush stated that the decision was '' not the end of the fight '' against the law . jeb : ruling is 'not the end of the fight ' against obamacare , the hill ( june 29 , 2015 ) . in 2015 , bush took the position that people in the united states illegally should have a path to legal status , but not a path to citizenship , and said that legal status and avoiding deportation should require immigrants to pay fines , get work permits , pay taxes , not receive government assistance , learn english , and not commit crimes . he supports tougher enforcement of immigration laws , including prosecution of businesses that try to hire illegal aliens . mullany , gerry . jeb bush on the issues , new york times ( june 5 , 2015 ) . bush , an opponent of same-sex marriage , disagreed with the obergefell v . hodges supreme court decision mclaughlin , seth ( june 26 , 2015 ) . jeb bush : same-sex marriage should have been decided by states . the washington times . retrieved : 17 september 2015 : '' former florida gov . jeb bush restated his support of traditional marriage in response to the supreme court opening the door to same-sex marriage across the country . '' and believes that the issue should be decided by the states rather than by the federal government patrick healy , jeb bush takes tougher stance against same-sex marriage , new york times ( may 17 , 2015 ) . and that it is not a constitutional right . alexandra jaffe , jeb bush stands by opposition to same-sex marriage , cnn ( may 18 , 2015 ) . he holds that businesses should have the right to refuse to provide services for same-sex weddings on religious grounds . in july 2015 , bush said he supported lifting the military 's ban on allowing transgender people to openly serve in the military , so long as '' the military 's comfortable with this '' and it did not impact morale . jon ward , jeb bush supports pentagon move to allow transgender military service , yahoo politics ( july 16 , 2016 ) . overall , bush is for expanding gun owners ' rights . rachel wellford , what does jeb bush believe ? where the candidate stands on 11 issues , pbs ( june 15 , 2015 ) . as governor , bush adopted a '' tough on crime '' approach . in the 1998 gubernatorial election , he ran on a 10-20-life platform which imposed stronger mandatory minimum sentences for individuals who used guns in crimes . bush is a supporter of the death penalty . andrew prokop , the jeb bush formula : how the staunch conservative learned to talk moderate — and win , vox ( june 15 , 2015 ) in his unsuccessful 1994 campaign for florida governor , bush promised to sign many more death warrants as governor . one of the '' central themes '' of bush 's 1994 campaign was his proposal to shorten the appeals period in capital cases . christina wilkie , if you think jeb bush is a moderate , then you missed his 1994 campaign , huffington post ( january 8 , 2015 ) . during bush 's term as governor , some 21 prisoners were executed . in 2015 , bush said he was conflicted about the death penalty . in his 1994 campaign , bush proposed publishing the names of juvenile delinquents so the public would '' know who the thugs are in their neighborhoods . '' in 2002 , bush opposed a florida ballot measure that would have allowed nonviolent drug offenders to enter treatment programs instead of prison . julie hauserman , bush opposes ballot measure in drug fight , st . petersburg times april 11 , 2002 ) . bush 's then-24-year-old daughter had been arrested the same year on drug-related charges and underwent treatment . bush admitted smoking marijuana in his teenage years . '' forty years ago i smoked marijuana and i admitted it , '' said bush . '' i 'm sure other people did it and did n't want to admit it in front of 40 million people . '' nick wing , jeb bush sheepishly talks about smoking weed 40 years ago , huffingtonpost ( september 16 , 2015 ) . he also agreed that his decision to take marijuana was '' stupid '' and '' wrong . '' michael kranish , jeb bush shaped by troubled phillips academy years , the boston globe ( february 01 , 2015 ) . mark ram , jeb bush on marijuana legalization , marijuana reform ( february 23 , 2016 ) . bush believes each state should be allowed to decide whether it is appropriate to legalize marijuana or not . bush opposes net neutrality . zeke j . miller . ( march 7 , 2015 ) . '' jeb bush : net neutrality decision is 'crazy . time . in september 2020 , bush told the carlos watson show that he was interested in the concept of a universal basic income , as popularized by 2020 democratic presidential candidate andrew yang . . economic issues . bush supports a decrease in capital gains taxes and property taxes . he supports cutting taxes for all americans and believes they do better with less government interference . bush also is a supporter of welfare restrictions . he supports the following : a four-year limit of benefits , a requirement that able-bodied recipients participate in work-related activities in order to receive benefits , and limiting benefits given to recipients if they have additional children while on welfare . bush favors gradually raising the retirement age ( i.e . , the age for collecting social security retirement benefits ) from 65 to 68 or 70 . max ehrenfreund , '' this presidential election could totally change when you can retire '' . the washington post . ( june 4 , 2015 ) . bush is a frequent critic of the consumer financial protection bureau and the dodd–frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 . alejandro lazo , jeb bush attacks obama policies , says gop needs 'hopeful ' message in 2016 , wall street journal ( january 23 , 2015 ) . jeb bush says u.s . bank rules may have contributed to systemic risks , reuters ( june 9 , 2015 ) . . international relations and security . in may 2015 , bush stated that he would have ordered the 2003 invasion of iraq had he been president at the time : '' i would have authorized the invasion , and so would have hillary clinton , just to remind everybody . and so would almost everybody that was confronted with the intelligence they got . '' he also indicated that the lack of focus on post-invasion security was a mistake . he later stated that '' knowing what we know now , . i would not have engaged '' . '' i would not have gone into iraq '' , he said . he also argued that the invasion—though perhaps inspired by faulty intelligence—had been beneficial , saying the world was '' significantly safer '' without saddam hussein in power . in 2015 , bush said that he does not support a further major commitment of u.s . troops in iraq to fight the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isis or isil ) , saying that such a deployment is not needed to defeat isis . david welna , jeb bush offers his prescription for iraq , npr weekend edition saturday ( august 15 , 2015 ) . he has not , however , ruled out such a deployment in the future . bush favors building a new u.s . base in iraq 's al-anbar province , and has said that some u.s . troops ought to be embedded with iraqi armed forces to help train them and identify targets as joint terminal attack controllers ( jtacs ) . bush has not commented on adding to the approximately 3,500 u.s . troops in iraq now . in a speech , bush said his brother , former president george w . bush , was his main adviser on policy with the middle east . bush later clarified that he was referring to policy on israel , rather than on the middle east as a whole . bush supports the continued mainway by the national security agency . he also supports the usa patriot act , and criticized efforts by senator rand paul and others to stop its reauthorization . bush stated that paul was '' wrong '' about the patriot act and stated that : '' the patriot act has kept us safe , plain and simple . the metadata program has kept us safe , plain and simple . there 's been no violation of civil liberties . '' erik schelzig , jeb bush says rand paul 'wrong ' on ending surveillance laws , associated press ( may 31 , 2015 ) . bush has called for increased military spending , expressing the belief that 2.5 % of gdp is an insufficient amount . doug bandow , jeb bush abandons mainstream , finds inner neocon , cato institute ( august 18 , 2015 ) . james bowen , jeb bush his 'own man ' , but with some familiar foreign policy ideas , the interpreter ( lowy institute for international policy ) ( february 19 , 2015 ) . bush has called the april 2015 iran nuclear deal framework a '' horrific deal '' and said he would likely terminate any final agreement should he become president . he has argued that the deal would put iran into a position where it could intimidate the middle east . bush condemned the july 2015 final nuclear agreement between iran and the p5+1 world powers , calling it '' appeasement . '' ben jacobs , jeb bush denounces iran nuclear deal as appeasement , guardian ( july 14 , 2015 ) . however , bush stated that he would not seek to revoke the agreement on his first day in office . eli stokols , jeb bush : i would n't roll back obama 's iran deal on day one , politico ( july 17 , 2015 ) . bush supported president donald trump 's decision to recognize jerusalem as israel 's capital . he tweeted : '' jerusalem is the capital of israel and i applaud potus for seeing through america ’ s promise to relocate its embassy there . this is an important show of solidarity with israel , one of our nation ’ s greatest allies . '' . civic and charitable activities . after losing a 1994 election for governor of florida against lawton chiles , bush pursued policy and charitable interests . he '' volunteered time to assist the miami children 's hospital , the united way of dade county and the dade county homeless trust '' . bush served from 2012 to 2015 as co-chair of the barbara bush foundation for family literacy . he has also worked with the james madison institute ( jmi ) , a free market public policy think tank based in tallahassee , florida . he helped the institute in numerous ways and still has his think tank working in conjunction with it . in june 2008 , bush 's foundation for excellence in education partnered with jmi to hold a summit called excellence in action : a national summit on education reform . in 1996 , the foundation for florida 's future published a book that bush had co-written , profiles in character , a clear parallel to john f . kennedy 's 1955 book profiles in courage . the foundation also published and distributed policy papers , such as '' a new lease on learning : florida 's first charter school '' , which bush co-wrote . bush subsequently wrote the foreword to another book , published by the conservatism heritage foundation and written by nina shokraii rees , school choice 2000 : what 's happening in the states . bush co-founded the first charter school in the state of florida : liberty city charter school , a grades k-6 elementary school . in a miami neighborhood that , in 1980 , was the site of the first major race riot since the civil rights era . the school 's co-founder , working alongside bush , was t . willard fair , a local black activist and head of the greater miami urban league . the liberty city charter school was closed in 2008 after falling more than 1 million in debt . in 2000 , bush established the points of light program to recognize an '' exemplary volunteer , organization , or person '' . bush is the honorary chairman of the annual at & t jeb bush florida golf classic , a fundraiser that benefits the cystic fibrosis foundation . he first became involved in the benefit after meeting with committee member lawson dutton , whose child suffered from cystic fibrosis . '' golf tournament – 19th annual at & t jeb bush florida classic sponsored by the wasie foundation event time & tickets . '' eventful . eventful , inc november 14 , 2014 19th annual jeb bush florida classic supporters raised more than 722,000 in 2014 at the 19th annual jeb bush florida classic , exceeding their goals in attendance and revenues raised . abraham , randy . fundraiser help fight cystic fibrosis sun sentinel , december 17 , 2014 . retrieved march 19 , 2015 . since the event 's inception 19 years ago , the total revenue netted has reached over 7.478 million . jeb bush florida classic history . retrieved march 19 , 2015 . . personal life . in the city of león , mexico , where he was teaching english during 1970 as part of a foreign exchange program , bush met columba bush . they were married on february 23 , 1974 , in austin , texas . as of 2014 , the family residence is in coral gables , florida . bush is fluent in spanish . the bushes have three children : george p . bush ( born april 24 , 1976 , in texas ) , went to gulliver preparatory school , studied at rice university , and earned a juris doctor degree from the university of texas school of law . in the 2014 election , he was elected commissioner of the texas general land office . noelle lucila bush ( born 1977 ) is his only daughter . in november 2015 , while campaigning in new hampshire , bush detailed noelle 's struggles with drug abuse . his other son , jeb bush jr . ( born 1983 ) , who attended bolles school , works for a miami , florida , commercial real estate firm . bush has four grandchildren , two through his elder son , and two through his younger son . in 1995 , bush converted from anglicanism to roman catholicism . in 2004 , he became a fourth degree knight of columbus . bush , a member of father hugon council 3521 in tallahassee , has joined the father hugon assembly . in april 2018 , upon mother barbara bush 's death , bush delivered a eulogy on behalf of the family at her funeral . . electoral history . bibliography .