Ted Koppel

early life and education . koppel , an only child , was born in nelson , england . his parents were german jews who had fled germany after the rise of adolf hitler and nazism . in germany , koppel 's father had operated a tire-manufacturing company . to help the british economy , the home secretary invited him and his wife to move the factory to lancashire , england , where , he was promised , they would be protected in the event of war . the factory moved in 1936 , but when war broke out in europe in 1939 , koppel 's father was declared an enemy alien and imprisoned on the isle of man for a year and a half . koppel was born in 1940 , shortly after his father was taken away . to provide for her infant son , his mother sold her personal jewelry and did menial work in london . after he was released from internment , koppel 's father was still not permitted to work in england , nor would he allow his wife to work . following the end of the war , the family gained some money from their confiscated assets and decided to leave for the united states . while in england , ted koppel was a pupil at abbotsholme school , in derbyshire . in 1953 , when he was 13 , the family emigrated to the united states , john ehrlichman . '' why we stay up for ted koppel . '' parade magazine , september 27 , 1987 , pp . p18 , 20-21 . where his mother , alice , became a singer and pianist , and his father , edwin , opened a tire factory . koppel said : '' they came here because they believed the opportunities for me would be better in america . '' koppel 's boyhood hero was radio broadcaster edward r . murrow , whose factual reports during the the blitz inspired him to become a journalist . moritz , charles . editor , current biography yearbook , 1984 , the h . w . wilson co . , n.y . ( 1984 ) pp . 216-220 after attending the mcburney school , a private preparatory institution in new york , dan nimmo and chevelle newsome . political commentators in the united states in the 20th century . greenwood press , 1997 , p . 151 . koppel attended syracuse university , from which he graduated at age 20 with a bachelor of science degree . he was a member of the alpha chi chapter of the pi kappa alpha fraternity . his roommate recalls that koppel '' was incredibly focused and had a photographic memory . he remembers almost every conversation he ever had with anybody . and the man never needs sleep . '' koppel then went to stanford university , where he earned a master of arts degree in mass communications research and political science . while at stanford , he met his future wife , grace anne dorney . . career . news correspondent . koppel had a brief stint as a teacher before being hired as a copyboy at the new york times and as a writer at wmca ( am ) in new york . in june 1963 , he became the youngest correspondent ever hired by abc radio news , working on the daily flair reports program . his coverage of the kennedy assassination in 1963 with charles osgood , caused the national news audience to take notice . he was scheduled to do a short report , but a delay during the crisis forced him to ad-lib for an hour and a half . in 1964 , he covered his first of many presidential nominating conventions . he also began covering the civil rights movement in selma , alabama . abc officials were impressed by koppel 's ability to clarify issues using plain language . in 1966 , he became the abc news correspondent for the vietnam war , moving from radio broadcasting to national television . he accepted the assignment only after the network agreed to send his wife and their two children to hong kong so they could be nearby . before going he took a course to learn the vietnamese language . he returned in 1968 to cover the campaign of richard nixon , before becoming hong kong bureau chief , and u.s . state department correspondent where koppel formed a friendship with henry kissinger . according to nixon advisor john ehrlichman , koppel 's friendship with kissinger was partly due to their similar backgrounds , having jewish refugee parents and emigrating to america in their youth . koppel was among those traveling to china with u.s . president richard nixon in 1972 . he spoke about it with the usc us-china institute in their '' assignment : china '' documentary series about american media coverage of china . koppel likened the trip to a '' journey to the dark side of the moon '' . by 1975 , he was anchoring the abc evening news on saturdays , and he continued to file reports for abc radio . '' the ted koppel collection '' . syracuse university library , special collections . koppel would often report on state department foreign conferences , as when he traveled with kissinger during his meetings in egypt and israel in 1975 . he said about kissinger : '' i have a high regard for henry . he has a first-class mind . a half hour with him gives me a better insight into a foreign policy question than hours with others . '' in the mid-1970s , koppel took a year off from his career , to stay home with his children so that his wife could complete her education at georgetown law school . koppel 's decision upset abc news president roone arledge , who demoted koppel from news anchor when he returned to the network . '' the real king of late night '' , the washington post , june 12 , 1996 in april 1979 , he was lead reporter for an eleven-segment series , '' second to none ? '' , which focused on explaining the dangers of nuclear war . he did his own research and wanted to present '' complex material to an audience that has n't paid much attention in the past but must in the future . if there is to be a future '' . for the series he received an alfred i . dupont–columbia university award . . nelson mandela interview . in 1990 , koppel interviewed nelson mandela in a us-style town hall meeting . nelson mandela destroys ted koppel part 1 . host of nightline . koppel became known for his work as the host of a late night news program called nightline . the program originated as a series of special reports about the 445-day-long iran hostage crisis , during which iranian militants held 52 americans captive , beginning in early november 1979 . at first , the program was called the iran crisis : america held hostage , and was hosted by frank reynolds . koppel eventually joined reynolds as co-anchor . in march 1980 , the program evolved into nightline , with koppel as its host . '' ask the globe '' . boston globe , april 28 , 1988 , p . 52 . in 1990 , abc news ran a one-hour special called '' the best of nightline with ted koppel '' . '' the best of nightline with ted koppel '' , 1 hour koppel spent twenty-five years anchoring the program , before leaving abc ( and leaving as host of nightline ) in late november 2005 . mark jurkowitz . '' koppel to leave nightline and abc news '' . boston globe , april 1 , 2005 , p . d5 . while hosting nightline , koppel also hosted a series of special programs called viewpoint , beginning in 1981 , which provided media criticism and analysis . the show was envisioned by abc news vice president george watson as a way to address any media bias that viewers might believe that they encountered on the network . broadcast before a live audience , it provided viewers with a chance to question how stories were reported or critique television news . judy flander . '' ted koppel to moderate 'viewpoint . ' '' chicago tribune , august 12 , 1982 , section 4 , p . 11 . viewpoint was broadcast sporadically , from 1981 until 1997 . some liberal groups suggested that koppel was a conduit for the government 's point of view and accused him of favoring conservatives when selecting guests . '' koppel looks back on a decade of nightline '' . boston globe , november 8 , 1989 , p . 80 in the late 1980s , the progressive media criticism organization fairness and accuracy in reporting ( fair ) claimed that policymakers and ex-officials dominated the nightline guest list , with critics of foreign policy less visible . in 1987 , newsweek called him the '' quintessential establishment journalist '' . koppel responded that '' we are governed by the president and his cabinet and their people . and they are the ones who are responsible for our foreign policy , and they are the ones i want to talk to '' . solomon , norman . – '' ted koppel : 'natural fit ' at npr news and longtime booster of henry kissinger '' . – fairness & accuracy in reporting ( fair ) . – january 16 , 2006 . controversy regarding pol pot video . in 1997 , nate thayer , a journalist writing for the far eastern economic review who later interviewed pol pot shortly before pol pot 's death , claimed that koppel and abc news made a oral contract with thayer for the exclusive north american rights to use video from a show trial of pol pot that thayer and asiaworks television videographer david mckaige witnessed on nightline , and that abc purportedly violated that agreement by posting still photo captures from the video on its news website , effectively allowing them to be viewed anywhere in the world . . departure from nightline . on november 22 , 2005 , koppel stepped down from nightline after 25 years with the program and left abc after 42 years with the network . his final nightline broadcast did not feature clips highlighting memorable interviews and famous moments from his tenure as host , as is typical when an anchor retires . instead , the show replayed an episode of nightline with koppel 's 1995 interviews with retired brandeis university sociology professor morrie schwartz , who was dying of lou gehrig 's disease . following nightline koppel has taken on a number of roles which span various formats of news media : he signed up as an editorial-contributing columnist , effective january 29 , 2006 , for the new york times , '' koppel takes posts at the times and npr '' , the new york times , january 13 , 2006 starting in june 2006 , he provided commentary to morning edition , all things considered , and day to day on national public radio , joining npr 's other two senior news analysts , cokie roberts and daniel schorr . '' ted koppel to join npr as senior news analyst '' , npr , january 12 , 2006 as such , he participated in the annual npr fourth of july reading of the declaration of independence in 2007 . koppel ended his regular commentary on npr in april 2008 , and last appeared as a news analyst on the network in 2014 . ted koppel biography , npr , koppel made occasional guest appearances on the daily show appearing in extreme close-up as a disembodied head , acting as jon stewart 's journalistic conscience , sometimes as the replacement for the so-called '' giant head of brian williams '' projected on the screen behind stewart . koppel has jokingly insisted that '' this is the actual size of koppel 's head '' koppel worked for bbc world news america as a '' contributing analyst '' covering the 2008 republican national convention and the 2008 democratic national convention and hosted a special edition of the program in 2011 . on december 12 , 2011 , koppel made his first appearance on nbc nightly news with brian williams as a reporter . he would later become a special correspondent for nbc 's rock center until the show 's cancellation . on august 6 , 2013 , wall street journal published an opinion piece by koppel entitled '' america 's chronic overreaction to terrorism '' . in 2015 koppel published the book , lights out : a cyberattack , a nation unprepared , surviving the aftermath , about the potential of a major cyber-attack on america 's power grid . '' ‘ lights out , ’ by ted koppel '' , new york times , nov . 20 , 2015 since march 2016 koppel has served as a special contributor to cbs sunday morning . on march 24 , 2020 , koppel made a guest appearance on nightline to mark the program 's 40th anniversary , discussing how he and his wife had been coping with the covid-19 pandemic . . discovery channel . following his departure from nightline koppel formed a three-year partnership with discovery communications as managing editor of the discovery channel . while at discovery , koppel produced several lengthy documentaries on a variety of subjects including a 2008 four-hour miniseries on china , which koppel '' ranks with some of the work that he is most proud of over the years '' . the four-part documentary , called the people 's republic of capitalism , is an extensive look at the fast-changing country . it takes a look at the role of chinese consumers in the growing yet communist economy . koppel and discovery communications parted ways in november , 2008 , terminating their contract six months early , prompting rumors that koppel would be hired for nbc 's meet the press . koppel stated that he was not interested in the job . . honors and awards . eight alfred i . dupont–columbia university awards for broadcast journalism ; nine overseas press club awards for best television commentary on foreign news ; '' ted koppel gets his own program '' , the jackson sun , ( jackson , tn ) july 4 , 1975 two george polk awards two sigma delta chi awards three george foster peabody awards ted koppel biography , museum of broadcast communications 1987 : honorary doctor of humane letters degree from duke university . 2004 : paul white award , radio television digital news association 2006 : honorary doctor of law degree , university of southern california koppel returns to syracuse university regularly as a guest speaker . he was a member of the student-run waer and keeps in touch with the student media at syracuse . he is a member of the pi kappa alpha fraternity . . emmy awards . he has won 25 emmy awards , including : '' rebuilding the future '' , the philadelphia inquirer , august 25 , 2000 1987 - outstanding coverage of a breaking news story - programs ( nightline ) 1999 - outstanding investigative journalism - programs ( nightline ) 1999 - outstanding coverage of a breaking news story - programs ( nightline ) 2004 - outstanding feature story in a news magazine ( nightline ) 2007 - lifetime achievement award . personal life . in 1962 , koppel married grace anne dorney . he became a naturalized citizen of the united states in 1963 . they have four children : andrea ( a former journalist ) , deirdre , andrew and tara . andrew koppel was found dead in an apartment in new york city on may 31 , 2010 , reportedly after a day-long drinking binge . a post mortem toxicology report identified illicit drugs . koppel speaks german and french , in addition to his native english . he is a longtime friend of henry kissinger . both of them moved to the united states as children . along with former secretary of state alexander haig , kissinger was the most frequent guest on nightline . in an interview , koppel commented , '' henry kissinger is , plain and simply , the best secretary of state we have had in 20 , maybe 30 years – certainly one of the two or three great secretaries of state of our century , '' and added , '' i ’ m proud to be a friend of henry kissinger . he is an extraordinary man . this country has lost a lot by not having him in a position of influence and authority '' . columbia journalism review , march/april 1989 . in 1993 , koppel and his wife paid 2.7 million for 16 acres overlooking the potomac river in potomac , maryland . mosk , matthew . - '' koppel tries to cut neighbors down to size '' . - washington post . - december 26 , 2002 . - retrieved : 2008-07-10 they sued to hold their neighbors to an agreement to limit the size of the houses in the neighborhood to . . see also . iran , the most dangerous nation ? . references . external links . biography from abc ted koppel to join 'ny times ' editorial page , contribute to npr , a january 2006 article from editor & publisher global national anchor kevin newman recalls ted koppel on his blog abc news ' '' time tunnel '' page containing clips of numerous newscasts ( including nightline ) on which koppel appeared memory and imagination : new pathways to the library of congress documentary