Cliff Burton

death . in sweden , on the damage inc . tour in support of master of puppets , the band members complained that the sleeping cubicles on their tour bus were unsatisfactory and uncomfortable . to decide who received pick of the bunks , kirk hammett and burton drew playing cards . on the evening of september 26 , 1986 , burton won the game with an ace of spades , thereby getting the first choice of bunk . burton turned to hammett and said '' i want your bunk '' ; hammett then responded , '' fine , take my bunk , i 'll sleep up front , it 's probably better up there anyway . '' burton was sleeping shortly before 7:00 a.m . on september 27 when , according to the driver , the bus skidded off the road ( the e4 , north of ljungby ) , and flipped onto the grass in kronoberg county . burton was thrown through the window of the bus , which fell on top of him and killed him . the bus driver said that the crash was caused by the bus hitting a patch of black ice on the road , but james hetfield later stated that he first believed the bus flipped because the driver was drunk . hetfield also stated that he walked long distances down the road looking for black ice and found none . when local freelance photographer lennart wennberg ( who attended the crash scene the following morning ) was asked in a later interview about the likelihood that black ice caused the accident , he said it was '' out of the question '' because the road was dry and the temperature around , above the freezing point of . this was confirmed by police who – like hetfield – also found no ice on the road . ljungby detective arne pettersson was reported in a local newspaper to have said the tracks at the accident site were exactly like ones seen when drivers fall asleep at the wheel . however , the driver stated under oath that he had slept during the day and was fully rested ; his testimony was confirmed by the driver of a second tour bus that was carrying the band 's crew and equipment . the driver was determined not at fault for the accident and no charges were brought against him . . legacy . burton 's body was cremated and the ashes were scattered at the maxwell ranch . at the ceremony , the song '' orion '' was played . shortly after burton 's death , jason newsted from flotsam and jetsam became metallica 's new bassist . metallica wrote a tribute to burton titled '' to live is to die '' for . and justice for all . burton also received a writing credit for the lyrics in the middle of the song . a non-metallica tribute to burton is the song '' in my darkest hour '' by thrash metal band megadeth . according to dave mustaine , after hearing of burton 's death , he sat down and wrote the music for the song in one sitting . the lyrics , however , are unrelated to burton 's death . mustaine was metallica 's lead guitarist in the early days and was a close friend of burton at the time . on october 3 , 2006 , a memorial stone was unveiled in sweden near the scene of the fatal crash . the lyrics '' . can not the kingdom of salvation take me home '' from '' to live is to die '' are written on burton 's memorial stone . thrash metal band anthrax dedicated its album among the living to him , as did metal church with the dark . on april 4 , 2009 , burton was posthumously inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame , with fellow metallica bandmates james hetfield , lars ulrich , and kirk hammett . subsequent bassists jason newsted and robert trujillo were inducted as well . during the ceremony , the induction was accepted by his father ray burton , who shared the stage with the band and said that cliff 's mother was metallica 's biggest fan . a biography , to live is to die : the life and death of metallica 's cliff burton , written by joel mciver , was published by jawbone press in june 2009 . hammett provided the book 's foreword . in november 2016 , metallica released the album hardwired . to self-destruct . the deluxe version of the album features a series of live recordings at berkeley , california 's legendary record store rasputin music in celebration of record store day on april 16 , 2016 . the song '' fade to black '' was played with lead singer hetfield dedicating the song to burton . during the song hetfield yells , '' can you hear us cliff ? '' . in 2017 , it was revealed that burton 's parents had been donating his posthumous royalty payments to a scholarship fund for music students at his alma mater castro valley high school . in 2018 , the alameda county , california , board of supervisors issued a proclamation declaring february 10 , 2018 , which would have been burton 's 56th birthday , as '' cliff burton day '' after a fan petition successfully passed . the s & m2 concert in 2019 featured san francisco symphony bassist scott pingel paying tribute to burton by playing his signature bass solo , '' anesthesia ( pulling teeth ) '' , using an electric double bass with pedal effects . . equipment . the first bass guitar he was publicly seen playing , in agents of misfortune , was a heavily modified rickenbacker 4001 painted in a '' burgundyglo '' color . after joining metallica , burton removed the stock pickups and had the neck humbucker from a gibson eb-0 installed in the neck position , a seymour duncan stacked jazz pickup in the bridge position and a seymour duncan stacked stratocaster pickup fitted within the bridge cavern of the bass , replacing the existing foam string mute . at some point after recording kill 'em all , burton retired this bass from public use due to malfunction , and instead used a variety of high-end basses including a black alembic spoiler ( which was later stolen ) and an aria pro sb-1000 black ' n ' gold . burton used a large array of amplifiers and effects pedals as well . cliff burton signature bass . in january 2013 , the guitar manufacturer aria revealed through metallica 's official website that it would be releasing a replica of burton 's bass , called the aria pro ii cliff burton signature bass . the company had received permission from burton 's family and from metallica to produce the instrument . the bass guitar was officially unveiled at winter namm in anaheim , california . on january 25 , 2013 , burton 's father ray attended the press conference where he signed autographs and talked about burton 's life and the instrument . current metallica bassist robert trujillo was also present and was the first to try out the bass , playing parts of '' ( anesthesia ) - pulling teeth '' . it is unknown whether any other members of metallica attended the event . ray burton said , '' what a beautiful instrument and a wonderful tribute to cliff . '' ; specifications headstock : original sb design neck shape : standard , medium neck : 7 ply maple/walnut neck joint : neck-through , heel-less cutaway tuners : handmade solid brass tuner buttons , 24 k gold plated nut : 40mm width solid brass truss rod cover : solid brass headstock front inlays : patent statement headstock back inlay : cliff burton authorized signature fretboard scale : 34 '' or 864mm frets : 24 frets fretboard : rosewood fretboard inlays : cat eye , mother of pearl inlays body shape : original sb shape , super balanced body body material : alder pickup : aria mb-v passive pickup controls : 1xvolume , 1xtone , 1-dual sound mini-toggle switch knobs : black sb knobs tailpiece : solid brass with 24k gold plated saddles and black plated body strap pins : 18k gold plated solid brass strings : rotosound rs66lb ( 35 , 55 , 70 , 90 ) certificate : certificate of authenticity signed by ray burton and toshi matsumura case : deluxe ostrich hardshell case with gold hardware . discography . studio albums kill 'em all ( 1983 ) ride the lightning ( 1984 ) master of puppets ( 1986 ) . and justice for all ( 1988 ) ( posthumous writing credit on '' to live is to die '' ) video cliff 'em all ( 1987 ) demos no life 'til leather ( 1982 ) ( credited but does not play ) megaforce ( 1983 ) ride the lightning ( 1983 ) master of puppets ( 1985 ) compilations garage inc . ( 1998 ) ( featured on '' am i evil ? '' and '' blitzkrieg '' only )