Nyssa sylvatica

names . nyssa sylvatica genus name , nyssa , refers to a greek naiad ; the species epithet sylvatica refers to its woodland habitat . the species ' common name , tupelo , is of native american origin , coming from the creek words ito '' tree '' and opilwa '' swamp '' ; it was in use by the mid-18th century . while these trees are often known as simply '' tupelo '' , the fuller name , black tupelo , helps distinguish it from the other species of the tupelo genus nyssa , some of which have overlapping ranges , such as water tupelo ( n . aquatica ) and swamp tupelo ( n . biflora ) . the name '' tupelo '' is used primarily in the american south ; northward and in appalachia , the tree is more commonly called the black gum or the sour gum , although no part of the plant is particularly gummy . both of these names contrast it with a different tree species with a broadly overlapping range , the sweet gum ( liquidambar styraciflua ) , which does produce an aromatic resin . another common name used occasionally in the northeast is pepperidge . in appalachia , the frequent variant is nyssa sylvatica var . caroliniana , which is sometimes called the yellow gum . its leaflets are thinner and less glossy , '' with rather long tips , the under surface persistently somewhat downy and covered with minute warty excrescences easily seen under an ordinary hand lens '' '' yellow gum is not a swamp tree , like black gum , but an inhabitant of dry land , hills , and the coves of the southern appalachians which it ascends to 3500 feet '' . on martha 's vineyard , in massachusetts , this species is called '' beetlebung '' , perhaps for its use in making the mallet known as a beetle , used for hammering bungs ( stoppers ) into barrels . . description . right nyssa sylvatica grows to tall , rarely to , with a trunk diameter of , rarely up to . these trees typically have a straight trunk with the branches extending outward at right angles . the bark is dark gray and flaky when young , but it becomes furrowed with age , resembling alligator hide on very old stems . the twigs of this tree are reddish-brown , usually hidden by a greyish skin . the pith is chambered with greenish partitions . the leaf of this species are variable in size and shape . they can be oval , elliptical , or obovate , and long . they have lustrous upper surfaces , with entire , often wavy margins . the foliage turns purple in autumn , eventually becoming an intense bright scarlet . deer are extremely fond of the leaves on seedlings and saplings , to the point where large populations of them can make establishment of the tree almost impossible . for comparison , mature trees are largely left alone . the flowers are very small , in greenish-white in clusters at the top of a long stalk and a rich source or nectar for bees . they are often dioecious so a male and female tree in proximity is required to set seed , however , many trees are also polygamo-dioecious , which means they have both male and female flowers on the same tree . the fruit is a black-blue , ovoid stone fruit , about 10 & nbsp ; mm long with a thin , oily , bitter-to-sour tasting flesh and very popular with small bird species . there are from one to three fruits together on a long slender stalk . they are a valuable energy food for birds , especially the american robin . nyssa sylvatica forms a large deep taproot when young that makes transplanting difficult . because of this , it is fairly uncommon in cultivation and the nursery trade . additional characteristics include : bark : light reddish brown , deeply furrowed and scaly . branchlets at first pale green to orange , sometimes smooth , often downy , later dark brown . wood : pale yellow , sapwood white ; heavy , strong , very tough , hard to split , not durable in contact with the soil . used for turnery . sp . gr . , 0.6353 ; weight of cu . ft . , 39.59 . winter buds : dark red , obtuse , one-fourth of an inch long . inner scales enlarge with the growing shoot , becoming red before they fall . leaves : alternate , often crowded at the end of the lateral branches , simple , linear , oblong to oval , two to five inches ( 127 & nbsp ; mm ) long , one-half to three inches ( 76 & nbsp ; mm ) broad , wedge-shaped or rounded at base , entire , with margin slightly thickened , acute or acuminate . they come out of the bud conduplicate , coated beneath with rusty tomentum , when full grown are thick , dark green , very shining above , pale and often hairy beneath . feather-veined , midrib and primary veins prominent beneath . in autumn they turn bright scarlet , or yellow and scarlet . petioles one-quarter to one-half an inch long , slender or stout , terete or margined , often red . flowers : may , june , when leaves are half grown . polygamodiœcious , yellowish green , borne on slender downy peduncles . staminate in many-flowered heads ; pistillate in two to several flowered clusters . calyx : cup-shaped , five-toothed . corolla : petals five , imbricate in bud , yellow green , ovate , thick , slightly spreading , inserted on the margin of the conspicuous disk . stamens : five to twelve . in staminate flowers exserted , in pistillate short , often wanting . pistil : ovary inferior , one to two-celled ; style stout , exserted , reflexed above the middle . entirely wanting in sterile flower . ovules , one in each cell . fruit : fleshy drupe , one to three from each flower cluster . ovoid , two-thirds of an inch long , dark blue , acid . stone more or less ridged . october . . distribution . nyssa sylvatica grows in various uplands and in alluvial stream bottoms from southwestern maine and new york , to extreme southern ontario , central michigan , illinois , and central missouri , south to southern florida , eastern texas , and eastern oklahoma . it also occurs locally in central and southern mexico . coladonato , milo 1992 . nyssa sylvatica . in : fire effects information system , & 91 ; online & 93 ; . u.s . department of agriculture , forest service , rocky mountain research station , fire sciences laboratory . retrieved 2012-09-30 . optimum development is made on lower slopes and terraces in the southeastern united states . “ black tupelo ” us forest service . retrieved 2012-09-30 . . ecology . nyssa sylvatica is found in a variety of upland and wetland habitats in its extensive range . its flowers are an important source of honey and its fruits are important to many birds and mammals . hollow trunks provide nesting or denning opportunities for bees and various mammals . it is the longest living non-clonal flowering plant in eastern north america , capable of obtaining ages of over 650 years . eastern oldlist . habitats . nyssa sylvatica is found in a wide range of climates , due to its extensive distribution . it commonly grows in both the creek bottoms of the southern coastal plains , to altitudes of about in the appalachian mountains . these trees grow best on well-drained , light-textured soils on the low ridges of second bottoms and on the high flats of silty alluvium . in the uplands it grows best on the loams and clay loams of lower slopes and coves . the species occurs 35 different forest cover types . when found on drier upper slopes and ridges , it is seldom of log size or quality . . wildlife . right nyssa sylvatica is an important food source for many migrating birds in the fall autumn . its early color change ( foliar fruit flagging ) is thought to attract birds to the available fruit , which ripen before many other fall fruits and berries . the fruit is quite marked , dark blue , in clusters of two or three . the sour fruits are eagerly sought by many kinds of birds , including : american robin , swainson 's thrush , gray-cheeked thrush , hermit thrush , wood thrush , northern cardinal , northern mockingbird , blue jay , red-bellied woodpecker , yellow-bellied sapsucker , northern flicker , pileated woodpecker , eastern phoebe , brown thrasher , eastern bluebird , european starling , scarlet tanager , grey catbird , cedar waxwing , and american crow , all primarily eastern north american birds migrating or residing year-round within the tree 's range . the limbs of these trees often deteriorate early , and the decayed holes make excellent dens for squirrels , raccoons , virginia opossums , as well as nesting sites for honeybees . uses . cultivation . nyssa sylvatica is cultivated as an ornamental tree in parks and large gardens , where it is often used as a specimen or shade tree . the tree is best when grown in sheltered but not crowded positions , developing a pyramidal shape in youth , and spreading with age . the stem rises to the summit of the tree in one tapering unbroken shaft , the branches come out at right angles to the trunk and either extend horizontally or droop a little , making a long-narrow , cone-like head . the leaves are short-petioled and so have little individual motion , but the branches sway as a whole . the spray is fine and abundant and lies horizontally so that the foliage arrangement is not unlike that of the beech ( fagus ) . its often spectacular autumnal coloring , with intense reds to purples , is highly valued in landscape settings . it is claimed to be the most fiery and brilliant of the 'brilliant group ' that includes maple , dogwood , sassafras , and sweet gum , as well as various species of tupelo . in the uk the cultivar 'wisley bonfire ' has gained the royal horticultural society 's award of garden merit . . honey production . nyssa sylvatica is a major source of wild honey in many areas within its range . hollow sections of black gum trunks were formerly used as bee gums by beekeepers . . wood . the wood of nyssa sylvatica is heavy , hard , cross-grained , and difficult to split , especially after drying . this resistance to splitting led to its use for making mauls , pulleys , wheels , agricultural rollers , bowls , and road surface . the wood is also used for pallets , rough floors , pulpwood , and firewood . since the wood is very tough , resistant to wear , it has been used for shuttles in weaving . because it is resistant to wear and very readily accepts creosote-based preservatives it is considered to be a premier wood for making railroad ties . pages 12 & 26 '' the tie guide 2nd edition ( 2016 ) '' prepared for the railway tie association ( rta ) by david a . webb and geoffrey v . webb the wood 's resistance to wear and some acids has led to its use as factory flooring . teeth-cleaning twig . it was also used traditionally by native americans as a teeth-cleaning twig . it also was used for dipping snuff . references . external links . virginia polytechnic institute and state university source ohio state university source michigan state university source hort.net profile nyssa sylvatica images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu interactive distribution map for nyssa sylvatica