Oda of Canterbury

early career . oda 's parents were danish , and he may have been born in east anglia . brooks early history of the church of canterbury p . 222–224 his father was said to have been a dane who came to england in 865 , together with the viking army of ubba and ivar , and presumably settled in east anglia . oda 's nephew oswald of worcester later became archbishop of york . it is possible that oswald 's relatives oscytel , afterwards archbishop of york , and thurcytel , an abbot , were also relatives of oda , but this is not known for sure . in byrhtferth 's life of saint oswald , oda is said to have joined the household of a pious nobleman called æthelhelm , whom he accompanied to rome on pilgrimage . while on pilgrimage , oda healed the nobleman 's illness . lapidge '' oda '' blackwell encyclopedia of anglo-saxon england other stories , such as those by the 12th-century writer william of malmesbury , describe oda as fighting under edward the elder and then becoming a priest , but these statements are unlikely . other statements in the life have oda being named '' bishop of wilton '' by the king , who is stated to have been æthelhelm 's brother . cubitt and costambeys '' oda '' oxford dictionary of national biography the chronicler may be referring , slightly inaccurately , to aethelhelm cousin of the king . this benefactor has also been associated with bishop athelm , who reportedly sponsored oda in his ecclesiastical career . fletcher conversion of europe p . 393 some sources state that oda became a monk at fleury-sur-loire in france . stenton anglo-saxon england p . 448 . bishop of ramsbury . oda was consecrated bishop of ramsbury sometime between 909 and 927 , fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 220 not to wilton as stated by both william of malmesbury and the life . the appointment was most likely made by king æthelstan , and the first securely attested mention in documents of the new bishop occurs in 928 , when he is a witness to royal charters as bishop . according to the late tenth-century chronicler , richerus , in 936 æthelstan sent oda to france to arrange the return to the throne of france of king louis iv . foot æthelstan p . 169 louis was æthelstan 's nephew and had been in exile in england for a number of years . stenton anglo-saxon england p . 347 however , this story is not related in any contemporary records . oda was said to have accompanied king æthelstan at the battle of brunanburh in 937 . delaney dictionary of saints p . 464 it was at this battle that oda is said to have miraculously provided a sword to the king when the king 's own sword slipped out of its scabbard . a ramsey chronicle records that in the 1170s , the sword was still preserved in the royal treasury , although the chronicler carefully states the story '' as is said '' rather than as fact . clanchy from memory to written record p . 40 there are no contemporary records of oda 's appearance at the battle . in 940 , oda arranged a truce between olaf iii guthfrithson , king of dublin and york , and edmund i , king of england . . archbishop of canterbury . in 941 oda was named archbishop of canterbury . fryde , et al . handbook of british chronology p . 214 during his time as archbishop , he helped king edmund with the new royal law-code , which had a number of laws concerned with ecclesiastical affairs . the archbishop was present , along with archbishop wulfstan of york , at council that proclaimed the first of these law codes and which was held by edmund wormald making of english law p . 310 at london , over easter around 945 or 946 . wormald making of english law pp . 440–441 oda also settled a dispute over the five burghs with wulfstan . oda also made constitutions , or rules , for his clergy . his constitutions of oda are the first surviving constitutions of a 10th-century english ecclesiastical reformer . stafford unification and conquest p . 9–10 oda reworked some statutes from 786 to form his updated code , and one item that was dropped were any clauses dealing with paganism . blair church in anglo-saxon society p . 481 footnote 252 other items covered were relations between laymen and the clergy , the duties of bishops , the need for the laity to make canonical marriages , how to observe fasts , and the need for tithes to be given by the laity . the work is extant in just one surviving manuscript , british museum cotton vespasian a xiv , folios 175v to 177v . this is an 11th-century copy done for wulfstan ii , archbishop of york . schoebe '' chapters of archbishop oda '' bulletin of the institute of historical research pp . 75–83 at the death of king eadred of england in 955 , oda was one of the recipients of a bequest from the king , in his case a large amount of gold . fletcher bloodfeud p . 24 he was probably behind the reestablishment of a bishopric at elmham , as the line of bishops in that see starts with eadwulf of elmham in 956 . stenton anglo-saxon england p . 437 oda crowned king eadwig in 956 , but in late 957 the archbishop joined eadwig 's rival and brother edgar who had been proclaimed king of the mercians in 957 , while eadwig continued to rule wessex . the exact cause of the rupture between the two brothers that led to the division of the previously united kingdom is unknown , but may have resulted from eadwig 's efforts to promote close kinsmen and his wife . the division was peaceful , and eadwig continued to call himself '' king of the english '' in contrast to edgar 's title of '' king of the mercians '' . miller '' eadwig '' blackwell encyclopaedia of anglo-saxon england pp . 151–152 in early 958 oda annulled the marriage of eadwig and his wife ælfgifu , who were too closely related . stafford unification and conquest p . 48–49 this act was likely a political move connected to the division between eadwig and edgar , as it is unlikely that the close kinship between eadwig and ælfgifu had not been known before their marriage . oda was a supporter of dunstan 's monastic reforms , darlington '' ecclesiastical reform '' english historical review p . 387 and was a reforming agent in the church along with cenwald the bishop of worcester and ælfheah the bishop of winchester . he also built extensively , and re-roofed canterbury cathedral after raising the walls higher . in 948 , oda took saint wilfrid 's relics from ripon . blair church in anglo-saxon society p . 314 frithegod 's verse life of wilfrid has a preface that was written by oda , in which the archbishop claimed that he rescued the relics from ripon , which he described as '' decayed '' and '' thorn-covered '' . brooks early history of the church of canterbury p . 53 he also acquired the relics of st ouen , and frithegod also wrote , at oda 's behest , a verse life of that saint , which has been lost . he was also an active in reorganizing the diocesan structure of his province , as the sees of elmham and lindsey were reformed during his archbishopric . darlington '' ecclesiastical reform '' english historical review p . 386 the archbishop died on 2 june 958 and is regarded as a saint , with a feast day of 4 july . walsh new dictionary of saints p . 454–455 other dates were also commemorated , including 2 june or 29 may . after his death , legendary tales ascribed miracles to him , including one where the eucharist dripped with blood . another was the miraculous repair of a sword . farmer oxford dictionary of saints p . 393 there is no contemporary evidence for veneration being made to oda , with the first indication of cult coming in the hagiography written by byrhtferth about oswald , but no hagiography specifically about oda was written until eadmer wrote the vita sancti odonis sometime between 1093 and 1125 . oda was known by contemporaries as '' the good '' and also became known as severus '' the severe '' . notes . citations . references . . external links . opera omnia by migne patrologia latina with analytical indexes