Royal Prussia

geography . the area consisted of the following districts : pomerelia and gdańsk , kulmerland and michałów land and toruń , the mouth of the vistula with elbląg and malbork , the bishopric of warmia ( ermland ) with olsztyn which were forcibly ceded from the teutonic order in the second peace of thorn ( 1466 ) to the kingdom of poland . stone , daniel . a history of east central europe . university of washington press , 2001 , . p . 30 from the 14th century , in old texts ( until the 16th or 17th century ) and in latin , the terms prut ( h ) enia and prut ( h ) enic refer not only to the original settlement area of the now extinct old prussians along the baltic coast east of the vistula river , but also to the adjacent lands of the former samboride dukes of pomerelia , which territory the teutonic knights had acquired from the king of poland in the 1343 treaty of kalisz and incorporated into the order 's state . pomerelia lauenburg and bütow land to the west was ruled by the pomeranian dukes , feoffment to the king of poland . royal prussia is distinguished from later ducal prussia , the remaining ( eastern ) parts of prussia around königsberg , founded and governend by the teutonic knights . after secularisation in 1525 , it succeeded to the protestant dukes of the hohenzollern dynasty . from 1618 this area was in personal union by the electors of brandenburg ( brandenburg-prussia ) . in 1657 the titular monarchy devolved by the treaty of wehlau . history . by 1308 the pomerelian part of the region was conquered by the first polish state , enjoying autonomy and self-government . frost , robert , the oxford history of poland-lithuania , vol . i during the rule of władysław i the elbow-high of poland , the margraviate of brandenburg staked its claim on the territory in 1308 , leading władysław to request assistance from the teutonic knights , who had replaced the brandenburgers and incorporated pomerelia into the teutonic order state , in 1309 ( teutonic takeover of danzig ( gdańsk ) and treaty of soldin ( myślibórz ) ) . after being checked at the battle of grunwald , the teutonic knights ’ s prestige declined , and by the 1411 peace of thorn were forced to pay large contributions to the king of poland , which became a financial burden on the citizenry . in 1440 , as the tax burden rose , indigenous nobles and hanseatic cities established the prussian confederation at kwidzyn ( kwidzyn ) in resistance of the order 's domestic and financial policies . the confederation was led by the citizens of danzig , elbing , and thorn . the gentry from chełmno land and pomerelia participated as well . grand master ludwig von erlichshausen demanded the dissolution and in 1453 searched for help from pope nicholas v and emperor frederick iii . in turn , in february 1454 , the confederation sent a delegation , under johannes von baysen , to king casimir iv jagiellon of poland , to ask him for support against the teutonic order 's rule and for incorporation of their homeland into the kingdom of poland . in this treaty , prussian delegates declared the polish king the only true sovereign of their lands , justified by the historical fact that the king of poland had earlier ruled them . after lengthy negotiation , on 6 march 1454 , the royal chancellery issued the act of treaty formalizing the terms of the treaty establishing royal prussia ’ s autonomy as a foreign dependency of the king . f . kiryk , b . ryś ( red . ) wielka historia polski , t . ii 1320-1506 , kraków 1997 , p . 160-161 . prussian–polish alliance . after the prussian confederation pledged allegiance to casimir on 6 march 1454 , the thirteen years ' war ( '' war of the cities '' ) began . king casimir iv jagiellon appointed baysen as the first war-time governor of royal prussia . on may 28 , 1454 , the king took an oath of allegiance from the citizens of thorn , and in june a similar oath from the citizens of elbing and königsberg was taken . the rebellion also included major cities from the eastern part of the order 's lands , such as kneiphof , later a part of königsberg . though the knights were victorious at the battle of chojnice in 1454 , they were not able to finance more knights in order to reconquer the castles occupied by the insurgents . thirteen years of attrition warfare ended in october 1466 with the second peace of thorn ( 1466 ) , which provided for the order 's cession to the polish crown of its rights over the western half of prussia , including pomerelia and the districts of elbing , marienburg , and chełmno . independence protected by the king of poland . according to the 1454 treaty signed by king casimir iv , royal prussia enjoyed complete autonomy as a dependency of the king : it had its own laws , rights , treasury , money , and armies . it governed itself in council , whose members were chosen from local lords and powerful burghers ( ius indigenatus ) . eventually , royal prussia was privileged to send one , non-voting observer to the sejm ( polish diet ) . thorn , elbing , and danzig ( danzig law ) were granted additional privileges similar to the status of a free imperial city . in many respects , the constitutional status of royal prussia was similar to the bailiwick of jersey or the isle of man , which are ruled by the monarch of the united kingdom . royal prussia , as a vassal state answerable to the king of poland alone , benefited from its association with the commonwealth , and owing to its liberties under the polish monarch , its rulers ranked as the most powerful among palatines of the commonwealth . the bishop of warmia had claimed imperial prince-bishopric status , as mentioned in the golden bull of 1356 by emperor charles iv . although the area was never directly under the emperor 's jurisdiction and the claim seems unsupported by any bestowal document , it was in wide use in the 17th century . the bishopric continued defending this status until the end of the holy roman empire in 1806 . integration into the kingdom of poland . in 1569 , royal prussia was integrated fully into the kingdom of poland , and its parliament reduced to the status of a provincial assembly , also separate prussian institutions were dissolved . the former territory was subsequently governed as pomeranian voivodeship , culm voivodeship , malbork voivodeship , and prince-bishopric of warmia . partitions . at the same time as the 1772 first partition of poland , the former lands of royal prussia were annexed by the kingdom of prussia , the successor state of the teutonic order . in 1793 , the new kingdom of prussia participated in the second partition of poland by temporarily annexing the neighboring regions , which were almost immediately returned to the tsarist kingdom of poland and incorporated into the russian empire . governors . 1454–1459 : johannes von baysen , war-time governor 1459–1480 : stibor von baysen acten der prussian estates unter der herrschaft des deutschen ordens : 5 vols . , max toeppen ( ed . ) , leipzig : duncker & humblot , 1874–1886 ; reprint aalen : scientia , 1968–1974 , vol . 5 : 'die jahre 1458–1525 ' , 1974 . p . 90 ] . 1480 : niklas von baysen , who was only elected ; he refused to swear allegiance to the king . he was also voivode of malbork . in 1510 , after several attempts to install another governor , the office was abolished . see also . ducal prussia duchy of prussia kingdom of prussia pomerelia kursenieki kashubia warmia the plague during the great northern war . references . further reading . karin friedrich , the other prussia : royal prussia , poland and liberty , 1569–1772 , cambridge university press , 2000 , on google books gerard labuda ( ed . ) , historia pomorza , vol . i–iv , poznań 1969–2003 ( also covers east prussia ) w . odyniec , dzieje prus królewskich ( 1454–1772 ) . zarys monograficzny , warszawa 1972 dzieje pomorza nadwiślańskiego od vii wieku do 1945 roku , gdańsk 1978 . external links . detailed map of prussia from about 1635 containing ducal and royal prussia