Otley

history . toponymy . otley 's name is derived from otto , otho , othe , or otta , a saxon personal name and leah , a woodland clearing in old english . it was recorded as ottanlege in 972 and otelai or othelia in the domesday book of 1086 . the name chevin has close parallels to the early brythonic welsh term cefn meaning ridge and may be a survival of the ancient cumbric language . . early history . there are pre-historic settlement finds alongside both sides of the river wharfe and it is believed the valley has been settled at this site since the bronze age . there are bronze age carvings on rocks situated on top of the chevin : one such example is the knotties stone . west yorkshire geology trust has reference to otley chevin and caley crags having a rich history of human settlement stretching back into palaeolithic times . flint tools , bronze age rock carvings and iron age earthworks have been found . in medieval times the forest park was used as common pasture land , as a source of wood and sandstones for buildings and walls . saxon and medieval . the majority of the early development of the town dates from saxon times and was part of an extensive manor granted by king athelstan to the see of york . the archbishops of york had a residence and were lords of the manor . their palace was located on the site occupied by the manor house . otley is close to leeds and may have formed part of the kingdom of elmet . remains of the archbishop 's palace were found during the construction of st joseph 's primary school . as in other areas of the north , the norman conquest largely laid waste this area . the saxon church was replaced by a norman one , but this contains much saxon sculpture . thus in the 11th and 12th century otley would have been a loose congregation of buildings around the two focal points of the manor house by the bridge and the church . an important reason for the town 's location was a water supply , the calhead beck ( now covered over ) which ran down from otley chevin over whitley croft , a little east of the church and then to the river near the bridge . the town grew in the first half of the 13th century when the archbishops laid out burgage ( freehold ) plots to attract merchants and tradespeople . the burgage plots were on boroughgate , walkergate and kirkgate . this began to create the layout of today , based on a triangle of these plots forming the streets . bondgate was for the workers : bondsmen and tenants . a leper hospital was founded on the road to harewood beyond cross green . as well as farming and use of woodland , important local activities were quarrying stone , and the manufacture of potash from bracken , used to make a soap which therefore supported a community carrying out fulling , the cleansing and finishing of woollen cloth on watergate . the chevin provided stone for building ( and millstones ) as well as bracken , wood and common grazing , while the river provided reeds for thatching houses . . industrial revolution . the woolen industry developed as a cottage industry but during the industrial revolution and the mechanisation of the textile industry , mills were built using water then steam power . a cotton mill and weaving shed for calicoes were built by the river in the late 18th century . later woolcombing and worsted spinning were introduced . by the mid 19th century 500 inhabitants were employed in two worsted-mills , a paper-mill , and other mills . a tannery was established in the 19th century . at this time the opening of the new leeds road and bradford road greatly increased access for trade . many houses were built from the middle of the 19th century onwards , including the first row of terraces by the newly formed otley building society from 1847 . otley railway station opened in 1865 connecting goods and people to leeds , with a connection to bradford in 1875 . at its peak it had 50 trains a day , but it was closed in 1965 under the beeching cuts . kirkgate was the first street to be paved in 1866 , followed by sewers in 1869 . the wharfedale printing machine was developed in otley by william dawson and david payne . otley museum website an early example can be seen in otley museum . by 1900 the printing machinery trade , with over 2,000 people employed in seven machine shops , was otley 's most important industry . . 20th century onwards . after the first world war there was a general shortage of housing in britain , and much of it was crowded slums . otley council prepared one of the first subsidized housing schemes , commencing with relatively open land in newall on the north of the river in 1920 . the 1920s also saw the beginnings of the conversion of properties to a sewer drainage system , and electric lighting instead of gas on the streets . further estates followed and by 1955 there were more than 1000 council houses . private housing was also expanded during this time , but was greatly reduced the second world war . house building revived in the 1960s to 1980s , but industry declined , with many factories closing , including the printing machine works in 1981 . . governance . historically otley was a market-town and the centre of a large ecclesiastical parish in the wapentakes of skyrack and claro in the west riding of yorkshire . the various chapelry and townships in the ancient parish became separate civil parishes in 1866 . vision of britain website the local authority was the lord of the manor until 1864 when otley board was formed and many public buildings date from then on . from 1894 otley formed an urban district , and in 1897 and 1903 expanded north of the river wharfe to include newall . since local government reorganisation in 1974 otley has been a civil parish in the metropolitan borough of the city of leeds , in the county of west yorkshire . the parish council has exercised its option to declare itself a town council . otley lies in the leeds north west constituency of the uk parliament and is represented by mp alex sobel ( labour party ( uk ) ) . it is part of the otley & yeadon ward on leeds city council and is represented by three liberal democrat councillors ryk downes , colin campbell & sandy lay . it is twinned with the france town of montereau-fault-yonne , south of paris . otley and wharfedale ward has a population of 24,000 , and otley itself has a population of 14,348 , according to the census 2001 . geography . otley lies south-west of york , north-west of leeds , north-east of bradford , and from london . the town lies in lower wharfedale , at a bridging point over the river wharfe where there is a seven-arched medieval bridge , and is surrounded by arable land . the historic town developed on the south bank of the wharfe , but in the 20th century otley expanded north of the river , to include new developments at newall and the weston estate . the south side of the valley is dominated by a gritstone escarpment overlooking otley called the chevin and to the north is newall carr . in 1944 , major le g.g.w . horton fawkes of farnley hall donated 263 acres ( 1.1 & nbsp ; km² ) of land on the chevin to the people of otley . this has been expanded to 700 acres ( 2.8 & nbsp ; km² ) and constitutes chevin forest park . it was from a quarry on the chevin that the foundation stones for the houses of parliament were hewn . to the east and west of otley are flooded gravel pits , where sand and gravel have been extracted in the 20th century . the gravel pits to the east at knotford nook are a noted birdwatching site . those to the west are devoted to angling and sailing . to the west are the villages of burley-in-wharfedale and menston . to the east is pool-in-wharfedale . to the south is the towns of guiseley , and yeadon . transport . roman roads bypassed otley , south of the chevin and north of timble , so most of roads in the area were little better than tracks until the 18th century when efforts were made to facilitate trade . by 1820 there was a regular post coach to leeds on 4 days a week and 9 carriers delivering as far as manchester . in 1840 and 1841 new roads to leeds and bradford were opened . from 1900 the first motor vehicles appeared in otley , and in 1912 a motor haulage business started with a vehicle with interchangeable bodies so that it could work as either as lorry or charabanc . by 1930 there were bus companies operating and in 1939 otley bus station opened . trolleybuses operated by leeds corporation tramways arrived in 1915 , but ceased in 1928 . the otley and ilkley joint railway opened otley railway station in 1865 and closed in march 1965 ; the town bypass follows the part of the line of the old railway . the trackbed between burley in wharfedale , otley and pool is to become a cycleway , footpath and equestrian route known as the wharfedale greenway , with possible extensions onward to ilkley alongside the extant railway . planning permission for the first phase of the greenway was granted in july 2020 . the main roads through the town are the a660 to the south east , which connects otley to bramhope , adel and leeds , and the a65 to the west , which goes to ilkley and skipton . the a6038 heads to guiseley , shipley and bradford , connecting with the a65 . to harrogate , the a659 heads east to the a658 , which is the main bradford–harrogate road . otley bus station is run by west yorkshire metro and services are operated by first west yorkshire , tlc travel , keighley bus company , and connexionsbuses . there are local services connecting the town and outlying areas . notable features . otley bridge and riverside . the bridge is a 7 span stone bridge and scheduled ancient monument , dating from 1228 , which was rebuilt after the flood of 1673 and widened in 1776 . in 1957 a concrete cantilevered footwalk was added to separate pedestrians from road traffic . on the north side eastwards , 2 miles of the riverbank is wharfemeadows park with extensive gardens on land donated to the town in 1924 by the fawkes family . it originally had an open-air swimming pool . opposite on the south side is the much smaller tittybottle park , originally designated manor park in 1909 but it acquired its popular ( and now official ) name for its popularity with mothers and nannies . on the south side westward , is manor garth park , formerly part of the land of the manor house . about east of the bridge is gallows hill , where the medieval gallows stood . low-lying land by this was formerly a sewage works , but was bought by the town council in the 1980s and developed into gallows hill nature reserve . . market place . while markets have been held from at least 1227 it has only been in the current market place from about 1800 . it contains the buttercross ( covered area for farm produce , now used for occasional charity events , otherwise rest and shelter for visitors ) and the jubilee clock , which was erected in 1888 at a cost of £175 . it has two plaques , one in memory to two locals killed in the transvaal war and one expressing the gratitude of belgian refugees who came to otley during the first world war . many of the buildings around are listed . education . a grammar school was founded by royal charter issued to thomas cave in 1607 by james vi and i , who named it '' the grammar school of prince henry '' . the single storey building was pulled down and rebuilt in the elizabethan style with two storeys in 1840 . it closed in 1878 and was used as a court-house , and in recent times has been commercial premises , currently a public house . in 1918 the foundation was re-established in temporary premises and in 1925 prince henry 's grammar school , otley , in farnley lane opened . otley has a number of primary schools . religion . otley 's first church was built in the early 7th century , made of wood , but was burnt down . the all saints ' church , otley originates from saxon times and contains the remains of two early anglo-saxon crosses , one of which has been reproduced for the town 's war memorial . the present building is based on a norman church from the 12th century but little of the original remains , except the north doorway . substantial changes were made in the 13th , 14th and 18th century , with the tower clock dating from 1793 . this church was the centre of an ancient ecclesiastical parish which comprised the chapelries of baildon , bramhope , burley in wharfedale , denton , and farnley , and the townships of esholt , hawksworth , lindley , menston , newall with clifton , pool-in-wharfedale , and little timble . the graveyard contains the '' navvies ' monument '' , a replica of the entrance to bramhope tunnel , a monument to those killed during its construction . inside the church is the tomb of the grandparents of thomas fairfax who commanded parliament 's forces at the battle of marston moor in 1644 . what is now the bridge church was originally the salem chapel , built in 1826 , being for many years the congregational church but having its present name from 1972 with the formation of the united reformed church . our lady and all saints roman catholic church was opened in 1851 . methodist preacher john wesley was a frequent visitor to the town in the 18th century . allegedly his horse died in the town and is buried in the grounds of the parish church . its grave is marked by an unusual stone , also known locally as the '' donkey stone '' . his journal for 1761 reads , '' 6 july monday ; in the evening i preached at otley and afterwards talked with many of the society . there is reason to believe that ten or twelve of these are filled with the love of god . '' wesley street is named after him . a chapel was established on walkergate in about 1800 , replaced by a larger one on westgate in 1857 : a third chapel ( now trinity methodist church ) was built on boroughate in 1876 . a primitive methodist chapel opened on new market in 1835 , and is now the salvation army citadel : a primitive church on station road opened in 1874 and closed in 1965 ( it is now residences ) . another primitive church on craven street opened in 1901 and closed in the early 1950s . it is now the headquarters of 2nd otley scouts , and is known as the chevin community centre . an 1890 quaker meeting house on cross green is now a gospel hall . what was formerly bethany chapel on myers croft became home to bethel evangelical church in the mid 1990s . other christian groups meet in members ' homes or rented rooms . . culture and community . otley has a diverse range of cultural organisations . it has five active morris dance sides , the wharfedale wayzgoose ( border ) , the buttercross belles ( ladies northwest ) , flash company ( border , molly , appalachian & clog ) , hellz bellz ( contemporary ) and kitchen taps ( appalachian step ) . drama groups include the otley community players , otley youth theatre ( oy ) , and a thriving arts centre in the former courthouse . there is a poetry society , which meets monthly in the black horse hotel . the town has a brass band who perform at many events in the town . it is not a regular contesting band , but won first prize in the unregistered section at their first contest at hardraw scar in september 2007 and again in 2008 . since then they have competed in the 1st to 3rd section winning second prize and best march in 2014 . otley hosts the annual otley folk festival in september , a victorian fayre in december , a carnival in june , and , in may , what is reputed to be the oldest one day agricultural show in the country . this celebrated its bicentenary in 2009 . there is a beer festival , organised by the church , in november . otley has four scout troops , otley parish , otley bridge , 2nd otley , and otley methodist scouts . wharfedale district scouts , retrieved 27 may 2011 an army cadet force detachment is also located in the town . in january 2013 the guardian newspaper featured an article in its weekend section entitled let 's move to otley , west yorkshire . published online in '' money '' section on 11 january 2013 . hostelries . the black horse hotel ( original demolished , current from 1901 and the royal white horse hotel ( the former barclays bank ( closed 2019 ) , in manor square ) were the original posting houses and many of the others were coaching inns . by 1900 there were over 30 inns , and otley was said to have '' a pub on every corner '' . this reputation has continued into recent years with bbc radio 4 's statistics programme '' more or less '' concluding that it had the greatest number per head of population . today there are 20 pubs in the town although the roebuck ( formerly known as the spite ) , the chevin and the royalty are on the outskirts , with the roebuck located in north yorkshire . some of the oldest buildings have been demolished or replaced , but the red lion on kirkgate dates from 1745 , the bowling green from 1757 ( originally a courthouse ) , the rose & crown ( originally cottages ) 1731 . the old grammar school is ( as of 2017 ) the stew and oyster pub . the old cock on crossgate ( despite its name ) has only recently become a pub , but inhabits former cottages from 1757 . these are all grade ii listed buildings . the black bull in the market place , was allegedly drunk dry by cromwell 's troops on the night before the battle of marston moor during the english civil war and has a 15th-century well in the beer garden . file : black horse hotel at otley.jpg black horse hotel file : the red lion - kirkgate - geograph.org.uk - 468541.jpg red lion file : bowling green , otley 7 august 2017.jpg the bowling green file : rose and crown otley 7 august 2017.jpg rose and crown file : otley old cock front cropped 7 august 2017.jpg old cock file : the black bull in otley.jpg black bull file : the bay horse , market place , otley ( 30th december 2013 ) . jpg bay horse file : the junction inn , bondgate , otley ( 30th december 2013 ) . jpg the junction inn file : whitakers , kirkgate , otley ( 30th december 2013 ) . jpg whitakers file : the white swan , boroughgate , otley ( 30th december 2013 ) 001.jpg the white swan file : the yeoman ( formerly the fountain ) , gay lane , otley ( 30th december 2013 ) 001.jpg the yeoman ( formerly the fountain ) file : the ring o'bells - new market - geograph.org.uk - 468527.jpg the ring o'bells ( now the otley tavern ) file : the cross pipes - westgate - geograph.org.uk - 1207285.jpg the cross pipes . filmography . otley is '' hotton '' in the itv television soap opera emmerdale , and appears in itv 's heartbeat where otley courthouse is the old police station . itv 's dci banks also regularly filmed in the town . otley was also the setting for the drama series the chase and the itv dramatisation of the bad mother 's handbook . . sport . otley angling club was formed in 1897 by local land owners . it controls the fishing on the river wharfe through otley and a coarse fishing pond on the outskirts of the town . it runs regular fishing matches on the river and junior matches on the club pond . otley athletic club meets at otley cricket club . otley cricket club , founded in 1820 , play in the airedale and wharfedale senior cricket league . the club has won the league title 13 times and shared it in 1966 . the club has three senior teams and provides facilities for juniors from under 9 to under 17 . the club play at cross green . otley r.u.f.c . play home matches at cross green , which was the venue for the italy v usa fixture in the 1991 rugby world cup . in 1979 cross green was the site of a victory by the north of england against the all blacks . otley r.u.f.c . finished 5th in national division one in both the 2003-4 and 2004-05 seasons but were relegated to national division two at the end of the 2006–07 season . the club won national division two in 2007-08 and returned to national division one for the 2008–09 season . otley town football club has teams in the premier division of the west yorkshire league , the premier division of the harrogate & district league and the reserves division of the west yorkshire league . it runs junior teams including two girls ' teams . the club is a charter standard football club run by volunteers . the sunday league team , otley wharfeside afc , play in the wharfedale triangle football league . otley cycle club was founded on 27 january 1927 . its patron is lizzie armitstead , an international champion cyclist who was born in the town . it meets regularly and hosts a number of races throughout the year . on 5 july 2014 , the tour de france stage 1 from leeds to harrogate passed through the town . on 3 may 2015 , the final stage of the first tour de yorkshire came through the outskirts of otley . on 30 april 2016 , otley was the start of the second stage of the tour de yorkshire . . notable people . thomas chippendale , the cabinetmaker , was born in a cottage at the junction of boroughgate and wesley street and his statue stands next to the old grammar school that he once attended in manor square . j.m.w . turner , the painter , visited otley in 1797 , aged 22 , when commissioned to paint watercolours of the area . he was so attracted to otley and the surrounding area that he returned time and time again . his friendship with walter ramsden fawkes made him a regular visitor to farnley hall , two miles from otley . the stormy backdrop of hannibal crossing the alps is reputed to have been inspired by a storm over otley 's chevin while turner was staying at farnley hall . elizabeth garnett , missionary to navvies and author , was born in 1839 in otley and did much to improve the life of the navvies working in the area . craig adams , member of the sisters of mercy , the mission and the cult olivia blake , current mp for sheffield hallam david thomas broughton , folk singer and guitarist lizzie deignan , british cyclist general nick houghton , kcb , cbe , former chief of the defence staff alan kernaghan , republic of ireland footballer joseph ritchie , surgeon , african explorer , and naturalist julian sands , british actor mike tindall , england rugby union captain the chevin , alternative rock band aidan white , professional footballer for leeds united . references . external links . otley town council otley online virtual tour of otley centre , and interactive map all saints church , otley the otley brass , palmes family , 1593 , all saints church , otley