Tourism in Russia

land and climate . central european russia ( e.g . moscow , saint petersburg , nizhny novgorod , kazan , etc . ) is in the same climate zone as the baltic states , belarus , and northern ukraine . the climate of south-west russia ( the lower volga , and the area between the black sea and the caspian sea ) is more arid , with hotter summers and shorter winters . the climate of russia 's far east along the pacific coast is similar to that of hokkaido , japan and heilongjiang . the most severe climate is in siberia where winters are very cold and summers are very hot , and in far north ( russia ) where temperatures are always low , with the exception of murmansk , where the sea never freezes due to the influence of the warm norwegian current . the climate of russia 's black sea coast is subtropical . contrary to popular belief , the climate of most popular tourist areas of russia is not severe and is similar to that of eastern europe . the mean temperatures of december , january and february in moscow are −4 & nbsp ; °c ( 25 & nbsp ; °f ) , −7 & nbsp ; °c ( 19 & nbsp ; °f ) , −6 & nbsp ; °c ( 21 & nbsp ; °f ) respectively , but colder weather is common . over the past few decades spells of extremely cold weather ( below −20 & nbsp ; °c/-4 & nbsp ; °f ) in central european russia have become rare ( in the winter 2016/2017 , moscow had temperatures below −20 & nbsp ; °c only for three days ) , while the number of wintry days when the temperature is close to or slightly above the freezing point has grown significantly . in coastal areas wintry temperatures can feel somewhat colder than they actually are due to high humidity . unless you are allergic to the pollen of certain trees and herbs ( such as birch , horse chestnut , alder , lilac , cherry tree , ash tree , rowan tree , lime tree , dandelion ) , the best time for travelling to central european russia is late spring when the temperatures are pleasant and many trees are in bloom , and early and mid autumn when trees change their colour and it is not cold yet . summer months are also good except for june in cities in central and south russia when poplar fluff can be a nuisance , but recently the authorities of many russian cities have taken action against the fluff by cutting and removing poplar trees and the situation has improved dramatically . late autumn , winter months , and early spring will be enjoyable if you wear appropriate clothes and shoes . if you are interested in winter activities , in central european russia it usually begins to snow in late autumn and snowpack usually does n't melt away completely before early april , although spells of warm weather do occur and snow can temporarily melt away in mid-winter . ski resorts in mountainous areas have snow throughout the winter season . central european russia sometimes experiences cold spells in early may when the temperature can go from +15 & nbsp ; °c/59 & nbsp ; °f to the freezing point for a few days . tourism . visa and entry requirements . the citizens of cis member states , most latin american countries , israel and south africa , can travel in russia for 90 days without a visa ; visitors from south korea can visit russia for 60 days without a visa ; while tourists from bosnia and herzegovina , cuba , laos , macau , macedonia , mongolia , montenegro , serbia , seychelles and thailand , can visit for 30 days without a visa . free e-visas for visiting three regions in russia 's far east ( primorye , sakhalin , and kamchatka ) are available for tourists from china , japan , india , iran , turkey , morocco , mexico , and some other countries . tourists from other countries are required to visit a russian diplomatic mission to purchase a visa . tourists are required to have a valid passport when crossing the russian border . russian visas can not be purchased at the border . for more information see visa policy of russia . cultural tourism . the most popular tourist destinations in russia are saint petersburg ( which appeared in the list of top visited cities of europe in 2010 ) and moscow , the current and the former capitals of the country and great cultural centers , recognized as world cities . moscow and saint petersburg feature such world-renowned museums as hermitage and tretyakov gallery , famous theaters including bolshoi and mariinsky , ornate churches such as saint basil 's cathedral , cathedral of christ the saviour , saint isaac 's cathedral and church of the savior on blood , impressive fortifications such as moscow kremlin and peter and paul fortress , beautiful squares such as red square and palace square , and streets such as tverskaya and nevsky prospect . rich palaces and parks of extreme beauty are found in the former imperial residences in the suburbs of moscow ( kolomenskoye , tsaritsyno ) and saint petersburg ( petergof , strelna , oranienbaum , gatchina , pavlovsk palace , tsarskoye selo ) . moscow contains a great variety of impressive soviet-era buildings along with modern skyscrapers , while saint petersburg , nicknamed venice of the north , boasts its classical architecture , many rivers , channels and bridges . nizhny novgorod is the capital of the volga region . it is considered to be '' younger brother '' of moscow because it has its own kremlin , the metro , the so-called '' nizhny novgorod arbat '' ( bolshaya pokrovskaya street ) and even a copy of the monument to minin and pozharsky , the original of which is in the russian capital . nizhny novgorod is divided into two parts by the oka river . the upper city is its historical part . here are the kremlin , minin and pozharsky square , bolshaya pokrovskaya and rozhdestvenskaya streets , nightclubs , open spaces , a large number of monuments and simply historical places . the lower city is its industrial and commercial part . here are the fair , the old sormovo and kanavino , gaz and sotsgorod ( the so-called '' city in the city '' ) , the railway terminal , the airport and many attractions for people who want to see the styles of underground , industrial and grunge . the city is the main starting point for cruises along volga river . from here begins shipping to moscow and st . petersburg . kazan , the capital of tatarstan , shows a unique mix of christian russian and muslim tatar cultures . the city has registered a brand the third capital of russia , though a number of other major russian cities compete for this status , including nizhny novgorod , novosibirsk , yekaterinburg and samara , all being major cultural centers with rich history and prominent architecture . veliky novgorod , pskov , dmitrov and the cities of golden ring ( vladimir , yaroslavl , kostroma and others ) have at best preserved the architecture and the spirit of ancient and medieval rus ' , and also are among the main tourist destinations . many old fortifications ( typically kremlins ) , monasteries and churches are scattered throughout russia , forming its unique cultural landscape both in big cities and in remote areas . sakha republic proposes to use former forced labour camps as a tourist attraction . poles visit places of communist crimes , e.g . of the katyn massacre and solovetsky islands . . notable museums . russia enjoys a rich cultural heritage and is home to many museums . the most notable include the tretyakov gallery , the kremlin armoury and the state historical museum in moscow , the hermitage museum , and the russian museum in st petersburg , the kazan kremlin in kazan , etc . russia is also famous for having many museums related to its literary and classical music heritage , such as yasnaya polyana associated with leo tolstoy , the mikhaylovskoye museum reserve associated with alexander pushkin , the dostoyevsky museum , the tchaikovsky state house-museum . the rimsky-korsakov apartment and museum , the mikhail glinka museum in moscow , the sergei rachmaninoff estate museum in ivanovka , tambov region , the alexander scriabin apartment museum in moscow . museums related to russia 's military history and military hardware include the museum of the great patriotic war , moscow on poklonnaya hill , the central museum of the armed forces of russia in moscow , the central museum of the russian air force in monino , moscow region , the central naval museum in st petersburg , the mamayev kurgan in volgograd . famous museums related to science and technology include the polytechnic museum of moscow , the memorial museum of cosmonautics , the museum of the energia rocket and space corporation in korolev , moscow region . transport . for security reasons , russian ticket offices sell tickets for trains , airplanes and coaches only if you show your passport . . railways . the state-owned company russian railways ( abbreviated as ржд ) operates most of rail services across the country and is crucial for the rail transport in russia . high-speed rail services are available between moscow and st petersburg , between moscow and nizhny novgorod , and between st petersburg and helsinki ( finland ) . european russia and the russian far east are connected by rail via the trans-siberian railway . a train trip from moscow to vladivostok takes 6 days . russia uses the russian gauge , which is also shared by all the former soviet republics ( estonia , latvia , lithuania , belarus , ukraine , georgia , armenia , azerbaijan , kazakhstan , turkmenistan , tajikistan , uzbekistan , kyrgyzstan ) , mongolia , and is practically identical with the rail gauge of finland . trains crossing the border between russia ( belarus , ukraine ) and eu member states ( except the baltic states and finland ) or between russia and china , stop at special crossing points where each carriage is lifted for its bogies to be changed . trains remain at crossing points for up to 2 hours . . sea and river transport . russia 's major sea ports : category : port cities and towns in russia include st petersburg and kaliningrad on the baltic coast ; murmansk and arkhangelsk on the arctic coast ; vladivostok , yuzhno-sakhalinsk , and petropavlovsk-kamchatsky on the pacific coast ; sochi , novorossiysk , and sevastopol on the black sea coast ; astrakhan on the caspian coast . in european russia , many river boat companies offer journeys to cities and towns on the volga river , its tributaries and connected canals : moscow ( via the moscow canal ) , yaroslavl , kostroma , nizhny novgorod , kazan , saratov , volgograd , astrakhan . river boats from st petersburg can travel to staraya ladoga and veliky novgorod on the volkhov river , to ladoga lake , and to moscow ( via canals ) . . air transport . russia 's busiest international airports are situated near moscow , st petersburg , volgograd , kazan , krasnodar , sochi , and vladivostok . for more information see a list of airports in russia . moscow and saint petersburg are served by direct flights from most european capitals , and moscow also has direct flights from many cities in east asia , south asia , africa , the middle east , and north america . countries that have no direct flights to russia include australia , canada and ukraine . . roads . major national thoroughfares are known as federal highways . for more information see russian federal highways . most of highways are toll-free , however recently there have opened a few toll roads . usual roads in smaller russian cities and in the countryside can be in bad condition . during the cold season ( from november till april ) , when there is permanent snowpack and ice on the roads , winter tyres are mandatory . . public transport in major cities . russian cities that have a metro include moscow , st petersburg , nizhny novgorod , novosibirsk , samara , yekaterinburg , kazan . entrances to metro stations are marked using the letter m which looks the same in the russian and roman alphabets . on the moscow metro , announcements on trains are made in russian and english , and direction signs and maps often include english . apart from buses and trams , trolleybuses are a very common means of overground transport in russian cities . for more information see the list of trolleybus systems in russia . another widely used means of public transport is marshrutkas , or shared taxies . if you are going to visit moscow and use public transport , see the article about the troika card ( a similar card known as podorozhnik is used in st petersburg ) . taxi services available in major russian cities include yandex , uber ( operated by yandex.taxi ) , and gett . major national holidays and celebrations . for a full list see public holidays in russia novy god ( new year 's eve ) , 31 december orthodox christmas , 7 january maslenitsa , in february or march , in the week before the lent ( according to the julian calendar ) easter , in spring after the lent ( according to the julian calendar ) victory day , 9 may day of slavic alphabet and culture , 24 may russia day , 12 june kupala night , 7 july day of christianization of kievan rus ' , 28 july navy day ( russia ) , the last sunday of july ( major celebrations include naval parades in saint petersburg and vladivostok ) unity day ( russia ) , 4 november defender of the fatherland day , 23 february . major events . honey fair in kolomenskoye , february – march , an annual honey festival in kolomenskoye , moscow khl conference finals and the gagarin cup , march and april , final series of the kontinental hockey league kinotavr , june , an international film festival in sochi scarlet sails festival , on a saturday in the second half of june , annual celebration in st petersburg marking the end of school year international tchaikovsky competition , 10–30 june , an annual international competition in moscow , final gala concerts 2–3 july in moscow and st petersburg russian super cup , july maks ( air show ) , july , an annual international aerospace show in zhukovsky , moscow region silk way rally , july battle on the neva , july , an international history festival in st petersburg featuring historical medieval battles ( hmb ) gum gorkyclassic motor rally , july , an annual motor rally and car parade featuring classic cars in moscow sabantui , on a sunday in summer , a major holiday celebrated primarily in tatarstan and bashkortostan spasskaya tower military music festival and tattoo , the last week of august , the first week of september , an annual international military music festival in red square , moscow eid al-fitr , 1st day of the month of shawwal in the islamic calendar , in order to mark the end of the holy month of ramadan eid al-adha , 10th day of the last month of dhul-hijjah in the islamic calendar , locally known as kurban bairam , celebrated primarily in tatarstan , bashkortostan , north caucasus and by muslim communities in major cities chereshnevy les festival , summer , an international annual open-arts festival in moscow okno v yevropu , 6–12 august , an annual russian film festival in vyborg , leningrad region moscow international film festival , an international biennial film festival in moscow city day in moscow , first saturday of september , an annual celebration marking the birthday of moscow borodino day , first sunday of september , an annual event in memory of the battle of borodino , includes historical re-enactment , in borodino , moscow region moscow fashion week , 24–29 october , an annual fashion event in moscow the moscow biennale , dates vary , a biennial contemporary art festival that started in 2003 . resorts and nature tourism . natural tourism . in russia , nature reserves have long history and it has its own word of definition zapovedniks , plural заповедники , ) more than 100 nature reserves exist in russia and it has a great attraction to tourists . several of them are among world heritage sites . the most famous national parks and sanctuaries of russia include the baikal nature reserve , the altai nature reserve , the lazovsky nature reserve , the kedrovaya pad nature reserve , the curonian spit nature reserve , the valdaysky national park , the baikal-lena nature reserve , the ilmen nature reserve . the seven wonders of russia , the most popular tourist destinations chosen in a national vote in 2008 , include lake baikal , valley of geysers , manpupuner rock formations , and mount elbrus . other areas interesting for tourists include kamchatka with its volcanoes and geysers , karelia where many lakes and granite rocks are found , including , tyva with its wild steppes , republic of adygea where fisht mountain is located , chechnya republic where lake kezenoyam is located . . health tourism . numerous spa towns having been established at a hot spring . the most renown regions are kamchatka krai , altai krai , krasnodar krai , stavropol krai , north caucasus region of russia cites enjoy natural hot spring water during winter and some of russian cities are called russian spa town , including pyatigorsk , yessentuki , kislovodsk , zheleznovodsk and mineralnye vody . this cities are called caucasian mineral waters . russia has one of the largest of water border in world and that make russia perfect for resort . the warm subtropical black sea coast of russia is the site for a number of popular seaside resorts such as sochi and tuapse , known for their shale beaches and wonderful nature . the warm subtropical black sea coast of russia is the site for a number of popular seaside resorts such as sochi and tuapse , known for their shale beaches and wonderful nature . winter sport . a vast part of russian territory is in subarctic climate and humid continental climate , and that is why it is cold . in addition , russia is mountainous in regions like northern caucasus , altai krai and kamchatka peninsula the highest pick in europe , is mount elbrus is in russia , that make russia a perfect place for winter sport . in fact , ski resorts are quite common in russia and 2014 winter olympics is the resemblance of how ski resorts has been developed in russia . the most famous ski resort in russia is sochi and its krasnaya polyana . other most popular ski resorts in russia are dombay in karachay–cherkessia in northern caucasus . souvenirs and food . typical souvenirs include the matryoshka doll and other handicraft , samovars for water heating , ushanka and papaha warm hats , and fur clothes among other items . russian vodka and caviar are among the food that attracts foreigners , along with honey , blini , pelmeni , shchi soup and other products and dishes of russian cuisine . file : tenorbalalaika1.jpg balalaika file : russkaya garmon.jpg garmoshka file : grayushanka.jpg ushanka file : russian-matroshka no bg.jpg matryoshka file : podnos.jpg zhostovo tray file : samovar.silver.jpg samovar file : blini tanya.jpg bliny file : selidi pod shuboi.jpg dressed herring file : pozharskaya kotleta.jpg kotlety file : caviar butterbrot.jpg caviar file : russian borscht with beef and sour cream.jpg borsch file : vatrushka.jpg vatrushka file : тульский пряник.jpg pryanik file : сырок глазигованный.jpg syrok ( cottage cheese covered in chocolate ) file : valenki.jpg valenki file : yantarny yuvelirprom amber manufactory necklace photo by viktor guseinov.jpg amber file : mezenskaya rospis.jpg birch bark souvenirs file : idyll_ ( salabanov ) . jpg palekh miniature file:1969.азарова.jpg gzhel file : cup_duck.jpg khokhloma file : merchant wife in red shawl by anonim ( 19 c . , tver gallery ) frame.jpg russian shawl file : rus stamp-2011 gagarin-50-letpoleta.jpg soviet space programme file : pioneers member pin.jpg soviet-era souvenirs . regions and localities associated with specific souvenirs and products . caviar : primorsky krai ; sakhalin ; kamchatka honey : bashkortostan ; altai territory ; krasnodar territory pryaniki : tula ; arkhangelsk ; vyazma , smolensk region ; pokrov , vladimir region ; gorodets , nizhny novgorod region chocolate : moscow ; pokrov , vladimir region amber : kaliningrad diamonds : yakutsk glass souvenirs : st petersburg ; moscow ; gus-khrustalny , vladimir region gems : nizhny tagil ; yekaterinburg beresta ( birch bark ) souvenirs : arkhangelsk ; semyonov , nizhny novgorod region metalwork : tula ; zhostovo , ivanovo region wooden souvenirs and pottery : gorodets , nizhny novgorod region ; palekh , ivanovo region ; gzhel , moscow region ; dymkovo district of kirov ; filimonovo , tula region ; semyonov , nizhny novgorod region textiles : ivanovo ; yaroslavl wool products : moscow ; pavlovsky posad , moscow region ; orenburg lace : vologda ; yelets , lipetsk region valenki and felt products : yaroslavl ; yelets , lipetsk region ; ivanovo furs : pyatigorsk ; kazan ; ulyanovsk ; tver wristwatches and clocks : moscow ; chelyabinsk . foreign travel statistics . in 2013 , 27 million international tourists arrived in russia , generating us 11.2 & nbsp ; billion in international tourism revenue for the country . including domestic and international tourism , the industry directly contributed rub860 & nbsp ; billion to the russian gdp and supported 966,500 jobs in the country . . safety . natural disasters . natural hazards of central european russia include hurricanes , thunderstorms , and spring floods when snowpack accumulated during the winter melts away ; south russia sometimes experiences flash floods . earthquakes do not occur in russia except for mountainous areas in the south ( the caucasus mountains , the altai mountains ) and the pacific coast . forest fires can occur in hot summers , especially in south siberia . dangerous animals . big wild animals such as bears and wolves are common in wooded areas of siberia and russia 's far east , they also inhabit some remote thick forests in north-east european russia ; female bears can be especially dangerous when they have cubs , while male bears are especially dangerous if they wake up and roam in wintertime ; wolves are dangerous in the winter period . the only poisonous snake in central european russia is the viper ; it mainly inhabits boggy and marshy forests but can occasionally be met in other types of forests , so high boots are advisable for forest trips and hikes . tick-borne encephalitis is another hazard that is associated with forests and parks in russia . animals that are most prone to rabies are stray dogs and cats , wild foxes , wolves , hedgehogs , raccoon dogs . environmental contamination . a certain level of radioactive contamination ( corresponding to that of central austria and central sweden ) caused by rains following the chernobyl disaster is found in some parts of bryansk region and tula region . high levels of industrial contamination are found in the city of norilsk and in chelyabinsk oblast and sverdlovsk oblast . socio-cultural concerns . . public safety . most russian cities are safe to visit . according to travel advice by the uk government , '' most visits to russia are trouble-free , but petty crime does happen '' . . militant groups . most regions of russia are safe , however travels to some areas in north caucasus can pose a certain risk , especially parts of chechnya and dagestan .