Sentience

philosophy and sentience . according to damasio , sentience is a minimalistic way of defining consciousness , which otherwise commonly and collectively describes sentience plus further features of the mind and consciousness , such as creativity , intelligence , sapience , self-awareness , and intentionality ( the ability to have thoughts about something ) . these further features of consciousness may not be necessary for sentience , which rests on the capacity to feel sensations and emotions . . recognition paradox and relation to sapience . while it has been traditionally assumed that sentience and sapience are , in principle , independent of each other , there are criticisms of that assumption . one such criticism is about recognition paradoxes , one example of which is that an entity that can not distinguish a spider from a non-spider can not be arachnophobia . more generally , it is argued that since it is not possible to attach an emotional response to stimuli that can not be recognized , emotions can not exist independently of cognition that can recognize . the claim that precise recognition exists as specific attention to some details in a modular mind is criticized both with regard to data loss as a small system of disambiguating synapses in a module physically can not make as precise distinctions as a interferometry encompassing the whole brain , and for energy loss as having one system for motivation that needs some built-in cognition to recognize anything anyway and another cognitive system for making strategies would cost more energy than integrating it all in one system that use the same synapses . data losses inherent in all information transfer from more precise systems to less precise systems are also argued to make it impossible for any imprecise system to use a more precise system as an '' emissary '' , as a less precise system would not be able to tell whether the outdata from the more precise system was in the interest of the less precise system or not . a . d . milner , m . d . rugg ( 2013 ) . '' the neuropsychology of consciousness '' e t mullin ( 2007 ) . '' the creation of sensation and the evolution of consciousness '' . empirical data on conditioned reflex precision . the original studies by ivan pavlov that showed that conditioned reflexes in human children are more discriminating than those in dogs , human children salivating only at ticking frequencies very close to those at which food was served while dogs drool at a wider range of frequencies , have been followed up in recent years with comparative studies on more species . it is shown that both brain size and brain-wide connectivity contribute to make perception more discriminating , as predicted by the theory of a brain-wide perception system but not by the theory of separate systems for emotion and cognition . catania , a.c . ( june 7 , 1994 ) . '' query : did pavlov 's research ring a bell ? '' . psycoloquy newsletter . consciousness . according to thomas nagel in his paper what is it like to be a bat ? , consciousness can refer to the ability of any entity to have subjective perceptual experiences , or as some philosophers refer to them , '' qualia '' —in other words , the ability to have states that it feels like something to be in . some philosophers , notably colin mcginn , believe that the physical process causing consciousness to happen will never be understood , a position known as '' new mysterianism . '' they do not deny that most other aspects of consciousness are subject to scientific investigation but they argue that qualia will never be explained . other philosophers , such as daniel dennett , argue that qualia are not a meaningful concept . regarding animal consciousness , according to the animal consciousness , which was publicly proclaimed on 7 july 2012 at the cambridge university , consciousness is that which requires specialized nervous system , chiefly neuroanatomical , neurochemical , and neurophysiological substrates , which manifests in more complex organisms as the central nervous system , to exhibit consciousness . accordingly , only organisms that possess these substrates , all within the animal kingdom , are said to be conscious . sentience is not mentioned anywhere in this document . sponges , placozoans , and mesozoans , with simple body plans and no nervous system , are the only members of the animal kingdom that possess no consciousness . indian religions . eastern religions including hinduism , buddhism , sikhism , and jainism recognise non-humans as sentient beings . the term sentient beings is translated from various sanskrit terms ( jantu , bahu jana , jagat , sattva ) and '' conventionally refers to the mass of living things subject to illusion , suffering , and rebirth ( saṃsāra ) '' . getz , daniel a . ( 2004 ) . '' sentient beings '' ; cited in buswell , robert e . ( 2004 ) . encyclopedia of buddhism . volume 2 . new york , usa : macmillan reference usa . ( volume 2 ) : pp.760 in some forms of buddhism plants , stones and other inanimate objects are considered to be 'sentient' . keiji , nishitani ( ed . ) ( 1976 ) . the eastern buddhist . 9.2 : p.72 . kyoto : eastern buddhist society ; cited in dumoulin , henrich ( author ) ; heisig , james ( translator ) ; and knitter , paul ( translator ) ( 2005 ) . zen buddhism : a history ~ volume 2 : japan . with an introduction by victor sogen hori . bloomington , indiana , usa : world wisdom , inc . in jainism many things are endowed with a soul , jīva , which is sometimes translated as 'sentience' . some things are without a soul , ajiva , such as a chair or spoon . there are different rankings of jīva based on the number of senses it has . water , for example , is a sentient being of the first order , as it is considered to possess only one sense , that of touch . in jainism and hinduism , this is related to the concept of ahimsa , non-violence toward other beings . sentience in buddhism is the state of having senses . in buddhism , there are six senses , the sixth being the subjective experience of the mind . sentience is simply awareness prior to the arising of skandha . thus , an animal qualifies as a sentient being . according to buddhism , sentient beings made of pure consciousness are possible . in mahayana buddhism , which includes zen and tibetan buddhism , the concept is related to the bodhisattva , an enlightened being devoted to the liberation of others . the first vow of a bodhisattva states , '' sentient beings are numberless ; i vow to free them . '' . animal welfare , rights , and sentience . some in the animal rights movement contend that the ability to experience pleasure and pain implies sentience . the documentary earthlings argues that while animals do not have all the desires and ability to comprehend as do humans , they do share the desires for food and water , shelter and companionship , freedom of movement and avoidance of pain . monson s ( 2005 ) , '' earthlings '' . animal-welfare advocates typically argue that any sentient being is entitled , at a minimum , to protection from unnecessary suffering , though animal-rights advocates may differ on what rights ( e.g . , the right to life ) may be entailed by simple sentience . sentiocentrism describes the theory that sentient individuals are the center of moral concern . gary francione also bases his abolitionist theory of animal rights , which differs significantly from singer 's , on sentience . he asserts that , '' all sentient beings , humans or nonhuman , have one right : the basic right not to be treated as the property of others . '' francione , gary . official blog andrew linzey , founder of the oxford centre for animal ethics in england , considers recognising animals as sentient beings as an aspect of his christianity . the interfaith association of animal chaplains encourages animal ministry groups to adopt a policy of recognising and valuing sentient beings . in 1997 the concept of animal sentience was written into the basic law of the european union . the legally binding protocol annexed to the treaty of amsterdam recognises that animals are '' sentient beings '' , and requires the eu and its member states to '' pay full regard to the welfare requirements of animals '' . artificial intelligence . the term '' sentience '' is not used by major artificial intelligence textbooks and researchers . see the four most popular ai textbooks ( or wikipedia 's survey of their contents ) , none of which mention '' sentience '' at all : it is sometimes used in popular accounts of ai to describe '' human level or higher intelligence '' ( or artificial general intelligence ) . sentience quotient . the sentience quotient concept was introduced by robert a . freitas jr . in the late 1970s . it defines sentience as the relationship between the information processing rate of each individual processing unit ( neuron ) , the weight/size of a single unit , and the total number of processing units ( expressed as mass ) . it was proposed as a measure for the sentience of all living beings and computers from a single neuron up to a hypothetical being at the theoretical computational limit of the entire universe . on a logarithmic scale it runs from −70 up to +50 . see also . blindsight causality consciousness ethics of uncertain sentience explanatory gap hard problem of consciousness ideasthesia mind mind-body problem mirror test pain in invertebrates philosophical zombie philosophy of mind problem of other minds sentientism sentiocentrism solipsism turing test wisdom . notes . a . quote : '' the absence of a neocortex does not appear to preclude an organism from experiencing affective states . convergent evidence indicates that non-human animals have the neuroanatomical , neurochemical , and neurophysiological substrates of conscious states along with the capacity to exhibit intentional behaviors . consequently , the weight of evidence indicates that humans are not unique in possessing the neurological substrates that generate consciousness . non-human animals , including all mammals and birds , and many other creatures , including octopuses , also possess these neurological substrates . '' b . quote : '' granted , these animals do not have all the desires we humans have ; granted , they do not comprehend everything we humans comprehend ; nevertheless , we and they do have some of the same desires and do comprehend some of the same things . the desires for food and water , shelter and companionship , freedom of movement and avoidance of pain . '' . references . further reading . sugunasiri , suwanda h.j . , the whole body , not heart , as 'seat of consciousness ' : the buddha 's view ' , philosophy east & west , vol . 45 , no . 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 409–430 ) . prof . sugunasiri is founder of nalanda college of buddhist studies , toronto , canada jeremy bentham - introduction to the principles of morals and legislation book about a theory of sentience readership : philosophers , psychologists , and neuroscientists interested in sensation and perception . authors , austen clark , professor of philosophy , university of connecticut , storrs d . cole : sense and sentience sense5 8/18/90 ; rev . 1-19-98 . ( original 1983 ) copyright david cole university of minnesota , duluth science , policy and cultural implications of animal sentience , suggested reading , compassion in world farming