Calvin Johnson (musician)

career . early years . calvin 's first introduction to underground music was in 1977 when he became a volunteer at olympia 's community radio station , kaos-fm , at the age of fifteen . the station 's uniquely progressive programming policy mandated a focus on music available through independent and artist owned labels , rather than centralized corporate media . this independent , diy culture has been an important influence on johnson 's career . johnson soon began writing for fanzines , such as sub/pop ( later to become sub pop records ) and op , and also organized music and film events . johnson attended the evergreen state college in olympia , where his first band , a short-lived group called cool rays , made their debut recordings with steve fisk in 1981 . calvin established k in the summer of 1982 . at some point , his father gave him a martin acoustic guitar . he later told an interviewer that his father had '' received it as a wedding present from his bride . '' . beat happening . johnson formed beat happening in 1982 with fellow evergreen students heather lewis and bret lunsford . beat happening were early leaders in the american indie rock and lo-fi movements , noted for their use of primitive recording techniques , disregard for the technical aspects of musicianship , and songs with subject matters of a childish or coy nature . instruments were guitar and drums , with members frequently switching instruments and calvin and heather taking turns on lead vocals . tours with artists such as fugazi confused and alienated audience members . while articulating a punk rock position of defiance that was more sensitive than macho . the band has been on hiatus since 1992 , but briefly resurfaced to release a new 7 '' in 2001 . go team . the go team was a collaborative project started in 1985 based around the core duo of johnson and tobi vail , later of bikini kill & kill rock stars . they toured the west coast as a two piece , adding billy karren for two u.s . tours . the group released several cassettes and 9 singles on k , with a rotating cast of collaborators that included kurt cobain , rich jensen , david nichols , and donna dresch . all of their recordings are currently out of print . dub narcotic sound system . dub narcotic sound system , named after calvin 's famed analog recording studio , was a project that explored funkier , more dance-party-oriented material in the tradition of the stax/volt house bands . johnson was the sole member to appear on every recording , surrounded by a loose collective of musicians that 's included larry butler , todd ranslow , and brian weber ( all members of hip-hop group dead presidents ) . numerous 7 '' singles and several full-length albums were released . the revolving door nature of the ensemble led to collaborations with jon spencer blues explosion , lois maffeo and director/writer/performer miranda july . the lineup later solidified around the trio of johnson , bassist chris sutton ( c.o.c.o , hornet leg , the gossip ) and drummer heather dunn ( tiger trap ) . a catastrophic tour van crash in montana in 2003 nearly ended the band 's career in tragedy . johnson suffered a major concussion that left him with broken ribs and a serious speech impediment ; he has since largely recovered . the band has not toured or released recordings since 2004 's degenerate introduction . halo benders . halo benders was a collaboration between johnson and doug martsch of built to spill . from 1994–1998 , they released three albums . calvin 's deep baritone voice and doug 's high melodies are heard simultaneously , occasionally harmonizing , but often operating independently of one another . despite the halo benders ' critical and commercial success , martsch 's commitment to touring with built to spill prevented the band from touring and recording more . the band reunited for a 2008 performance in boise , and may be working on new material . solo career . concurrent with his activity with dub narcotic sound system , johnson began performing solo shows under his own name . calvin 's solo material was a marked contrast to the upbeat rock of halo benders and the funk-soul of dnss , as it allowed him to explore mournful blues , folk , & gospel elements . his first solo album , what was me , is an introspective album about love , loss , and death . while some songs employ simple nylon-string guitar accompaniment , many feature only johnson 's voice . it also contains duets with beth ditto of the gossip and mirah . his second album , before the dream faded . , is more varied . it includes collaborations with a variety of northwest indie luminaries . the songs cover an odd range of subjects , such as the size and color of hearts , lucifer , and falling in love . the most recent album calvin johnson & the sons of the soil is a career-spanning collection of re-recorded songs with a band consisting of kyle field , adam forkner , and jason anderson , documenting that ensemble 's 2003 west coast touring lineup . current projects . in 2008 , calvin johnson appeared in the film the lollipop generation by g.b . jones . calvin 's newest project is hive dwellers , who made their recorded début performing superchunk 's '' my noise '' on score ! 20 years of merge records : the covers ! a full-length release is planned for fall 2009 . calvin has also revived his dub narcotic disco plate 45 rpm series , collaborating with artists such as atlas sound , mahjongg , and joey casio at dub narcotic to record an a-side , and creating a selector dub narcotic version for the b-side . relationship with other musicians . after meeting ian mackaye in 1980 , johnson later became friends with the members of fugazi , and beat happening was the opening band on one of fugazi 's first tours . johnson has worked with modest mouse , beck , heavenly , the microphones , jon spencer blues explosion , the blow , jens lekman , mecca normal , the gossip and built to spill , fifth column , among many others . since founding his dub narcotic recording studio in 1993 , he has produced and engineered recordings by many bands and artists . friends of kurt cobain such as ian dickson of earth , mark arm of mudhoney , bruce pavitt and slim moon have all acknowledged johnson 's significant influence on the late musician . cobain cited beat happening 's jamboree as one of his favorite records , kurt cobain journals and even got the k records logo ( a small '' k '' in a shield ) tattooed on his arm to '' try and remind him to stay a child . '' nirvana : the true story by everett true they were friends in the late 80s/early 90s when cobain lived in olympia ; he 'd been a guest with the go team , and on september 25 , 1990 , cobain appeared on a kaos ( fm ) show hosted by johnson and performed a number of songs acoustically , including a duet with johnson on the wipers song , '' d-7 . '' cobain later grew to resent johnson 's '' arrogance '' and denounced his ties in a ( private ) journal entry . cobain , kurt . journals . riverhead books , 2002 . pg . 267 johnson is also referred to in the john peel session version of the hole song , '' olympia '' ( also credited as '' rock star '' on the album live through this ) . the band 's lead singer , courtney love has the line : ' i went to school with calvin , ' a reference to johnson 's influence within the burgeoning olympia indie music scene . in 1993 , johnson had a restraining order placed on love for harassment and assault . . solo discography . what was me ( 2002 , k records ) before the dream faded . ( 2005 , k records ) calvin johnson & the sons of the soil ( 2007 , k records ) this party is just getting started ( as selector dub narcotic , 2016 , k records ) a wonderful beast ( 2018 ) . references . external links . interview with kittenpants