Daughters of the American Revolution

other historic accomplishments . the dar museum was founded in 1890 as a repository for family treasures . today , the museum contains over 30,000 historical relics that form a collective memory of the decorative and fine arts in america from 1700 to 1850 . the dar library was founded in 1896 as a collection of genealogical and historical publications for the use of staff genealogists verifying application papers for the national society daughters of the american revolution . shortly after 1900 the growing collection was opened to the public and has remained so ever since . during the spanish–american war , dar purchased a ship 's tender for the uss missouri to be used as a hospital launch for transporting the wounded from shore to ship . to help with the war effort during world war i , dar loaned its national headquarters land to the united states . the federal government used the land to erect a temporary war office building that provided office space for 600 people . after world war i , dar funded the reconstruction of the water system in the village of tilloloy , france , and donated more than 130,000 for the support of 3,600 french war orphans . dar provided materials for sewing , wood , and leatherwork to the immigrants detained for processing on ellis island . this helped to alleviate the depression and anxiety of these men and women who were strangers in a new land . in 1921 , dar compiled and published the '' dar manual for citizenship . '' dar distributed this guide to american immigrants at ellis island and other ports of entry . to date , more than 10 million manuals have been distributed . from november 1921 until february 1922 , world leaders met in dar memorial continental hall for the conference on limitation of armaments , a groundbreaking meeting for peace . the americana collection , founded in the early 1940s , brought together rare manuscripts and imprints previously scattered among the holdings of the dar museum and dar library . today , the collection flourishes from more than 60 years of actively seeking out and acquiring artifacts that reflect a unique image of our nation . dar raised thousands of dollars to assist in the re-forestation project of the u.s . forest service during the 1940s . during world war ii , dar provided 197,000 soldiers with care packages and sponsored all 89 crews of landing craft infantry ships . during world war ii , the use of the dar buildings was given to the american red cross . a children 's day nursery was set up in the basement of constitution hall for enlisted men 's wives who had to go to work . the tradition of celebrating the constitution was started many years ago by the daughters of the american revolution . in 1955 , the dar petitioned congress to set aside september 17–23 annually to be dedicated for the observance of constitution week . the resolution was later adopted by the u . s . congress and signed into public law 915 on august 2 , 1956 , by president dwight d . eisenhower . . contemporary dar . there are nearly 180,000 current members of the dar in approximately 3,000 chapters across the united states and in several other countries . the organization describes itself as '' one of the most inclusive genealogical societies '' in the united states , noting on its website that , '' any woman 18 years or older — regardless of race , religion , or ethnic background — who can prove lineal descent from a patriot of the american revolution , is eligible for membership '' . the current dar president general is denise doring vanburen , a former public relations executive from new york . eligibility . membership in the dar today is open to all women , regardless of race or religion , who can prove lineal bloodline descent from an ancestor who aided in achieving united states independence . the national society dar is the final arbiter of the acceptability of the documentation of all applications for membership . qualifying participants in achieving independence include the following : signatories of the united states declaration of independence ; military veterans of the american revolutionary war , including state navies and militias , local militias , privateers , and french or spanish soldiers and sailors who fought in the american theater of war ; civil servants of provisional or state governments , continental congress and state conventions and assemblies ; signers of oath of allegiance or oath of fidelity and support ; participants in the boston tea party ; prisoners of war , refugees , and defenders of fortresses and frontiers ; doctors and nurses who aided revolutionary casualties ; ministers ; petitioners ; and others who gave material or patriotic support to the revolutionary cause . the dar published a book , available online , with the names of thousands of minority patriots , to enable family and historical research . its online genealogical research system ( grs ) provides access to a database , and it is digitizing family bibles to collect more information for research . the organization has chapters in all 50 u.s . states and in the district of columbia . dar chapters have been founded in australia , austria , the bahamas , bermuda , canada , france , germany , italy , japan , mexico , spain , and the united kingdom . education outreach . the dar contributes more than 1 million annually to support six schools that provide for a variety of special student needs . supported schools : kate duncan smith dar school , grant , alabama tamassee dar school , tamassee , south carolina crossnore school , crossnore , north carolina hillside school , marlborough , massachusetts hindman settlement school , hindman , kentucky berry college , mount berry , georgia in addition , the dar provides 70,000 to 100,000 in scholarships and funds to american indian youth at chemawa indian school , salem , oregon ; bacone college , muskogee , oklahoma ; and the indian youth of america summer camp program . . civic work . dar members participate in a variety of veteran and citizenship-oriented projects , including : providing more than 200,000 hours of volunteer time annually to veterans in u.s . veterans administration hospitals and non-va facilities offering support to america 's service personnel in current conflicts abroad through care packages , phone cards and other needed items sponsoring special programs promoting the constitution during its official celebration week of september 17–23 participating in naturalization ceremonies . exhibits and library at dar headquarters . the dar maintains a genealogical library at its headquarters in washington , dc and provides guides for individuals doing family research . its bookstore presents scholarship on united states and women 's history . temporary exhibits in the galleries have featured women 's arts and crafts , including items from the dar 's quilt and embroidery collections . exhibit curators provide a social and historical context for girls ' and women 's arts in such exhibits , for instance , explaining practices of mourning reflected in certain kinds of embroidery samplers , as well as ideals expressed about the new republic . permanent exhibits include american furniture , silver and furnishings . literacy promotion . in 1989 , the dar established the nsdar literacy promotion committee , which coordinates the efforts of dar volunteers to promote child and adult literacy . volunteers teach english , tutor reading , prepare students for ged examinations , raise funds for literacy programs , and participate in many other ways . . american history essay contest . each year , the dar conducts a national american history essay contest among students in grades 5 through 8 . a different topic is selected each year . essays are judged '' for historical accuracy , adherence to topic , organization of materials , interest , originality , spelling , grammar , punctuation , and neatness . '' the contest is conducted locally by the dar chapters . chapter winners compete against each other by region and nationally ; national winners receive a monetary award . . scholarships . the dar awards 150,000 per year in scholarships to high school graduates , and music , law , nursing , and medical school students . only two of the 20 scholarships offered are restricted to dar members or their descendants . . segregation and exclusion of african americans . in 1932 the dar adopted a rule excluding african-american musicians from performing at dar constitution hall in response to complaints by some members against '' mixed seating , '' as both black and white people were attracted to concerts of black artists . in 1939 , they denied permission for marian anderson to perform a concert . first lady eleanor roosevelt resigned from the organization . in her letter to the dar , roosevelt wrote , '' i am in complete disagreement with the attitude taken in refusing constitution hall to a great artist . you had an opportunity to lead in an enlightened way and it seems to me that your organization has failed . '' as the controversy grew , the american press overwhelmingly backed anderson 's right to sing . the philadelphia tribune wrote , '' a group of tottering old ladies , who do n't know the difference between patriotism and putridism , have compelled the gracious first lady to apologize for their national rudeness . '' the richmond times-dispatch wrote , '' in these days of racial intolerance so crudely expressed in the third reich , an action such as the d.a.r . ’ s ban . seems all the more deplorable . '' at eleanor roosevelt 's behest , president roosevelt and walter white , then-executive secretary of the naacp , and anderson 's manager , impresario sol hurok arranged an open-air concert on the steps of the lincoln memorial with a dignified and stirring rendition of '' america ( my country , 't is of thee ) . '' the event attracted a crowd of more than 75,000 in addition to a national radio audience of millions . the dar officially reversed its '' white performers only '' policy in 1952 . kennedy center , '' biography of marian anderson '' . in 1977 , karen batchelor farmer ( now karen batchelor ) of detroit , was admitted as the first known african-american member of the dar . '' karen farmer '' , american libraries 39 ( february 1978 ) , p . 70 ; negro almanac , pp . 73,1431 ; who 's who among africans , 14th ed . , p . 405 . batchelor 's admission as the first known african-american member of dar sparked international interest after it was featured in a story on page one of the new york times . in 1984 , lena lorraine santos ferguson , a retired school secretary , was denied membership in a washington , d.c . chapter of the dar because she was black , according to a report by the washington post . ferguson met the lineage requirements and could trace her ancestry to jonah gay , a white man who fought in maine . when asked for comment , sarah m . king , the president general of the dar , told the washington post that the dar 's chapters have autonomy in determining members . king went on to tell washington post reporter ronald kessler , '' being black is not the only reason why some people have not been accepted into chapters . there are other reasons : divorce , spite , neighbors ' dislike . i would say being black is very far down the line.there are a lot of people who are troublemakers . you would n't want them in there because they could cause some problems . '' after king 's comments were reported in a page one story , outrage erupted , and the d.c . city council threatened to revoke the dar 's real estate tax exemption . king quickly corrected her error , saying that ferguson should have been admitted , and that her application had been handled '' inappropriately . '' dar changed its bylaws to bar discrimination '' on the basis of race or creed . '' in addition , king announced a resolution to recognize '' the heroic contributions of black patriots in the american revolution . '' “ washington post ” april 18 , 1984 since the mid-1980s , the dar has supported a project to identify african-americans , native americans , and individuals of mixed race who were patriots of the american revolution , expanding their recognition beyond soldiers . in 2008 , dar published forgotten patriots : african-american and american indian patriots in the revolutionary war . in 2007 , the dar posthumously honored mary hemings bell , a slave of thomas jefferson at monticello , as a '' patriot of the revolution . '' since hemings bell has been honored as a patriot , all of her female descendants qualify for membership in the dar . american spirit magazine , daughters of the american revolution , january–february 2009 , p . 4 wilhelmena rhodes kelly , in 2019 , would become the first african-american elected to the dar national board of management when she was installed as new york state regent in june . . notable members . living members . betsy boze , american academic , chief executive officer and dean , kent state university stark ada e . brown , first african-american woman federal judge appointed by president donald trump and confirmed by the senate , and first african-american woman on the united states district court for the northern district of texas in its 140-year history . laura bush , former first lady of the united states rosalynn carter , former first lady of the united states , politician , political and social activism bo derek , actress , former model , and conservative political activist elizabeth dole , former u.s . senator from north carolina , former transportation secretary , labor secretary , american red cross , federal trade commissioner , presidential candidate , and presidential advisor tammy duckworth , american army veteran , former u.s . representative , and from 2017 , u.s . senator from illinois . duckworth is depicted along with molly pitcher in a statue sponsored by the dar illinois chapter and dedicated to women veterans on the grounds of the brehm memorial library in mt . vernon , illinois candace whittemore lovely , painter stephanie moulton sarkis , writer and psychotherapist . mary caroline mixon , organizing régent jacob braselton chapter , farmer . margaret rhea seddon , nasa astronaut . deceased members . jane addams , activist and nobel peace prize winner mary jane aldrich ( 1833–1909 ) , american temperance reformer and lecturer susan b . anthony , american suffragist lillie stella acer ballagh , national chairman of colonial relics mary ross banks ( 1846–1910 ) , litterateur and author clara barton , american red cross founder cora m . beach , state chairman and member of national committee for genealogical and historical research sarah bond hanley , first democratic woman to serve in the illinois house of representatives . she served as the illinois state regent . leah belle kepner boyce , state recording and secretary of the california daughters of the american revolution alice willson broughton ( 1889–1980 ) , first lady of north carolina olivia dudley bucknam , hollywood chapter luella j . b . case ( 1807–1857 ) , author florence anderson clark ( 1835–1918 ) , author , newspaper editor , librarian , university dean vinnie b . clark , established and developed the geography department at the san diego state teachers college emily parmely collins ( 1814–1909 ) – suffragist , activist , writer inez mabel crawford , first registrar of the general edward hand chapter carrie chase davis ( 1863–1953 ) , american physician , suffragist estelle skidmore doremus , supporter of the new york philharmonic ella loraine dorsey ( 1853–1935 ) , author , journalist , translator fanny murdaugh downing ( 1831-1894 ) , author and poet saidie orr dunbar , executive secretary of the oregon tuberculosis association caroline b . eager , american philanthropist who worked mainly with the igorot people of the philippine islands mary baker eddy , founder of christian science church isabel h . ellis , rubidoux chapter infanta eulalia of spain , spanish princess and author hunter , ann arnold , a century of service : the story of the dar , p . 63 inglis fletcher , american writer mary alice fonda ( 1837–1897 ) , american musician , linguist , author , critic abigail keasey frankel , prominent club and civic worker of portland . she was the first president of the oregon federation of business and professional women dale pickett gay , wyoming clubwoman and one of the best known women of her time in the oil business lillian gish , actress fannie smith goble , held several high offices in daughters of the american revolution organization isophene goodin bailhache , national vice chairman of historic spots , state officer , chapter regent gene grabeel , mathematician and cryptanalyst who founded the venona project harriet a . haas , attorney and member of piedmont board of education inez m . haring , american botanist sallie foster harshbarger , from 1920 to 1922 , state regent of the daughters of the american revolution caroline harrison , former first lady of the united states grace hopper , rear admiral , usnr anna morris holstein ( 1825-1900 ) , founder first regent d.a.r . valley forge chapter , hosted 1891 dar national leadership visit to valley forge , washington_memorial_chapel in her honor , founder , regent centennial and memorial association , civil war nurse , author . nancy a . leatherwood , national chairman of historical and literary reciprocity committee of the daughters of the american revolution mary “ maxine ” holst , member colonel westray battle long , director of the women 's army corps edith bolte maccracken , state regent of the daughters of the american revolution virginia donaghe mcclurg , member ruth karr mckee , member moina michael , educator and originator of memorial day poppies anne hazen mcfarland , m.d . , physician and medical journal editor anita newcomb mcgee , founder of the army nurse corps bessie morse , founder of the morse school of expression , st . louis sara e . morse , held positions in several organizations grandma moses , folk artist alice curtice moyer emma huntington nason ( 1845–1921 ) , poet , author , and musical composer jacqueline noel , leader in promoting the colonial history of the united states florence sillers ogden , columnist , conservative activist , and segregationist elizabeth fry page ( ? –1943 ) , author , editor fannie brown patrick , musician and leader in civic and social affairs alice paul , american suffragist edith allen phelps , twice president of the oklahoma library association , the first professional in the library science field in the oklahoma city system sarah childress polk , first lady of the united states frances porcher , officer of the jefferson chapter ada e . purpus , member emily lee sherwood ragan , author , journalist janet reno , former attorney general of the united states emily warren roebling , engineer , known for her contribution to the completion of the brooklyn bridge ginger rogers , actress and dancer eleanor roosevelt , first lady of the united states . she resigned her membership in protest of racism . fannie forbis russel , one of the pioneer women of the state of montana susan augusta pike sanders , national president of the woman 's relief corps phyllis schlafly , conservative political activist and writer julia green scott , dar president general m . elizabeth shellabarger , registered nurse , army nurse overseas during world war i and director of american red cross nursing service in albania and montenegro jessamine shumate , noted artist and cartographer eva munson smith ( 1843–1915 ) , composer , poet , author margaret chase smith , us congresswoman and us senator helen norton stevens , lady stirling chapter vera blanche thomas , president of the arizona state nurses ' association from 1927 to 1928 gertrude vanderbilt whitney , sculptor , art patron and collector , and founder in 1931 of the whitney museum of american art maryly van leer peck , founder of guam community college , first female president of a florida community college , first woman chemical engineer graduate from vanderbilt university . received the national community service award from dar . florence warfield sillers , historian and socialite , founding member of the mississippi delta chapter agnes wright spring , member . honors . a memorial to the daughters of the american revolution 's four founders , at constitution hall in washington , d.c . , was dedicated on april 17 , 1929 . it was sculpted by gertrude vanderbilt whitney , a dar member .