Ultimate fate of the universe

emerging scientific basis . theory . the theoretical scientific exploration of the ultimate fate of the universe became possible with albert einstein 's 1915 theory of general relativity . general relativity can be employed to describe the universe on the largest possible scale . there are several possible solutions to the equations of general relativity , and each solution implies a possible ultimate fate of the universe . alexander friedmann proposed several solutions in 1922 , as did georges lemaître in 1927 . translated by a . s . eddington : in some of these solutions , the universe has been expanding from an initial singularity which was , essentially , the big bang . observation . in 1929 , edwin hubble published his conclusion , based on his observations of cepheid variable stars in distant galaxies , that the universe was expanding . from then on , the beginning of the universe and its possible end have been the subjects of serious scientific investigation . big bang and steady state theories . in 1927 , georges lemaître set out a theory that has since come to be called the big bang theory of the origin of the universe . in 1948 , fred hoyle set out his opposing steady state model in which the universe continually expanded but remained statistically unchanged as new matter is constantly created . these two theories were active contenders until the 1965 discovery , by arno penzias and robert wilson , of the cosmic microwave background radiation , a fact that is a straightforward prediction of the big bang theory , and one that the original steady state theory could not account for . as a result , the big bang theory quickly became the most widely held view of the origin of the universe . cosmological constant . einstein and his contemporaries believed in a static universe . when einstein found that his general relativity equations could easily be solved in such a way as to allow the universe to be expanding at the present and contracting in the far future , he added to those equations what he called a cosmological constant ⁠— ⁠essentially a constant energy density , unaffected by any expansion or contraction ⁠— ⁠whose role was to offset the effect of gravity on the universe as a whole in such a way that the universe would remain static . however , after hubble announced his conclusion that the universe was expanding , einstein would write that his cosmological constant was '' the greatest blunder of my life . '' did einstein predict dark energy ? , hubblesite.org . density parameter . an important parameter in fate of the universe theory is the density parameter , omega ( \omega ) , defined as the average matter density of the universe divided by a critical value of that density . this selects one of three possible geometries depending on whether \omega is equal to , less than , or greater than 1 . these are called , respectively , the flat , open and closed universes . these three adjectives refer to the overall shape of the universe , and not to the local curving of spacetime caused by smaller clumps of mass ( for example , galaxies and stars ) . if the primary content of the universe is inert matter , as in the dust models popular for much of the 20th century , there is a particular fate corresponding to each geometry . hence cosmologists aimed to determine the fate of the universe by measuring \omega , or equivalently the rate at which the expansion was decelerating . repulsive force . starting in 1998 , observations of supernovas in distant galaxy have been interpreted as consistent with a universe whose accelerating universe . subsequent cosmological theorizing has been designed so as to allow for this possible acceleration , nearly always by invoking dark energy , which in its simplest form is just a positive cosmological constant . in general , dark energy is a catch-all term for any hypothesized field with negative pressure , usually with a density that changes as the universe expands . role of the shape of the universe . the current scientific consensus of most cosmologists is that the ultimate fate of the universe depends on its overall shape , how much dark energy it contains and on the equation of state which determines how the dark energy density responds to the expansion of the universe . recent observations conclude , from 7.5 billion years after the big bang , that the expansion rate of the universe has likely been increasing , commensurate with the open universe theory . however , other recent measurements by wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe suggest that the universe is either flat or very close to flat . . closed universe . if \omega > 1 , the geometry of space is closed like the surface of a sphere . the sum of the angles of a triangle exceeds 180 degrees and there are no parallel lines ; all lines eventually meet . the geometry of the universe is , at least on a very large scale , elliptic . in a closed universe , gravity eventually stops the expansion of the universe , after which it starts to contract until all matter in the universe collapses to a point , a final singularity termed the '' big crunch '' , the opposite of the big bang . some new modern theories assume the universe may have a significant amount of dark energy , whose repulsive force may be sufficient to cause the expansion of the universe to continue forever—even if \omega > 1 . . open universe . if \omega , the geometry of space is open , i.e . , negatively curved like the surface of a saddle . the angles of a triangle sum to less than 180 degrees , and lines that do not meet are never equidistant ; they have a point of least distance and otherwise grow apart . the geometry of such a universe is hyperbolic . even without dark energy , a negatively curved universe expands forever , with gravity negligibly slowing the rate of expansion . with dark energy , the expansion not only continues but accelerates . the ultimate fate of an open universe is either universal heat death , a '' big freeze '' ( not to be confused with heat death , despite seemingly similar name interpretation ⁠— ⁠see theories about the end of the universe below ) , or a '' big rip '' , where the acceleration caused by dark energy eventually becomes so strong that it completely overwhelms the effects of the gravity , electromagnetic and strong binding forces . conversely , a negative cosmological constant , which would correspond to a negative energy density and positive pressure , would cause even an open universe to re-collapse to a big crunch . this option has been ruled out by observations . flat universe . if the average density of the universe exactly equals the critical density so that \omega 1 , then the geometry of the universe is flat : as in euclidean geometry , the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees and parallel lines continuously maintain the same distance . measurements from wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe have confirmed the universe is flat within a 0.4 % margin of error . in the absence of dark energy , a flat universe expands forever but at a continually decelerating rate , with expansion asymptotically approaching zero ; with dark energy , the expansion rate of the universe initially slows down , due to the effects of gravity , but eventually increases , and the ultimate fate of the universe becomes the same as that of an open universe . theories about the end of the universe . the fate of the universe is determined by its density . the preponderance of evidence to date , based on measurements of the rate of expansion and the mass density , favors a universe that will continue to expand indefinitely , resulting in the '' big freeze '' scenario below . wmap - fate of the universe , wmap 's universe , nasa . accessed online july 17 , 2008 . however , observations are not conclusive , and alternative models are still possible . . big freeze or heat death . the big freeze ( or big chill ) is a scenario under which continued expansion results in a universe that asymptote approaches absolute zero temperature . this scenario , in combination with the big rip scenario , is gaining ground as the most important hypothesis . it could , in the absence of dark energy , occur only under a flat or hyperbolic geometry . with a positive cosmological constant , it could also occur in a closed universe . in this scenario , stars are expected to form normally for 10 12 to 10 14 ( 1–100 trillion ) years , but eventually the supply of gas needed for star formation will be exhausted . as existing stars run out of fuel and cease to shine , the universe will slowly and inexorably grow darker . eventually black holes will dominate the universe , which themselves will disappear over time as they emit hawking radiation . over infinite time , there would be a spontaneous entropy decrease by the poincaré recurrence theorem , thermal fluctuations , and the fluctuation theorem . a related scenario is heat death , which states that the universe goes to a state of maximum entropy in which everything is evenly distributed and there are no gradients—which are needed to sustain information processing , one form of which is life . the heat death scenario is compatible with any of the three spatial models , but requires that the universe reach an eventual temperature minimum . . big rip . the current hubble constant defines a rate of acceleration of the universe not large enough to destroy local structures like galaxies , which are held together by gravity , but large enough to increase the space between them . a steady increase in the hubble constant to infinity would result in all material objects in the universe , starting with galaxies and eventually ( in a finite time ) all forms , no matter how small , disintegrating into unbound elementary particles , radiation and beyond . as the energy density , scale factor and expansion rate become infinite the universe ends as what is effectively a singularity . in the special case of phantom energy , which has supposed negative kinetic energy that would result in a higher rate of acceleration than other cosmological constants predict , a more sudden big rip could occur . big crunch . the big crunch hypothesis is a symmetric view of the ultimate fate of the universe . just as the big bang started as a cosmological expansion , this theory assumes that the average density of the universe will be enough to stop its expansion and the universe will begin contracting . the end result is unknown ; a simple estimation would have all the matter and space-time in the universe collapse into a dimensionless singularity back into how the universe started with the big bang , but at these scales unknown quantum effects need to be considered ( see quantum gravity ) . recent evidence suggests that this scenario is unlikely but has not been ruled out , as measurements have been available only over a short period of time , relatively speaking , and could reverse in the future . this scenario allows the big bang to occur immediately after the big crunch of a preceding universe . if this happens repeatedly , it creates a cyclic model , which is also known as an oscillatory universe . the universe could then consist of an infinite sequence of finite universes , with each finite universe ending with a big crunch that is also the big bang of the next universe . a problem with the cyclic universe is that it does not reconcile with the second law of thermodynamics , as entropy would build up from oscillation to oscillation and cause the eventual heat death of the universe . current evidence also indicates the universe is not closed . this has caused cosmologists to abandon the oscillating universe model . a somewhat similar idea is embraced by the cyclic model , but this idea evades heat death because of an expansion of the branes that dilutes entropy accumulated in the previous cycle . big bounce . the big bounce is a theorized scientific model related to the beginning of the known universe . it derives from the oscillatory universe or cyclic repetition interpretation of the big bang where the first cosmological event was the result of the collapse of a previous universe . according to one version of the big bang theory of cosmology , in the beginning the universe was infinitely dense . such a description seems to be at odds with other more widely accepted theories , especially quantum mechanics and its uncertainty principle . it is not surprising , therefore , that quantum mechanics has given rise to an alternative version of the big bang theory . also , if the universe is closed , this theory would predict that once this universe collapses it will spawn another universe in an event similar to the big bang after a universal singularity is reached or a repulsive quantum force causes re-expansion . in simple terms , this theory states that the universe will continuously repeat the cycle of a big bang , followed up with a big crunch . big slurp . this theory posits that the universe currently exists in a false vacuum and that it could become a true vacuum at any moment . in order to best understand the false vacuum collapse theory , one must first understand the higgs field which permeates the universe . much like an electromagnetic field , it varies in strength based upon its potential . a true vacuum exists so long as the universe exists in its lowest energy state , in which case the false vacuum theory is irrelevant . however , if the vacuum is not in its lowest energy state ( a false vacuum ) , it could tunnel into a lower energy state . this is called vacuum decay . this has the potential to fundamentally alter our universe ; in more audacious scenarios even the various physical constants could have different values , severely affecting the foundations of matter , energy , and spacetime . it is also possible that all structures will be destroyed instantaneously , without any forewarning . . cosmic uncertainty . each possibility described so far is based on a very simple form for the dark energy equation of state . but as the name is meant to imply , very little is currently known about the physics of dark energy . if the theory of inflation is true , the universe went through an episode dominated by a different form of dark energy in the first moments of the big bang ; but inflation ended , indicating an equation of state far more complex than those assumed so far for present-day dark energy . it is possible that the dark energy equation of state could change again resulting in an event that would have consequences which are extremely difficult to predict or parametrize . as the nature of dark energy and dark matter remain enigmatic , even hypothetical , the possibilities surrounding their coming role in the universe are currently unknown . none of these theoretic endings for the universe are certain . observational constraints on theories . choosing among these rival scenarios is done by 'weighing ' the universe , for example , measuring the relative contributions of matter , radiation , dark matter , and dark energy to the critical density . more concretely , competing scenarios are evaluated against data on galaxy clusters and distant supernovas , and on the anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background .