Bark (botany)

botanic description . what is commonly called bark includes a number of different tissues . cork is an external , secondary tissue that is impermeable to water and gases , and is also called the phellem . the cork is produced by the cork cambium which is a layer of meristematically active cells which serve as a lateral meristem for the periderm . the cork cambium , which is also called the phellogen , is normally only one cell layer thick and it divides periclinally to the outside producing cork . the phelloderm , which is not always present in all barks , is a layer of cells formed by and interior to the cork cambium . together , the phellem ( cork ) , phellogen ( cork cambium ) and phelloderm constitute the periderm . dickison , wc . 2000 . integrative plant anatomy , academic press , san diego , 186–195 . cork cell walls contain suberin , a waxy substance which protects the stem against water loss , the invasion of insects into the stem , and prevents infections by bacteria and fungal spores . the cambium tissues , i.e . , the cork cambium and the vascular cambium , are the only parts of a woody stem where cell division occurs ; undifferentiated cells in the vascular cambium divide rapidly to produce secondary xylem to the inside and secondary phloem to the outside . phloem is a nutrient-conducting tissue composed of sieve tubes or sieve cells mixed with parenchyma and fibers . the cortex is the primary tissue of stems and roots . in stems the cortex is between the epidermis layer and the phloem , in roots the inner layer is not phloem but the pericycle . from the outside to the inside of a mature woody stem , the layers include : bark periderm cork ( phellem or suber ) , includes the rhytidome cork cambium ( phellogen ) phelloderm cortex phloem vascular cambium wood ( xylem ) sapwood ( alburnum ) heartwood ( duramen ) pith ( medulla ) in young stems , which lack what is commonly called bark , the tissues are , from the outside to the inside : epidermis , which may be replaced by periderm cortex primary and secondary phloem vascular cambium secondary and primary xylem . as the stem ages and grows , changes occur that transform the surface of the stem into the bark . the epidermis is a layer of cells that cover the plant body , including the stems , leaves , flowers and fruits , that protects the plant from the outside world . in old stems the epidermal layer , cortex , and primary phloem become separated from the inner tissues by thicker formations of cork . due to the thickening cork layer these cells die because they do not receive water and nutrients . this dead layer is the rough corky bark that forms around tree trunks and other stems . periderm . often a secondary covering called the periderm forms on small woody stems and many non-woody plants , which is composed of cork ( phellem ) , the cork cambium ( phellogen ) , and the phelloderm . the periderm forms from the phellogen which serves as a lateral meristem . the periderm replaces the epidermis , and acts as a protective covering like the epidermis . mature phellem cells have suberin in their walls to protect the stem from desiccation and pathogen attack . older phellem cells are dead , as is the case with woody stems . the skin on the potato tuber ( which is an underground stem ) constitutes the cork of the periderm . in woody plants the epidermis of newly grown stems is replaced by the periderm later in the year . as the stems grow a layer of cells form under the epidermis , called the cork cambium , these cells produce cork cells that turn into cork . a limited number of cell layers may form interior to the cork cambium , called the phelloderm . as the stem grows , the cork cambium produces new layers of cork which are impermeable to gases and water and the cells outside the periderm , namely the epidermis , cortex and older secondary phloem die . within the periderm are lenticels , which form during the production of the first periderm layer . since there are living cells within the cambium layers that need to exchange gases during metabolism , these lenticels , because they have numerous intercellular spaces , allow gaseous exchange with the outside atmosphere . as the bark develops , new lenticels are formed within the cracks of the cork layers . rhytidome . the rhytidome is the most familiar part of bark , being the outer layer that covers the trunks of trees . it is composed mostly of dead cells and is produced by the formation of multiple layers of suberin periderm , cortical and phloem tissue . the rhytidome is especially well developed in older stems and roots of trees . in shrubs , older bark is quickly exfoliated and thick rhytidome accumulates . it is generally thickest and most distinctive at the trunk or bole ( the area from the ground to where the main branching starts ) of the tree . chemical composition . bark tissues make up by weight between 10–20 % of woody vascular plants and consists of various biopolymers , tannins , lignin , suberin , suberan and polysaccharides . up to 40 % of the bark tissue is made of lignin , which forms an important part of a plant , providing structural support by crosslinking between different polysaccharides , such as cellulose . condensed tannin , which is in fairly high concentration in bark tissue , is thought to inhibit decomposition . it could be due to this factor that the degradation of lignin is far less pronounced in bark tissue than it is in wood . it has been proposed that , in the cork layer ( the phellogen ) , suberin acts as a barrier to microbial degradation and so protects the internal structure of the plant . analysis of the lignin in bark wall during decay by the white-rot fungi lentinula edodes ( shiitake mushroom ) using 13 c nmr revealed that the lignin polymers contained more guaiacyl lignin units than syringyl units compared to the interior of the plant . guaiacyl units are less susceptible to degradation as , compared to syringyl , they contain fewer aryl-aryl bonds , can form a condensed lignin structure and have a lower redox potential . this could mean that the concentration and type of lignin units could provide additional resistance to fungal decay for plants protected by bark . . uses . image : rindenmulch016.jpg thumb right barkdust cork , sometimes confused with bark in colloquial speech , is the outermost layer of a woody stem , derived from the cork cambium . it serves as protection against damage from parasites , herbivory animals and diseases , as well as dehydration and fire . cork can contain antiseptics like tannins , that protect against fungal and bacterial attacks that would cause decay . in some plants , the bark is substantially thicker , providing further protection and giving the bark a characteristically distinctive structure with deep ridges . in the cork oak ( quercus suber ) the bark is thick enough to be harvested as a cork product without killing the tree ; in this species the bark may get very thick ( e.g . more than 20 & nbsp ; cm has been reported ) . some barks can be removed in long sheets ; the smooth surfaced bark of birch trees has been used as a covering in the making of canoes , as the drainage layer in roofs , for shoes , backpacks etc . the most famous example of using birch bark for canoes is the birch canoes of north america . adney , tappan , and howard irving chapelle . 1964 . the bark canoes and skin boats of north america . washington : smithsonian institution . the inner bark ( phloem ) of some trees is edible ; in scandinavia , bark bread is made from rye to which the toasted and ground innermost layer of bark of scots pine or birch is added . the sami people of far northern europe used large sheets of pinus sylvestris bark that were removed in the spring , prepared and stored for use as a staple food resource and the inner bark was eaten fresh , dried or roasted . . mechanical bark processing . bark contains strong fibres known as bast , and there is a long tradition in northern europe of using bark from coppiced young branches of the small-leaved lime ( tilia cordata ) to produce rope and rope , used for example in the rigging of viking age longships . among the commercial products made from bark are cork , cinnamon , quinine duran-reynals , marie louise de ayala . 1946 . the fever bark tree ; the pageant of quinine . garden city , n.y . : doubleday . ( from the bark of cinchona ) markham , clements r . 1880 . peruvian bark . a popular account of the introduction of chinchona cultivation into british india . london : j . murray . and aspirin ( from the bark of willow trees ) . the bark of some trees notably oak ( quercus robur ) is a source of tannic acid , which is used in tanning . bark chips generated as a by-product of lumber production are often used in bark mulch in western north america . bark is important to the horticultural industry since in shredded form it is used for plants that do not thrive in ordinary soil , such as epiphytes . bark chip extraction . wood bark contains lignin ; when it is pyrolyzed ( subjected to high temperatures in the absence of oxygen ) , it yields a liquid bio-oil product rich in natural phenol derivatives . the phenol derivatives are isolated and recovered for application as a replacement for fossil-based phenols in phenol-formaldehyde ( pf ) resins used in oriented strand board ( osb ) and plywood . . bark removal . cut logs are inflamed either just before cutting or before curing . such logs and even trunks and branches found in their natural state of decay in forests , where the bark has fallen off , are said to be decorticated . a number of living organisms live in or on bark , including insects , lieutier , françois . 2004 . bark and wood boring insects in living trees in europe , a synthesis . dordrecht : kluwer academic publishers . fungi and other plants like mosses , algae and other vascular plants . many of these organisms are pathogens or parasites but some also have symbiotic relationships . bark repair . the degree to which trees are able to repair gross physical damage to their bark is very variable . some are able to produce a callus growth which heals over the wound rapidly , but leaves a clear scar , whilst others such as oaks do not produce an extensive callus repair . frost crack and sun scald are examples of damage found on tree bark which trees can repair to a degree , depending on the severity . file : chinese evergreen elm after yellow-bellied sapsucker , february 2012.jpg the patterns left in the bark of a chinese evergreen elm after repeated visits by a yellow-bellied sapsucker ( woodpecker ) in early 2012 . file : chinese evergreen elm in process of healing , february 2014.jpg the self-repair of the chinese evergreen elm showing new bark growth , lenticels , and other self-repair of the holes made by a yellow-bellied sapsucker ( woodpecker ) about two years earlier . file : alder bark and callus.jpg alder bark ( alnus glutinosa ) with characteristic lenticels and abnormal lenticels on callused areas . file : sun scald on sitka spruce.jpg sun scald damage on sitka spruce . gallery . file : bark nunniong.jpg eucalypt bark file : close-up of living bark on a tree in england.jpg close-up of living bark on a tree in england file : acer capillipes ( snakebark maple ) . jpg acer capillipes ( red snakebark maple ) file : pine bark.jpg monterey pine bark file : black poplar burrs and bark.jpg a rare black poplar tree , showing the bark and burls . file : bark of an old sycamore.jpg the typical appearance of sycamore bark from an old tree . file : burr on oak at kilbirnie.jpg quercus robur bark with a large burl and lichen . file : the_mc_kinney_kauri_borke.jpg kauri bark file : beech tree - recovery from heat damage.jpg beech bark with callus growth following fire ( heat ) damage file : oakholly.jpg damaged bark file : rainbow eucalyptus maui.jpg '' rainbow '' eucalyptus bark on the hawaiian island of maui . see also . bark beetle bark painting trunk ( botany ) bark isolate bark-binding , a diseased condition of tree bark . references . other references . cédric pollet , bark : an intimate look at the world 's trees . london , frances lincoln , 2010 . ( translated by susan berry )