Baytown, Texas

county , state and federal services . the united states postal service operates the baytown main post office at 601 west baker road and the baytown post office '' station a '' at 3508 market street . the '' station a '' designation is a leftover from baytown 's pre-consolidation days . prior to consolidation in 1948 each of the tri-cities , ( baytown , pelly , and goose creek ) , had their own post office . after 1948 when the tri-cities consolidated under the name baytown , goose creek 's post office became the main post office but they still needed a post office to service the rest of town so the old baytown post office became '' station a '' . '' post office location – baytown . '' united states postal service . retrieved on december 6 , 2008 . '' post office location – station a baytown . '' united states postal service . retrieved on december 6 , 2008 . harris county precinct two operates baytown park , a senior citizen sports complex , at 4500 hemlock drive . '' baytown park . '' harris county , texas . retrieved on november 30 , 2008 . baytown park includes two unlighted baseball/softball fields and toilets . '' precinct two park listings . '' harris county , texas . retrieved on november 30 , 2008 . the precinct also operates the baytown soccer complex , located north of baytown at 9600 north main street in an unincorporated area . '' baytown soccer complex . '' harris county , texas . retrieved on november 30 , 2008 . the complex has eight soccer fields ; four are lighted and four are unlighted . harris county hospital district operates the baytown health center in baytown . the center opened on february 14 , 1967 . '' a proud history of caring for more than 45 years . '' harris county hospital district . retrieved on february 9 , 2012 . harris county operates a tax office at 701 west baker boulevard . '' branch office locations . '' harris county tax office . retrieved october 13 , 2008 . . education . colleges and universities . east harris county and west chambers county are served by lee college , a two-year community college . texas education code , section 130.186 , '' lee college district service area '' . . primary and secondary schools . baytown is served by the goose creek consolidated independent school district . based in baytown , the district has 14 elementary schools ( grades k-5 ) , 5 junior highs ( grades 6–8 ) , 3 high schools ( grades 9–12 ) , a career center , and two alternative centers for education . the district serves all of baytown , highlands , outlying areas of east harris county , and a small portion of western chambers county . the three local high schools are robert e . lee ( opened in 1928 ) , ross s . sterling ( opened in 1966 ) , and goose creek memorial high school ( opened in 2008 ) . stallworth stadium is the home for varsity football and soccer for gccisd as well as for the annual bayou bowl . the stadium seats approximately 16,000 fans , making it one of the largest high school sports venues in the nation . it recently underwent a press box renovation in 2009 , as well as an innovation in 2006 when artificial turf and a huge scoreboard were installed . on a campaign stop for the 1976 presidential election , president gerald ford attended a robert e . lee high school fall football game . the immediate area has four private schools . these include : baytown christian academy , chinquapin preparatory school , light house baptist academy , and the roman catholic archdiocese of galveston-houston ’ s st . joseph regional catholic school . transportation . harris county transit provides public transportation . '' routes / maps . '' harris county transit . retrieved on january 15 , 2010 . the baytown park and ride lot is located on the western side of san jacinto mall . '' park & ride . '' harris county transit . retrieved on may 28 , 2010 . harris county transit also offers a bus line that runs along decker drive , garth road , north main street , baker road , and rollingbrook drive connecting most of baytown 's major shopping areas with lee college . greyhound bus lines operates the baytown station at baytown travel express . '' baytown , texas . '' greyhound lines . retrieved on november 30 , 2008 . baytown airport is a privately owned general aviation airport in unincorporated harris county located north of baytown . rwj airpark is a privately owned airport three miles ( 5 & nbsp ; km ) east of baytown in beach city . the closest airports with commercial airline service are william p . hobby airport and george bush intercontinental airport in houston . '' transportation . '' city of baytown . retrieved on november 30 , 2008 . baytown is served by metropolitan transit authority of harris county , texas ( metro ) express route 236 maxey road/baytown during the rush hours , sending commuters to downtown houston . '' east corridor . '' metropolitan transit authority of harris county , texas . retrieved on november 30 , 2008 . baytown is linked to interstate 10 ( see map ) by state highway 146 ( lanier freeway ) and spur 330 ( decker drive ) . it is also linked by the fred hartman bridge , which crosses into the city from nearby la porte ; the bridge was built in 1995 , replacing the baytown tunnel , to allow a deeper ship channel . notable people . raelynn , country music star and competed on the voice ( tv series ) in 2012 . buddy wakefield , champion slam poet , was raised in baytown . rocky bernard , defensive tackle for the nfl new york giants kirk botkin , former nfl player and collegiate football coach william broyles , jr . , oscar-winning screenwriter , co-founder of texas monthly magazine ; raised in old baytown , robert e . lee high school graduate nicholas chavez/ charlotte grey , drag hostess for drag bingo monday nights at the food spot , a local eatery . gary busey , born in goose creek , texas gary busey chris cagle , country music artist wanda garner cash , open government advocate and former publisher of the baytown sun quentin coryatt , former nfl player and texas a & m linebacker ; attended baytown lee high school macey cruthird , actress born in baytown bobby fuller , rock musician best known for his single '' i fought the law '' ; born in baytown john hagee , pastor of cornerstone church in san antonio , texas ; born in baytown brian johnson , former quarterback for the university of utah , now the quarterbacks coach at mississippi state . gene kelton , singer-songwriter , blues musician , and band leader of mean gene kelton & the die hards romany malco , actor/rapper ; attended ross s . sterling high school leeland mooring , lead singer for christian band leeland . brother jack mooring is the keyboardist for the band , also from baytown . ell roberson iii , former kansas state university quarterback ; graduated in 1999 from baytown lee high school howard sampson , former nfl player wayne smith ( born 1943 ) , republican member of the texas house of representatives from baytown since 2003 sherwood stewart , former pro tennis player clint stoerner , former dallas cowboys and university of arkansas quarterback ; 1996 baytown lee graduate tom stolhandske , nfl and cfl player dwayne stovall , born in baytown in 1966 , businessman in cleveland , texas , school board member , and unsuccessful republican candidate for the united states senate in the primary election held on march 4 , 2014 drew tate , former university of iowa quarterback and current cfl member joe tex , popular r & b singer during the 1960s henrietta bell wells , first african-american woman to participate in debate team in wiley college and to be a lawyer glenn wilson , former major league baseball outfielder renée zellweger , oscar-winning actress , resident until age 9 . lived in chapparell village , attended stephen f . austin elementary . ( source : personal memories of her friends and baytown sun articles january 26 , 2003 and 03/01/2004 ) charles renfro , architect with diller scofidio + renfro mark warren , attended ross s . sterling . executive editor at esquire magazine and current vice president and executive editor at random house . bob lanier , born and raised in baytown . mayor of houston 1991–97 . jeremy jones ( pocket billiards ) 2-time us open winner , 9-ball ( 2003 ) and one pocket ( 1998 ) . 7-time mosconi cup team member , and current mosconi cup captain . bling bling kickers ( kickball team ) gold medalist in the 2012 summer olympics . retired may of 2020 due to personal reasons . proud graduates of ross s . sterling high school .