Lillestrøm

history . the name means '' the little part of strøm '' , strøm being the name of an old and large farm ( old norse : straumr , which also meant '' stream '' as well ) . lillestrøm 's history dates back to the times river powered sawmills came into use for the production of building materials . later lillestrøm got its own steam sawmill which laid the base for the development of the area which became the town . the area was , by and large , a moss covered swamp-like area , at the time considered almost uninhabitable . however , the almost non-existent property values were judged to be a fair exchange and so the workers started living and settling in the area around the sawmill , and lillestrøm was born . on 1 january 1908 lillestrøm became a municipality of its own , having been split from skedsmo . at that time lillestrøm municipality had a population of 4,351 . on 1 january 1962 the two municipalities were reunited under the name skedsmo . before the merger lillestrøm municipality had a population of 10,840 . in 1997 , skedsmo municipal council declared lillestrøm to be a town ( by ) in its own right ( a purely honorary status which has no effect upon the organization of local government , but is a matter of local pride nonetheless ) . the event is commemorated in an annual 4-day street fair , which includes music by high-profile norwegian artists on several outdoor stages , food stalls , retail business exhibitions , and thrill rides . the whole thing ( with free admission to all ) is held in lillestrøm 's main thoroughfare and its connecting streets , which are closed to all vehicles for the duration . in 2002 , norway trade fairs moved from skøyen to lillestrøm . norway trade fairs . transport . road . norwegian national road 159 is a four-lane motorway connecting central lillestrøm directly to oslo . the european route e6 bypasses lillestrøm a few kilometres to the west on its way from oslo to the north of the country . national road 22 , running from northwest to southeast , passes through the northern outskirts of the conurbation . rail . lillestrøm is connected to oslo by two separate railway lines . the hovedbanen ( opened 1854 ) runs to oslo via the groruddalen and is used mostly by commuter trains calling at all stations , as well as freight trains . non-stop commuter trains , airport express trains , and long-distance expresses use the high-speed gardermobanen ( opened 1999 ) , which runs mostly in tunnel to oslo . the trunk line north of lillestrøm carries frequent local passenger trains as far as dal as well as freight trains to eidsvoll , lillehammer , and trondheim . the gardermoen line ( the stretch of which north of lillestrøm opened in 1998 ) is used by airport express trains , regional trains to eidsvoll and lillehammer , and long-distance passenger services to trondheim . running north-east from lillestrøm , the kongsvinger line ( opened 1862 ) conveys hourly local trains to kongsvinger as well as a number of longer-distance trains , passenger and freight , to and from sweden . air . kjeller , a village north of the town of lillestrøm , is the site of kjeller airport , founded in 1912 , which has the closest operational runway to oslo city centre . however , this is overshadowed by the much larger international airport at gardermoen ( opened 1998 ) , which is further north but just 12 minutes away from lillestrøm station by high-speed rail . education . lillestrøm is home to the following primary , lower secondary , and upper secondary schools : . primary . . lower secondary . bingsfoss ungdomsskole kjellervolla skole østersund ungdomsskole . high school . lillestrøm videregående skole skedsmo videregående skole . government . lillestrøm municipality is controlled by the local labor party , with jørgen vik as the mayor , he has been mayor since the 2020 merger . the head office of accident investigation board norway is located in lillestrøm , '' contact us . '' accident investigation board norway . retrieved on january 13 , 2011 . '' visiting address : sophie radichsvei 17 n-2003 lillestrøm . '' and is led by grete myhre . the university college of norwegian correctional service ( kriminalomsorgens høgskole og utdanningssenter , krus ) is in lillestrøm . '' about us . '' university college of norwegian correctional service . retrieved on 16 september 2018 . . facilities . facilities in lillestrøm include hotels , norway trade fairs , a brand new cinema , a mall , lillestrøm torv , restaurants , a high speed commuter train that reaches both oslo and gardermoen airport ( the gardermoen line ) , a community cultural house ( kulturhus ) , and a community outdoor swimming pool complex . at kjeller , just outside the city , there is a military airport ( 1912 ) and several research institutes . sport . the local football team , lillestrøm sk , plays in the norwegian first division . their home ground is åråsen stadion . the nearby lillestrøm stadion is used for training , and was an ice hockey venue at the 1952 winter olympics . there are also two indoor arenas , one multi-purpose ( skedsmohallen ) and one for football ( lsk-hallen ) , and in 2007 a track and field stadium romerike friidrettsstadion was built as a cooperation between the municipalities skedsmo , rælingen and lørenskog . the local track and field club is named minerva . athletes such as hanne haugland and håkon särnblom have represented the club . rugby is represented by newly formed rugby league club lillestrøm lions rlk . notable people . claus wiese ( 1924–1987 ) an norwegian actor and american-based radio broadcaster imdb database retrieved 19 february 2021 ole edvard borgen ( 1925–2009 ) a norwegian theologian and methodist bishop carl fredrik lowzow ( 1927–2009 ) local and national politician peder borgen ( born 1928 ) a norwegian methodist minister , researches the dead sea scrolls gerd grønvold saue ( born 1930 ) journalist , novelist , hymnwriter and peace activist jan mangerud ( born 1937 ) geologist , grew up in lillestrøm arild andersen ( born 1945 ) a norwegian jazz bass player , born in strømmen sasha gabor ( 1945–2008 ) a hungarian-norwegian actor and director imdb database retrieved 19 february 2021 ole kristian ruud ( born 1958 ) a conductor at the norwegian academy of music anne holt ( born 1958 ) author , lawyer and politician ; grew up in lillestrøm bjarne andre myklebust ( born 1972 ) , media professional for nrk chris holsten ( born 1993 ) a norwegian singer and songwriter . sport . tom lund ( born 1950 ) , footballer , 247 club caps with lillestrøm sk and 47 for norway kay stenshjemmet ( born 1953 ) , speed skater , two silver medalls at the 1980 winter olympics erik solér ( born 1960 ) a former footballer with 39 caps with norway national football team bjørn nyland ( born 1962 ) a norwegian speed skater bente nordby ( born 1974 ) a former football goalkeeper , with 172 caps with norway women pål steffen andresen ( born 1982 ) footballer with over 320 club caps fredrik gulbrandsen ( born 1992 ) footballer with over 220 club caps thomas skoglund ( born 1993 ) , handball player , 41 matches with the norwegian national team