Black knight

historical figures . edward of woodstock , prince of wales , duke of cornwall , prince of aquitaine . the eldest son of king edward iii , father to king richard ii of england , was a military leader remembered for both his success and the massacres he ordered , popularly known as the '' black prince '' . james stewart , the black knight of lorn , a descendant of robert i of scotland , lived in the late 14th and early 15th centuries . knights hospitaller , distinguished by their black mantles . zawisza the black of garbów also known as '' the black knight '' or '' first knight of europe '' , was a polish knight and nobleman . he served as a soldier and diplomat under the polish king władysław ii jagiello and hungarian-bohemian king sigismund of luxembourg . during his life , he was regarded as a model of knightly virtues and was renowned for winning multiple tournaments in europe . his nickname is due to his black hair and his custom-made , black armor , which is kept at the jasna góra monastery . in 1410 he took part in the battle of grunwald against the teutonic order . in 1412 he participated in the conference between sigismund , and tvrtko ii of bosnia at buda , where he won the tournament held there , with 1500 knights present . in 1416 he participated in a tournament in perpignan in which he defeated the well-known knight/king john ii of aragon . in 1428 , zawisza , with his retinue as a commander of light horse banner of 500 horsemen , joined the forces of sigismund in the king 's war against the ottoman turks . during that disastrous campaign he fought the turks at the siege of golubac on the danube in modern-day serbia . sigismund 's army was defeated by the turkish forces . they had to retreat across the danube , with only a few boats to ferry the troops over to safety . zawisza 's banner was guarding the retreating army . being a man of importance , he was personally sent for by king sigismund . he allegedly refused to retreat , disheartened by the king 's apparent cowardice . he was either killed in combat or executed in turkish captivity . zawisza the black of garbów . music . british composer edward elgar composed a cantata titled the black knight ( op . 25 , 1889–93 ) . its libretto is a translation of ludwig uhland 's ballad der schwarze ritter by henry wadsworth longfellow . the uhland poem ( in german language ) was set to music also by heinrich von herzogenberg . literature . le morte d'arthur by thomas malory : '' there sat a knight all armed in black harness , and his name was the knight of the black laund . then the damosel , when she saw that knight , she bade him flee down that valley , for his horse was not saddled . gramercy , said beaumains , for always ye would have me a coward . with that the black knight , when she came nigh him , spake and said , damosel , have ye brought this knight of king arthur to be your champion ? nay , fair knight , said she , this is but a kitchen knave that was fed in king arthur 's kitchen for alms . why cometh he , said the knight , in such array ? it is shame that he beareth you company . '' idylls of the king by alfred lord tennyson ivanhoe by sir walter scott : richard the lionhearted poses as an unknown black knight to avoid detection while in england , fighting alongside ivanhoe in a tournament and helping the assault on front-de-boeuf 's castle . raymond chandler in his first novel , the big sleep ( 1939 ) , lets his private eye philip marlowe describe and comment on '' a knight in dark armour rescuing a lady who was tied to a tree and did n't have any clothes on but some very long and convenient hair . '' the book of the duchess by geoffrey chaucer die jungfrau von orleans ( the maid of orleans ) by friedrich schiller ( 1801 ) . the black knight appears as a wraith to warn johanna ( joan of arc ) to cease her campaign to liberate france . schiller himself offered the interpretation that it represented the ghost of sir john talbot . the grailquest series of adventure gamebooks by j . h . brennan features a character known as the black knight in the first three books . in the first two , however , the character turns out to be king pellinore . in the third book , the real black knight is the final enemy the reader must defeat in order to complete the adventure . marvel comics has different characters that went by the name black knight . video games . in the mmorpg world of warcraft the black knight is a dungeon boss '' trial of the champion '' . the game also features a sword of the same name the black knight . the black knight is one of the primary antagonists of fire emblem : path of radiance and fire emblem : radiant dawn . in the dark souls franchise , wandering black knights are hostile mobs whose armor was singed black as they lost their liege , lord gwyn , who sacrificed himself to rekindle the first flame . in fortnite battle royale , the tier 70 battle pass skin of season 2 is the black knight . in the popular mmorpg runescape , the black knights are central antagonists in a number of quest lines and were the most powerful hostile npcs in the game when it was first released . the popular williams pinball franchise “ black knight ” utilizes this character as its antagonist . black knight is the name of the knight 's final promotion in '' might and magic vii : for blood and honor '' when the dark path is chosen . they 're an evil counterpart to the champion , equivalent in every aspect . in the 2014 video game shovel knight , black knight is one of the main antagonists , first facing off shovel knight in the beginning of the first level . a black knight makes an appearance in kingdom come : deliverance , a 14th century simulation role-playing game , after being defeated in the rattay tournament . another black knight is also featured in the game , acting as a primary antagonist and a member of the mercenary army of king sigismund of luxembourg . in legendary fighting game , shrek super slam , the black knight features as an playable character , wielding a two-handed axe and speaking only in grunts . sports . the black knights are the united states military academy at west point 's mascots in a number of sports teams . the black knight is a moniker given to golfer gary player in the 1960s by the media for his penchant for black attire on and off the golf course and for his courteous demeanor . the black knight logo identifies all the companies of the gary player group . . finance . in business , a white knight is a friendly investor or savior , while a black knight functions as a destroyer . typically , a black knight will enter a business or company as an influential person such as a major investor or as a member of the board of directors and will dismantle a profitable or asset-rich business to enrich themselves , which typically leaves the previously profitable company in a weaker financial position . such black knights achieve their aims by : siphoning out cash through high personal expenses , salaries and bonuses selling off profitable parts of the business to a private company related to the black knight buying unprofitable businesses / assets previously owned by the black knight selling assets at below market value to persons related to the black knight buying assets at inflated prices occasionally , the term black knight describes an investor who acquires a firm in opposition to the will of its management , as in a hostile takeover . the label may not be accurate if the ultimate intention of the acquirer is unknown . it could be for commercial reasons ( rather than personal reasons ) , such as merging the entity with another entity owned by the acquirer to promote synergy . see also . dark knight ( disambiguation ) black and white dualism black company black horseman of the apocalypse hans von trotha . references .