Poperinge

history . archaeological finds in the area date local habitation back to the neolithic . under the romans a link was made to it from the road between cassel and aardenburg . in the time of the franks it appeared under the name pupurningahem and was made subject to the ecclesiastical benefice of saint-omer in the mid-7th century . the count of flanders , dietrich of alsace , granted the town a charter in 1147 at the request of the abbot . from this time it began to thrive as a cloth-making centre and , in order to accommodate the growing population , the churches of saint john and of our lady were added in 1290 to the already existing sint-bertinuskerk . in 1322 louis de nevers forbade cloth-making outside ieper , which inclined the citizens to join the revolt against him the following year . nor did they ever submit to this restraint on their prosperity and were forever finding new ways to evade the restriction . john h . munro , “ mediaeval woolens ” in the cambridge history of western textiles , cambridge university 2003 , pp . 251-5 their resistance during this period gained them the nickname of keikoppen ( cobble-heads ) , a term first recorded in 1341 , when the ieper militia took revenge on the town . during the disturbances associated with the hundred years war , poperinge suffered from the shifting allegiances of the counts of flanders and their commercial consequences . when they supported the french , the wool trade with england was interrupted . in the course of the consequent revolt , the town was sacked and burned by french troops in 1382 . then in 1436 it suffered the same fate from an english army . in 1513 , at a time of declining prosperity , much of the town was again destroyed by fire and once more in 1563 . during this period poperinge was stirred up to support the protestant cause and took part in the beeldenstorm of 1566 . it was in the consequent fighting and persecution that the town and its trade were finally ruined . matters were made worse by the wars between the french and the dutch for control of the region . by the treaty of nijmegen in 1678 the town passed into french hands and then returned to the spaniards by the treaty of ryswick in 1697 , before being ceded to the austrians in 1713 by the treaty of utrecht . in 1794 it was absorbed by revolutionary france into the département of lys . following the defeat of napoleon it was included in the united kingdom of the netherlands , from which belgium revolted in 1830 . since then poperinge has repaired its fortunes by concentrating on hop-production , the growing of which was first introduced in the 15th century . the bulk of the information here is taken from the article in the : fr : poperinge and from j-j.altmeyer 's notice historique sur la ville de poperinghe during world war i , the town was one of only two in belgium not under german occupation . it was used to billet british troops and also provided a safe area for field hospitals . known familiarly as '' pop '' , it was just behind the front line and formed an important link for the soldiers and their families , especially through the rest house known as talbot house ( or '' toc h '' ) . a grim reminder of that time remains within the town hall , where two death cells are preserved , and outside in the courtyard , where there is a public execution post used by firing squads . another reminder is the location of a number of military cemeteries on the outskirts of the town with the graves of canadian , british , australian , french , german , us servicemen and men of the chinese labor corps . one of these is lijssenthoek military cemetery for soldiers who had been wounded near ypres and later died in the large allied casualty clearing stations located in the area . literary associations . poperinge is mentioned by two major english poets . geoffrey chaucer makes it the birthplace of his flemish knight in '' the tale of sir thopas '' from the canterbury tales . yborn he was in fer contree , /in flaundres , al biyonde the see , /at poperyng in the place , lines 7-9 some 150 years later john skelton follows a line in flemish with the mention that 'in popering grew pears when parrot was an egg ' in his enigmatic poem '' speak parrot '' . john skelton , selected poems ( ed . gerald hammond ) , manchester uk 1980 line 70 , p . 93 the poem is an attack on cardinal wolsey and the line is taken to refer to his ambition to become pope . david wallace , premodern places , p . 130 , note 51 the town has also been associated with several neo latin poets . jacques may ( jacobus majus ) was born in poperinge and left a latin verse epistle in sapphics dated 1563 . later in the century maximiliaan de vriendt , who was born elsewhere , wrote a poem that praised the town and its churches : : : : non formosa pales , non hospitae in urbe napeae , : : : non agiles radii , palidiique coli : : : non celebres baiae ( quae dos tua propria ) tantis : : : nominibus celebrem te , poperinga vehunt : : : : quantum larga manus , pietasque insigne avorum , : : : in superos templis testificata sacris . : : : omnia de nobis praedantur fata : tonanti : : : quas damus , has solas semper habemus opes . altmeyer ( 1840 ) , pp . 59-60 the flemish poet gislain de coninck , who was born in the town , translated the latin poems of charles wynkius in himni , quorum usus est in ecclesiastico dei cultu , and the two were published together in 1573 . ferdinand françois , e . van der haeghen , bibliographie gantonoise , ghent 1858 , pp199-200 then in the following century there were two more latin poets from the town , joannes bartholomaeus roens and petrus wenis ( 1648-1726 ) . tom deneire , '' the latin works of two poets from poperinge : joannes bartholomaeus roens and petrus wenis '' , in syntagmatia : essays on neolatin literature in honour of monique mund-dopchie and gilbert tournoy , supplementa humanistica lovaniensia 26 , leuven university press , 2006 , ( pp . 709-721 ) . wenis published gheestelycken nachtegael ( the spiritual nightingale , 1698 ) on the miracle that restored a still-born child to life in 1479 , an event associated with the statue of our lady in sint-janskerk that is still celebrated . in modern times , the town was referred to in one of the epigrams in charles baudelaire ’ s amœnitates belgicæ . in “ une béotie belge ” the sophisticated french-speakers of brussels look down on the rustic poperinghe of their flemish compatriots . in the following century , the town is the subject of the imagist night piece '' poperinghe 1917 '' by the canadian poet w . w . e . ross . brian douglas tennyson , the canadian experience of the great war : a guide to memoirs , the scarecrow press , 2013 , p.345 , note 1544 the flemish novelist anne provoost , who now lives in antwerp , was born in poperinge in 1964 . gallery . file : poperinge - city hall 2.jpg poperinge town hall in 2007 file : poperinge-sint-bertinuskerk 3.jpg sint bertinuskerk , the oldest church in poperinge file : poperinge - sint-janskerk.jpg sint janskerk , the site of the mediaeval miracle file : poperinge - keikop 1.jpg the keikop monument to the obstinacy of the citizens file : hopmuseum poperinge 1.jpg an old warehouse at the hop museum file : poperinge war memorial.jpg war memorial