Medgar Evers

early life . evers was born on july 2 , 1925 , in decatur , mississippi , the third of five children ( including elder brother charles evers ) of jesse ( wright ) and james evers . the family included jesse 's two children from a previous marriage . '' james charles evers '' , black past the evers family owned a small farm and james also worked at a sawmill . evers and his siblings walked a day to attend segregated schools ; eventually medgar earned his high school diploma . sina , “ freedom hero : medgar wiley evers . ” the my hero project , 2005 . retrieved october 25 , 2009 . evers served in the united states army during world war ii from 1943 to 1945 . he was sent to the european theater where he fought in the battle of normandy in june 1944 . after the end of the war , evers was honorably discharged as a sergeant . in 1948 , evers enrolled at alcorn agricultural and mechanical college ( a historically black college , now alcorn state university ) , majoring in business administration . he also competed on the debate , football , and track teams , sang in the choir , and was junior class president . he earned his bachelor of arts in 1952 . on december 24 , 1951 , he married classmate myrlie beasley . together they had three children : darrell kenyatta , reena denise , and james van dyke evers . . activism . the couple moved to mound bayou , mississippi , a town developed by african americans , where evers became a salesman for t . r . m . howard 's magnolia mutual life insurance company . evers was also president of the regional council of negro leadership ( rcnl ) , which began to organize actions for civil rights ; evers helped organize the rcnl 's boycott of gasoline stations that denied blacks the use of the stations ' restrooms . evers and his brother charles attended the rcnl 's annual conferences in mound bayou between 1952 and 1954 , which drew crowds of 10,000 or more . in 1954 , following the u.s . supreme court decision that segregated public schools were unconstitutional , evers applied to the state-supported university of mississippi law school , but his application was rejected because of his race . he submitted his application as part of a test case by the naacp . on november 24 , 1954 , evers was named as the naacp 's first field secretary for mississippi . in this position , he helped organize boycotts and set up new local chapters of the naacp . he was involved with james meredith 's efforts to enroll in the university of mississippi in the early 1960s . evers also encouraged dr . gilbert mason sr . in his organizing of the biloxi wade-ins from 1959 to 1963 , protests against segregation of the city 's public beaches on the mississippi gulf coast . evers conducted actions to help integrate jackson 's privately owned buses and tried to integrate the public parks . he led voter registration drives , and used boycotts to integrate leake county schools and the mississippi state fair . evers 's civil rights leadership , along with his investigative work , made him a target of white supremacy . following the brown v . board of education decision , local whites founded the citizens ' council in mississippi , and numerous local chapters were started , to resist the integration of schools and facilities . in the weeks before evers was killed , he encountered new levels of hostility . his public investigations into the 1955 lynching of chicago teenager emmett till in mississippi , and his vocal support of clyde kennard , had made him a prominent black leader . on may 28 , 1963 , a molotov cocktail was thrown into the carport of his home . on june 7 , 1963 , evers was nearly run down by a car after he came out of the naacp office in jackson , mississippi . . assassination . medgar evers lived with the constant threat of death . a large white supremacist population and the ku klux klan were present in jackson and its suburbs . the risk was so high that before his death , evers and his wife myrlie had trained their children on what to do in case of a shooting , bombing or other kind of attack on their lives . bates , karen grigsby . '' trials & transformation : myrlie evers ' 30-year fight to convict medgar 's accused killer '' , emerge 02 1994 : 35 . proquest . web . 27 may 2017 evers , who was regularly followed home by at least two fbi cars and one police car , arrived at his home on the morning of his death without an escort . none of his usual protection was present , for reasons unspecified by the fbi or local police . there has been speculation that many members of the police force at the time were members of the klan . in the early morning of wednesday , june 12 , 1963 , just hours after president john f . kennedy 's nationally televised civil rights address , evers pulled into his driveway after returning from a meeting with naacp lawyers . evers ' family had worried for his safety that day , and evers himself had warned his wife that he felt in greater danger than usual . emerging from his car and carrying naacp t-shirts that read '' jim crow laws '' , evers was struck in the back with a bullet fired from an m1917 enfield ; the bullet passed through his heart . initially thrown to the ground by the impact of the shot , evers rose and staggered before collapsing outside his front door . his wife , myrlie , was the first to find him . he was taken to the local hospital in jackson , where he was initially refused entry because of his race . his family explained who he was and he was admitted ; he died in the hospital 50 minutes later . he was only 37 years old . birnbaum , p . 490 . evers was the first african american to be admitted to an all-white hospital in mississippi . mourned nationally , evers was buried on june 19 in arlington national cemetery , where he received military funeral before a crowd of more than 3,000 . . after evers was assassinated , an estimated 5,000 people marched from the masonic temple on lynch street to the collins funeral home on north farish street in jackson . allen johnson , the rev . martin luther king jr . and other civil rights leaders led the procession . the mississippi police came prepared with riot gear and rifles in case the protests turned violent . while tensions were initially high in the stand-off between police and marchers , both in jackson and in many similar marches around the state , leaders of the movement maintained nonviolence among their followers . . trials . on june 21 , 1963 , byron de la beckwith , a fertilizer salesman and member of the citizens ' council ( and later of the ku klux klan ) , was arrested for evers ' murder . district attorney and future governor bill waller prosecuted de la beckwith . all-white juries in february and april 1964 hung jury on de la beckwith 's guilt and failed to reach a verdict . at the time , most black people were still disfranchisement after reconstruction era and voter registration practices ; this meant they were also excluded from juries , which were drawn from the pool of registered voters . myrlie evers did not give up the fight for a conviction of her husband 's killer . she waited until a new judge had been assigned in the county to take her case against de la beckwith back into the courtroom . in 1994 , de la beckwith was prosecuted by the state based on new evidence . bobby delaughter was the prosecutor . during the trial , the body of evers was exhumed for an autopsy . de la beckwith was convicted of murder on february 5 , 1994 , after having lived as a free man for much of the three decades following the killing . ( he had been imprisoned from 1977 to 1980 on separate charges : conspiring to murder a . i . botnick . ) in 1997 , de la beckwith appealed his conviction in the evers case , but the mississippi supreme court upheld it . he died at age 80 in prison on january 21 , 2001 . '' deliverance . '' people weekly feb 21 1994 : 60 . proquest . web . 27 may 2017 '' unfinished business '' . u.s . news & world report jan 24 1994 : 14 . proquest web . 27 may 2017 . legacy . evers was memorialized by leading mississippi and national authors both black and white : james baldwin , margaret walker , eudora welty , and anne moody . minrose gwin , '' mourning medgar : justice , aesthetics , and the local '' , southern spaces , 2008 . in 1963 , evers was posthumously awarded the spingarn medal by the naacp . in 1969 , medgar evers college was established in brooklyn , as part of the city university of new york . evers 's widow myrlie evers co-wrote the book for us , the living with william peters in 1967 . in 1983 , a television movie was made based on the book . celebrating evers 's life and career , it starred howard rollins and irene cara as medgar and myrlie evers , airing on pbs . the film won the writers guild of america award for best adapted drama . in 1969 , a community pool in the central district neighborhood of seattle , washington , was named after evers , honoring his life . on june 28 , 1992 , the city of jackson , mississippi , erected a statue in honor of evers . all of delta drive ( part of u.s . highway 49 ) in jackson was renamed in evers 's honor . in december 2004 , the jackson city council changed the name of the city 's airport to jackson–medgar wiley evers international airport in his honor . his widow myrlie evers became a noted activist in her own right , eventually serving as national chairperson of the naacp . myrlie also founded the medgar evers institute in 1998 , with the initial goal of preserving and advancing the legacy of medgar evers ' life 's work . anticipating the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the assassination of medgar evers and recognizing the international leadership role of myrlie evers , the institute 's board of directors changed the organization 's name to the medgar and myrlie evers institute . medgar 's brother charles evers returned to jackson in july 1963 , and served briefly with the naacp in his slain brother 's place . he remained involved in mississippi civil rights activities for many years , and in 1969 , was the first african-american mayor elected in the state . he died on july 22 , 2020 , aged 97 . on the 40th anniversary of evers 's assassination , hundreds of civil rights veterans , government officials , and students from across the country gathered around his grave site at arlington national cemetery to celebrate his life and legacy . barry bradford and three students—sharmistha dev , jajah wu , and debra siegel , formerly of adlai e . stevenson high school in lincolnshire , illinois—planned and hosted the commemoration in his honor . '' medgar evers '' , arlingon cemetery . note : bradford later was notable for his work in helping reopen the mississippi burning and clyde kennard cases . evers was the subject of the students ' research project . lottie l . joiner ( july 2003 ) , '' the nation remembers medgar evers '' , the crisis , 110 ( 4 ) , 8 . retrieved october 26 , 2009 from research library core . in october 2009 , navy secretary ray mabus , a former mississippi governor , announced that , a , would be named in the activist 's honor . mabus , ray , '' the navy honors a civil rights pioneer . '' the white house blog . october 9 , 2009 . retrieved september 2 , 2010 . the ship was christened by myrlie evers-williams on november 12 , 2011 . '' a memorial for medgar '' , san diego union-tribune , november 13 , 2011 . in june 2013 , a statue of evers was erected at his alma mater , alcorn state university , to commemorate the 50th anniversary of his death . alumni and guests from around the world gathered to recognize his contributions to american society . evers was honored in a tribute at arlington national cemetery on the 50th anniversary of his death . former president bill clinton , attorney general eric holder , navy secretary ray mabus , senator roger wicker , and naacp president benjamin jealous all spoke commemorating evers . evers 's widow , myrlie evers-williams , spoke of his contributions to the advancement of civil rights : medgar was a man who never wanted adoration , who never wanted to be in the limelight . he was a man who saw a job that needed to be done and he answered the call and the fight for freedom , dignity and justice not just for his people but all people . he was identified as a freedom hero by the my hero project . in 2017 , the medgar and myrlie evers house was named as a national historic landmark . two years later , in 2019 , the site was designated a national monument . in popular culture . music . musician bob dylan wrote his song '' only a pawn in their game '' about the assassination on july 2 , 1963 , on what would have been evers 38th birthday . nina simone wrote and sang '' mississippi goddam '' about the evers case . phil ochs referred to evers in the song '' love me , i 'm a liberal '' and wrote the songs '' another country '' and '' too many martyrs '' ( also titled '' the ballad of medgar evers '' ) in response to the killing . matthew jones and the student nonviolent coordinating committee freedom singers recorded a version of the latter song . wadada leo smith 's album ten freedom summers contains a track called '' medgar evers : a love-voice of a thousand years ' journey for liberty and justice '' . jackson c . frank 's self-titled debut album , released in 1965 , also includes a reference to medgar evers in the song '' do n't look back . '' . essays and books . eudora welty 's short story , '' where is the voice coming from ? '' , in which the speaker is the imagined assassin of medgar evers , was published in the new yorker in july 1963 . eudora welty , '' where is the voice coming from ? '' , the new yorker , july 6 , 1963 . attorney bobby delaughter wrote a first-person narrative article entitled '' mississippi justice '' published in reader 's digest about his experiences as state prosecutor in the murder trial . he added to this account in a book , never too late : a prosecutor 's story of justice in the medgar evers case ( 2001 ) . . film . evers was portrayed by howard rollins in the 1983 television film for us the living : the medgar evers story . the film ghosts of mississippi ( 1996 ) , directed by rob reiner , explores the 1994 trial of de la beckwith in which prosecutor delaughter of the hinds county district attorney office secured a conviction in state court . beckwith and delaughter were played by james woods and alec baldwin , respectively ; whoopi goldberg played myrlie evers . evers was portrayed by james pickens jr . the film was based on a book of the same name . in the documentary film i am not your negro ( 2016 ) , evers is one of three black activists ( the other two are martin luther king jr . and malcolm x ) who are the focus of reminiscences by author james baldwin . baldwin recounts the circumstances of and his reaction to evers 's assassination . young , deborah ( september 20 , 2016 ) . '' ‘ i am not your negro ’ : film review tiff 2016 '' . the hollywood reporter . in the 2011 film the help , a clip of medgar evers speaking for civil rights is shown on tv , quickly followed by news of his assassination , and a glimpse of an article by his widow published in life magazine . . see also . list of civil rights leaders . references . further reading . . external links . sncc digital gateway : medgar evers , documentary website created by the sncc legacy project and duke university , telling the story of the student nonviolent coordinating committee & grassroots organizing from the inside-out jfk first draft condolence letter to medgar evers ’ widow , june 12 , 1963 shapell manuscript foundation audio recording of t . r . m . howard 's eulogy at the memorial service for medgar evers , june 15 , 1963 , jackson , mississippi . medgar evers in the u.s . federal census american civil rights pioneers medgar evers biography at africawithin.com imbd.com fbi article : civil rights in the ‘ 60s : justice for medgar evers medgar evers 's fbi file hosted at the internet archive medgar evers fund collected records held at swarthmore college peace collection