1955 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top-grossing hits of 1955 in the united states . notable films released in 1955 . united states unless stated . . 5 against the house , starring kim novak , guy madison , brian keith . a . abbott and costello meet the keystone kops , starring bud abbott and lou costello , featuring an appearance by mack sennett abbott and costello meet the mummy , starring bud abbott and lou costello above us the waves , starring john mills – ( gb ) the adventures of quentin durward , starring robert taylor , kay kendall ai n't misbehavin ' , starring piper laurie , rory calhoun , mamie van doren all that heaven allows , directed by douglas sirk , starring jane wyman and rock hudson the americano , starring glenn ford le amiche ( the girlfriend ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni – ( italy ) anděl na horách ( angel in the mountains ) – ( czechoslovakia ) apache ambush , starring richard jaeckel artists and models , starring dean martin , jerry lewis , dorothy malone , shirley maclaine azaad , starring dilip kumar – ( india ) . b . bad day at black rock , directed by john sturges , starring spencer tracy , robert ryan , walter brennan barney 's christmas carol , directed by john trian battle cry , starring van heflin , aldo ray , anne francis the beast with a million eyes bedevilled , starring anne baxter and steve forrest the big combo , starring cornel wilde , richard conte , brian donlevy , jean wallace the big knife , starring jack palance , ida lupino , jean hagen , rod steiger , shelley winters blackboard jungle , starring glenn ford , anne francis , louis calhern , sidney poitier , vic morrow , richard kiley blood alley , starring john wayne and lauren bacall a bullet for joey , starring edward g . robinson and george raft . c . captain lightfoot , starring rock hudson carrington v.c . , starring david niven – ( gb ) cast a dark shadow , starring dirk bogarde – ( gb ) chief crazy horse , starring victor mature cinerama holiday ciske de rat ( aka a child needs love ) – ( netherlands ) the cobweb , directed by vincente minnelli , starring richard widmark , gloria grahame , lauren bacall , charles boyer , lillian gish the cockleshell heroes , directed by and starring josé ferrer , with trevor howard – ( gb ) the colditz story , directed by guy hamilton , starring john mills and eric portman – ( gb ) confession , directed by ken hughes , starring sydney chaplin – ( gb ) the constant husband , starring rex harrison , margaret leighton , kay kendall – ( gb ) count three and pray , starring van heflin , joanne woodward and raymond burr the counterfeit coin – ( greece ) the court-martial of billy mitchell , directed by otto preminger , starring gary cooper , ralph bellamy , rod steiger , elizabeth montgomery el coyote crashout , starring arthur kennedy and william bendix the criminal life of archibaldo de la cruz ( ensayo de un crimen ) , directed by luis buñuel – ( mexico ) . d . daddy long legs , starring fred astaire and leslie caron the dam busters , starring richard todd and michael redgrave , with an early role by robert shaw – ( gb ) davy crockett , king of the wild frontier , starring fess parker and buddy ebsen death of a cyclist ( muerte de un ciclista ) , directed by juan antonio bardem – ( spain ) the deep blue sea , starring vivien leigh – ( gb ) the desperate hours , starring humphrey bogart and fredric march devdas , based on novel with devdas , starring dilip kumar , vyjayanthimala , suchitra sen – ( india ) les diaboliques ( the devils ) , directed by henri-georges clouzot , starring simone signoret – ( france ) dreams ( kvinnodröm ) , directed by ingmar bergman , starring eva dahlbeck – ( sweden ) . e-f . east of eden , directed by elia kazan , starring julie harris , james dean ( in his first major role ) , raymond massey the enchanted boy ( zakoldovanyy malchik ) – ( ussr ) escuela de vagabundos ( school for tramps ) , starring pedro infante – ( mexico ) the far horizons , starring fred macmurray , charlton heston , donna reed , barbara hale the fast and the furious , starring john ireland and dorothy malone female on the beach , starring joan crawford , jeff chandler , jan sterling fire in the night ( det brenner i natt ! ) – ( norway ) floating clouds ( ukigumo ) – ( japan ) footsteps in the fog , starring stewart granger and jean simmons – ( gb ) foxfire , starring jane russell francis in the navy , starring donald o'connor and martha hyer , with clint eastwood in an early role . g . galapagos , a documentary by thor heyerdahl – ( norway ) a generation ( pokolenie ) , directed by andrzej wajda – ( poland ) the girl in the red velvet swing , directed by richard fleischer , starring ray milland , joan collins , farley granger – ( u.s . ) the girl rush , starring rosalind russell , fernando lamas , gloria dehaven godzilla raids again ( gojira no gyakushū ) – ( japan ) good morning , miss dove , starring jennifer jones and robert stack the good soldier schweik , animation directed by jiří trnka – ( czechoslovakia ) guys and dolls , directed by joseph l . mankiewicz , starring marlon brando , jean simmons , frank sinatra , vivian blaine . h . hell on frisco bay , starring alan ladd and edward g . robinson hell 's island , starring john payne and mary murphy heroes of shipka ( geroite na shipka ) – ( bulgaria/ussr ) the hidden one ( la escondida ) , starring pedro armendáriz – ( mexico ) hit the deck , directed by roy rowland , starring jane powell , debbie reynolds , ann miller , tony martin , vic damone house of bamboo , starring robert ryan how to be very , very popular , starring betty grable in her final film role . i . i am a camera , starring julie harris and laurence harvey – ( gb ) i died a thousand times , starring jack palance , shelley winters , earl holliman , lee marvin i live in fear ( ikimono no kiroku ) , directed by akira kurosawa – ( japan ) i 'll cry tomorrow , starring susan hayward illegal , a film noir starring edward g . robinson and jayne mansfield interrupted melody , starring eleanor parker and glenn ford it came from beneath the sea , starring kenneth tobey and faith domergue , with special effects by ray harryhausen it happened on july 20th ( es geschah am 20 . juli ) , directed by g . w . pabst , starring bernhard wicki – ( austria ) it 's always fair weather , starring gene kelly , dan dailey , michael kidd , cyd charisse . j . jedda , directed by charles chauvel – ( australia ) john and julie , starring moira lister and sid james – ( gb ) journey to the beginning of time ( cesta do pravěku ) – ( czechoslovakia ) jupiter 's darling , directed by george sidney , starring esther williams and howard keel . k . kanyasulkam , starring n . t . rama rao – ( india ) the kentuckian , directed by and starring burt lancaster , featuring film debut of walter matthau killer 's kiss , directed by stanley kubrick the king 's thief , starring ann blyth and david niven kiss me deadly , directed by robert aldrich , starring ralph meeker as mickey spillane 's mike hammer . l . lady and the tramp , an animated disney musical featuring voice of peggy lee lady godiva of coventry , starring maureen o'hara the ladykillers , directed by alexander mackendrick , starring alec guinness , cecil parker , herbert lom , peter sellers – ( gb ) land of the pharaohs , starring joan collins and jack hawkins the last frontier , directed by anthony mann , starring victor mature , robert preston , anne bancroft the last ten days ( der letzte akt ) , directed by g . w . pabst – ( austria/west germany ) the left hand of god , starring humphrey bogart and gene tierney little red monkey , directed by ken hughes – ( britain ) lola montès , directed by max ophüls – ( france ) the long gray line , starring tyrone power and maureen o'hara love is a many-splendored thing , starring william holden and jennifer jones love me or leave me , starring doris day and james cagney love never dies ( el amor nunca muere ) – ( argentina ) lucy gallant ( reissued as oil town ) , starring jane wyman . m . magic fire , starring alan badel mambo , directed by robert rossen , starring silvana mangano , vittorio gassman , shelley winters – ( u.s./italy ) a man alone , directed by and starring ray milland , with mary murphy the man from laramie , directed by anthony mann , starring james stewart the man who loved redheads , starring moira shearer – ( gb ) the man with the golden arm , directed by otto preminger , starring frank sinatra , eleanor parker , darren mcgavin , kim novak , arnold stang man with the gun , starring robert mitchum man without a star , starring kirk douglas and william campbell marty , directed by delbert mann , starring ernest borgnine , betsy blair , joe mantell , frank sutton , jerry paris the mcconnell story , starring alan ladd and june allyson the mill of good luck ( la 'moara cu noroc ' ) – ( romania ) miracle of marcelino ( marcelino pan y vino ) – ( spain ) missamma , starring n . t . rama rao – ( india ) mister roberts , co-directed by john ford and mervyn leroy , starring henry fonda , james cagney , william powell , jack lemmon moonfleet , starring stewart granger and joan greenwood mr . & mrs . '55 , starring guru dutt and madhubala – ( india ) mr . arkadin , directed by and starring orson welles – ( france/spain/switzerland ) my sister eileen , starring janet leigh and betty garrett . n . new york confidential , starring broderick crawford , richard conte , marilyn maxwell , anne bancroft night and fog , a documentary directed by alain resnais – ( france ) the night my number came up , starring michael redgrave – ( gb ) the night of the hunter , directed by charles laughton , starring robert mitchum , shelley winters , lillian gish , peter graves not as a stranger , starring robert mitchum , olivia de havilland , frank sinatra , gloria grahame , broderick crawford , lon chaney , jr . o . oh , ibuku ( o , my mother ) , directed by ali joego , debuting aminah cendrakasih – ( indonesia ) oklahoma ! ( first film shot in widescreen process known as todd-ao ) , starring gordon macrae , shirley jones , rod steiger , gloria grahame ordet ( the word ) , directed by carl theodor dreyer – ( denmark ) our best days ( ayyamna al-holwa ) , starring omar sharif – ( egypt ) out of the clouds , directed by basil dearden , starring anthony steel , robert beatty – ( u.k . ) . p-q . passage home , directed by roy ward baker , starring anthony steel , peter finch , diane cilento – ( u.k . ) pather panchali ( song of the little road ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) pete kelly 's blues , starring jack webb , janet leigh , edmond o'brien , peggy lee the phenix city story , starring richard kiley , john mcintire , john larch , james edwards , edward andrews picnic , directed by joshua logan , starring william holden , kim novak , cliff robertson , rosalind russell prince of players , starring richard burton princess yang kwei-fei ( aka yôkihi ) – ( japan ) the prisoner , directed by peter glenville , starring alec guinness and jack hawkins – ( gb ) the private war of major benson , starring charlton heston the prodigal , starring lana turner the quatermass xperiment – ( gb ) queen bee , starring joan crawford . r . the racers , starring kirk douglas , gilbert roland , bella darvi radio stories ( historias de la radio ) – ( spain ) die ratten ( the rats ) , starring maria schell and curd jürgens – ( west germany ) – golden bear rage at dawn , starring randolph scott the rains of ranchipur , starring lana turner and richard burton rebel without a cause , directed by nicholas ray , starring james dean , sal mineo , natalie wood red fish ( los peces rojos ) , starring arturo de córdova – ( spain ) richard iii , directed by and starring laurence olivier , with ralph richardson , claire bloom , john gielgud – ( gb ) rififi ( du rififi chez les hommes ) , directed by jules dassin – ( france ) a ripple in the pond ( ena votsalo sti limni ) – ( greece ) romeo and juliet ( romeo i dzhulyetta ) , starring yuri zhdanov and galina ulanova – ( ussr ) roots ( raíces ) – ( mexico ) the rose tattoo , starring anna magnani and burt lancaster run for cover , starring james cagney , john derek , ernest borgnine . s . samurai ii : duel at ichijoji temple ( zoku miyamoto musashi : ichijōji no kettō ) – ( japan ) scandal in sorrento ( pane , amore e . ) , starring vittorio de sica and sophia loren – ( italy ) the scarlet coat , starring cornel wilde , george sanders , anne francis the sea chase , starring john wayne and lana turner seagulls die in the harbour ( meeuwen sterven in de haven ) – ( belgium ) seema , starring nutan – ( india ) seven angry men , starring raymond massey the seven little foys , starring bob hope , featuring james cagney reprising role of george m . cohan from yankee doodle dandy the seven year itch , directed by billy wilder , starring marilyn monroe and tom ewell shree 420 , directed by and starring raj kapoor , with nargis – ( india ) the shrike , directed by and starring josé ferrer the sign of venus ( il segno di venere ) , starring sophia loren and vittorio de sica – ( italy ) simba , starring dirk bogarde – ( gb ) sissi , starring romy schneider – ( austria ) six bridges to cross , starring tony curtis smiles of a summer night ( sommarnattens leende ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) son of sinbad so this is paris , starring tony curtis and gloria dehaven the spoilers , starring anne baxter and jeff chandler strategic air command , starring james stewart stella , directed by michael cacoyannis , starring melina mercouri – ( greece ) storm over the nile , starring anthony steel and laurence harvey – ( u.k . ) summertime , directed by david lean , starring katharine hepburn , rossano brazzi , darren mcgavin – ( britain/u.s . ) il bidone ( il bidone ) , directed by federico fellini , starring broderick crawford – ( italy ) . t . taira clan saga ( shin heike monogatari ) , directed by kenji mizoguchi – ( japan ) tall man riding , starring randolph scott and dorothy malone the tall men , starring clark gable , jane russell , robert ryan tarantula , directed by jack arnold , starring john agar , mara corday , with clint eastwood in a bit part the tender trap , starring frank sinatra , debbie reynolds , david wayne , celeste holm that lady , starring olivia de havilland – ( gb/spain ) this island earth , directed by joseph m . newman , starring jeff morrow , rex reason , faith domergue , russell johnson three for the show , starring betty grable tight spot , starring ginger rogers , edward g . robinson , brian keith , lorne greene to catch a thief , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring cary grant and grace kelly to hell and back , starring audie murphy , marshall thompson , charles drake , david janssen the phantom from 10,000 leagues , starring kent taylor , cathy downs , michael whalen the treasure of pancho villa , starring rory calhoun and shelley winters trial , starring glenn ford the trouble with harry , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring edmund gwenn , john forsythe , shirley maclaine . u-v . unknown soldier ( tuntematon sotilas ) – ( finland ) unchained , starring barbara hale underwater ! , starring jane russell untamed , starring tyrone power and susan hayward the violent men , starring glenn ford , barbara stanwyck , edward g . robinson , brian keith violent saturday , starring victor mature , ernest borgnine , lee marvin the virgin queen , starring bette davis , richard todd , joan collins . w-z . we 're no angels , starring humphrey bogart , peter ustinov , aldo ray , basil rathbone white feather , starring robert wagner , jeffrey hunter , debra paget wichita , starring joel mccrea amici per la pelle ( amici per la pelle ) – ( italy ) women 's prison , starring ida lupino , jan sterling , audrey totter , phyllis thaxter you 're never too young , starring dean martin and jerry lewis . serials . the adventures of captain africa king of the carnival panther girl of the kongo . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) donald duck ( 1934–1956 ) the three stooges ( 1934–1959 ) tom and jerry ( 1940–1958 ) bugs bunny ( 1940–1962 ) mighty mouse ( 1942–1955 ) chip ' n ' dale ( 1943–1956 ) droopy ( 1943–1958 ) yosemite sam ( 1945–1963 ) ranger don ( 1953–1956 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953–1968 ) cartoon : good will to men ( mgm cartoon series ) ( frederick quimby , william hanna and joseph barbera , producers ; mgm ) the legend of rockabye point ( walter lantz productions ; universal-international ) no hunting ( donald duck series ) ( walt disney productions ; rko radio ) speedy gonzales ( merrie melodies series ) ( warner bros . cartoons , inc . ; warner bros . ) one-reel : gadgets galore ( warner varieties series ) ( robert youngson , producer ; warner bros . ) survival city ( movietone cinemascope series ) ( edmund reek , producer ; twentieth century-fox ) 3rd ave . el ( carson davidson productions ; ardee films ) three kisses ( topper special series ) ( justin herman , producer ; paramount ) two-reel : the battle of gettysburg ( dore schary , producer ; mgm ) the face of lincoln ( university of southern california presentation ; cavalcade pictures , inc . ) on the twelfth day . ( united kingdom series ) ( go pictures , inc . ; george brest and associates ) switzerland ( people and places series ) ( walt disney productions ; buena vista ) 24-hour alert ( cedric francis , producer ; warner bros . ) . births . january 6 – rowan atkinson , english comedian and actor january 9 – j . k . simmons , american actor january 18 – kevin costner , american actor , producer and director january 20 – wyatt knight , american actor ( d . 2011 ) february 7 – miguel ferrer , american actor ( d . 2017 ) february 15 – christopher mcdonald , american actor february 19 – jeff daniels , american actor february 21 – kelsey grammer , american actor and comedian february 28 - gilbert gottfried , american stand-up comedian , actor and voice actor march 9 – ornella muti , italian actress march 17 – gary sinise , american actor , producer and director march 19 – bruce willis , american actor march 22 – lena olin , swedish actress march 28 - reba mcentire , american country singer , songwriter , actress , and record producer march 29 - brendan gleeson , irish actor and film director april 6 – michael rooker , american actor april 23 – judy davis , australian actress april 24 – michael o'keefe , american actor april 30 – zlatko topčić , bosnian screenwriter may 16 – debra winger , american actress may 17 – bill paxton , american actor ( d . 2017 ) may 18 – chow yun-fat , hong kong actor may 31 – susie essman , american actress june 2 – dana carvey , american actor and comedian june 7 – william forsythe , american actor june 8 – griffin dunne , american actor and director june 15 – julie hagerty , american actress june 16 – laurie metcalf , american actress june 25 - mike mcshane , american actor , singer and improvisational comedian june 27 – isabelle adjani , french actress july 9 – jimmy smits , american actor july 19 – toborr kristina tomlinsen , american-canadian voice actress july 21 – béla tarr , hungarian director july 22 – willem dafoe , american actor august 3 – corey burton , american voice actor august 4 – billy bob thornton , american actor , director and screenwriter august 7 – wayne knight , american actor and comedian august 19 – peter gallagher , american actor august 27 – diana scarwid , american actress october 15 – tanya roberts , american actress ( d . 2021 ) october 20 – thomas newman , american composer november 13 – whoopi goldberg , american actress and comedian december 2 – dennis christopher , american actor december 3 – melody anderson , canadian actress december 6 - steven wright , american stand-up comedian , actor , writer and film producer . deaths . february 11 – ona munson , 55 , american actress , five star final , gone with the wind february 12 tom moore , 71 , irish-american actor , forever amber , road house s . z . sakall , 72 , hungarian actor , casablanca , yankee doodle dandy april 7 – theda bara , 69 , american silent film actress , a fool there was , cleopatra april 25 – constance collier , 77 , british actress , stage door , rope may 13 – betty ann davies , 44 , british actress , my old duchess , the man in black june 11 – walter hampden , 75 , american actor , sabrina , the hunchback of notre dame july 31 – robert francis , 25 , american actor , the caine mutiny , the long gray line , airplane accident august 5 – carmen miranda , 46 , brazilian singer and actress , copacabana , the gang 's all here august 6 – janet beecher , 70 , american actress , the story of vernon and irene castle , the mark of zorro august 10 – jane murfin , 70 , american screenwriter , what price hollywood ? , the women august 12 – lynne carver , 38 , american actress , everybody sing , young dr . kildare september 20 – robert riskin , 58 , american screenwriter , it happened one night , mr . deeds goes to town noel m . smith , 60 , american director , secret service of the air , cattle town september 30 – james dean , 24 , american actor , rebel without a cause , east of eden , automobile accident october 1 – charles christie , 75 , canadian pioneer film studio owner october 9 – alice joyce , 65 , american actress , the green goddess , white man october 19 – john hodiak , 41 , american actor , lifeboat , a bell for adano , heart attack november 9 – tom powers , 65 , american actor , double indemnity , the blue dahlia november 14 – robert e . sherwood , 59 , american screenwriter , the best years of our lives , rebecca november 15 – lloyd bacon , 65 , american director , the oklahoma kid , knute rockne , all american november 22 – shemp howard , 60 , american actor , comedian of the three stooges , the bank dick , pittsburgh november 27 – william nigh , 74 , american director , mr . wong , detective , the gay cavalier . film debuts . james cromwell – daddy long legs clint eastwood – revenge of the creature dennis hopper – rebel without a cause jill ireland – no love for judy shirley jones – oklahoma ! cloris leachman – kiss me deadly shirley maclaine – the trouble with harry jayne mansfield – female jungle walter matthau – the kentuckian sal mineo – six bridges to cross elizabeth montgomery – the court-martial of billy mitchell vic morrow – blackboard jungle jerry orbach – marty maximilian schell – children , mother , and the general paul scofield – that lady joanne woodward – count three and pray . notes . references .