Bernadette Devlin McAliskey

political beginnings . devlin was born in cookstown , county tyrone , to a catholic family , where she was the third eldest of six children born to john james and elizabeth bernadette devlin . her father raised her to hold irish republican ideals before he died when bernadette was nine years old . subsequently , the family had to depend on welfare to survive , an experience which affected bernadette deeply . bernadette 's mother died when bernadette was nineteen years old , leaving her to partially raise her siblings while also attending university . she attended st patrick 's girls academy in dungannon . cain : biographies of prominent people – mcaliskey she was studying psychology at queen 's university belfast in 1968 when she took a prominent role in a student-led civil rights organisation , people 's democracy . devlin was subsequently excluded from the university . she stood unsuccessfully against james chichester-clark in the 1969 northern ireland general election . when george forrest , the mp for mid ulster , died , she fought the subsequent by-election on the '' unity '' ticket , defeating the ulster unionist party candidate , forrest 's widow anna , and was elected to the westminster parliament . aged 21 , she was the baby of the house , and remained the youngest woman ever elected to westminster until the may 2015 general election when 20-year-old mhairi black eclipsed devlin 's achievement . devlin stood on the slogan '' i will take my seat and fight for your rights '' – signalling her rejection of the traditional irish republican tactic of abstentionism . on 22 april 1969 , the day before her 22nd birthday , she swore the oath of allegiance journal of the house of commons , session 1968–69 , p . 217 and made her maiden speech within an hour . maiden speech in commons , 22 april 1969 , hansard.millbanksystems.com ; accessed 8 august 2015 . . the troubles . battle of the bogside . after engaging , on the side of the residents , in the battle of the bogside in august , she was convicted of incitement to riot in december 1969 , for which she served a short jail term . after being re-elected in the 1970 general election , devlin declared that she would sit in parliament as an independent socialist . f . w . s . craig , '' british parliamentary election results , 1950–1973 '' , parliamentary research services , chichester , 2nd ed . 1983 , p . 687 . . u.s . tour . almost immediately after the battle of the bogside devlin undertook a tour of the united states in august 1969 , a trip which generated a significant amount of media attention . she met with members of the black panther party in watts , los angeles and gave them her support . she made an appearance on the johnny carson show . at a number of speaking events , she made parallels between the struggle in the u.s . by african-americans seeking civil rights and catholics in northern ireland , sometimes to the embarrassment of her audience . during an event in philadelphia , she had to goad an african-american singer to sing '' we shall overcome '' to the irish-american audience , many of whom refused to stand for the song . in detroit , she refused to take the stage until african-americans who were barred from the event were allowed in . in new york , mayor john lindsay arranged a ceremony to present devlin with a key to the city of new york . devlin , frustrated with conservative elements of the irish-american community , left the tour to return to northern ireland and , believing the freedom of new york should go to the american poor , sent eamonn mccann to gift the key on her behalf to a representative from the harlem chapter of the black panther party . . bloody sunday . having witnessed the events of bloody sunday , devlin was infuriated that she was later consistently denied the floor in the house of commons by the speaker selwyn lloyd , despite the fact that parliamentary convention decreed that any mp witnessing an incident under discussion would be granted an opportunity to speak about it therein . transcript ( 31 january 1972 ) , hansard.millbanksystems.com ; accessed 22 march 2015 . the day following bloody sunday , devlin slapped conservative home secretary reginald maudling across the face when he incorrectly asserted in the house of commons that the paratroopers had fired in self-defence on bloody sunday . thirteen years later , edward heath recalled the event : “ i remember very well when an hon . lady rushed from the opposition benches and hit mr . maudling . i remember that vividly because i thought that she was going to hit me . she could not stretch as far as that , so she had to make do with him . ” . irsp . devlin helped to form the irish republican socialist party with seamus costello in 1974 . this was a revolutionary socialist breakaway from official sinn féin and , on the afternoon after the morning the party was established , costello also created the irish national liberation army 's as a split from the official irish republican army . devlin did not join the inla and while she served on the party 's national executive in 1975 , she resigned when a proposal that the inla become subordinate to the party executive was defeated . in 1977 , she joined the independent socialist party , but it disbanded the following year . peter barberis , john mchugh and mike tyldesley . encyclopedia of british and irish political organisations , pinter publishers ( march 2000 ) ; . support for prisoners . bernadette devlin stood as an independent candidate in support of the prisoners on the blanket protest and dirty protest at long kesh prison in the 1979 elections to the european parliament in the northern ireland constituency , and won 5.9 % of the vote . she was a leading spokesperson for the smash h-block campaign , which supported the 1981 irish hunger strike . wounded in loyalist shooting . on 16 january 1981 , devlin and her husband were shot by members of the ulster freedom fighters , a cover name of the ulster defence association ( uda ) , who broke into their home near coalisland , county tyrone . chronology of the conflict : january 1981 , cain peter taylor , loyalists , p . 168 the gunmen shot devlin nine times in front of her children . cain : chronology of the conflict : january 1981 british soldiers were watching the mcaliskey home at the time , but they failed to prevent the assassination attempt . it has been claimed that devlin 's assassination was ordered by british authorities and that collusion was a factor . an army patrol of the 3rd battalion , the parachute regiment entered the house and waited for half an hour . devlin has claimed they were waiting for the couple to die . another group of soldiers then arrived and transported her by helicopter to a nearby hospital . mcaliskey shootings , people.com ; accessed 23 march 2015 . the paramilitaries had torn out the telephone and , while the wounded couple were being given first aid by the newly arrived troops , a soldier ran to a neighbour 's house , commandeered a car , and drove to the home of a councillor to telephone for help . the couple were taken by helicopter to hospital in nearby dungannon for emergency treatment and then to the musgrave park hospital , military wing , in belfast , under intensive care . '' devlin is 'very ill ' after shooting '' , the guardian , 17 january 1981 . peter taylor , loyalists , london : bloomsbury , 2000 , p . 168 . the attackers—ray smallwoods , tom graham ( 38 ) , both from lisburn , and andrew watson ( 25 ) from seymour hill , dunmurry—were captured by the army patrol and subsequently jailed . murray , raymond ( 1990 ) . the sas in ireland . mercier press . p.263 all three were members of the south belfast uda . smallwoods was the driver of the getaway car . lister , david ; jordan , hugh ( 2004 ) . mad dog : the rise and fall of johnny adair and ' c ' company . edinburgh : mainstream . p.221 . dáil éireann elections . she twice failed , in february and november 1982 , in attempts to be elected to the dublin north-central constituency of dáil éireann . . denied entry into the us . in 2003 she was barred from entering the united states and deported on the grounds that the united states department of state had declared her to pose '' a serious threat to the security of the united states '' – apparently referring to her conviction for incitement to riot in 1969 – although she protested that she had no terrorist involvement and had frequently been permitted to travel to the united states in the past . '' bernadette devlin mcaliskey barred entry to the united states '' , counterpunch , 22 february 2003 . step . mcaliskey is chief executive of the south tyrone empowerment programme ( step ) and was involved in its founding in 1997 . step provides a range of services and advocacy in areas including community development , training , support and advice for migrants , policy work and community enterprise . . funeral of dominic mcglinchey . in 1994 , mcaliskey attended the funeral of former irish national liberation army chief of staff dominic mcglinchey . the inla had been the armed wing of the irish republican socialist party , which mcaliskey had helped found . during the funeral , she condemned the recent press coverage which had accused mcglinchey of drug dealing and criminality and said of the journalists responsible that they were '' curs and dogs . may every one of them rot in hell . they have taken away dominic mcglinchy 's character and they will stand judgement for it . he was the finest republican of them all . he never dishonoured the cause he believed in . his war was with the armed soldiers and the police of this state '' . mcglinchey had previously told the media in 1982 he was personally responsible for at least 30 killings in northern ireland , earning him the moniker '' mad dog '' . this includes admitting involvement in the droppin well bombing , which killed 11 off duty soldiers and 6 civilians who were attending a disco and injured 30 more . . personal life . in 1971 , while still unmarried , she gave birth to a daughter , róisín . this cost her some political support . she married michael mcaliskey on 23 april 1973 , which was her 26th birthday . on 12 may 2007 she was guest speaker at éirígí 's first annual james connolly commemoration in arbour hill , dublin . she works with migrant workers to improve their treatment in northern ireland . . in popular culture . in 1969 john goldschmidt , a director and producer , made the documentary film bernadette devlin for atv , which was shown on itv and on cbs 's 60 minutes and included footage of devlin during the battle of the bogside . another documentary , bernadette : notes on a political journey , directed by leila doolan , was released in 2011 . galway film fleadh website , galwayfilmfleadh.com ; accessed 8 august 2015 . at the 2008 cannes film festival a biopic of devlin was announced , but she stated that '' the whole concept is abhorrent to me '' and the film was not made . mcaliskey , and her assault on mp/home secretary reginald maudling after the bloody sunday massacre , were the subject of the title song to anarchism pop/punk band chumbawamba 's 1990 album , slap ! . references . external links . podcast interview with bernadette devlin mcaliskey . the blindboy podcast . 2018 public lecture by bernadette devlin mcaliskey . ' a terrible state of chassis ' , derry , 2016 ( 51 min . video ) , field day , 30 september 2016 . mcaliskey , bernadette devlin . the price of my soul ( foreword and chapter twelve ) , cain.ulst.ac.uk ; accessed 8 august 2015 . mcintyre , anthony . '' knowing too much and saying it too well : bernadette mcaliskey barred from us '' , lark.phoblacht.net , 23 february 2003 ; accessed 8 august 2015 . interview with peter stanford , independent.co.uk , 29 july 2007 .