Night vision

types of ranges . spectral range . night-useful spectral range techniques can sense radiation that is invisible to a human observer . human vision is confined to a small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called visible light . enhanced spectral range allows the viewer to take advantage of non-visible sources of electromagnetic radiation ( such as near-infrared or ultraviolet radiation ) . some animals such as the mantis shrimp and trout can see using much more of the infrared and/or ultraviolet spectrum than humans . . intensity range . sufficient intensity range is simply the ability to see with very small quantities of light . many animals have better night vision than humans do , the result of one or more differences in the morphology and anatomy of their eyes . these include having a larger eyeball , a larger lens , a larger optical aperture ( the pupils may expand to the physical limit of the eyelids ) , more rods than cones ( or rods exclusively ) in the retina , and a tapetum lucidum . enhanced intensity range is achieved via technological means through the use of an image intensifier , gain multiplication ccd , or other very low-noise and high-sensitivity arrays of photodetectors . biological night vision . all photoreceptor cells in the vertebrate eye contain molecules of photoreceptor protein which is a combination of the protein photopsin in cone cell , rhodopsin in rod cell , and retinal ( a small photoreceptor molecule ) . retinal undergoes an irreversible change in shape when it absorbs light ; this change causes an alteration in the shape of the protein which surrounds the retinal , and that alteration then induces the physiological process which results in vision . the retinal must diffuse from the vision cell , out of the eye , and circulate via the blood to the liver where it is regenerated . in bright light conditions , most of the retinal is not in the photoreceptors , but is outside of the eye . it takes about 45 minutes of dark for all of the photoreceptor proteins to be recharged with active retinal , but most of the night vision adaptation occurs within the first five minutes in the dark . '' sensory reception : human vision : structure and function of the human eye '' vol . 27 , p . 179 encyclopædia britannica , 1987 adaptation results in maximum sensitivity to light . in dark conditions only the rod cells have enough sensitivity to respond and to trigger vision . right rhodopsin in the human rods is insensitive to the longer red wavelengths , so traditionally many people use red light to help preserve night vision . red light only slowly depletes the rhodopsin stores in the rods , and instead is viewed by the red sensitive cone cells . another theory posits that since stars typically emit light with shorter wavelengths , the light from stars will be in the blue-green color spectrum . therefore , using red light to navigate would not desensitize the receptors used to detect star light . using red light for night vision is less effective for people with red–green color blindness , due to their insensitivity to red light . many animals have a tissue layer called the tapetum lucidum in the back of the eye that reflects light back through the retina , increasing the amount of light available for it to capture , but reducing the sharpness of the focus of the image . this is found in many nocturnal animals and some deep sea animals , and is the cause of eyeshine . humans , and monkeys , lack a tapetum lucidum . j . van de kraats and d . van norren : '' directional and nondirectional spectral reflection from the human fovea '' j.biomed . optics , 13 , 024010 , 2008 nocturnal mammals have rods with unique properties that make enhanced night vision possible . the nuclear pattern of their rods changes shortly after birth to become inverted . in contrast to conventional rods , inverted rods have heterochromatin in the center of their nuclei and euchromatin and other transcription factors along the border . in addition , the outer layer of cells in the retina ( the outer nuclear layer ) in nocturnal mammals is thick due to the millions of rods present to process the lower light intensities . the anatomy of this layer in nocturnal mammals is such that the rod nuclei , from individual cells , are physically stacked such that light will pass through eight to ten nuclei before reaching the photoreceptor portion of the cells . rather than being scattered , the light is passed to each nucleus individually , by a strong lensing effect due to the nuclear inversion , passing out of the stack of nuclei , and into the stack of ten photorecepting rod cell . the net effect of this anatomical change is to multiply the light sensitivity of the retina by a factor of eight to ten with no loss of focus . . night vision technologies . night vision technologies can be broadly divided into three main categories : image intensifier , active lighting , and thermal imaging . image intensification . this magnifies the amount of received photons from various natural sources such as starlight or moonlight . examples of such technologies include night glasses and low light cameras . in the military context , image intensifiers are often called '' low light tv '' since the video signal is often transmitted to a display within a control center . these are usually integrated into a sensor containing both visible and ir detectors and the streams are used independently or in fused mode , depending on the mission at hand 's requirements . the image intensifier is a vacuum-tube based device ( photomultiplier tube ) that can generate an image from a very small number of photons ( such as the light from stars in the sky ) so that a dimly lit scene can be viewed in real-time by the naked eye via visual output , or stored as data for later analysis . while many believe the light is '' amplified , '' it is not . when light strikes a charged photocathode plate , electrons are emitted through a vacuum tube and strike the microchannel plate . this causes the image screen to illuminate with a picture in the same pattern as the light that strikes the photocathode and on a wavelength the human eye can see . this is much like a crt television , but instead of color guns the photocathode does the emitting . the image is said to become '' intensified '' because the output visible light is brighter than the incoming light , and this effect directly relates to the difference in passive and active night vision goggles . currently , the most popular image intensifier is the drop-in anvis module , though many other models and sizes are available at the market . recently , the us navy announced intentions to procure a dual-color variant of the anvis for use in the cockpit of airborne platforms . . active illumination . active illumination couples imaging intensification technology with an active source of illumination in the near infrared ( nir ) or shortwave infrared ( swir ) band . examples of such technologies include low light cameras . active infrared night-vision combines infrared illumination of spectral range 700–1,000 & nbsp ; nm ( just below the visible spectrum of the human eye ) with ccd cameras sensitive to this light . the resulting scene , which is apparently dark to a human observer , appears as a monochrome image on a normal display device . because active infrared night-vision systems can incorporate illuminators that produce high levels of infrared light , the resulting images are typically higher resolution than other night-vision technologies . active infrared night vision is now commonly found in commercial , residential and government security applications , where it enables effective night time imaging under low-light conditions . however , since active infrared light can be detected by night-vision goggles , there can be a risk of giving away position in tactical military operations . laser range gated imaging is another form of active night vision which utilizes a high powered pulsed light source for illumination and imaging . range gating is a technique which controls the laser pulses in conjunction with the shutter speed of the camera 's detectors . gated imaging technology can be divided into single shot , where the detector captures the image from a single light pulse , and multi-shot , where the detector integrates the light pulses from multiple shots to form an image . one of the key advantages of this technique is the ability to perform target recognition rather than mere detection , as is the case with thermal imaging . thermal vision . thermal imaging detects the temperature difference between background and foreground objects . some organisms are able to sense a crude thermal image by means of special organs that function as bolometers . this allows thermal infrared sensing in snakes , which functions by detecting thermal radiation . thermographic camera are excellent tools for night vision . they detect thermal radiation and do not need a source of illumination . they produce an image in the darkest of nights and can see through light fog , rain , and smoke ( to a certain extent ) . thermal imaging cameras make small temperature differences visible . they are widely used to complement new or existing security networks , and for night vision on aircraft , where they are commonly referred to as '' flir '' ( for '' forward-looking infrared '' ) . when coupled with additional cameras ( for example , a visible spectrum camera or swir ) multispectral sensors are possible , which take advantage of the benefits of each detection band 's capabilities . contrary to misconceptions portrayed in the media , thermal imagers can not '' see '' through solid objects ( walls , for example ) , nor can they see through glass or acrylic , as both these materials have their own thermal signature and are opaque to long wave infrared radiation . night vision devices . see articles : night-vision device and thermal imaging camera . history . before the introduction of image intensifiers , night glasses were the only method of night vision , and thus were widely utilized , especially at sea . second world war era night glasses usually had a lens diameter of 56 & nbsp ; mm or more with magnification of seven or eight . major drawbacks of night glasses are their large size and weight . current technology . thumb a night vision device ( nvd ) is a device comprising an image intensifier tube in a rigid casing , commonly used by military forces . lately , night vision technology has become more widely available for civilian use . for example , enhanced vision systems ( evs ) have become available for aircraft , to augment the situational awareness of pilots to prevent accidents . these systems are included in the latest avionics packages from manufacturers such as cirrus and cessna . the us navy has begun procurement of a variant integrated into a helmet-mounted display , produced by elbit systems . a specific type of nvd , the night vision goggle ( nvg ) is a night vision device with dual eyepieces . the device can utilize either one intensifier tube with the same image sent to both eyes , or a separate image intensifier tube for each eye . night vision goggles combined with magnification lenses constitutes night vision binoculars . other types include monocular night vision devices with only one eyepiece which may be mounted to firearms as night sights . nvg and evs technologies are becoming more popular with helicopter operations , to improve safety . the ntsb is considering evs as recommended equipment for safety features . night glasses are single or binocular with a large diameter objective . large lenses can gather and concentrate light , thus intensifying light with purely optical means and enabling the user to see better in the dark than with the naked eye alone . often night glasses also have a fairly large exit pupil of 7 & nbsp ; mm or more to let all gathered light into the user 's eye . however , many people can not take advantage of this because of the limited dilation of the human pupil . to overcome this , soldiers were sometimes issued atropine eye drops to dilate pupils . night vision systems can also be installed in vehicles . an automotive night vision system is used to improve a vehicle driver 's perception and seeing distance in darkness or poor weather . such systems typically use infrared cameras , sometimes combined with active illumination techniques , to collect information that is then displayed to the driver . such systems are currently offered as optional equipment on certain premium vehicles .