Balafon

history . believed to have been developed independently of the southern african and south american instrument now called the marimba , oral histories of the balafon date it to at least the rise of the mali empire in the 12th century ce . balafon is a manding name , but variations exist across west africa , including the balangi in sierra leone cootje van oven . '' music of sierra leone '' , in african arts , vol . 3 , no . 4 ( summer , 1970 ) , pp . 20-27+71 . and the gyil of the dagara , lobi and gurunsi from ghana , burkina faso and ivory coast . similar instruments are played in parts of central africa , with the ancient kingdom of kongo denoting the instrument as palaku . records of the balafon go back to at least the 12th century ce . in 1352 ce , moroccan traveller ibn battuta reported the existence of the xalam and balafon at the court of malian ruler mansa suleiman . european visitors to west africa described balafons in the 17th century largely identical to the modern instrument . the atlantic slave trade brought some balafon players to the americas . the virginia gazette records african-americans playing a barrafoo in 1776 , which appears to be a balafon . other north american references to these instruments die out by the mid-19th century . cited in dena j . epstein . sinful tunes and spirituals : black folk music to the civil war . university of illinois press ( 1977 ) . the balafon has seen a resurgence since the 1980s in the growth of african roots music and world music . most famous of these exponents is the rail band , led by salif keita . even when not still played , its distinctive sound and traditional style has been exported to western instruments . maninka from eastern guinea play a type of guitar music that adapts balafon playing style to the imported instrument . etymology . in the malinké language balafon is a compound of two words : balan is the name of the instrument and fô is the verb to play . balafon therefore is really the act of playing the bala . bala still is used as the name of a large bass balafon in the region of kolokani and bobo dioulasso . these bala have especially long keys and huge calabashes for amplification . balani is then used as the name of the high pitched , small balafon with small calabashes and short ( 3 to 4 & nbsp ; cm long ) keys . the balani is carried with a strap and usually has 21 keys , while the number of keys on a bala vary with region . construction . thumb a balafon can be either fixed-key ( where the keys are strung over a fixed frame , usually with calabash resonators underneath ) or free-key ( where the keys are placed independently on any padded surface ) . the balafon usually has 17–21 keys , tuned to a tetratonic , pentatonic or heptatonic scale , depending on the culture of the musician . the balafon is generally capable of producing 18 to 21 notes , though some are built to produce many fewer notes ( 16 , 12 , 8 or even 6 and 7 ) . balafon keys are traditionally made from béné wood , dried slowly over a low flame , and then tuned by shaving off bits of wood from the underside of the keys . wood is taken off the middle to flatten the key or the end to sharpen it . in a fixed-key balafon , the keys are suspended by leather straps just above a wooden frame , under which are hung graduated-size calabash gourd resonators . a small hole in each gourd is covered with a membrane traditionally of thin spider's-egg sac filaments ( nowadays more usually of cigarette paper or thin plastic film ) to produce the characteristic nasal-buzz timbre of the instrument , which is usually played with two gum-rubber-wound mallets while seated on a low stool ( or while standing using a shoulder or waist sling hooked to its frame ) . regional traditions . as the balafon cultures vary across west africa , so does the approach to the instrument itself . in many areas the balafon is played alone in a ritual context , in others as part of an ensemble . in guinea and mali , the balafon is often part of an ensemble of three , pitched low , medium and high . in cameroon , six balafon of varying size perform together in an orchestra , called a komenchang . an igbo variation exists with only one large tuned key for each player . and while in most cases a single player hits multiple keys with two mallets , some traditions place two or more players at each keyboard . the susu and malinké people of guinea are closely identified with the balafon , as are the other manding peoples of mali , senegal , and the gambia . cameroon , chad , and even the nations of the congo basin have a long balafon traditions . often , balafon players will wear belled bracelets on each wrist , accentuating the sound of the keys . in some cultures the balafon was ( and in some still is ) a sacred instrument , playable only by trained religious caste members and only at ritual events such as festivals , royal , funerial , or marriage celebrations . here the balafon is kept in a temple storehouse , and can only be removed and played after undergoing purification rites . specific instruments may be built to be only played for specific rituals and repertoires . young adepts are trained not on the sacred instrument , but on free-key pit balafons . gyil . the gyil or is the name of a buzzing pentatonic balafon common to the gur-speaking populations in northern ghana , burkina faso , southeastern mali and northern ivory coast in west africa . among mande populations in ghana like the ligbi ( numu ) , bissa and dyula , the same instrument is known as bala . the gyil is the primary traditional instrument of the dagara people of northern ghana and burkina faso , and of the lobi of ghana , southern burkina faso , and ivory coast . the gyil is usually played in pairs , accompanied by a calabash gourd drum called a kuor . it can also be played by one person with the drum and the stick part as accompaniment , or by a soloist . gyil duets are the traditional music of dagara funerals . the instrument is generally played by men , who learn to play while young ; however , there is no restriction on gender . it is also played by the gurunsi people of the upper east region of ghana , as well as neighbouring gurunsi populations across the border in south and central burkina faso . a dance related to the gyil is the bewaa . the gyil 's design is similar to the balaba or balafon used by the mande-speaking bambara , dyula and sosso peoples further west in southern mali and western burkina faso , as well as the senoufo people of sikasso , a region that shares many musical traditions with those of northern ivory coast and ghana . it is made with 14 wooden keys of an african hardwood called liga attached to a wooden frame , below which hang calabash gourds . spider web silk covers small holes in the gourds to produce a buzzing sound and antelope sinew and leather are used for the fastenings . the instrument is played with rubber-headed wooden mallets . cameroon . during the 1950s , bars sprang up across cameroon 's capital to accommodate an influx of new inhabitants , and soon became a symbol for cameroonian identity in the face of colonialism . balafon orchestras , consisting of 3–5 balafons and various percussion instruments became common in these bars . some of these orchestras , such as richard band de zoetele , became quite popular in spite of scorn from the european elite . the middle of the 20th century saw the popularisation of a native folk music called bikutsi . bikutsi is based on a war rhythm played with various rattles , drums and balafon . sung by women , bikutsi featured sexually explicit lyrics and songs about everyday problems . in a popularised form , bikutsi gained mainstream success in the 1950s . anne-marie nzie was perhaps the most important of the early innovators the next bikutsi performer of legendary stature was messi me nkonda martin and his band , los camaroes , who added electric guitars and other new elements . balafon orchestras had remained popular throughout the 50s in yaoundé 's bar scene , but the audience demanded modernity and the popular style at the time was unable to cope . messi martin was a cameroonian guitarist who had been inspired to learn the instrument by listening to spanish language-broadcasts from neighboring equatorial guinea , as well as cuban and zairean rumba . messi changed the electric guitar by linking the strings together with pieces of paper , thus giving the instrument a damper tone that emitted a '' thudding '' sound similar to the balafon . guinea . the balafon , kora ( lute-harp ) , and the ngoni ( the ancestor of the banjo ) are the three instruments most associated with griot bardic traditions of west africa . each is more closely associated with specific areas , communities , and traditions , though all are played together in ensembles throughout the region . guinea has been the historic heartland of solo balafon . as griot culture is a hereditary caste , the kouyaté family has been called the keepers of the balafon , and twentieth century members of this family have helped introduce it throughout the world . the sosso bala . the : fr : sosso bala is a balafon , currently kept in the town of niagassola , guinea that is reputed to be the original balafon , constructed over 800 years ago . the epic of sundiata , a story of the formation of the mali empire , tells that a griot ( praise-singer ) named bala faséké kouyaté convinced sosso king sumanguru kante to employ him after sneaking into sumanguru 's palace and playing the sacred instrument . sundiata keita , founder of the mali empire overthrew sumanguru , seized the balafon , and made the griot faséké its guardian . this honor is said to have passed down through his family , the kouyatés , and conveys upon them mastership of the balafon to this day . '' preserving the sosso bala '' , jumbierecords.com : a charity record to raise funds for preserving this instrument . thumb regardless of the truth of this story , the sosso bala is an instrument of great age , and was named by unesco as one of the nineteen masterpieces of the oral and intangible heritage of humanity in 2001 . '' the cultural space of 'sosso-bala ' in niagassola , guinea '' , unesco.org . . senegal . the title of the senegalese national anthem is '' pincez tous vos koras , frappez les balafons '' ( everyone strum your koras , strike the balafons ) . mali . a modern festival devoted to the balafon , the triangle du balafon , now takes place annually at sikasso in mali . mali ministry of culture . le triangle du balafon : projet de festival du balafon , troisieme edition , sikasso – 02 au 05 novembre 2006 , ( 2006 ) . . famous players and ensembles . famous balafon players have included : richard bona , cameroonian jazz musician abdou karim diabate '' tunkaraba '' king of balafon , from the village of tabatto , guinea-bissau djiby diabaté kélétigui diabaté , playing for habib koité 's bamada group mamadou diabate , knight of the national order of burkina faso ( 2016 ) , winner of the '' grand prix '' & '' prix de la virtuosite de festival triangle du balafon '' in mali ( 2012 ) , winner of the austrian world music award ( 2011 ) lassana diabaté , malian musician known for work with toumani diabaté 's symmetric orchestra and afrocubism modibo diabaté , from mali zerika djabate , bissau-guinean musician djiguiya , percussion band from burkina faso danny elfman of oingo boingo les freres coulibaly , burkina-based balafon ensemble stefon harris , american jazz musician dominic howard of muse used a balafon on the band 's second album , origin of symmetry mory kanté , early in his career aly keita , aly keita and the magic balaphone , malian balafon player gertrude kilian , dvd '' the balafon with aly keita & gert kilian '' , '' balafon beat '' / verlag zimmermann lawrence killian , american jazz musician mahama konaté of john cena , burkina-based balafon ensemble balla kouyate , from mali/guinea , whose father , sekou '' filani '' kouyaté , is the current guardian of the sosso bala mamadi kouyate , from mali/guinea , ( germany since 2015 ) , whose grandfather sékou '' filani '' kouyaté , is the current guardian of the sosso bala el hadj djeli sory kouyaté n'faly kouyate of the afro celt sound system adam malik , burkina-based balafon ensemble dave mann , jazz percussionist , played with the dave brubeck neba solo ( senufo balafon group , led by souleymane traoré ) from sikasso mama ohandja , cameroonian composer and performer to his country qasim , burkina-based balafon ensemble pharoah sanders , american jazz musician saramaya , burkina-based balafon ensemble raheel sharif , british band leader originally from senegal bill summers , american jazz musician , performing with quincy jones , herbie hancock , and los hombres calientes lonnie liston smith , american jazz musician rokia traoré , malian singer , guitarist , and band leader le troupe saaba , burkina-based balafon ensemble momo werner wevers , german balafon player , plays solo and with the '' ensemble m.pahiya '' ( balafon and classical guitar ) n'camara abou sylla ( guinea ; les ballets africains ) . see also . music of guinea music of mali marimba , covers the modern instrument which developed independently in both south america and southern africa .