Brandenburg Gate

history . design and construction . image : zlb-berliner ansichten-januar.jpg thumb right berlin in 1688 : the future site of the brandenburg gate was near the middle left of the map , separating the tiergarten from unter den linden . travellers going west from the city toward brandenburg an der havel could pass in this direction . in the time of frederick william ( 1688 ) , shortly after the thirty years ' war and a century before the gate was constructed , berlin was a small walled city within a star fort with several named gates : spandauer tor , st . georgen tor , stralower tor , köpenick tor , neues tor , and leipziger tor ( see map ) . relative peace , a policy of religious tolerance , and status as capital of the kingdom of prussia facilitated the growth of the city . the brandenburg gate was not part of the old berlin fortress , but one of eighteen gates within the berlin customs wall , erected in the 1730s , including the old fortified city and many of its then suburbs . the new gate was commissioned by frederick william ii of prussia to represent peace and was originally named the peace gate ( german : friedenstor ) . it was designed by carl gotthard langhans , the court superintendent of buildings , and built between 1788 and 1791 , replacing the earlier simple guardhouses which flanked the original gate in the customs wall . the gate consists of twelve doric columns , six to each side , forming five passageways . citizens were originally allowed to use only the outermost two on each side . its design is based on the propylaea , the gateway to the acropolis in athens , greece , and is consistent with berlin 's history of architectural classicism ( first , baroque , and then neo-palladian ) . the gate was the first element of a '' new athens on the river spree '' by architect langhans . ward , graham , '' the making of the modern metropolis '' in the oxford handbook of theology and modern european thought , p . 68 . oxford university press , 2013 . atop the gate is a quadriga , a chariot drawn by four horses driven by victoria , the roman goddess of victory , sculpted by johann gottfried schadow . 19th and early 20th centuries . the brandenburg gate has played different political roles in german history . after the 1806 prussian defeat at the battle of jena-auerstedt , napoleon was the first to use the brandenburg gate for a triumphal procession , and took its quadriga to paris . after napoleon 's defeat in 1814 and the prussian occupation of paris by general ernst von pfuel , the quadriga was restored to berlin . it was now redesigned by karl friedrich schinkel for the new role of the brandenburg gate as a prussian triumphal arch . the goddess , now definitely victoria , was equipped with the prussian eagle and iron cross on her lance with a wreath of oak leaves . the quadriga faces east , as it did when it was originally installed in 1793 . only the royal family was allowed to pass through the central archway , as well as members of the pfuel family , from 1814 to 1919 . the kaiser granted this honour to the family in gratitude to ernst von pfuel , who had overseen the return of the quadriga to the top of the gate . in addition , the central archway was also used by the coaches of ambassadors on the single occasion of their presenting their letters of credence to council . when the nazis ascended to power , they used the gate as a party symbol . the gate survived world war ii and was one of the damaged structures still standing in the pariser platz ruins in 1945 ( another being the academy of fine arts ) . the gate was badly damaged with holes in the columns from bullets and nearby explosions . one horse 's head from the original quadriga survived , and is today kept in the collection of the märkisches museum . efforts to disguise the government district of berlin and confuse allied bombers had included the construction of a replica brandenburg gate located away from the city centre . . cold war . after germany 's surrender and the end of the war , the governments of east berlin and west berlin restored it in a joint effort . the holes were patched , but were visible for many years . the gate was located in the soviet occupation zone , directly next to the border to the british occupation zone , which later became the border between east and west berlin . vehicles and pedestrians could travel freely through the gate until the day after construction began on the berlin wall on barbed wire sunday , 13 august 1961 . west berliners gathered on the western side of the gate to demonstrate against the berlin wall , among them west berlin 's mayor , willy brandt , who had returned from a federal election campaign tour in west germany earlier the same day . the wall passed directly by the western side of the gate , which was closed throughout the berlin wall period , which ended on 22 december 1989 . post-1989 . when the revolutions of 1989 occurred and the wall was demolished , the gate symbolized freedom and the desire to unify the city of berlin . thousands of people gathered at the wall to celebrate its fall on 9 november 1989 . on 22 december 1989 , the brandenburg gate border crossing was reopened when helmut kohl , the west german chancellor , walked through to be greeted by hans modrow , the east german prime minister . demolition of the rest of the wall around the area took place the following year . during 1990 , the quadriga was removed from the gate as part of renovation work carried out by the east german authorities following the fall of the wall in november 1989 . germany was german reunification in october 1990 . the brandenburg gate was privately refurbished on 21 december 2000 , at a cost of six million euros . it was once again opened on 3 october 2002 following extensive refurbishment , for the 12th anniversary of german reunification . brandenburg gate became the main venue for the 20th-anniversary celebrations of the fall of the berlin wall or '' festival of freedom '' on the evening of 9 november 2009 . the high point of the celebrations was when over 1000 colorfully designed foam domino tiles , each over tall , were lined up along the route of the former wall through the city centre . the domino '' wall '' was then toppled in stages converging here . the brandenburg gate is now again closed to vehicle traffic , and much of pariser platz has been turned into a cobblestone pedestrian zone . the gate , along with the broad straße des 17 . juni avenue to the west , is also one of the large public areas in berlin where over a million people can gather to watch stage shows or party together , watch major sport events shown on huge screens , or see fireworks at midnight on new year 's eve . after winning the 2014 fifa world cup , the german national football team held their victory rally in front of the gate . it has also hosted street events at 2009 iaaf world championships in athletics and repeated its role in 2018 european athletics championships . it is also the usual finish line of the berlin marathon . political history . a soviet flag flew from a flagpole atop the gate from 1945 until 1957 , when it was replaced by an east german flag . since the reunification of germany in 1990 , the flag and the pole have been removed . during the 1953 riots in east berlin the soviet flag was torn off by west germans . in 1963 , u.s . president john f . kennedy visited the brandenburg gate . the soviets hung large red banners across it to prevent him looking into east berlin . in the 1980s , decrying the existence of two german states and two berlins , west berlin mayor richard von weizsäcker said : '' the german question is open as long as the brandenburg gate is closed . '' on 12 june 1987 , u.s . president ronald reagan spoke to the west berlin populace at the brandenburg gate , demanding the razing of the berlin wall . addressing the general secretary of the communist party of the soviet union , mikhail gorbachev , reagan said , on 25 december 1989 , less than two months after the berlin wall began to come down , the conductor leonard bernstein conducted the berlin philharmonic in a version of the ninth symphony of beethoven at the then newly opened brandenburg gate . in the concluding choral movement of the symphony , the '' ode to joy '' , the word freude ( '' joy '' ) was replaced with freiheit ( '' freedom '' ) to celebrate the fall of the wall and the imminent reunification of germany . on 2–3 october 1990 , the gate was the scene of the official ceremony to mark the reunification of germany . at the stroke of midnight on 3 october , the flag of germany—now the flag of a reunified germany—was raised over the gate . on 12 july 1994 , u.s . president bill clinton spoke at the gate about peace in post–cold war europe . on 9 november 2009 , chancellor angela merkel , walked through brandenburg gate with russia 's mikhail gorbachev and poland 's lech wałęsa as part of the 20-year celebration of tearing down the berlin wall . on 13 august 2011 , germany marked the 50th anniversary of the day the berlin wall started to go up with a memorial service and a minute of silence in memory of those who died trying to flee to the west . '' it is our shared responsibility to keep the memory alive and to pass it on to the coming generations as a reminder to stand up for freedom and democracy to ensure that such injustice may never happen again , '' berlin mayor klaus wowereit said . german chancellor angela merkel—who grew up behind the wall in germany 's communist eastern part—also attended the commemoration . german president christian wulff added , '' it has been shown once again : freedom is invincible at the end . no wall can permanently withstand the desire for freedom . '' on 19 june 2013 , u.s . president barack obama spoke at the gate about nuclear arms reduction and the recently revealed u.s . internet surveillance activities . on the night of 5 january 2015 , the lights illuminating the gate were completely shut off in protest against a protest held by far-right anti-islamic group pegida . tagesspiegel : bärgida und gegendemonstration beendet ( in german ) , 5 january 2015 , retrieved 20 november 2015 rbb : licht aus am brandenburger tor ( in german ) '' lights off at brandenburg gate '' , 5 january 2015 , retrieved 20 november 2015 storify : anti-islamization rally in germany met with countrywide protests , 5 january 2015 , retrieved 20 november 2015 in april 2017 , die zeit noted that the gate was not illuminated in russian colours after the 2017 saint petersburg metro bombing . the gate was previously illuminated after attacks in jerusalem and orlando . the berlin senate only lets the gate be illuminated for events in partner cities and cities with a special connection to berlin . . gallery . file : charles meynier - entrée de napoléon à berlin . 27 octobre 1806.jpg napoleon passing through the brandenburg gate after the battle of jena-auerstedt ( 1806 ) . painted by charles meynier in 1810 . file : bundesarchiv bild 102-05818 , berlin , brandenburger tor in nächtlicher beleuchtung.jpg the gate in 1928 file : basa-237k-1-351-86-brandenburg column and parisian place.jpg the gate in the 1930s file : sfp 186 - brandenburger tor.ogv thumbtime 0:05 the gate in 1945 just after the end of world war ii file : people_observing_the_brandenburg_gate_from_the_east_berlin_side , _1984.jpg in 1984 , east berliners and others were kept away from the gate , which they could view only from this distance . file : west and east germans at the brandenburg gate in 1989.jpg the berlin wall in front of the brandenburg gate , shortly before its fall in 1989 file:2005-10-26 brandenburger-tor.jpg gate with pariser platz file : view from reichstag to brandenburg gate and us embassy.jpg the brandenburg gate as seen from the rooftop terrace of the reichstag building , with the united states embassy in the background file : brandenburger tor 2003.jpg brandenburg gate in 2003 file : quadriga.jpg the quadriga with skyscrapers of potsdamer platz file : atardeceres.jpg dark silhouette impression at sunset , 21 august 2010 file : brandenburg gate in french flag colours after paris attack ( 23028317551 ) . jpg the gate lit up with the colors of the french flag after the november 2015 paris attacks file : brandenburg gate quadriga at night.jpg the quadriga at night . see also . mitte ( locality ) puerta de alcalá – a similar structure in madrid siegestor – a similar structure in bavaria . references . external links . official website events at brandenburg gate