Music of Africa

music by regions . north africa and the horn of africa . north africa is the seat of ancient egypt and carthage , civilizations with strong ties to the ancient near east and which influenced the ancient greek and ancient rome . eventually , egypt fell under persian rule followed by greek and roman rule , while carthage was later ruled by romans and vandals . north africa was later conquered by caliphate , who established the region as the maghreb of the arab world . like the musical genres of the nile valley and the horn of africa ( sky-blue and dark green region on map ) , its music has close ties with middle eastern music and utilizes similar melodic modes ( maqamat ) . north african music has a considerable range , from the music of egypt to the berber and the tuareg music of the desert nomads . the region 's art music has for centuries followed the outline of arabic and andalusian classical music : its popular contemporary genres include the algerian raï . with these may be grouped the music of sudan and of the horn of africa , including the music of eritrea , ethiopia , djibouti and somalia . somali music is typically pentatonic , using five pitches per octave in contrast to a heptatonic ( seven note ) scale such as the major scale . the music of the ethiopian highlands uses a fundamental modal system called qenet , of which there are four main modes : tezeta , bati , ambassel , and anchihoy . three additional modes are variations on the above : tezeta minor , bati major , and bati minor . abatte barihun , liner notes of the album ras deshen , 200 . some songs take the name of their qenet , such as tizita , a song of reminiscence . . west , central , southeast and south africa . the ethnomusicological pioneer arthur morris jones ( 1889–1980 ) observed that the shared rhythmic principles of sub-saharan african music traditions constitute one main system . jones , a . m . ( 1959 ) . studies in african music . london : oxford university press . 1978 edition : . similarly , master drummer and scholar c . k . ladzekpo affirms the '' profound homogeneity '' of sub-saharan african rhythmic principles . ladzekpo , c . k . ( 1996 ) . '' cultural understanding of polyrhythm '' . foundation course in african music . african traditional music is frequently functional in nature . performances may be long and often involve the participation of the audience . gcse music – edexcel areas of study , coordination group publications , uk , 2006 , p . 36 . there are , for example , specialised work songs , songs accompanying childbirth , marriage , hunting and political activities , music to ward off evil spirits and to pay respects to good spirits , the dead and the ancestors . none of this is performed outside its intended social context and much of it is associated with a particular dance . some of it , performed by professional musicians , is sacral music or ceremonial and courtly music performed at royal courts . musicologically , sub-saharan africa may be divided into four regions : the eastern region ( light green regions on map ) includes the music of uganda , kenya , rwanda , burundi , tanzania , malawi , mozambique and zimbabwe as well as the islands of madagascar , the seychelles , mauritius and comor . many of these have been influenced by arabic music and also by the music of india , indonesia and polynesia , though the region 's indigenous musical traditions are primarily in the mainstream of the sub-saharan niger–congo language . the southern region ( brown region on map ) includes the music of south africa , lesotho , swaziland , botswana , namibia and angola . the central region ( dark blue region on map ) includes the music of chad , the central african republic , the democratic republic of the congo and zambia , including pygmy music . west african music ( yellow region on map ) includes the music of senegal and the gambia , of guinea and guinea-bissau , sierra leone and liberia , of the inland plains of mali , niger and burkina faso , the coastal nations of cote d'ivoire , ghana , togo , benin , nigeria , cameroon , gabon and the republic of the congo as well as islands such as sao tome and principe . southern , central and west africa are similarly in the broad sub-saharan musical tradition . they also have several ancillary influences , from the islamic world of africa , and in modern times , the americas and western europe . afrobeat , juju , fuji , highlife , makossa , and kizomba are performed in west africa . west african music has regional variations , with muslim regions incorporating elements of islamic music and non-muslim regions more influenced by indigenous traditions , according to the historian sylviane diouf and ethnomusicologist gerhard kubik . according to diouf , traditional muslim west african music incorporates elements of the adhan ( originating from bilal ibn rabah , an abyssinian african muslim in the early 7th century ) , including lyrics praising god , melody , note changes , '' words that seem to quiver and shake '' in the vocal chords , dramatic changes in musical scales , and nasal intonation . according to kubik , the vocal style of muslim west african singers '' using melisma , wavy intonation , and so forth is a heritage of that large region of west africa that had been in contact with the arabic-islamic world of the maghreb since the seventh and eighth centuries . '' in terms of instrumentation , kubik notes that stringed instruments ( including ancestors of the banjo ) were traditionally favored by muslim west africans , while drumming was traditionally favored by non-muslim west africans . . musical instruments . besides vocalisation , which uses various techniques such as complex hard melisma and yodel , a wide array of musical instruments are also used . african musical instruments include a wide range of drums , slit gongs , rattles and double bells , different types of harps , and harp-like instruments such as the kora and the ngoni , as well as fiddles , many kinds of xylophone and lamellophone such as the mbira , and different types of wind instrument like flutes and trumpets . additionally , string instruments are also used , with the lute-like oud and ngoni serving as musical accompaniment in some areas . there are five groups of sub-saharan africa musical instruments : membranophones , chordophones , aerophones , idiophones , and percussion . membranophones are the drums , including kettles , clay pots , and barrels . chordophones are stringed instruments like harps and fiddles . aerophones are another name for wind instruments . these can include flutes and trumpets , similar to the instruments you hear in american music . idiophones are rattles and shakers , while percussion can be sounds like foot-stomping and hand-clapping . many of the wooden instruments have shapes or pictures carved out into them to represent ancestry . some are decorated with feathers or beads . drums used in african traditional music include talking drums , bougarabou and djembe in west africa , water drums in central and west africa , and the different types of ngoma drums ( or engoma ) in central and southern africa . other percussion instruments include many rattles and shakers , such as the kosika ( kashaka ) , rain stick , bells and wood sticks . also , africa has many other types of drums , and many flutes and stringed and wind instruments . the playing of polyrhythms is one of the most universal characteristics of sub-saharan music , in contrast to polyphony in western music . several uniquely designed instruments have evolved there over time to facilitate the playing of simultaneous contrasting rhythms . the mbira , kalimba , kora , ngoni and dousn'gouni are examples of these instruments which organize notes not in the usual single linear order from bass to treble , but in two separated rank arrays which allows additional ease in playing cross rhythms . the continuing influence of this principle can be seen in the 20th century american instruments the gravi-kora and gravikord which are new modern examples . relationship to language . many languages of africa are tonal languages , leading to a close connection between music and language in some local cultures . these particular communities use vocal sounds and movements with their music as well . in singing , the tonal pattern or the text puts some constraints on the melodic patterns . on the other hand , in instrumental music a native speaker of a language can often perceive a text or texts in the music . this effect also forms the basis of drum languages ( talking drums ) . gcse music – edexcel areas of study , coordination group publications , uk , 2006 , p . 35 , quoting examination board syllabus . . influences on african music . historically , several factors have influenced the traditional music of africa . the music has been influenced by language , the environment , a variety of cultures , politics , and population movement , all of which are intermingled . each african group evolved in a different area of the continent , which means that they ate different foods , faced different weather conditions , and came in contact with different groups than other societies did . each group moved at different rates and to different places than others , and thus each was influenced by different people and circumstances . furthermore , each society did not necessarily operate under the same government , which also significantly influenced their music styles . nketia , j . h . kwabena . the music of africa . new york : norton and company , 1974 . print . . influence on north american music . although african-american music is widely known and loved , and much popular north american music emerged from it , white american music also has strong african roots . the musical traditions of the irish and scottish settlers merged with african-american musical elements to become old-time and bluegrass , among other genres . african music has been a major factor in the shaping of what we know today as dixieland , the blues and jazz . these styles have all borrowed from african rhythms and sounds , brought over the atlantic ocean by slaves . african music in sub-saharan africa is mostly upbeat polyrhythmic and joyful , whereas the blues should be viewed as an aesthetic development resulting from the conditions of slavery in the new world . on his album graceland , the american folk musician paul simon employs african bands , rhythms and melodies as a musical backdrop for his own lyrics ; especially ladysmith black mambazo . in the early 1970s , remi kabaka , an afro-rock avant-garde drummer , laid the initial drum patterns that created the afro-rock sounds in bands such as ginger baker 's airforce , the rolling stones , and steve winwood 's traffic . he continued to work with winwood , paul mccartney , and mick jagger throughout the decade . azam , o . a . ( 1993 ) , '' the recent influence of african music on the american music scene and music market '' . certain sub-saharan african musical traditions also had a significant influence on such works as disney 's the lion king and the lion king ii : simba 's pride , which blend traditional music with western music . songs such as '' circle of life '' and '' he lives in you '' combine of zulu and english lyrics , as well as traditional african styles of music with more modern western styles . additionally , the disney film incorporates numerous words from the bantu swahili language . the phrase hakuna matata , for example , is an actual swahili phrase that does in fact mean '' no worries '' . characters such as simba , kovu , and zira are also swahili words , meaning '' lion '' , '' scar '' , and '' hate '' , respectively . '' the characters . '' lion king pride . 2008 . disney , 1997–2008 . web . 1 february 2010 . babatunde olatunji , miriam makeba and hugh masekela were among the earliest african performing artists to develop sizable fan bases in the united states . non-commercial african-american radio stations promoted african music as part of their cultural and political missions in the 1960s and 1970s . african music also found eager audiences at historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) and appealed particularly to activists in the civil rights and black power movements . '' african sounds in the american south : community radio , historically black colleges , and musical pan africanism , '' the journal of popular music studies , december 2015 . popular music . african popular music , like african traditional music , is vast and varied . most contemporary genres of african popular music build on cross-pollination with western popular music . many genres of popular music , including blues , jazz and rumba , derive to varying degrees from musical traditions from africa , taken to the americas by enslaved africans . these rhythms and sounds have subsequently been adapted by newer genres like rock , soul music , and rhythm and blues . similarly , african popular music has adopted elements , particularly the musical instruments and recording studio techniques of western music . one of the most important 20th century singers of south african popular music was miriam makeba , who played a key-role , in the 60s , in drawing global audience 's attention to african music and its meaning . zenzile miriam makeba was said to have been one of the most influential and popular musicians of africa , beginning in the 1950s . she was a part of three bands , including one all-woman band and two others . she performed all types of jazz music , traditional african music , and music that was popular in western africa at the time . miriam played a majority of her music in the form of '' mbube '' , which was '' a style of vocal harmony which drew on american jazz , ragtime , and anglican church hymns , as well as indigenous styles of music . '' after she moved to the u.s . , problems with makeba 's passport occurred and she had to stay in america , it was said that she put an american twist on most of her african music . she had a very diverse scale of her vocal range and could hit almost any note . miriam makeba musical style and themes '' the empress of african music '' died at the age of 76 . the afro-euro hybrid style , the cuban son , has had an influence on certain popular music in africa . some of the first guitar bands on the continent played covers of cuban songs . roberts , john storm ( 1986 : cassette ) afro-cuban comes home : the birth and growth of congo music , original music . the early guitar-based bands from the congo called their music rumba ( although it was son rather than rumba-based ) . the congolese style eventually evolved into what became known as soukous . music industry . for african artists , concerts were the one of the few ways to earn in the industry . piracy and changing consumer behavior are behind declining sales of records . enforcement of copyright law remains weak in africa . musikbi is the first legal music download website in africa . it does not offer streaming and is limited by internet speeds in africa . african countries ( kenya , gambia and south africa ) have seen protest over airtime given to american music . in zimbabwe 75 % of airtime has to be given to local music . protective actions have seen the growth of new genres like urban grooves emerge in zimbabwe . in 2016 sony music launched in africa by opening an office in nigeria . traditionally services of western major international studios have not been available in africa , the local demand for their music being met through piracy .