Spanish language in the United States

current status . although the united states has no de jure official language , english is the dominant language of business , education , government , religion , media , culture , and the public sphere . virtually all state and federal government agencies and large corporations use english as their internal working language , especially at the management level . some states , such as arizona , california , florida , new mexico , and texas provide bilingual legislated notices and official documents in spanish and english and in other commonly-used languages . english is the home language of most americans , including a growing proportion of hispanics . between 2000 and 2015 , the proportion of hispanics who spoke spanish at home decreased from 78 to 73 percent . as noted above , the only major exception is the commonwealth of puerto rico in which spanish is the official and the most commonly-used language . throughout the history of the southwest united states , the controversial issue of language as part of cultural rights and bilingual state government representation has caused sociocultural friction between anglophones and hispanophones . spanish is now the most widely-taught second language in the united states . . california . california 's first constitution recognized spanish-language rights : by 1870 , english-speakers were a majority in california ; in 1879 , the state promulgated a new constitution with a clause under which all official proceedings were to be conducted exclusively in english , which remained in effect until 1966 . in 1986 , california voters added a new constitutional clause by referendum : spanish remains widely spoken throughout the state , and many government forms , documents , and services are bilingual in english and spanish . although all official proceedings are to be conducted in english : . arizona . the state , like its neighbors in the southwest , has had close linguistic and cultural ties with mexico . the state , except for the 1853 gadsden purchase , was part of the new mexico territory until 1863 , when the western half was made into arizona territory . the area of the former gadsden purchase spoke mostly spanish until the 1940s although the tucson area had a higher ratio of anglophones ( including mexican americans who were fluent in english ) . the continuous arrival of mexican settlers increases the number of spanish-speakers . florida . most of the residents of the miami metropolitan area speak spanish at home , and the influence of spanish can even be seen in many features of the local dialect of english . miami is considered the '' capital of latin us '' for its many bilingual corporations , banks , and media outlets that cater to international business . in addition , there are several other major cities in florida with a sizable percentage of the population able to speak spanish , most notably tampa ( 18 % ) and orlando ( 16.6 % ) . ybor city , a historical neighborhood close to downtown tampa , was founded and is populated chiefly by spanish and cuban immigrants . most latinos in florida are of cuban ( especially in miami and tampa ) or puerto rican ( miami and orlando ) ancestry , followed by mexican ( tampa and fort myers/naples ) and colombian ancestry . new mexico . new mexico is commonly thought to have spanish as an official language alongside english because of its wide usage and legal promotion of spanish in the state ; however , the state has no official language . new mexico 's laws are promulgated in both spanish and english . english is the state government 's paper working language , but government business is often conducted in spanish , particularly at the local level . spanish has been spoken in the new mexico-colorado border and the contemporary us–mexico border since the 16th century . because of its relative isolation from other spanish-speaking areas over most of its 400-year existence , new mexico spanish , particularly the spanish of northern new mexico and colorado has retained many elements of 16th- and 17th-century spanish and has developed its own vocabulary . cobos , rubén ( 2003 ) '' introduction '' a dictionary of new mexico & southern colorado spanish ( 2nd ed . ) museum of new mexico press , santa fe , n.m . , p . ix , in addition , it contains many words from nahuatl , the language that is still spoken by the nahua people in mexico . new mexican spanish also contains loanwords from the pueblo languages of the upper rio grande , mexican-spanish words ( mexicanismos ) , and borrowings from english . grammatical changes include the loss of the second-person plural verb form , changes in verb endings , particularly in the preterite , and the partial merger of the second and third conjugations . cobos , rubén , op . cit . , pp . x-xi . . texas . in texas , english is the state 's de facto official language although it lacks de jure status and is used in government . however , the continual influx of spanish-speaking immigrants has increased the import of spanish in texas . although it is a part of the southern united states , texas 's counties bordering mexico are mostly hispanic and so spanish is commonly spoken in the region . the texas government , in section 2054.116 of the government code , mandates providing by state agency of information on their websites in spanish to assist residents who have limited english proficiency . '' sec . 2054.001 . '' texas legislature . retrieved on june 27 , 2010 . . kansas . spanish has been spoken in the state of kansas since at least the early 1900s , primarily because of several waves of immigration from mexico . that began with refugees fleeing the mexican revolution ( c . 1910–1920 ) . there are now several towns in kansas with significant spanish-speaking populations : liberal , garden city , and dodge city all have latino populations over 40 % . recently , linguists working with the kansas speaks project have shown how high numbers of spanish-speaking residents have influenced the dialect of english spoken in areas like liberal and in other parts of southwest kansas . there are many spanish-language radio stations throughout kansas , like kyys in the kansas city area as well as various spanish-language newspapers and television stations throughout the state . several towns in kansas boast spanish-english dual language immersion schools in which students are instructed in both languages for varying amounts of time . examples include horace mann elementary in wichita , named after the horace mann , and buffalo jones elementary in garden city , named after charles '' buffalo '' jones , a frontiersman , bison preservationist , and cofounder of garden city . puerto rico . the commonwealth of puerto rico recognizes spanish and english as official languages , but spanish is the dominant first language . this is largely due to the fact that the territory was under spanish control for 400 years , and was inhabited by mainly spanish-speaking settlers prior to being ceded to the united states in 1898 . place names . learning trends . spanish is currently the most widely taught language after english in american secondary schools and higher education . richard i . brod . afl bulletin . vol . 19 , no . 2 ( january 1988 ) : 39–44 more than 790,000 university students were enrolled in spanish courses in the autumn of 2013 , with spanish the most widely taught foreign language in american colleges and universities . some 78.6 percent of the total number of u.s . students enrolled in foreign-language courses take spanish , followed by french ( 12.7 % ) , american sign language ( 7 % ) , german ( 5.5 % ) , italian ( 4.6 % ) , japanese ( 4.3 % ) , and chinese ( 3.9 % ) although the totals remain relatively small in relation to the total us population . . radio . spanish language radio is the largest non-english broadcasting media . todd chambers , '' the state of spanish-language radio . '' journal of radio studies 13.1 ( 2006 ) : 34–50 . while foreign language broadcasting declined steadily , spanish broadcasting grew steadily from the 1920s to the 1970s . the 1930s were boom years . jorge reina schement , “ the origins of spanish-language radio : the case of san antonio , texas , ” journalism history 4:2 ( 1977 ) : 56–61 . the early success depended on the concentrated geographical audience in texas and the southwest . félix f . gutiérrez and jorge reina schement , spanish-language radio in the southwestern united states ( austin : ut center for mexican american studies , 1979 ) . american stations were close to mexico , which enabled a steady circular flow of entertainers , executives and technicians and stimulated the creative initiatives of hispanic radio executives , brokers , and advertisers . ownership was increasingly concentrated in the 1960s and 1970s . the industry sponsored the now-defunct trade publication sponsor from the late 1940s to 1968 . andrew paxman , '' the rise of us spanish-language radio from 'dead airtime ' to consolidated ownership ( 1920s–1970s ) . '' journalism history 44.3 ( 2018 ) . spanish-language radio has influenced american and latino discourse on key current affairs issues such as citizenship and immigration . dolores inés casillas , sounds of belonging : us spanish-language radio and public advocacy ( nyu press , 2014 ) . . variation . there is a great diversity of accents of spanish in the united states . the influence of english on american spanish is very important . in many latino ( also called hispanic ) youth subcultures , it is common to mix spanish and english to produce spanglish , the name for the mixture of english words and phrases to spanish for effective communication . the academia norteamericana de la lengua española ( north american academy of the spanish language ) tracks the developments of the spanish spoken in the united states and the influences of english . varieties . linguists distinguish the following varieties of the spanish spoken in the united states : mexican spanish : the us–mexico border , throughout the southwest from california to texas , as well as in chicago , but becoming ubiquitous throughout the continental united states since mexican spanish is used as the standard dialect of spanish in the continental united states . caribbean spanish : spanish as spoken by puerto ricans , cubans , and dominicans . it is largely heard throughout the northeast and florida , especially new york city and miami , and in other cities in the east . central american spanish : spanish as spoken by hispanics with origins in central american countries such as el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , costa rica , and panama . it is largely heard in major cities throughout california and texas , as well as washington , dc ; new york ; and miami . south american spanish : spanish as spoken by hispanics with origins in south american countries such as venezuela , colombia , peru , ecuador , chile , and bolivia . it is largely heard in major cities throughout new york state , california , texas , and florida . colonial spanish : spanish as spoken by descendants of spanish colonists and early mexicans before the united states expanded and annexed the southwest and other areas . californian ( 1769–present ) : california , especially the central coast isleño spanish ( 1783–present ) : st . bernard parish , louisiana new mexican spanish : central and north-central new mexico and south-central colorado and the border regions of arizona , texas , and new mexico , and southeastern colorado most spanish-speakers , other than those of the first generation , tend to speak the language with the accents of american english of the region in which they grow up . common english words derived from spanish . many standard american english words are of spanish etymology , or originate from third languages but entered english via spanish . admiral avocado from nahuatl aficionado banana ( originally from wolof ) buckaroo cafeteria chili ( from nahuatl chocolate ( from nahuatl cigar corral coyote ( from nahuatl desperado guerrilla guitar hurricane from the taíno storm god juracán ) junta lasso patio potato ; see potato etymology ) ranch rodeo siesta tomato from nahuatl tornado vanilla . phonology . like in most of hispanic america , and ( before and are pronounced as , just like . however , seseo ( not distinguishing from is also typical of the speech of hispanic americans of andalusian and canary islands . also , the english pronunciation of soft c helps to entrench seseo even though occurs in english . spanish in spain , particularly the regions with a distinctive phoneme , pronounces with the tip of tongue against the alveolar ridge . phonetically , that is an '' apico-alveolar '' '' grave '' sibilant , with a weak '' hushing '' sound that is reminiscent of fricatives . in the americas and in andalusia and the canary islands , both in spain , standard european spanish may sound similar to like english sh as in she . however , thwt apico-alveolar realization of is common in some latin american spanish dialects which lack . some inland colombian spanish , particularly antioquia , and andean regions of peru and bolivia also have an apico-alveolar . american spanish usually features yeísmo , with no distinction between and , and both are pronounced . however , yeísmo is an expanding and now a dominant feature of european spanish , particularly in urban speech ( madrid , toledo ) and especially in andalusia and the canary islands , but has been preserved in some rural areas of northern spain . speakers of rioplatense spanish pronounce both and as or . the traditional pronunciation of the digraph , , is preserved in some dialects along the andes range , especially in inland peru and the highlands of colombia highlands , northern argentina , and all of bolivia and paraguay . most speakers with ancestors born in the coastal regions may debuccalize or aspirate syllable-final to or entirely drop ; this , está ( '' s/he is '' ) sounds like or , as in southern spain ( murcia , castile–la mancha ( except the northeastern part ) , canary islands , ceuta , and melilla ) . ( before or and are usually aspirated to in caribbean and other coastal dialects as well as in colombia , southern mexico , and most of southern spain . while it may be in other dialects of the americas and often in peru , that is a common feature of castilian spanish . it is usually aspirated to , like in most of southwestern spain . very often , especially in argentina and chile , becomes more fronted before high vowels and then approaches the realization of ich-laut . in other phonological environments , it is realized as either or . in many caribbean dialects , the phonemes and can be exchanged or sound alike at the end of a syllable : caldo > cardo , cardo > caldo . at the end of words , becomes silent , which gives caribbean spanish a partial non-rhoticity . that occurs left often happens as well in ecuador and chile and is a feature brought from extremadura and westernmost andalusia , in spain . in many andean regions , the alveolar trill of rata and carro is realized as an alveolar approximant or even a voiced apico-alveolar . the alveolar approximant is particularly associated with an indigenous substrate and is quite common in andean regions , especially in inland ecuador , peru , most of bolivia , and parts of northern argentina and paraguay . in puerto rico , besides , , and , syllable-final can be realized as , an influence of american english : '' verso '' ( verse ) can become , besides , , or ; '' invierno '' ( winter ) can become , aside from , , or ; and '' escarlata '' ( scarlet ) can become , aside from , , or . word-finally , is usually one of the following : a trill , a tap , approximant , , or silent before a consonant or a pause , as in amo paterno 'paternal love ' , and amor , a tap , approximant , or before a vowel-initial word , as in amo and eterno 'eternal love ' ) . voiced consonants , , and are pronounced as plosives after and sometimes before any consonant in most colombian spanish dialects ( rather than the fricative or approximant characteristic of most other dialects ) , as in pardo , barba , algo , peligro , desde , rather than , , , , . a notable exception is the nariño department and most costeño speech ( atlantic coastal dialects ) , which feature the soft , fricatives that are common to all other hispanic american and european dialects . word-finally , is frequently velar in latin american spanish and pan ( bread ) is often pronounced . to an english-speaker , the makes pan sound like pang . velarization of word-final is so widespread in the americas that only a few regions maintain the alveolar , , as in europe : most of mexico , colombia ( except for coastal dialects ) , and argentina ( except for some northern regions ) . elsewhere , velarization is common although alveolar word-final appears among some educated speakers , especially in the media or in singing . velar word-final is also frequent in spain , especially in the south ( andalusia and the canary islands ) and in the northwest : galicia , asturias , and león . vocabulary . the usage of spanish words by american bilinguals shows a convergence of semantics between english and spanish cognates . for example , the spanish words atender ( '' to pay attention to '' ) and éxito ( '' success '' ) have acquired a similar semantic range in american spanish to the english words '' attend '' and '' exit . '' in some cases , loanwords from english turn existing spanish words into homonyms : coche has come to acquire the additional meaning of '' coach '' in the united states , it retains its older meaning of '' car . '' disappearance of de ( of ) in certain expressions , as is the case with canarian spanish : esposo rosa for esposo de rosa , gofio millo for gofio de millo , etc . doublets of arabic-latin synonyms , with the arabic form are more common in american spanish , which derives from latin american spanish and so is influenced by andalusian spanish , like andalusian and latin american alcoba for standard habitación or dormitorio ( 'bedroom ' ) or alhaja for standard joya ( 'jewel ' ) . see spanish dialects and varieties vocabulary . future . spanish-speakers are the fastest growing linguistic group in the united states . continued immigration and the prevalent spanish-language mass media ( such as univisión , telemundo , and azteca américa ) support spanish-speakers . moreover , the north american free trade agreement makes many american manufacturers use multilingual product labeling in english , french , and spanish , three of the four official languages of the organization of american states ( the other is portuguese ) . besides the businesses that always have catered to hispanophone immigrants , a small but increasing number of mainstream american retailers now advertise bilingually in spanish-speaking areas and offer bilingual customer services . one common indicator of such businesses is se habla español , which means '' spanish is spoken '' . the annual state of the union address and other presidential speeches are translated into spanish , following the precedent set by bill clinton 's administration . moreover , non-hispanic american origin politicians fluent in spanish speak in spanish to hispanic-majority constituency . there are 500 spanish newspapers , 152 magazines , and 205 publishers in the united states . magazine and local television advertising expenditures for the hispanic market have increased substantially from 1999 to 2003 , with growth of 58 percent and 43 percent , respectively . historically , immigrants ' languages tend to disappear or to be reduced by generational assimilation . spanish disappeared in several countries and us territories during the 20th century , notably in the philippines and in the pacific island countries of guam , micronesia , palau , the northern marianas islands , and the marshall islands . the english-only movement seeks to establish english as the sole official language of the united states . generally , they exert political public pressure upon hispanophone immigrants to learn english and speak it publicly . as universities , business , and the professions use english , there is much social pressure to learn english for upward socio-economic mobility . generally , hispanics ( 13.4 % of the 2002 us population ) are bilingual to a degree . a simmons market research survey recorded that 19 percent of hispanics speak only spanish , 9 percent speak only english , 55 percent have limited english proficiency , and 17 percent are fully english-spanish bilingual . intergenerational transmission of spanish is a more accurate indicator of spanish 's future in the united states than raw statistical numbers of hispanophone immigrants . although hispanics hold varying english proficiency levels , almost all second-generation hispanics speak english , but about 50 percent speak spanish at home . two thirds of third-generation mexican americans speak only english at home . calvin veltman undertook in 1988 , for the national center for education statistics and for the hispanic policy development project , the most complete study of anglicization by hispanophone immigrants . veltman 's language shift studies document abandonment of spanish at rates of 40 percent for immigrants who arrived in the us before the age of 14 , and 70 percent for immigrants who arrived before the age of 10 . the complete set of the studies ' demographic projections postulates the near-complete assimilation of a given hispanophone immigrant cohort within two generations . although his study based itself upon a large 1976 sample from the bureau of the census , which has not been repeated , data from the 1990 census tend to confirm the great anglicization of the hispanic population . literature . american literature in spanish dates back to 1610 when a spanish explorer gaspar pérez de villagrá first published his epic poem history of new mexico . however , it was not until the late 20th century that spanish , spanglish , and bilingual poetry , plays , novels , and essays were readily available on the market through independent , trade , and commercial publishing houses and theaters . cultural theorist christopher gonzález identifies latina/o authors—such as oscar zeta acosta , gloria anzaldúa , piri thomas , gilbert hernandez , sandra cisneros , and junot díaz—as having written innovative works that created new audiences for hispanic literature in the united states .