Lucerne

historic population . the historical population of lucerne is given in the following table : . religion . the city grew up around sankt leodegar abbey , founded in ad 840 , and remained strongly roman catholic into the 21st century . by 1850 , 96.9 % of the population was catholic , in 1900 it was 81.9 % and in 1950 it was still 72.3 % . the religious membership of lucerne was : 35,682 ( 60 % ) roman catholic , 9,227 ( 15.5 % ) protestant , with an additional 1,979 ( 3.33 % ) who were of some other christian denominations ; 1,824 individuals ( 3.07 % of the population ) muslim ; 196 individuals ( 0.33 % of the population ) jewish . of the remainder , 1,073 ( 1.8 % ) individuals were another religion ; 6,310 ( 10.61 % ) stated they do not belong to any organized religion ; and 3,205 ( 5.39 % ) did not answer the question . . economy . , there were a total of 77,641 people employed in the municipality . of these , a total of 166 people worked in 53 businesses in the primary economic sector . the secondary sector employed 7,326 workers in 666 separate businesses . finally , the tertiary sector provided 70,149 jobs in 6,929 businesses . in 2013 a total of 11.0 % of the population received social assistance . swiss federal statistical office - regional portraits accessed 2 may 2016 51.7 % of the population of the municipality were employed in some capacity . at the same time , women made up 47.9 % of the workforce . lucerne is home to a number of major swiss companies , including schindler group , chronoswiss , emmi , ef education first and the luzerner kantonalbank . suva , one of switzerland 's oldest accident insurance companies , is also based in lucerne , as is the university of lucerne , the youngest of switzerland 's traditional universities . thanks to its continuous tax-cutting policies , lucerne has become switzerland 's most business-friendly canton . lucerne offers switzerland 's lowest corporate tax rate at cantonal level . furthermore , lucerne also offers very moderate personal income tax rates . in a recent published study of bak basel economics taxation index 2012 , lucerne made it to the 4th place with an only marginally 2 % higher tax rate compared to the top canton in this comparison . . sights . since the city straddles the reuss where it drains the lake , it has a number of bridges . the most famous is the chapel bridge ( kapellbrücke ) , a long wooden covered bridge originally built in 1333 , the oldest covered bridge in europe , although much of it had to be replaced after a fire on 18 august 1993 , allegedly caused by a discarded cigarette . partway across , the bridge runs by the octagonal water tower ( wasserturm ) , a fortification from the 13th century . inside the bridge are a series of paintings from the 17th century depicting events from lucerne 's history . the bridge with its tower is the city 's most famous landmark . downriver , between the kasernenplatz and the mühlenplatz , the spreuer bridge ( spreuerbrücke or mühlenbrücke , mill bridge ) zigzags across the reuss . constructed in 1408 , it features a series of medieval-style 17th century plague paintings by kaspar meglinger ( de ) titled dance of death ( totentanzzyklus ) . the bridge has a small chapel in the middle that was added in 1568 . old town lucerne is mainly located just north of the reuss , and still has several fine half-timber structures with painted fronts . remnants of the old town walls exist on the hill above lucerne , complete with eight tall watch towers . an additional gated tower sits at the base of the hill on the banks of the reuss . the twin needle towers of the church of st . leodegar , which was named after the city 's patron saint , sit on a small hill just above the lake front . originally built in 735 , the present structure was erected in 1633 in the late renaissance style . however , the towers are surviving remnants of an earlier structure . the interior is richly decorated . the church is popularly called the hofkirche ( in german ) and is known locally as the hofchile ( in swiss-german ) . bertel thorvaldsen 's famous carving of a dying lion ( the lion monument , or löwendenkmal ) is found in a small park just off the löwenplatz . the carving commemorates the hundreds of swiss guards who were massacred in 1792 during the french revolution , when an armed mob stormed the tuileries palace in paris . the swiss museum of transport is a large and comprehensive museum exhibiting all forms of transport , including locomotives , automobiles , ships , and aircraft . it is to be found beside the lake in the northern-eastern section of the city . the culture and convention center ( kkl ) beside the lake in the center of the city was designed by nouvel jean . the center has one of the world 's leading concert halls , with acoustics by russell johnson . the richard wagner museum is found on the lake at tribschen and is dedicated to the composer richard wagner . wagner lived in lucerne from 1866 to 1872 and his former villa now hosts the museum dedicated to him . . culture and events . culture . since plans for the new culture and convention centre arose in the late 1980s , lucerne has found a balance between the so-called established culture and alternative culture . a consensus was reached that culminated in a culture compromise ( kulturkompromiss ) . the established culture comprises the lucerne culture and congress centre ( kkl ) , the city theater ( luzerner theater ) and , in a broader sense , smaller establishments such as the kleintheater , founded by comedian emil steinberger , a lucerne native , or stadtkeller , a music restaurant in the city 's old town . kkl houses a concert hall as well as the museum of art lucerne ( kunstmuseum luzern ) . alternative culture took place mostly on the premises of a former tube factory , which became known as boa . other localities for alternative culture have since emerged in the same inner city area as boa . initially , boa staged various plays , but concerts became more and more common ; this new use of the building clashed with the development of apartment buildings on nearby lots of land . due to possible noise pollution , boa was closed and a replacement in a less heavily inhabited area is currently under construction . critics claimed though that the new establishment would not meet the requirements for an alternative culture . südpol is a center for performing arts in lucerne presenting music- , dance- and theatre-events . the house at the foot of pilatus opened in november 2008 . lucerne is home to the luzerner sinfonieorchester , a category a symphonic orchestra , and to the 21st century symphony , and they both hold most of their performances in the lucerne culture and congress centre . lucerne is also home to keramikkonzerte , a series of classical chamber music concerts held throughout each year , as well as zaubersee , a festival dedicated to russian classical music . . events . every year , towards the end of winter , fasnacht ( carnival ) breaks out in the streets , alleyways and squares of the old town . this is a glittering outdoor party , where chaos and merriness reign and nothing is as it normally is . strange characters in fantastic masks and costumes make their way through the alleyways , while guggenmusiken ( carnival bands ) blow their instruments in joyful cacophony and thousands of bizarrely clad people sing and dance away the winter . the lucerner fasnacht , based on religious , catholic backgrounds , starts every year on the thursday before aschermittwoch ( ash wednesday ) with a big bang at 5am called morgenwacht ( morning watch ) . there are big parades in the afternoon on schmotzige donnerstag ( literally : fat tuesday ) and the following monday , called güdismontag ( literally : shrove monday ) , which attract tens of thousands of people . lucerne 's carnival ends with a crowning finish on güdisdienstag ( literally : fat tuesday ) evening with the monstercorso , a tremendous parade of guggenmusiken , lights and lanterns with even a larger audience . rather recently a fourth fasnacht day has been introduced on the saturday between the others fasnacht days , the rüüdige samstag while mainly several indoor balls take place . from dusk till dawn on the evenings of schmotzige donnerstag , güdismontag , and after the monstercorso many bands wander through the historical part of the city playing typical fasnacht tunes . until midnight , the historical part of the city usually is packed with people participating . a large part of the audience are also dressed up in costumes , even a majority in the evenings . the city hosts various renowned festivals throughout the year . the lucerne festival for classical music takes place in the summer . its orchestra , the lucerne festival orchestra , is hand-picked from some of the finest instrumentalists in the world . in june yearly the pop music festival b-sides takes place in lucerne . it focuses on international acts in alternative music , indie rock , experimental rock and other cutting edge and left field artistic musical genres . in july , the blue balls festival brings jazz , blues and punk music to the lake promenade and halls of the culture and convention center . the lucerne blues festival is another musical festival which usually takes place in november . since spring 2004 , lucerne has hosted the festival rose d'or for television entertainment . and in april , the well-established comics festival fumetto attracts an international audience . being the cultural center of a rather rural region , lucerne regularly holds different folklore festivals , such as lucerne cheese festival , held annually . in 2004 , lucerne was the focus of schwingen fans when it had hosted the swiss wrestling and alpine festival ( eidgenössisches schwing- und älplerfest ) , which takes place every three years in a different location . a national music festival ( eidgenössiches musikfest ) attracted marching bands from all parts of switzerland in 2006 . in summer 2008 , the yodelling festival ( eidgenössisches jodlerfest ) had a similar impact . the 2021 winter universiade will be hosted by lucerne . transport . lucerne boasts a developed and well-run transport network , with the main operator , verkehrsbetriebe luzern , running both the trolleybuses in lucerne and a motor buses network in the city and to neighboring municipalities . other operators , such as postauto schweiz and auto ag rothenburg , provide bus services to other towns and villages . lucerne railway station is one of switzerland 's principal stations , and is well-connected to the rest of switzerland via railway services operated by swiss federal railways and the zentralbahn . there are 40 trains per day between lucerne and zurich , with an average travel time of 48 minutes . zurich airport can be reached in just over an hour . two other railway stations are located within the city boundaries , with lucerne allmend/messe railway station close to the swissporarena in the south of the city , and the lucerne verkehrshaus railway station adjacent to the swiss museum of transport in the east . lucerne 's city transit system is fully integrated into the coherent and integrated fare network system called passepartout encompassing all kind of public transport in the cantons of lucerne , obwalden , and nidwalden . sport . image : swissporarena luftaufnahme cropped.jpg right thumb the swissporarena is home to fc lucerne of the swiss super league there are several football clubs throughout the city . the most successful one is fc luzern which plays in switzerland 's premier league ( swiss super league ) . the club plays its home matches at the new swissporarena , with a capacity of 16,800 . the city 's main hockey team is the hc luzern which plays in the swiss second league , the fourth tier of swiss hockey . they play their home games in the 5,000-seat swiss life arena . in the past , lucerne also produced national successes in men 's handball and women 's volleyball and softball . having a long tradition of equestrianism , lucerne has co-hosted csio switzerland , an international equestrian show jumping event , until it left entirely for st . gallen in 2006 . since then , the lucerne equestrian masters replaced it . there is also an annual horse racing event , usually taking place in august . lucerne annually hosts the final leg of the rowing world cup on rotsee lake . numerous world rowing championships have been held in lucerne including the inaugural world championships of 1962 and then the regattas of 1974 , 1982 and 2001 lucerne hosts the annual spitzen leichtathletik luzern track and field meeting , which attracts world class athletes such as yohan blake and valerie adams . the city also provides facilities for ice-hockey , figure-skating , golf , swimming , basketball , rugby , skateboarding , climbing and more . lucerne hosted fivb beach volleyball world tour event lucerne open 2015 and fivb beach volleyball u21 world championship in 2016 . gallery . file : lucerne 's jesuit church at sunset.jpg jesuit church file : löwendenkmal tourists.jpg lucerne 's famous lion monument commemorates the swiss guards of louis xvi who were massacred in 1792 during the french revolution file : luzern - rathausquai.jpg the crowded rathausquai file : jodlerfest08.jpg yodelling festival 2008 file : suva , schw . unfallversicherungsgesellschaft img 4964.jpg the suva head office , set on a hill overlooking the centre of lucerne file : picswiss lu-03-24.jpg lucerne 's town hall has been home to the city 's government for centuries . notable people .