Self-esteem

history . the concept of self-esteem has its origins in the 18th century , first expressed in the writings of david hume . the scottish enlightenment thinker , shows the idea that it is important to value and think well of yourself because it serves as a motivational function that enables people to explore their full potential . the identification of self-esteem as a distinct psychological construct has its origins in the work of philosopher , psychologist , geologist , and anthropologist william james ( 1892 ) . james identified multiple dimensions of the self , with two levels of hierarchy : processes of knowing ( called the ' i-self ' ) and the resulting knowledge about the self ( the 'me-self ' ) . the observation about the self and storage of those observations by the i-self creates three types of knowledge , which collectively account for the me-self , according to james . these are the material self , social self , and spiritual self . the social self comes closest to self-esteem , comprising all characteristics recognized by others . the material self consists of representations of the body and possessions and the spiritual self of descriptive representations and evaluative dispositions regarding the self . this view of self-esteem as the collection of an individual 's attitudes toward oneself remains today . james , w . ( 1892 ) . psychology : the briefer course . new york : henry holt . in the mid-1960s , social psychologist morris rosenberg defined self-esteem as a feeling of self-worth and developed the rosenberg self-esteem scale ( rses ) , which became the most-widely used scale to measure self-esteem in the social sciences . in the early 20th century , the behaviorism minimized introspective study of mental processes , emotions , and feelings , replacing introspection with objective study through experiments on behaviors observed in relation with the environment . behaviorism viewed the human being as an animal subject to reinforcements , and suggested placing psychology as an experimental science , similar to chemistry or biology . as a consequence , clinical trials on self-esteem were overlooked , since behaviorists considered the idea less liable to rigorous measurement . josé-vicente bonet . sé amigo de ti mismo : manual de autoestima . 1997 . ed . sal terrae . maliaño ( cantabria , españa ) . in the mid-20th century , the rise of phenomenology and humanistic psychology led to renewed interest in self-esteem . self-esteem then took a central role in personal self-actualization and in the treatment of psychic disorders . psychologists started to consider the relationship between psychotherapy and the personal satisfaction of persons with high self-esteem as useful to the field . this led to new elements being introduced to the concept of self-esteem , including the reasons why people tend to feel less worthy and why people become discouraged or unable to meet challenges by themselves . in 1992 the political scientist francis fukuyama associated self-esteem with what plato called thumos – the '' spiritedness '' part of the platonic soul . the core self-evaluations approach included self-esteem as one of four dimensions that comprise one 's fundamental appraisal of oneself - along with locus of control , neuroticism , and self-efficacy . the concept of core self-evaluations as first examined by judge , locke , and durham ( 1997 ) , has since proven to have the ability to predict job satisfaction and job performance . self-esteem may be essential to self-evaluation . . in public policy . the importance of self-esteem gained endorsement from some government and non-government groups starting around the 1970s , such that one can speak of a self-esteem movement . this movement can be used as an example of promising evidence that psychological research can have an effect on forming public policy . the underlying idea of the movement was that low self-esteem was the root of problems for individuals , making it the root of societal problems and dysfunctions . a leading figure of the movement , psychologist nathaniel branden , stated : '' i can not think of a single psychological problem – from anxiety and depression , to fear of intimacy or of success , to spouse battery or child molestation – that is not traced back to the problem of low self-esteem '' . self-esteem was believed to be a cultural phenomenon of western society since low self-esteem was not found in collectivism countries such as japan . concern about low self-esteem and its many presumed negative consequences led california assemblyman john vasconcellos to work to set up and fund the task force on self-esteem and personal and social responsibility in california in 1986 . vasconcellos argued that this task force could combat many of the state 's problems – from crime and teen pregnancy to school underachievement and pollution . he compared increasing self-esteem to giving out a vaccine for a disease : it could help protect people from being overwhelmed by life 's challenges . the task force set up committees in many california counties and formed a committee of scholars to review the available literature on self-esteem . this committee found very small associations between low self-esteem and its assumed consequences , ultimately showing that low self-esteem is not the root of all societal problems and not as important as the committee had originally thought . however , the authors of the paper that summarized the review of the literature still believe that self-esteem is an independent variable that affects major social problems . the task force disbanded in 1995 , and the national council for self-esteem and later the national association for self-esteem ( nase ) was established , taking on the task force 's mission . vasconcellos and jack canfield were members of its advisory board in 2003 , and members of its masters ' coalition included anthony robbins , bernie siegel , and gloria steinem . . theories . many early theories suggested that self-esteem is a basic human need or motivation . american psychologist abraham maslow included self-esteem in his hierarchy of human needs . he described two different forms of '' esteem '' : the need for respect from others in the form of recognition , success , and admiration , and the need for self-respect in the form of self-love , self-confidence , skill , or aptitude . respect from others was believed to be more fragile and easily lost than inner self-esteem . according to maslow , without the fulfillment of the self-esteem need , individuals will be driven to seek it and unable to grow and obtain self-actualization . maslow also states that the healthiest expression of self-esteem '' is the one which manifests in the respect we deserve for others , more than renown , fame , and flattery '' . modern theories of self-esteem explore the reasons humans are motivated to maintain a high regard for themselves . sociometer theory maintains that self-esteem evolved to check one 's level of status and acceptance in ones ' social group . according to terror management theory , self-esteem serves a protective function and reduces anxiety about life and death . carl rogers ( 1902–1987 ) , an advocate of humanistic psychology , theorized the origin of many people 's problems to be that they despise themselves and consider themselves worthless and incapable of being loved . this is why rogers believed in the importance of giving unconditional acceptance to a client and when this was done it could improve the client 's self-esteem . in his therapy sessions with clients , he offered positive regard no matter what . indeed , the concept of self-esteem is approached since then in humanistic psychology as an inalienable right for every person , summarized in the following sentence : . measurement . self-esteem is typically assessed using self-report inventories . one of the most widely used instruments , the rosenberg self-esteem scale ( rses ) is a 10-item self-esteem scale score that requires participants to indicate their level of agreement with a series of statements about themselves . an alternative measure , the coopersmith inventory uses a 50-question battery over a variety of topics and asks subjects whether they rate someone as similar or dissimilar to themselves . if a subject 's answers demonstrate solid self-regard , the scale regards them as well adjusted . if those answers reveal some inner shame , it considers them to be prone to social deviance . implicit measures of self-esteem began to be used in the 1980s . these rely on indirect measures of cognitive processing thought to be linked to implicit self-esteem , including the name letter task . koole , s . l . , & pelham , b . w . ( 2003 ) . on the nature of implicit self-esteem : the case of the name letter effect . in s . spencer , s . fein , & m . p . zanna ( eds . ) , motivated social perception : the ontario symposium ( pp . 93–116 ) . hillsdale , nj : lawrence erlbaum . such indirect measures are designed to reduce awareness of the process of assessment . when used to assess implicit self-esteem , psychologists feature self-relevant stimuli to the participant and then measure how quickly a person identifies positive or negative stimuli . for example , if a woman was given the self-relevant stimuli of female and mother , psychologists would measure how quickly she identified the negative word , evil , or the positive word , kind . development across lifespan . experiences in a person 's life are a major source of how self-esteem develops . in the early years of a child 's life , parents have a significant influence on self-esteem and can be considered the main source of positive and negative experiences a child will have . unconditional love from parents helps a child develop a stable sense of being cared for and respected . these feelings translate into later effects on self-esteem as the child grows older . students in elementary school who have high self-esteem tend to have authoritative parents who are caring , supportive adults who set clear standards for their child and allow them to voice their opinion in decision making . although studies thus far have reported only a correlation of warm , supportive parenting styles ( mainly authoritative and permissive ) with children having high self-esteem , these parenting styles could easily be thought of as having some causal effect in self-esteem development . childhood experiences that contribute to healthy self-esteem include being listened to , being spoken to respectfully , receiving appropriate attention and affection and having accomplishments recognized and mistakes or failures acknowledged and accepted . experiences that contribute to low self-esteem include being harshly criticized , being physically , sexually or emotionally abused , being ignored , ridiculed or teased or being expected to be '' perfect '' all the time . '' self-esteem . '' self-esteem . n.p . , n.d . web . 27 nov . 2012 . during school-aged years , academic achievement is a significant contributor to self-esteem development . consistently achieving success or consistently failing will have a strong effect on students ' individual self-esteem . however , students can also experience low self- esteem while in school . for example , they may not have academic achievements , or they live in a troubled environment outside of school . issues like the ones previously stated , can cause adolescents to doubt themselves . social experiences are another important contributor to self-esteem . as children go through school , they begin to understand and recognize differences between themselves and their classmates . using social comparisons , children assess whether they did better or worse than classmates in different activities . these comparisons play an important role in shaping the child 's self-esteem and influence the positive or negative feelings they have about themselves . as children go through adolescence , peer influence becomes much more important . adolescents make appraisals of themselves based on their relationships with close friends . successful relationships among friends are very important to the development of high self-esteem for children . social acceptance brings about confidence and produces high self-esteem , whereas rejection from peers and loneliness brings about self-doubts and produces low self-esteem . adolescence shows an increase in self-esteem that continues to increase in young adulthood and middle age . a decrease is seen from middle age to old age with varying findings on whether it is a small or large decrease . reasons for the variability could be because of differences in health , cognitive ability , and socioeconomic status in old age . no differences have been found between males and females in their development of self-esteem . multiple cohort studies show that there is not a difference in the life-span trajectory of self-esteem between generations due to societal changes such as grade inflation in education or the presence of social media . high levels of mastery , low risk taking , and better health are ways to predict higher self-esteem . in terms of personality , emotionally stable , extroverted , and conscientious individuals experience higher self-esteem . these predictors have shown us that self-esteem has trait-like qualities by remaining stable over time like personality and intelligence . however , this does not mean it can not be changed . hispanic adolescents have a slightly lower self-esteem than their black and white peers , but then slightly higher levels by age 30 . african americans have a sharper increase in self-esteem in adolescence and young adulthood compared to whites . however , during old age , they experience a more rapid decline in self-esteem . . shame . shame can be a contributor to those with problems of low self-esteem . feelings of shame usually occur because of a situation where the social self is devalued , such as a socially evaluated poor performance . a poor performance leads to higher responses of psychological states that indicate a threat to the social self namely a decrease in social self-esteem and an increase in shame . this increase in shame can be helped with self-compassion . in a survey on technology 60 % of people using social media reported that it has impacted their self-esteem in a negative way . . real self , ideal self , and dreaded self . there are three levels of self-evaluation development in relation to the real self , ideal self , and the dreaded self . the real , ideal , and dreaded selves develop in children in a sequential pattern on cognitive levels . moral judgment stages : individuals describe their real , ideal , and dreaded selves with stereotypical labels , such as '' nice '' or '' bad '' . individuals describe their ideal and real selves in terms of disposition for actions or as behavioral habits . the dreaded self is often described as being unsuccessful or as having bad habits . ego development stages : individuals describe their ideal and real selves in terms of traits that are based on attitudes as well as actions . the dreaded self is often described as having failed to meet social expectations or as self-centered . self-understanding stages : individuals describe their ideal and real selves as having unified identities or characters . descriptions of the dreaded self focus on a failure to live up to one 's ideals or role expectations often because of real world problems . this development brings with it increasingly complicated and encompassing moral demands . this level is where individuals ' self-esteems can suffer because they do not feel as though they are living up to certain expectations . this feeling will moderately affect one 's self-esteem with an even larger effect seen when individuals believe they are becoming their dreaded selves . . types . high . people with a healthy level of self-esteem : adapted from firmly believe in certain values and principles , and are ready to defend them even when finding opposition , feeling secure enough to modify them in light of experience . are able to act according to what they think to be the best choice , trusting their own judgment , and not feeling guilty when others do not like their choice . do not lose time worrying excessively about what happened in the past , nor about what could happen in the future . they learn from the past and plan for the future , but live in the present intensely . fully trust in their capacity to solve problems , not hesitating after failures and difficulties . they ask others for help when they need it . consider themselves equal in dignity to others , rather than inferior or superior , while accepting differences in certain talents , personal prestige or financial standing . understand how they are an interesting and valuable person for others , at least for those with whom they have a friendship . resist manipulation , collaborate with others only if it seems appropriate and convenient . admit and accept different internal feelings and drives , either positive or negative , revealing those drives to others only when they choose . are able to enjoy a great variety of activities . are sensitive to feelings and needs of others ; respect generally accepted social rules , and claim no right or desire to prosper at others ' expense . can work toward finding solutions and voice discontent without belittling themselves or others when challenges arise . . secure vs . defensive . a person can have high self-esteem and hold it confidently where they do not need reassurance from others to maintain their positive self-view , whereas others with defensive high self-esteem may still report positive self-evaluations on the rosenberg scale , as all high self-esteem individuals do ; however , their positive self-views are fragile and vulnerable to criticism . defensive high self-esteem individuals internalize subconscious self-doubts and insecurities , causing them to react very negatively to any criticism they may receive . there is a need for constant positive feedback from others for these individuals to maintain their feelings of self-worth . the necessity of repeated praise can be associated with boastful , arrogant behavior or sometimes even aggressive and hostile feelings toward anyone who questions the individual 's self-worth , an example of threatened egotism . the journal of educational psychology conducted a study in which they used a sample of 383 malaysian undergraduates participating in work integrated learning ( wil ) programs across five public universities to test the relationship between self-esteem and other psychological attributes such as self-efficacy and self-confidence . the results demonstrated that self-esteem has a positive and significant relationship with self-confidence and self-efficacy since students with higher self-esteem had better performances at university than those with lower self-esteem . it was concluded that higher education institutions and employers should emphasize the importance of undergraduates ' self-esteem development . . implicit , explicit , narcissism and threatened egotism . implicit self-esteem refers to a person 's disposition to evaluate themselves positively or negatively in a spontaneous , automatic , or unconscious manner . it contrasts with explicit self-esteem , which entails more conscious and reflective self-evaluation . both explicit self-esteem and implicit self-esteem are subtypes of self-esteem proper . narcissism is a disposition people may have that represents an excessive love for one 's self . it is characterized by an inflated view of self-worth . individuals who score high on narcissism measures , robert raskin 's 40 item true or false test , would likely select true to such statements as '' if i ruled the world , it would be a much better place . '' barbara krahe , the social psychology of aggression ( psychology press , 2013 ) , 75 . there is only a moderate correlation between narcissism and self-esteem ; that is to say that an individual can have high self-esteem but low narcissism or can be a conceited , obnoxious person and score high self-esteem and high narcissism . threatened egotism is characterized as a response to criticism that threatens the ego of narcissists ; they often react in a hostile and aggressive manner . . low . low self-esteem can result from various factors , including genetic factors , physical appearance or weight , mental health issues , socioeconomic status , significant emotional experiences , social stigma , peer pressure or bullying . a person with low self-esteem may show some of the following characteristics : heavy self-criticism and dissatisfaction . hypersensitivity to criticism with resentment against critics and feelings of being attacked . chronic indecision and an exaggerated fear of mistakes . excessive will to please and unwillingness to displease any petitioner . perfectionism , which can lead to frustration when perfection is not achieved . neurotic guilt , dwelling on or exaggerating the magnitude of past mistakes . floating hostility and general defensiveness and irritability without any proximate cause . pessimism and a general negative outlook . envy , invidiousness , or general resentment . sees temporary setbacks as permanent , intolerable conditions . individuals with low self-esteem tend to be critical of themselves . some depend on the approval and praise of others when evaluating self-worth . others may measure their likability in terms of successes : others will accept themselves if they succeed but will not if they fail . . the three states . this classification proposed by martin ross ross , martín . el mapa de la autoestima . 2013 . dunken . distinguishes three states of self-esteem compared to the '' feats '' ( triumphs , honors , virtues ) and the '' anti-feats '' ( defeats , embarrassment , shame , etc . ) of the individuals . . shattered . the individual does not regard themselves as valuable or lovable . they may be overwhelmed by defeat , or shame , or see themselves as such , and they name their '' anti-feat '' . for example , if they consider that being over a certain age is an anti-feat , they define themselves with the name of their anti-feat , and say , '' i am old '' . they express actions and feelings such as pity , insulting themselves , and they may become paralyzed by their sadness . . vulnerable . the individual has a generally positive self-image . however , their self-esteem is also vulnerable to the perceived risk of an imminent anti-feat ( such as defeat , embarrassment , shame , discredit ) , consequently , they are often nervous and regularly use defense mechanisms . a typical protection mechanism of those with vulnerable self-esteem may consist in avoiding decision-making . although such individuals may outwardly exhibit great self-confidence , the underlying reality may be just the opposite : the apparent self-confidence is indicative of their heightened fear of anti-feats and the fragility of their self-esteem . they may also try to blame others to protect their self-image from situations that would threaten it . they may employ defense mechanisms , including attempting to lose at games and other competitions in order to protect their self-image by publicly dissociating themselves from a need to win , and asserting an independence from social acceptance which they may deeply desire . in this deep fear of being unaccepted by an individual 's peers , they make poor life choices by making risky decisions . . strong . people with strong self-esteem have a positive self-image and enough strength so that anti-feats do not subdue their self-esteem . they have less fear of failure . these individuals appear humble , cheerful , and this shows a certain strength not to boast about feats and not to be afraid of anti-feats . they are capable of fighting with all their might to achieve their goals because , if things go wrong , their self-esteem will not be affected . they can acknowledge their own mistakes precisely because their self-image is strong , and this acknowledgment will not impair or affect their self-image . they live with less fear of losing social prestige , and with more happiness and general well-being . however , no type of self-esteem is indestructible , and due to certain situations or circumstances in life , one can fall from this level into any other state of self-esteem . . contingent vs . non-contingent . a distinction is made between contingent ( or conditional ) and non-contingent ( or unconditional ) self-esteem . contingent self-esteem is derived from external sources , such as what others say , one 's success or failure , one 's competence , or relationship-contingent self-esteem . therefore , contingent self-esteem is marked by instability , unreliability , and vulnerability . persons lacking a non-contingent self-esteem are '' predisposed to an incessant pursuit of self-value '' . however , because the pursuit of contingent self-esteem is based on receiving approval , it is doomed to fail , as no one receives constant approval , and disapproval often evokes depression . furthermore , fear of disapproval inhibits activities in which failure is possible . non-contingent self-esteem is described as true , stable , and solid . christopher j . mruk , self-esteem research , theory , and practice ( springer , 1995 ) , 88 . it springs from a belief that one is '' acceptable period , acceptable before life itself , ontologically acceptable '' . terry d . cooper , paul tillich and psychology : historic and contemporary explorations in theology , psychotherapy , and ethics ( mercer university,2006 ) . 7 . belief that one is '' ontologically acceptable '' is to believe that one 's acceptability is '' the way things are without contingency '' . in this belief , as expounded by theologian paul tillich , acceptability is not based on a person 's virtue . it is an acceptance given '' in spite of our guilt , not because we have no guilt '' . terry d . cooper , paul tillich and psychology : historic and contemporary explorations in theology , psychotherapy , and ethics ( mercer university,2006 ) . 5 . psychiatrist thomas a harris drew on tillich for his classic i 'm ok , you 're ok that addresses non-contingent self-esteem . harris translated tillich 's '' acceptable '' by the vernacular ok , a term that means '' acceptable '' . the christian message , said harris , is not '' you can be ok , if '' ; it is '' you are accepted , unconditionally '' . thomas a . harris , i 'm ok — you 're ok ( harper and row ) , 1969 , 235 . a secure non-contingent self-esteem springs from the belief that one is ontologically acceptable and accepted . . importance . abraham maslow states that psychological health is not possible unless the essential core of the person is fundamentally accepted , loved and respected by others and by oneself . self-esteem allows people to face life with more confidence , benevolence , and optimism , and thus easily reach their goals and self-actualize . nathaniel branden . cómo mejorar su autoestima . 1987 . versión traducida : 1990 . 1ª edición en formato electrónico : enero de 2010 . ediciones paidós ibérica . self-esteem may make people convinced they deserve happiness . understanding this is fundamental , and universally beneficial , since the development of positive self-esteem increases the capacity to treat other people with respect , benevolence and goodwill , thus favoring rich interpersonal relationships and avoiding destructive ones . for erich fromm , the love of others and love of ourselves are not alternatives . on the contrary , an attitude of love toward themselves will be found in all those who are capable of loving others . self-esteem allows creativity at the workplace and is a specially critical condition for teaching professions . christian miranda . la autoestima profesional : una competencia mediadora para la innovación en las prácticas pedagógicas . revista iberoamericana sobre calidad , eficacia y cambio en educación . 2005 . volume 3 , number 1 . pdf format . josé-vicente bonet claims that the importance of self-esteem is obvious as a lack of self-esteem is , he says , not a loss of esteem from others , but self-rejection . bonet claims that this corresponds to major depressive disorder . freud also claimed that the depressive has suffered '' an extraordinary diminution in his self-regard , an impoverishment of his ego on a grand scale.he has lost his self-respect '' . sigmund freud , on metapsychology ( pfl 11 ) p . 254-6 the yogyakarta principles , a document on international human rights law , addresses the discriminatory attitude toward lgbt people that makes their self-esteem low to be subject to human rights violation including human trafficking . the yogyakarta principles , preamble and principles 11 the world health organization recommends in '' preventing suicide '' , published in 2000 , that strengthening students ' self-esteem is important to protect children and adolescents against mental distress and despondency , enabling them to cope adequately with difficult and stressful life situations . other than increased happiness , higher self-esteem is also known to correlate with a better ability to cope with stress and a higher likeliness of taking on difficult tasks relative to those with low self-esteem . . correlations . from the late 1970s to the early 1990s many americans assumed as a matter of course that students ' self-esteem acted as a critical factor in the grades that they earned in school , in their relationships with their peers , and in their later success in life . under this assumption , some american groups created programs which aimed to increase the self-esteem of students . until the 1990s , little peer-reviewed and controlled research took place on this topic . peer-reviewed research undertaken since then has not validated previous assumptions . recent research indicates that inflating students ' self-esteems in and of itself has no positive effect on grades . roy baumeister has shown that inflating self-esteem by itself can actually decrease grades . the relationship involving self-esteem and academic results does not signify that high self-esteem contributes to high academic results . it simply means that high self-esteem may be accomplished as a result of high academic performance due to the other variables of social interactions and life events affecting this performance . '' attempts by pro-esteem advocates to encourage self-pride in students solely by reason of their uniqueness as human beings will fail if feelings of well-being are not accompanied by well-doing . it is only when students engage in personally meaningful endeavors for which they can be justifiably proud that self-confidence grows , and it is this growing self-assurance that in turn triggers further achievement . '' reasoner , robert w . ( n.d . ) . '' research.htm extending self-esteem theory and research . '' retrieved february 20 , 2011 . high self-esteem has a high correlation to self-reported happiness ; whether this is a causal relationship has not been established . the relationship between self-esteem and life satisfaction is stronger in individualistic cultures . additionally , self-esteem has been found to be related to forgiveness in close relationships , in that people with high self-esteem will be more forgiving than people with low self-esteem . high self-esteem does not prevent children from smoking , drinking , taking drugs , or engaging in early sex . one exception is that high self-esteem reduces the chances of bulimia in females . . neuroscience . in research conducted in 2014 by robert s . chavez and todd f . heatherton , it was found that self-esteem is related to the connectivity of the frontostriatal circuit . the frontostriatal pathway connects the medial prefrontal cortex , which deals with self-knowledge , to the ventral striatum , which deals with feelings of motivation and reward . stronger anatomical pathways are correlated with higher long-term self-esteem , while stronger functional connectivity is correlated with higher short-term self-esteem . . criticism and controversy . the american psychologist albert ellis criticized on numerous occasions the concept of self-esteem as essentially self-defeating and ultimately destructive . ellis , a . ( 2001 ) . feeling better , getting better , staying better . impact publishers although acknowledging the human propensity and tendency to ego rating as innate , he has critiqued the philosophy of self-esteem as unrealistic , illogical and self- and socially destructive – often doing more harm than good . questioning the foundations and usefulness of generalized ego strength , he has claimed that self-esteem is based on arbitrary definitional premises , and over-generalized , perfectionistic and grandiose thinking . acknowledging that rating and valuing behaviors and characteristics is functional and even necessary , he sees rating and valuing human beings ' totality and total selves as irrational and unethical . the healthier alternative to self-esteem according to him is unconditional self-acceptance and unconditional other-acceptance . rational emotive behavior therapy is a psychotherapy based on this approach . : '' there seem to be only two clearly demonstrated benefits of high self-esteem.first , it increases initiative , probably because it lends confidence . people with high self-esteem are more willing to act on their beliefs , to stand up for what they believe in , to approach others , to risk new undertakings . ( this unfortunately includes being extra willing to do stupid or destructive things , even when everyone else advises against them . ) . it can also lead people to ignore sensible advice as they stubbornly keep wasting time and money on hopeless causes '' . false attempts . for persons with low self-esteem , any positive stimulus will temporarily raise self-esteem . therefore , possessions , sex , success , or physical appearance will produce the development of self-esteem , but the development is ephemeral at best . nathaniel branden , the six pillars of self-esteem ( bantam , 1995 ) , 52 . also see nathaniel branden , how to raise your self-esteem : the proven action-oriented approach to greater self-respect and self-confidence ( random house , 1988 ) , 9 . spanish edition : cómo mejorar su autoestima ( paidos , 2009 ) . such attempts to raise one 's self-esteem by positive stimulus produce a '' boom or bust '' pattern . '' compliments and positive feedback '' produce a boost , but a bust follows a lack of such feedback . for a person whose '' self-esteem is contingent '' , success is '' not extra sweet '' , but '' failure is extra bitter '' . . as narcissism . life satisfaction , happiness , healthy behavioral practices , perceived efficacy , and academic success and adjustment have been associated with having high levels of self-esteem ( harter , 1987 ; huebner , 1991 ; lipschitz-elhawi & itzhaky , 2005 ; rumberger 1995 ; swenson & prelow , 2005 ; yarcheski & mahon , 1989 ) . however , a common mistake is to think that self-love is necessarily equivalent to narcissism , as opposed for example to what erik erikson speaks of as '' a post-narcissistic love of the ego '' . people with a healthy self-esteem accept and love themselves unconditionally , acknowledging both virtues and faults in the self , and yet , in spite of everything , is able to continue to love themselves . in narcissists , by contrast , an '' uncertainty about their own worth gives rise to.a self-protective , but often totally spurious , aura of grandiosity '' & nbsp ; – producing the class '' of narcissists , or people with very high , but insecure , self-esteem . fluctuating with each new episode of social praise or rejection . '' narcissism can thus be seen as a symptom of fundamentally low self-esteem , that is , lack of love towards oneself , but often accompanied by '' an immense increase in self-esteem '' based on '' the defense mechanism of denial by overcompensation . '' '' idealized love of self.rejected the part of him '' that he denigrates & nbsp ; – '' this destructive little child '' within . instead , the narcissist emphasizes their virtues in the presence of others , just to try to convince themself that they are a valuable person and to try to stop feeling ashamed for their faults ; such '' people with unrealistically inflated self-views , which may be especially unstable and highly vulnerable to negative information , . tend to have poor social skills . ''