Microcredit

history . ideas relating to microcredit can be found at various times in modern history , such as the starr-bowkett society . jonathan swift inspired the irish loan funds of the 18th and 19th centuries . in the mid-19th century , individualist anarchism lysander spooner wrote about the benefits of numerous small loans for entrepreneurial activities to the poor as a way to alleviate poverty . at about the same time , but independently to spooner , friedrich wilhelm raiffeisen founded the first cooperative lending banks to support farmers in rural germany . deutscher raiffeisenverband : the raiffeisen organization : beginnings , tasks , current developments , march 2011 . comilla model . in the 1950s , akhtar hameed khan began distributing group-oriented credit in east pakistan . khan used the comilla model , in which credit is distributed through community-based initiatives . the project failed due to the over-involvement of the pakistani government , and the hierarchies created within communities as certain members began to exert more control over loans than others . . modern microcredit . image : grameen yunus dec 04.jpg thumb upright nobel laureate muhammad yunus , the founder of grameen bank , which is generally considered the first modern microcredit institution the origins of microcredit in its current practical incarnation can be linked to several organizations founded in bangladesh , especially the grameen bank . the grameen bank , which is generally considered the first modern microcredit institution , was founded in 1983 by muhammad yunus . yunus began the project in a small town called jobra , using his own money to deliver small loans at low-interest rates to the rural poor . grameen bank was followed by organizations such as brac in 1972 and asa in 1978 . microcredit reached latin america with the establishment of prodem in bolivia in 1986 ; a bank that later transformed into the for-profit bancosol . in chile , bancoestado microempresas is the primary microcredit institution . microcredit quickly became a popular tool for economic development , with hundreds of institutions emerging throughout the third world . though the grameen bank was formed initially as a non-profit organization dependent upon government subsidies , it later became a corporate entity and was renamed grameen ii in 2002 . yunus was awarded the nobel peace prize in 2006 for his work providing microcredit services to the poor . nobel prize.org : the nobel peace prize 2006 : muhammad yunus , grameen bank , retrieved on 13 february 2012 . principles . economic principles . microcredit organizations were initially created as alternatives to the '' loan-sharks '' known to take advantage of clients . indeed , many microlenders began as non-profit organizations and operated with government funds or private subsidies . by the 1980s , however the '' financial systems approach , '' influenced by neoliberalism and propagated by the harvard institute for international development , became the dominant ideology among microcredit organizations . the neoliberal model of microcredit can also be referred to as the institutionist model , which promotes applying market solutions as a viable way to address social problems . the commercialization of microcredit officially began in 1984 with the formation of unit desa ( bri-ud ) within the bank rakyat indonesia . unit desa offered ‘ kupedes ’ microloans based on market interest rates . yunus has sharply criticized the shift in microcredit organizations from the grameen bank model as a non-profit bank to for-profit institutions . '' i never dreamed that one day microcredit would give rise to its own breed of loan sharks . there are always people eager to take advantage of the vulnerable . but credit programs that seek to profit from the suffering of the poor should not be described as “ microcredit , ” and investors who own such programs should not be allowed to benefit from the trust and respect that microcredit banks have rightly earned . '' muhammad yunus , “ sacrificing microcredit for megaprofits ” new york times ( 15 january 2011 ) a.23 . many microcredit organizations now function as independent banks . this has led to their charging higher interest rates on loans and placing more emphasis on savings programs . notably , unit desa has charged in excess of 20 percent on small business loans . the application of neoliberal economics to microcredit has generated much debate among scholars and development practitioners , with some claiming that microcredit bank directors , such as muhammad yunus , apply the practices of loan sharks for their personal enrichment . indeed , the academic debate foreshadowed a wall-street style scandal involving the mexican microcredit organization compartamos . even so , the numbers indicate that ethical microlending and investor profit can go hand-in-hand . in the 1990s a rural finance minister in indonesia showed how unit desa could lower its rates by about 8 % while still bringing attractive returns to investors . . group lending . though lending to groups has long been a key part of microcredit , microcredit initially began with the principle of lending to individuals . despite the use of solidarity circles in 1970s jobra , grameen bank and other early microcredit institutions initially focused on individual lending . ( a solidarity circle is a group of borrowers that provide mutual encouragement , information , and assistance in times of need , though loans remain the responsibility of individuals . ) indeed , muhammad yunus propagated the notion that every person has the potential to become an entrepreneur . yunus saw poverty eradication as being in the hands of the individual . because of this , he promoted private ownership , and consequently , neoliberalism.the use of group-lending was motivated by economics of scale , as the costs associated with monitoring loans and enforcing repayment are significantly lower when credit is distributed to groups rather than individuals . many times the loan to one participant in group-lending depends upon the successful repayment from another member , thus transferring repayment responsibility off of microcredit institutions to loan recipients . . lending to women . lending to women has become an important principle in microcredit , with banks and ngos such as bancosol , wwb , and pro mujer catering to women exclusively . pro mujer also implemented a new strategy to combine microcredits with health-care services , since the health of their clients is crucial to the success of microcredits . microfinance - healthy clients though grameen bank initially tried to lend to both men and women at equal rates , women presently make up ninety-five percent of the bank ’ s clients . women continue to make up seventy-five percent of all microcredit recipients worldwide . exclusive lending to women began in the 1980s when grameen bank found that women have higher repayment rates , and tend to accept smaller loans than men . . examples . bangladesh . grameen bank in bangladesh is the oldest and probably best-known microfinance institution in the world . grameen bank launched their us operations in new york in april 2008 . university of michigan , urban and regional planning economic development handbook : microcredit strategies for assisting neighborhood businesses , 22 march 2005 , retrieved on 13 february 2012 bank of america has announced plans to award more than 3.7 million in grants to nonprofits to use in backing microloan programs . accion usa , the us subsidiary of the better-known accion international , has provided over 450 million in microloans since 1991 , with an over 90 % repayment rate . one research study of the grameen model shows that poorer individuals are safer borrowers because they place more value on the relationship with the bank . federal reserve bank of kansas city , the creditworthiness of the poor : a model of the grameen bank , april 2010 even so , efforts to replicate grameen-style solidarity lending in developed countries have generally not succeeded . for example , the calmeadow foundation tested an analogous peer-lending model in three locations in canada during the 1990s . it concluded that a variety of factors — including difficulties in reaching the target market , the high risk profile of clients , their general distaste for the joint liability requirement , and high overhead costs — made solidarity lending unviable without subsidies . cheryl frankiewicz . '' calmeadow metrofund : a canadian experiment in sustainable microfinance '' , calmeadow foundation , april 2001 . microcredits have also been introduced in israel , svivatomehet.org.il russia , ukraine and other nations where micro-loans help small business entrepreneurs overcome cultural barriers in the mainstream business society . the israel free loan association ( ifla ) has lent more than 100 million in the past two decades to israeli citizens of all backgrounds . israel free loan associantion , history of ifla , , july 26 , 2013 . india . in india , the national bank for agriculture and rural development ( nabard ) finances more than 500 banks that on-lend funds to self-help groups ( shgs ) . shgs comprise twenty or fewer members , of whom the majority are women from the poorest castes and tribes . members save small amounts of money , as little as a few rupees a month in a group fund . members may borrow from the group fund for a variety of purposes ranging from household emergencies to school fees . as shgs prove capable of managing their funds well , they may borrow from a local bank to invest in small business or farm activities . banks typically lend up to four rupees for every rupee in the group fund . in asia borrowers generally pay interest rates that range from 30 % to 70 % without commission and fees . nimal a . fernando : understanding and dealing with high interest rate on microcredit , asian development bank , may 2006 , p . 1 nearly 1.4 million shgs comprising approximately 20 million women now borrow from banks , which makes the indian shg-bank linkage model the largest microfinance program in the world . similar programs are evolving in africa and southeast asia with the assistance of organizations like ifad , opportunity international , catholic relief services , compassion international , care , apmas , oxfam , tearfund and world vision . united states . in the united states , microcredit has generally been defined as loans of less than 50,000 to people — mostly entrepreneurs — who can not , for various reasons , borrow from a bank . most nonprofit microlenders include services like financial literacy training and business plan consultations , which contribute to the expense of providing such loans but also , those groups say , to the success of their borrowers . one such organization in the united states of america , the accion u.s . network is a nonprofit microfinance organization headquartered in new york , ny . it is the largest and only nationwide nonprofit microfinance network in the u.s . the accion u.s . network is part of accion international , a u.s.-based nonprofit organization operating globally , with the mission of giving people the financial tools they need to create or grow healthy businesses . the domestic accion programs started in brooklyn , ny , and grew from there to become the first nationwide network microlender . accion u.s . network u.s . microcredit programs have helped many poor but ambitious borrowers to improve their lot . the aspen institute ’ s study of 405 microentrepreneurs indicates that more than half of the loan recipients escaped poverty within five years . on average , their household assets grew by nearly 16,000 during that period ; the group ’ s reliance on public assistance dropped by more than 60 % . several corporate sponsors including citi foundation and capital one launched grameen america in new york . since then the financial outfit – not bank - has been serving the poor , mainly women , throughout four of the city ’ s five boroughs ( bronx , brooklyn , manhattan , and queens ) as well as omaha , nebraska and indianapolis , indiana . in four years , grameen america has facilitated loans to over 9,000 borrowers valued over 35 million . it has had , as grameen ceo stephen vogel notes , “ a 99 percent repayment rate . ” . peer-to-peer lending over the web . the principles of microcredit have also been applied in attempting to address several non-poverty-related issues . among these , multiple internet-based organizations have developed platforms that facilitate a modified form of peer-to-peer lending where a loan is not made in the form of a single , direct loan , but as the aggregation of a number of smaller loans—often at a negligible interest rate . examples of platforms that connect lenders to micro-entrepreneurs via internet are kiva , zidisha , and the microloan foundation . another www-based microlender , united prosperity , uses a variation on the usual microlending model ; with united prosperity the micro-lender provides a guarantee to a local bank which then lends back double that amount to the micro-entrepreneur . united prosperity claims this provides both greater leverage and allows the micro-entrepreneur to develop a credit history with their local bank for future loans . in 2009 , the us-based nonprofit zidisha became the first peer-to-peer microlending platform to link lenders and borrowers directly across international borders without local intermediaries . '' zidisha set to '' expand '' in peer-to-peer microfinance '' , microfinance focus , feb 2010 from 2008 through 2014 , vittana allowed peer-to-peer lending for student loans in developing countries . rao . l . ( 2010 ) . vittana applies the kiva model to help finance education in developing countries . retrieved march 9 , 2011 , from . impact of microcredit . the impact of microcredit is a subject of much controversy . proponents state that it reduces poverty through higher employment and higher incomes . this is expected to lead to improved nutrition and improved education of the borrowers ' children . some argue that microcredit empowers women . in the us , uk and canada , it is argued that microcredit helps recipients to graduate from welfare programs . nitin bhatt , gary painter , and shui-yan tang , 1999 . “ can microcredit work in the united states ? ” , harvard business review , november–december 1999 issue . retrieved march 06 , 2018 , from - '' u.s . microcredit programs have helped many poor but ambitious borrowers to improve their lot . the aspen institute ’ s study of 405 microentrepreneurs indicates that more than half of the loan recipients escaped poverty within five years . on average , their household assets grew by nearly 16,000 during that period ; the group ’ s reliance on public assistance dropped by more than 60 % . '' critics say that microcredit has not increased incomes , but has driven poor households into a debt trap , in some cases even leading to suicide . they add that the money from loans is often used for durable consumer goods or consumption instead of being used for productive investments , that it fails to empower women , and that it has not improved health or education . tonelli m . and c . dalglish , 2012 . “ micro-credit is necessary but not sufficient for entrepreneurs in desperate poverty ” , fsr forum , vo.14 , issue 4 ( p.16-21 ) . issn 1389-0913 retrieved july 12 , 2012 , from - '' u.s . microcredit programs have helped many poor but ambitious borrowers to improve their lot . the aspen institute ’ s study of 405 microentrepreneurs indicates that more than half of the loan recipients escaped poverty within five years . on average , their household assets grew by nearly 16,000 during that period ; the group ’ s reliance on public assistance dropped by more than 60 % . '' the available evidence indicates that in many cases microcredit has facilitated the creation and the growth of businesses . it has often generated self-employment , but it has not necessarily increased incomes after interest payments . in some cases it has driven borrowers into debt traps . there is no evidence that microcredit has empowered women . in short , microcredit has achieved much less than what its proponents said it would achieve , but its negative impacts have not been as drastic as some critics have argued . microcredit is just one factor influencing the success of a small businesses , whose success is influenced to a much larger extent by how much an economy or a particular market grows . unintended consequences of microfinance include informal intermediaton : that is , some entrepreneurial borrowers become informal intermediaries between microfinance initiatives and poorer micro-entrepreneurs . those who more easily qualify for microfinance split loans into smaller credit to even poorer borrowers . informal intermediation ranges from casual intermediaries at the good or benign end of the spectrum to 'loan sharks ' at the professional and sometimes criminal end of the spectrum . . improvement . many scholars and practitioners suggest an integrated package of services ( '' a credit-plus '' approach ) rather than just providing credits . when access to credit is combined with savings facilities , non-productive loan facilities , insurance , enterprise development ( production-oriented and management training , marketing support ) and welfare-related services ( literacy and health services , gender and social awareness training ) , the adverse effects discussed above can be diminished . some argue that more experienced entrepreneurs who are getting loans should be qualified for bigger loans to ensure the success of the program . one of the principal challenges of microcredit is providing small loans at an affordable cost . the global average interest and fee rate is estimated at 37 % , with rates reaching as high as 70 % in some markets . the reason for the high interest rates is not primarily cost of capital . indeed , the local microfinance organizations that receive zero-interest loan capital from the online microlending platform kiva charge average interest and fee rates of 35.21 % . rather , the principal reason for the high cost of microcredit loans is the high transaction cost of traditional microfinance operations relative to loan size . microcredit practitioners have long argued that such high interest rates are simply unavoidable . the result is that the traditional approach to microcredit has made only limited progress in resolving the problem it purports to address : that the world 's poorest people pay the world 's highest cost for small business growth capital . the high costs of traditional microcredit loans limit their effectiveness as a poverty-fighting tool . borrowers who do not manage to earn a rate of return at least equal to the interest rate may actually end up poorer as a result of accepting the loans . according to a recent survey of microfinance borrowers in ghana published by the center for financial inclusion , more than one-third of borrowers surveyed reported struggling to repay their loans . in recent years , microcredit providers have shifted their focus from the objective of increasing the volume of lending capital available , to address the challenge of providing microfinance loans more affordably . analyst david roodman contends that in mature markets , the average interest and fee rates charged by microfinance institutions tend to fall over time . roodman , david . '' due diligence : an impertinent inquiry into microfinance . '' center for global development , 2011 . professor dean karlan from yale university advocates also giving the poor access to savings accounts . bbc : business weekly , 2 august 2009 . see also . cooperative banking count me in ( charity ) crowdfunding crowd sourcing flat rate ( finance ) microcredit for water supply and sanitation microgrant m-pesa project enterprise solidarity lending the women 's development bank oikocredit . references . further reading . adams , dale , doug graham and j.d . von pischke ( eds . ) . undermining rural development with cheap credit . westview press , boulder , colorado , 1984 . bateman , milford . 'why does n't microfinance work ? the destructive rise of local neoliberalism ' . zed books , london , 2010 . drake , deborah , and elizabeth rhyne ( eds . ) . the commercialization of microfinance : balancing business and development . kumarian press , 2002 . rhyne , elizabeth . mainstreaming microfinance : how lending to the poor began , grew and came of age in bolivia . kumarian press , 2001 . fuglesang , andreas and dale chandler . participation as process – process as growth – what we can learn from the grameen bank . grameen trust , dhaka , 1993 . gibbons , david . the grameen reader . grameen bank , dhaka , 1992 . harper , malcolm and shailendra vyakarnam . rural enterprise : case studies from developing countries . itdg publishing , 1988 . hulme , david and paul mosley . finance against poverty . routledge , london , 1996 . johnson , susan and ben rogaly . microfinance and poverty reduction . oxfam , oxford uk , 1997 . kadaras , james & elizabeth rhyne . characteristics of equity investment in microfinance . accion international , 2004 . khandker , shahidur r . fighting poverty with microcredit . bangladesh edition , the university press ltd , dhaka , 1999 . ledgerwood , joanna . microfinance handbook . washington , d.c . , world bank , 1998 . rutherford , stuart . asa : the biography of an ngo , empowerment and credit in rural bangladesh . asa , dhaka , 1995 . small enterprise development . intermediate technology publications , london . todd , helen women at the center : grameen borrowers after one decade . university press ltd , dhaka , 1996 . wood , geoff d . & i . sharif ( eds . ) . who needs credit ? poverty and finance in bangladesh . university press ltd . , dhaka , 1997 . yunus muhammad , moingeon bertrand & laurence lehmann-ortega , '' building social business models : lessons from the grameen experience '' , april-june , vol 43 , n° 2-3 , long range planning , 2010 , p . 308-325 '' tonelli m . and c . dalglish , 2012 . “ micro-credit is necessary but not sufficient for entrepreneurs in desperate poverty ” , fsr forum , vo.14 , issue 4 ( p . & nbsp ; 16-21 ) . issn 1389-0913 yunus , muhammad . banker to the poor : micro-lending and the battle against world poverty . public affairs , 2003 . padmanabahn , k.p . , rural credit , intermediate tech . publ . ltd . , london 1988 . germidis d . et al . , financial systems and development : what role for the formal and informal financial sectors ? , oecd , paris 1991 . robinson , marguerite s . , the microfinance revolution , the world bank , washington d.c . , 2001 . mauri , arnaldo , ( 1995 ) : a new approach to institutional lending and loan administration in rural areas of ldcs , international review of economics , issn 1865-1704 , vol . 45 , no . 4 , pp . & nbsp ; 707–716 . johnson , s . 1997 . gender and micro-finance : guidelines for best practice . action aid-uk . kabeer , n . 1998 . 'money ca n't buy me love ' ? re-evaluating gender , credit and empowerment in rural bangladesh . ids discussion paper 363 . mayoux , l . 1998a . women 's empowerment and micro-finance programmes : approaches , evidence and ways forward . the open university working paper no 41 . cheston , s . and kuhn , l . ( 2002 ) . empowering women through microfinance . pathways out of poverty : innovations in microfinance for the poorest families . harper , a . ( 1995 ) . providing women in baltistan with access to loans – potential and problems . lahore , akrsp pakistan . mutalima , i . k . , 2006 , microfinance and gender equality : are we getting there ? : micro credit summit , halifa , royal tropical institute and oxfam novib . external links . what is microcredit latest findings from randomized evaluations of microfinance access to finance forum by cgap and its partners no . 2 , december 2011 building a microfinance institution from scratch institution 's objective is to offer financial services on a self-sustaining yet efficient basis to microentrepreneurs . journal of microfinance , a forum for practitioners in microfinance and microenterprise development to exchange information and ideas omidyar-tufts microfinance fund , a partnership between pierre omidyar and tufts university . '' microfinance in the u.s . '' helping ensure egalitarian access to needed financial services . the promise of microfinance for poverty relief in the developing world microcredit regulatory authority , mra the central body to monitor and supervise microfinance operation of ngos of bangladesh alleviation and poverty and empowerment of the poor , brac bangladesh the european union project '' credit cooperatives – russian federation '' official web site small fortunes : microcredit and the future of poverty web site for a pbs documentary