Webcomic

medium . image : dieselsweeties 01583.png thumb many webcomics like diesel sweeties use non-traditional art styles . image : fetusx fx082106painting.jpg thumb the themes of webcomics like eric millikin 's have caused controversy . there are several differences between webcomics and print comics . with webcomics the restrictions of traditional newspapers or magazines can be lifted , allowing artists and writers to take advantage of the web 's unique capabilities . styles . the creative freedom webcomics provide allows artists to work in nontraditional styles . clip art or photo comics ( also known as fumetti ) are two types of webcomics that do not use traditional artwork . a softer world , for example , is made by overlaying photographs with strips of typewriter-style text . as in the constrained comics tradition , a few webcomics , such as dinosaur comics by ryan north , are created with most strips having art copied exactly from one ( or a handful of ) template comics and only the text changing . pixel art , such as that created by richard stevens of diesel sweeties , is similar to that of sprite comics but instead uses low-resolution images created by the artist themself . however , it is also common for some artists to use traditional styles , similar to those typically published in newspapers or comic books . content . webcomics that are independently published are not subject to the content restrictions of book publishers or print syndications , enjoying an artistic freedom similar to underground and alternative comics . some webcomics stretch the boundaries of taste , taking advantage of the fact that internet censorship is virtually nonexistent in countries like the united states . the content of webcomics can still cause problems , such as leisure town artist tristan farnon 's legal trouble after creating a homoerotic dilbert parody , or the catholic league 's protest of artist eric millikin 's '' blasphemous treatment of jesus . '' . format . webcomic artists use many formats throughout the world . comic strips , generally consisting of three or four panels , have been a common format for many artists . other webcomic artists use the format of traditional printed comic books and graphic novels , sometimes with the plan of later publishing books . scott mccloud , one of the first advocates of webcomics , pioneered the idea of the '' infinite canvas '' where , rather than being confined to normal print dimensions , artists are free to spread out in any direction indefinitely with their comics . such a format proved highly successful in webtoon when junkoo kim implemented an infinite scrolling mechanism in webtoon in 2004 . in 2009 , french web cartoonist balak described turbomedia , a format for webcomics where a reader only views one panel at a time , in which the reader decides their own reading rhythm by going forward one panel at a time . some web cartoonists , such as political cartoonist mark fiore or charley parker with argon zark ! , incorporate animations or interactivity into their webcomics . . history . the first comics to be shared through the internet were eric millikin 's witches and stitches , which he started uploading on compuserve in 1985 . services such as compuserve and usenet were used before the world wide web started to rise in popularity in 1993 . early webcomics were often derivatives from strips in college newspapers , but when the web became widely popular in the mid-1990s , more people started creating comics exclusively for this medium . by the year 2000 , various webcomic creators were financially successful and webcomics became more artistically recognized . unique genres and styles became popular during this period . the 2010s also saw the rise of webtoons in south korea , where the form has become very prominent . this decade has also seen an increasingly larger number of successful webcomics being adapted into animated series in china and japan . webcomics collectives . in march 1995 , artist bebe williams launched one of the first webcomics collectives , art comics daily . peterson , iver ( october 28 , 1996 ) . '' the search for the next 'doonesbury '' . the new york times , pg . d9 newspaper comic strip syndicates also launched websites in the mid-1990s . other webcomics collectives followed , with many launching in the next decade . in march 2000 , chris crosby , crosby 's mother teri , and other artists founded keenspot . yim , roger . ( april 2 , 2001 ) . '' dot-comics : online cartoons skip traditional syndication and draw loyal fans on the internet '' . san francisco chronicle . pg . d1 newman , heather . ( february 2 , 2001 ) . '' see you in the funny pixels michigan cartoonists draw on web sites to find readers '' . detroit free press . pg . 1h in july 2000 , austin osueke launched eigomanga , publishing original online manga , referred to as '' webmanga '' . in 2001 , the subscription webcomics site cool beans world was launched . contributors included uk-based comic book creators pat mills , simon bisley , john bolton , and kevin o'neill , and the author clive barker . serialised content included scarlet traces and marshal law . in march 2001 , shannon denton and patrick coyle launched komikwerks.com serving free strips from comics and animation professionals . the site launched with 9 titles including steve conley 's astounding space thrills , jason kruse 's the world of quest , and bernie wrightson ’ s the nightmare expeditions . on march 2 , 2002 , joey manley founded modern tales , offering subscription-based webcomics . ho , patricia jiayi ( july 8 , 2003 ) . '' online comic artists do n't have to play panel games '' . alameda times-star ( alameda , ca ) the modern tales spin-off serializer followed in october 2002 , then came girlamatic and graphic smash in march and september 2003 respectively . by 2005 , webcomics hosting had become a business in its own right , with sites such as webcomics nation . walker , leslie ( june 16 , 2005 ) . '' comics looking to spread a little laughter on the web '' . the washington post , p . d1 . traditional comic book publishers , such as marvel comics and slave labour graphics , did not begin making serious digital efforts until 2006 and 2007 . dc comics launched its web comic imprint , zuda comics in october 2007 . the site featured user submitted comics in a competition for a professional contract to produce web comics . in july 2010 , it was announced that dc was closing down zuda . . business . image : xkcd philosophy.png thumb xkcd ( 2005 ) is among the many financially successful webcomics . creators of webcomics are able to do so professionally through various revenue channels . webcomic artists may sell merchandise based on their work , such as t-shirts and toys , or they may sell print versions or compilations of their webcomic . many webcomic creators make use of online advertisement on their websites . in the second half of the 2000s , webcomics became less financially sustainable due to the rise of social media and consumers ' uninterest in certain kinds of merchandise . crowdfunding through kickstarter and patreon have also become sources of income for web cartoonists . webcomics have been used by some cartoonists as a path towards syndication in newspapers . since the mid-1990s , scott mccloud advocated for micropayments systems as a source of income for web cartoonists , but micropayment systems have not been popular with artists or readers . . awards . many webcomics artists have received honors for their work . in 2006 , gene luen yang 's graphic novel american born chinese , originally published as a webcomic on modern tales , was the first graphic novel to be nominated for a national book award . bosman , julie . ( october 12 , 2006 ) . '' national book award finalists chosen '' . the new york times , pg . e2 don hertzfeldt 's animated film based on his webcomics , everything will be ok , won the 2007 sundance film festival jury award in short filmmaking , a prize rarely bestowed on an animated film . many traditionally print-comics focused organizations have added award categories for comics published on the web . the eagle awards established a favorite web-based comic category in 2000 , and the ignatz awards followed the next year by introducing an outstanding online comic category in 2001 . after having nominated webcomics in several of their traditional print-comics categories , the eisner awards began awarding comics in the best digital comic category in 2005 . in 2006 the harvey awards established a best online comics work category , and in 2007 the shuster awards began an outstanding canadian web comic creator award . in 2012 the national cartoonists society gave their first reuben award for '' on-line comic strips . '' other awards focus exclusively on webcomics . the web cartoonists ' choice awards '' attack of the show '' . g4techtv . aired august 12 , 2005 . consist of a number of awards that were handed out annually from 2001 to 2008 . the dutch clickburg webcomic awards ( also known as the clickies ) has been handed out four times between 2005 and 2010 . the awards require the recipient to be active in the benelux countries , with the exception of one international award . . webcomics in print . though webcomics are typically published primarily on the world wide web , some web cartoonists may get publishing deals in which comic books are created of their work . sometimes , these books are published by mainstream comics publishers who are traditionally aimed at the direct market of comic books stores . some web cartoonists may pursue print syndication in established newspapers or magazines . in other cases , webcomic creators decide to self-publish their work . the traditional audience base for webcomics and print comics are vastly different , and webcomic readers do not necessarily go to bookstores . for some web cartoonists , a print release may be considered the '' goal '' of a webcomic series , while for others , comic books are '' just another way to get the content out . '' webcomics have been seen by some artists as a potential new path towards syndication in newspapers . according to jeph jacques ( questionable content ) , '' there 's no real money '' in syndication for webcomic artists . some artists are not be able to syndicate their work in newspapers because their comics are targeted to a specific niche audience and would n't be popular with a broader readership . . non-anglophone webcomics . many webcomics are published primarily in english , this being a major language in australia , canada , india , the united states , and the united kingdom . cultures surrounding non-anglophone webcomics have thrived in countries such as china , france , india , japan , and south korea . webcomics have been a popular medium in india since the early 2000s . indian webcomics are successful as they reach a large audience for free and they are frequently used by the country 's younger generation to spread social awareness on topics such as politics and feminism . these webcomics achieve a large amount of exposure by being spread through social media . in china , chinese webcomics have become a popular way to criticize the communist government and politicians in the country . many webcomics by popular artists get shared around the country thanks to social networks such as sina weibo and wechat . many titles will often be censored or taken down by the government . see also . digital comic digital illustration list of webcomic creators list of webcomics web fiction webtoon . references . external links . the rise of web comics video produced by off book ( web series )