Saint Valentine

identification . saint valentine does n't occur in the earliest list of roman martyrs , the chronography of 354 , although the patron of the chronography 's compilation was a wealthy roman christian named valentinus . roger pearse , the chronography of 354 in '' early church fathers '' online . retrieved september 27 , 2012 however , it is found in the martyrologium hieronymianum , '' xvi kalendas martii interamnae via flaminia miliario ab urbe roma lxiii natale valentini . '' in j . b . de rossi , p . 20 ( xvi kl . mar . ) . see also m . schoepflin , p . 40 : '' the original text '' . which was compiled between 460 and 544 from earlier local sources . the feast of st . valentine of february 14 was first established in 496 by pope gelasius i , who included valentine among all those '' . whose names are justly reverenced among men , but whose acts are known only to god . '' the catholic encyclopedia and other hagiography sources rené aigrain , hagiographie : ses sources , ses méthodes , son histoire , ( paris 1953 , pp . 268–269 ; agostino s . amore , '' s . valentino di roma o di terni ? '' , antonianum 41 . ( 1966 ) , pp . 260–277 . speak of three saints valentine that appear in connection with february 14 . one was a roman priest , another the bishop of interamna ( modern terni , italy ) both buried along the via flaminia outside rome , at different distances from the city . the third was said to be a saint who suffered on the same day with a number of companions in the africa ( roman province ) , of whom nothing else is known . though the extant accounts of the martyrdoms of the first two listed saints are of a late date and contain legendary elements , a common nucleus of fact may underlie the two accounts and they may refer to a single person . oxford dictionary of the christian church , 1983 , p . 1423 according to the official biography of the diocese of terni , bishop valentine was born and lived in interamna and while on a temporary stay in rome he was imprisoned , tortured , and martyred there on february 14 , 269 . his body was hastily buried at a nearby cemetery and a few nights later his disciples retrieved his body and returned him home . san valentino : biografia . diocese of terni . 2009 . english version , written probably after examining all previous sources . the roman martyrology , the catholic church 's official list of recognized saints , for february 14 gives only one saint valentine : a martyr who died on the via flaminia . martyrologium romanum 2001 , february 14 , p . 141 . the name '' valentine '' derived from valens ( worthy , strong , powerful ) , was popular in late antiquity . about eleven other saints having the name valentine are commemorated in the roman catholic church . some eastern churches of the western rite may provide still other different lists of saint valentines . the roman martyrology lists only seven who died on days other than february 14 : a priest from viterbo ( november 3 ) ; valentine of passau , papal missionary bishop to raetia , among first patrons of passau , and later hermit in zenoburg , near mais , south tyrol , italy , where he died in 475 ( january 7 ) ; a 5th-century priest and hermit ( july 4 ) ; saint fructus ( october 25 ) ; valentine berrio ochoa , martyred in 1861 ( november 24 ) ; and valentine jaunzarás gómez , martyred in 1936 ( september 18 ) . it also lists a virgin , saint valentina , who was martyred in 308 ( july 25 ) in caesarea , palestine . martyrologium romanum ( libreria editrice vaticana , 2001 . index , p . 768 ; saint valentina okay finep . 390 . . hagiography and testimony . the inconsistency in the identification of the saint is replicated in the various vitae that are ascribed to him . a common hagiography describes saint valentine as a priest of rome or as the former bishop of terni , an important town of umbria , in central italy . while under house arrest of judge asterius , and discussing his faith with him , valentinus ( the latin version of his name ) was discussing the validity of jesus . the judge put valentinus to the test and brought to him the judge 's adopted blind daughter . if valentinus succeeded in restoring the girl 's sight , asterius would do whatever he asked . valentinus , praying to god , laid his hands on her eyes and the child 's vision was restored . immediately humbled , the judge asked valentinus what he should do . valentinus replied that all of the idols around the judge 's house should be broken , and that the judge should fast for three days and then undergo the christian sacrament of baptism . the judge obeyed and , as a result of his fasting and prayer , freed all the christian inmates under his authority . the judge , his family , and his forty-four member household of adult family members and servants were baptized . castleden , rodney , '' the book of saints '' . 2006 , p.28 . valentinus was later arrested again for continuing to evangelism and was sent to the prefect of rome , to the emperor claudius gothicus ( claudius ii ) himself . claudius took a liking to him until valentinus tried to convince claudius to embrace christianity , whereupon claudius refused and condemned valentinus to death , commanding that valentinus either renounce his faith or he would be beaten with clubs and beheaded . valentinus refused and claudius ' command was executed outside the flaminian gate february 14 , 269 . an embellishment to this account states that before his execution , saint valentine wrote a note to asterius 's daughter signed '' from your valentine '' , which is said to have '' inspired today 's romantic missives '' . the golden legend of jacobus de voragine , compiled about 1260 and one of the most-read books of the high middle ages , gives sufficient details of the saints for each day of the liturgical year to inspire a homily on each occasion . the very brief vita of st valentine states that he was executed for refusing to deny christ by the order of the '' emperor claudius '' under the circumstances , emperor claudius was a detail meant to enhance verisimilitude . attempts to identify him with the only 3rd-century claudius , claudius gothicus , who spent his brief reign ( 268–270 ) away from rome winning his cognomen , are illusions in pursuit of a literary phantom : '' no evidence outside several late saints ' legends suggests that claudius ii reversed the policy of toleration established by the policy of his predecessor gallienus '' , jack oruch states , in '' st . valentine , chaucer , and spring in february '' , speculum 56.3 ( july 1981 ) , p . 536 , referencing william h . c . frend , martyrdom and persecution in the early church ( new york , 1967 , p . 326 . in the year 269 . before his head was cut off , this valentine restored sight and hearing to the daughter of his jailer . jacobus makes a play with the etymology of '' valentine '' , '' as containing valor '' . a popularly ascribed hagiographical identity appears in the nuremberg chronicle ( 1493 ) . alongside a woodcut portrait of valentine , the text states that he was a roman priest martyred during the reign of claudius gothicus . he was arrested and imprisoned upon being caught marrying christian couples and otherwise aiding christians who were at the time being persecuted by claudius in rome . helping christians at this time was considered a crime . claudius took a liking to this prisoner . however , when valentinus tried to convert the emperor , he was condemned to death . he was beaten with clubs and stones ; when that failed to kill him , he was beheaded outside the flaminian gate . various dates are given for the martyrdom or martyrdoms : 269 , 270 , or 273 . jack oruch , '' st . valentine , chaucer , and spring in february '' , speculum 56.3 ( july 1981 pp . 534–565 535 ) . there are many other legends behind saint valentine . one is that in the 3rd century ad it is said that valentine , who was a priest , defied the order of the emperor claudius and secretly performed christian weddings for couples , allowing the husbands involved to escape conscription into the pagan army . this legend claims that soldiers were sparse at this time so this was a big inconvenience to the emperor . the account mentions that in order '' to remind these men of their vows and god ’ s love , saint valentine is said to have cut hearts from parchment '' , giving them to these persecuted christians , a possible origin of the widespread use of hearts on st . valentine 's day . frank staff , the valentine & its origins , 1969 , frederick a . praeger . . churches named after saint valentine . image : st-valentine-kneeling-in-supplication.jpg thumb st valentine kneeling in supplication ( david teniers iii , 1600s ) – valentine kneels to receive a rosary from the virgin mary left 224x224px there are many churches dedicated to saint valentine in countries such as italy . saint valentine was venerated no more than other christian martyrs and saints . henry ansgar kelly , in chaucer and the cult of saint valentine . 1986 , p . 62 , says : as thurston has noted , no english church is known to have been dedicated to st . valentine ( thurston , butler 's lives , 2:217 ) . i should add that we have no record of a large number of churches in england . a 5th- or 6th-century work called passio marii et marthae made up a legend about saint valentine 's basilica being dedicated to saint valentine in rome . a later passio repeated the legend and added the adornment that pope julius i ( 357–352 ) had built the ancient basilica s . valentini extra portam on top of his sepulchre , in the via flaminia . this church was really named after a 4th-century tribune called valentino , who donated the land on which it is built . ansgar , 1986 , pp . 49–50 it hosted the martyr 's relics until the 13th century , when they were transferred to santa prassede , and the ancient basilica decayed . christian hülsen , chiese di roma nel medio evo ( florence : olschki , ( on-line text ) . saint valentine 's church in rome , built in 1960 for the needs of the olympic village , continues as a modern , well-visited parish church . saint valentine 's day . saint valentine of rome was martyred on february 14 in ad 269 . the feast of saint valentine , also known as saint valentine 's day , was established by pope gelasius i in ad 496 to be celebrated on february 14 in honour of the christian martyr . february 14 is saint valentine 's day in the lutheran calendar of saints . the church of england had him in its pre-reformation calendars , and restored his mention as bishop and martyr in its 1661–62 book of common prayer , and most provinces of the anglican communion celebrate his feast . see february calendar on the here on the church of england website . the roman catholic church includes him in its official list of saints , the roman martyrology . he was also in the general roman calendar for celebration as a simple feast until 1955 , when pope pius xii reduced all such feasts to just a commemoration within another celebration . the 1969 revision of the general roman calendar removed even this mention leaving it for inclusion only in local calendars such as that of balzan , malta . his commemoration was still in the 1962 roman missal and is thus observed also by those who , in the circumstances indicated in pope benedict xvi 's 2007 motu proprio summorum pontificum , use that edition . july 6 is the date on which the eastern orthodox church celebrates the roman presbyter valentine ; on july 30 it observes the feast of the hieromartyr valentine , bishop of interamna . members of the greek orthodox church named valentinos ( male ) or valentina ( female ) may observe their name day on the western ecclesiastical calendar date of february 14 . english 18th-century antiquarians alban butler and francis douce , noting the obscurity of saint valentine 's identity , suggested that saint valentine 's day was created as an attempt to supersede the pagan holiday of lupercalia ( mid-february in rome ) . this idea has lately been dismissed by academics and researchers , such as professor jack b . oruch of the university of kansas , henry ansgar kelly of the university of california , los angeles and associate professor michael matthew kaylor of the masaryk university . many of the current legends that characterize saint valentine were invented in the 14th century in england , notably by geoffrey chaucer and his circle , when the feast day of february 14 first became associated with romantic love . jack oruch identified the inception of this possible connection in butler 's lives of the . saints , 1756 , and douce 's illustrations of shakespeare , and of ancient manner , see oruch charges that the traditions associated with '' valentine 's day '' , documented in geoffrey chaucer 's parlement of foules and set in the fictional context of an old tradition , did not exist before chaucer . he argues that the speculative explanation of sentimental customs , posing as historical fact , had their origins among 18th-century antiquary , notably alban butler , the author of butler 's lives of saints , and have been perpetuated even by respectable modern scholars . in the french 14th-century manuscript illumination from a vies des saints ( illustration above ) , saint valentine , bishop of terni , oversees the construction of his basilica at terni ; there is no suggestion here that the bishop was a patron of lovers . bn , mss fr . 185 . the book of lives of the saints , with illuminations by richard de montbaston and collaborators , was among the manuscripts that cardinal richelieu bequeathed to the king of france . during the middle ages , it was believed that birds paired in mid-february . this was then associated with the romance of valentine . although these legends differ , valentine 's day is widely recognized as a day for romance and devotion . associated christian relics . the flower-crowned alleged skull of st . valentine is exhibited in the basilica of santa maria in cosmedin , rome . st . valentine 's remains are deposited in st anton 's church , madrid , where they have lain since the late 1700s . they were a present from the pope to king carlos iv , who entrusted them to the order of poor clerics regular of the mother of god of the pious schools ( piarists ) . the relics have been displayed publicly since 1984 , in a foundation open to the public at all times in order to help people in need . whitefriar street carmelite church , dublin , also houses some relics of st valentine . on 27 december 1835 the very reverend father john spratt , master of sacred theology to the carmelite order in dublin , was sent the partial remains of st valentine by cardinal carlo odescalchi , under the auspices of pope gregory xvi . the relics and the accompanying letter from cardinal odescalchi have remained in the church ever since . the remains , which include '' a small vessel tinged with his blood '' , were sent as a token of esteem following an eloquent sermon fr spratt had delivered in rome . shrine of st valentine , whitefriar street church , irish province of the order of carmelites on saint valentine 's day in ireland , many individuals who seek true love make a christian pilgrimage to the shrine of st . valentine in whitefriar street carmelite church in dublin , which is said to house relics of saint valentine of rome ; they pray at the shrine in hope of finding romance . there lies a book in which foreigners and locals have written their prayer requests for love . another relic was found in 2003 in prague in church of st peter and paul at vyšehrad . a silver reliquary containing a fragment of st . valentine 's skull is found in the parish church of st . mary 's assumption in chełmno , poland . relics can also be found in mytilene on the greek island of lesbos . another set of relics can also be found in savona , in the cathedral of santa maria assunta . alleged relics of st . valentine also lie at the reliquary of roquemaure , gard , france , in the st . stephen 's cathedral , vienna , in balzan in malta and also in blessed john duns scotus ' church in the gorbals area of glasgow , scotland . there is also a gold reliquary bearing the words '' corpus st . valentin , m '' ( body of st . valentine , martyr ) at birmingham oratory , uk , in one of the side altars in the main church . see also . la fête du baiser persecution of christians in the roman empire saint fructus saint valentine , patron saint archive st . valentine 's key . notes . bibliography . johannes baptista de rossi et ludovicus duchesne , ed . , ( 1894 ) . martyrologium hieronymianum : ad fidem codicum adiectis prolegomenis . ex actibus sanctorum novembris , tomi ii , pars prior . bruxellis . lxxxii , 195 p . s . valentinus , p . 20 . de voragine , jacobus . the life of saint valentine . in legenda aurea , compiled around 1275 thurston , herbert ( 2015 ) . st . valentine . the catholic encyclopedia , vol . 15 . hülsen , christian ( 1927 ) . le chiese di roma nel medio evo : cataloghi ed appunti . florence . cxv , 640 p . ( on-line text ) . thurston , herbert ( 1933 ) . st . valentine , martyr . in alban butler 's lives of the saints , vol . ii , pp . & nbsp ; 214–217 . new york . 409 pp . aigrain , rené ( 1953 ) . hagiographie : ses sources , ses méthodes , son histoire . paris . amore , agostino . s . valentino di roma o di terni ? , antonianum 41 ( 1966 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 260–77 . kellogg , alfred ( 1972 ) . '' chaucer 's st . valentine : a conjecture . '' in kellogg , chaucer , langland , arthur . 1972 , pp . & nbsp ; 108–145 . amore , agostino ( 1975 ) . i martiri di roma . roma , antonianum . 322 p . kelly , henry ansgar ( 1986 ) . chaucer and the cult of saint valentine . leiden , the netherlands . 185 p . martyrologium romanum . libreria editrice vaticana , 2001 , p . & nbsp ; 141 ( february 14 ) . 773 p . in search of st . valentine . scotsman.com blog , 14 february 2005 . oruch , jack b . '' st . valentine , chaucer , and spring in february '' , speculum 56 ( july 1981 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 534–565 . schoepflin , maurizio and seren , linda ( ) 2000 ) . san valentino di terni : storia , tradizione , devozione . morena ( roma ) . 111 p . vincenzo paglia . '' saint valentine 's message '' . washington post , february 15 , 2007 . saint valentine : biography . diocese of terni . 2009 . st valentine of terni – english translation of his '' passio '' ( bhl 8460 ) st valentine of rome – english translation of his '' passio '' ( bhl 8465 ) – actually an extract from the acts of marius , martha , audifax and habbakuk ( bhl 5543 ) .