1967 in literature

events . january the first publication of mikhail bulgakov 's novel the master and margarita ( « ма́стер и маргари́та » ) , in the form left at the author 's death in 1940 , concludes in the magazine moskva , although censored portions circulate only in samizdat in the soviet union . it is first published in book form this year , by the ymca press in paris . barbara gordon is introduced as batgirl in the detective comics series in the united states ; when not exercising her superhero powers she uses her doctorate in library science as head of gotham city public library . march 16 – the first performance of d . h . lawrence 's january 1913 play the daughter-in-law is given at the royal court theatre in london . april 24 – the 18-year-old s . e . hinton 's bildungsroman the outsiders is published in the united states by viking press . she wrote it at the age of 15–16 . august 9 – the english playwright joe orton ( aged 34 ) is battered to death by his partner , kenneth halliwell , who commits suicide in their north london home shortly after . orton has completed work on a film script , up against it , for the beatles ( unproduced ) . october 21 – american writer norman mailer is arrested for civil disobedience during the national mobilization committee to end the war in vietnam march on the pentagon . november 9 – the first issue of the magazine rolling stone is published in san francisco . unknown dates the influential new wave science fiction anthology dangerous visions is published in the united states . the sabon typeface , designed by jan tschichold , is introduced . new books . fiction . lloyd alexander – taran wanderer j . g . ballard the day of forever the disaster area the overloaded man lindsay barrett – song for mumu luis berenguer – el mundo de juan lobón thomas berger – killing time thomas bernhard – verstörung ( disturbance , translated as gargoyles ) hilda bernstein – the world that was ours richard brautigan – trout fishing in america mikhail bulgakov ( died 1940 ) – the master and margarita kenneth bulmer cycle of nemesis to outrun doomsday arthur j . burks – black medicine guillermo cabrera infante – tres tristes tigres angela carter – the magic toyshop agatha christie – endless night john christopher ( sam youd ) the white mountains the city of gold and lead margaret craven – i heard the owl call my name l . sprague de camp editor – the fantastic swordsmen r.f . delderfield – cheap day return august derleth editor – travellers by night margaret drabble – jerusalem the golden nell dunn – poor cow cameron duodu – the gab boys allan w . eckert – wild season mircea eliade – the old man and the bureaucrats janice elliott – the buttercup chain claire etcherelli – elise , ou la vraie vie gabriel garcía márquez – one hundred years of solitude ( cien años de soledad ) alan garner – the owl service william golding – the pyramid richard gordon – the facemaker winston graham – the walking stick paul guimard – intersection s . e . hinton – the outsiders william hope hodgson – deep waters robert e . howard conan the warrior ( with l . sprague de camp ) – conan the usurper ( with l . sprague de camp and lin carter ) – conan james jones – go to the widow-maker anna kavan – ice elia kazan – the arrangement thomas keneally – bring larks and heroes milan kundera – the joke ( žert ) alex la guma – the stone-country ira levin – rosemary 's baby joan lindsay – picnic at hanging rock h . p . lovecraft – three tales of horror alistair maclean – where eagles dare naguib mahfouz – miramar daniel pratt mannix iv – the fox and the hound catherine marshall – christy berkely mather – the gold of malabar v . s . naipaul – the mimic men r . k . narayan – the vendor of sweets ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o – a grain of wheat brian o'nolan – the third policeman ( written 1939–40 ; published posthumously ) scott o'dell – the black pearl kenzaburō ōe ( 大江 健三郎 ) – the silent cry ( 万延元年のフットボール , man'en gannen no futtoboru ) k . m . peyton – flambards chaim potok – the chosen marin preda – moromeţii , vol . 2 e . hoffmann price – strange gateways valentin rasputin – money for maria ( деньги для марии ) ruth rendell – a new lease of death gaia servadio – tanto gentile e tanto onesta aleksandr solzhenitsyn – cancer ward ( раковый корпус , rakovy korpus ) mary stewart – the gabriel hounds william styron – the confessions of nat turner piri thomas – down these mean streets leon uris – topaz jack vance – the palace of love thornton wilder – the eighth day colin wilson – the mind parasites roger zelazny – lord of light ( hugo award winner 1968 ) . children and young people . ingri and edgar parin d'aulaire – norse gods and giants john d . fitzgerald – the great brain c . s . forester – hornblower and the crisis alan garner – the owl service rumer godden – home is the sailor s . e . hinton – the outsiders aldous huxley ( died 1963 ) – the crows of pearblossom ( short story written 1944 ) e . l . konigsburg from the mixed-up files of mrs . basil e . frankweiler jennifer , hecate , macbeth , william mckinley , and me , elizabeth boy lornsen – robbi , tobbi und das fliewatüüt ruth manning-sanders – a book of wizards daniel p . mannix ( with john schoenherr ) – the fox and the hound bill martin jr . – brown bear , brown bear , what do you see ? ( board book ) r . d . mascott – the adventures of james bond junior 003½ jessica nelson north – the giant 's shoe bill peet buford the little bighorn jennifer and josephine k . m . peyton – flambards ( first in eponymous series of four books ) joan g . robinson – when marnie was there barbara sleigh – jessamy zilpha keatley snyder the egypt game the gypsy game . drama . simon gray – wise child christopher hampton – total eclipse peter handke – kaspar dorothy hewett – this old man comes rolling home rolf hochhuth – soldiers ( soldaten : nekrolog auf genf ) peter nichols – a day in the death of joe egg efua sutherland – edufa vijay tendulkar – shantata ! court chalu aahe peter ustinov – the unknown soldier and his wife luis valdez – los vendidos leonid zorin – a warsaw melody . poetry . roger mcgough , brian patten and adrian henri – the mersey sound . non-fiction . j . a . baker – the peregrine dmitri borgmann – beyond language peter brown – augustine of hippo : a biography robert coles – a study in courage and fear , volume 1 of children of crisis l . sprague de camp and catherine crook de camp – the story of science in america joseph fletcher – moral responsibility e . d . hirsch – validity in interpretation martin luther king jr . – where do we go from here : chaos or community ? ira m . lapidus – muslim cities in the later middle ages robert macarthur and e . o . wilson – the theory of island biogeography marshall mcluhan and quentin fiore – the medium is the massage william manchester – the death of a president robert k . massie – nicholas and alexandra desmond morris – the naked ape josep pla – life embitters ( la vida amarga ) paul robert ( editor ) – petit robert abridged dictionary valerie solanas – scum manifesto a . t . q . stewart – the ulster crisis : resistance to home rule 1912–14 . births . january 7 – benjamin kwakye , ghanaian novelist march 8 – mitsuyo kakuta ( 角田 光代 ) , japanese novelist and translator april 19 – steven h silver , american science fiction writer june 16 – maylis de kerangal , french novelist july 11 – jhumpa lahiri , english-born indian/american writer july 19 zoran drvenkar , croatian german novelist wladimir kaminer , russian german short story writer july 31 – elizabeth wurtzel , american memoirist ( prozac nation ) ( died 2020 ) september 21 – suman pokhrel , nepali poet , lyricist , playwright , translator and artist october 4 – miloš urban , czech novelist december 12 – robert lepage , french canadian playwright , actor and director uncertain date – s . f . said , lebanese-born british children 's fiction writer . deaths . january 29 – ion buzdugan , romanian poet and political figure ( born 1887 ) february 8 – victor gollancz , english publisher ( born 1893 ) march 2 – josé martínez ruiz ( azorín ) , spanish novelist ( born 1873 ) march 7 – alice b . toklas , american memoirist and autobiographer ( born 1893 ) march 30 – jean toomer , african american writer ( born 1894 ) may 12 – john masefield , english poet laureate ( born 1878 ) may 22 – langston hughes , american poet , novelist and playwright ( born 1902 ) june 3 – arthur ransome , english author of children 's and other books ( born 1884 ) june 4 – j . r . ackerley , english journalist ( born 1896 ) june 7 – dorothy parker , american humorist ( born 1893 ) july 22 lajos kassák , hungarian poet , novelist and translator ( born 1887 ) carl sandburg , american historian and poet ( born 1878 ) july 31 – margaret kennedy , english novelist and playwright ( born 1896 ) august 2 – giles romilly , english journalist ( tranquilizer overdose , born 1916 ) august 9 – joe orton , english playwright ( murdered , born 1933 ) august 29 – sidney bradshaw fay , american historian and author ( born 1876 ) september 1 – siegfried sassoon , english poet and memoirist ( born 1886 ) september 12 – vladimir bartol , slovene author ( born 1903 ) september 16 – pavlo tychyna , ukrainian poet ( born 1891 ) september 24 – robert van gulik , dutch author ( cancer , born 1910 ) september 29 – carson mccullers , american novelist ( brain hemorrhage , born 1917 ) september – christopher okigbo , nigerian poet ( killed in action , born 1930 ) october 8 – vernon watkins , welsh poet ( heart failure , born 1906 ) october 9 – andré maurois , french novelist ( born 1885 ) october 13 – georges sadoul , french journalist and writer on cinema ( born 1904 ) october 14 – marcel aymé , french novelist and children 's author ( born 1902 ) november 17 – bo bergman , swedish poet ( born 1869 ) november 30 – patrick kavanagh , irish poet ( born 1904 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : miguel ángel asturias . canada . see 1967 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : andré pieyre de mandiargues , la marge prix médicis : claude simon , histoire . united kingdom . carnegie medal for children 's literature : alan garner , the owl service cholmondeley award : seamus heaney , brian jones , norman nicholson eric gregory award : angus calder , marcus cumberlege , david harsent , david selzer , brian patten james tait black memorial prize for fiction : margaret drabble , jerusalem the golden james tait black memorial prize for biography : winifred gérin , charlotte brontë : the evolution of genius queen 's gold medal for poetry : charles causley . united states . frost medal : marianne moore hugo award : robert a . heinlein , the moon is a harsh mistress nebula award : samuel r . delany , the einstein intersection newbery medal for children 's literature : irene hunt , up a road slowly pulitzer prize for drama : edward albee , a delicate balance pulitzer prize for fiction & national book award : bernard malamud – the fixer pulitzer prize for poetry : anne sexton : live or die . elsewhere . akutagawa prize : oshiro tatsuhiro ( 大城立裕 ) , the cocktail party miles franklin award : thomas keneally , bring larks and heroes premio nadal : josé maría sanjuán , réquiem por todos nosotros viareggio prize : raffaello brignetti , il gabbiano azzurro . references .