UC Davis School of Law

rankings and academics . in 2016 , us news & world report ranked uc davis 30th among all law schools in the united states . for diversity among the five law schools in the uc system , uc davis was named the second-most diverse after uc hastings by us news & world report . princeton review placed uc davis law tenth in the nation for faculty diversity in the 2009 version of its annual law ranking . it is listed as an '' a- '' in the march 2011 '' diversity honor roll '' by the national jurist : the magazine for law students . it is listed as an '' a '' ( 16 ) in the january 2011 '' best public interest law schools '' ratings by the national jurist : the magazine for law students . uc davis law has the smallest student body of the uc law schools . it has a slightly higher student/faculty ratio than ucla or berkeley . uc davis has been ranked as the fifth most-expensive public law school in the nation by u.s . news & world report . it is also ranked first for providing the most financial aid . uc davis grants the second-most in financial aid in the country . uc davis law 's king hall loan repayment assistance program ( lrap ) , founded in 1990 to help alumni working in relatively low-income public-service law careers to repay student loans , was the first loan repayment assistance program established at any uc law school . according to brian leiter 's law school rankings , davis ranks 23rd in the nation for scholarly impact as measured by total academic citations of tenure-stream faculty . . bar passage rates . based on a 2001-2007 6 year average , 79.4 % of uc davis law graduates passed the california state bar exam . in 2009 , 89 % of first-time test takers passed the california bar . for july 2012 , 78.9 % of first-time test takers passed the california bar exam . for july 2013 , 85.0 % of first-time test takers passed the california bar exam . for july 2014 , 86 % of first-time test takers passed the california bar exam . . employment . according to king hall 's official 2019 aba-required disclosures , 85 % of the class of 2019 obtained full-time , long-term , jd-required employment nine months after graduation . king hall 's law school transparency under-employment score is 6.5 % , indicating the percentage of the class of 2019 unemployed , pursuing an additional degree , or working in a non-professional , short-term , or part-time job nine months after graduation . . costs . the total cost of attendance ( indicating the cost of tuition , fees , and living expenses ) at king hall for the 2013-2014 academic year is 68,346 for california residents and 80,591 for non-residents . the law school transparency estimated debt-financed cost of attendance for three years is 265,806 for residents . . coffee cart fire . early in the morning of april 29 , 2010 a coffee cart operating immediately outside of the law school burned down . the cause of the fire remains unknown but was regarded by local officials as suspicious . expansion . the law school completed a 30 million expansion project in 2011 . the project has added an additional wing to the law school 's current building , increasing assignable space by nearly 30 percent to provide for additional classrooms , offices , and a new courtroom , named the paul kalmanovitz appellate courtroom in honor of a 1 million gift to the project from the kalmanovitz charitable foundation . the courtroom is used by the u.s . court of appeals for the ninth circuit , california supreme court , and california court of appeal . noted people . faculty . alan brownstein , boochever and bird chair for the study and teaching of freedom and equality gabriel j . chin , professor of law , specialist in fields of immigration law and criminal procedure joel dobris , professor of law , scholar of trusts , wills , and estates angela p . harris , professor of law , critical legal theory scholar robert w . hillman , professor of law , fair business practices and investor advocacy chair edward imwinkelried , edward l . barrett jr . professor of law kevin johnson , dean and mabie-apallas professor of public interest law and chicana/o studies , specialist in civil rights , immigration , and chicano/a rights law miguel méndez , professor of law , evidence law scholar terry o'neill , president , national organization for women , acting professor of law 1988-1989 . rex r . perschbacher , daniel j . dykstra endowed chair , former dean of the law school , 1998-2008 cruz reynoso , associate justice of the california supreme court 1982-1987 , professor emeritus martha west , former associate dean ; professor emeritus bill dodge , professor of law , international law , international transactions , and international dispute resolution . he currently serves as co-reporter for the american law institute 's restatement ( fourth ) of foreign relations law : jurisdiction and as a member of the state department 's advisory committee on international law . alumni . tani cantil-sakauye , the 28th and current chief justice of the california supreme court craig f . stowers , associate justice ( and formerly the 18th chief justice ) of the alaska supreme court kristina pickering , associate justice of the supreme court of nevada clint bolick , associate justice of the supreme court of arizona f . philip carbullido , associate justice of the supreme court of guam ; chief justice 2003-2008 luis alejo , california state assemblymember charles calderon , california state assemblymember , former majority leader of the california state senate sharon l . gleason , judge , united states district court for the district of alaska elihu harris , former democratic mayor of oakland , california ryan t . holte , judge , united states court of federal claims paul igasaki , chief judge & chair of the u.s . department of labor administrative review board ; deputy chief executive officer of equal justice works ; former chair of the u.s . equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) , appointed by president clinton gus lee , american author and ethicist laura liswood , co-founder of the council of women world leaders ; senior advisor , goldman sachs george miller , democratic congressman ; ranking member , united states house committee on education and labor angela e . oh , activist , former chair of u.s . senator barbara boxer 's federal judicial nominations committee dean d . pregerson , judge , united states district court for the central district of california ; son of judge harry pregerson jane a . restani , chief judge , united states court of international trade jim rogers , city councilman , city of richmond , california jon sands , chief federal public defender for the district of arizona anna slotky , actress gary d . solis , adjunct professor of law , georgetown university law center darrell steinberg , mayor of sacramento , california state senate president pro tem , ( d-sacramento ) arthur torres , california state senator ; former chairman of the california democratic party monika kalra varma , director , robert f . kennedy center for justice and human rights steve white , former presiding judge , sacramento county superior court ; former inspector general of the california department of corrections and rehabilitation . references . external links .