Abu Hamza al-Masri

background . hamza was born mustafa kamel mustafa , in alexandria , egypt , in 1958 , the son of a middle-class army officer . in 1979 , he entered britain on a student visa . his initial reaction to life in britain was to describe it as '' a paradise , where you could do anything you wanted . '' he studied civil engineering at brighton polytechnic . prior to his conversion to islamism in malta , 1999 , hamza was known as a '' gentle giant '' and a '' womaniser '' . hamza gained employment as a bouncer in the strip bars of soho under his original name from 1980 until 1983 , when club baron jean agius was arrested and charged for conspiring to be a pimp . agius alleges that hamza may have also co-owned a club during this time . in the early 1990s , hamza lived in bosnia under another name , and fought alongside bosniaks against serbs and croats during the bosnian war . hamza , who has one eye and no hands , once claimed he lost them fighting soviet–afghan war . cnn reported they were '' injuries he says he sustained while tackling a landmine in afghanistan . '' among several accounts that take issue with hamza 's story , bbc security correspondent gordon corera 's introduction to omar nasiri 's memoir inside the jihad : my life with al qaeda says hamza '' boosted his credibility '' with rumours he sustained the injuries fighting jihad ; also that nasiri knew they resulted from '' an accident during experiments in a training camp '' , and hamza asked nasiri '' to keep this secret in order to avoid undermining his reputation . '' during his trial in the united states , hamza stated that his injuries occurred whilst working with explosives with the pakistani military in lahore . the uk tabloid press have nicknamed him '' hook '' in allusion to the fictional pirate captain hook . the original article in the times is available by subscription . . family . on 16 may 1980 , hamza married british citizen valerie fleming , a roman catholic convert to islam , and soon after they had a son , mohammed mustafa kamel born in october 1981 . in 1984 , their relationship came under increasing strain and later in that year hamza took three-year-old mohammed with him to egypt , effectively breaking contact with valerie . eventually they divorced and he married najat mustafa , with whom he has seven children : five sons followed by two daughters . hamza 's stepdaughter , donna traverso , told the times in 2006 that she was convinced hamza had duped her mother , valerie , into marrying him in order to gain the right to stay in the uk ( see '' arrests , charges and imprisonment '' below ) . in 1999 , hamza 's son mohammed , then 17 years old , was arrested in yemen with hamza 's stepson mohssin ghalain and eight other men . all were tried and convicted of planning a terrorist bombing campaign that the prosecution alleged hamza had sent the men to carry out . mohammed and mohssin received prison sentences of three and seven years , respectively . mohammed , mohssin , and hamza 's oldest son with najat , hamza mustafa kamel , were convicted of fraud by a london court in 2009 , and sentenced to prison terms . '' mohammed chiadmi , 31 , from maida vale ; his brother abdul chiadmi , 22 , from ladbroke grove ; khalid jebari , 22 , from pimlico ; and hamza mrimou , 27 , from feltham admitted fraud , handling stolen goods and money laundering . '' hamza 's third son with najat , yasser kamel , was sentenced to 12 months in youth detention in 2010 , for violent disorder at anti-israel protests in 2009 . in 2012 , hamza 's second youngest son , imran mustafa kamel , was convicted of armed robbery and illegal possession of a firearm with intent to commit an offence and was sentenced to 11 years ' imprisonment . in 2013 , the evening standard reported that hamza 's second-oldest son with najat , uthman mustafa kamal , delivered sermons at an-noor mosque in acton , west london , that were allegedly 'in support of holy war ' , videos of which were uploaded online but have since been taken down . in 2017 , hamza 's youngest son , sufiyan mustafa kamel , was stripped of his uk passport after travelling to syria in 2013 to fight alongside rebel groups against bashar al-assad . hamza 's moroccan daughter-in-law was jailed for attempting to smuggle a mobile phone sim card when visiting him in belmarsh prison in 2012 . she is now facing deportation but because she is the sole carer of her son , a british national , the european court of justice 's advocate general has ruled she can not automatically be deported despite her criminality unless she is deemed to pose a 'serious ' threat to society . . religious life . hamza was the imam of finsbury park mosque from 1997 , and a leader of the supporters of sharia , a group that believed in a strict interpretation of sharia . on 14 september 1999 , he sent an article to al-hayat , one of the largest pan-arab newspapers , supporting the russian apartment bombings , claiming that , while '' in a war , no one targets women and children in a war '' , these attacks were necessary as '' a muslim revenge for the russian criminal policies in chechnya '' . in 2003 , he addressed a rally in central london called by the islamic al-muhajiroun , where members spoke of their support for islamist goals such as the creation of a new islamic caliphate and replacing the western-backed middle eastern regimes . on 4 february 2003 ( after being suspended since april 2002 ) , hamza was dismissed from his position at the finsbury park mosque by the charity commission , the government department that regulates charities in england and wales . after his exclusion from the mosque , he preached outside the gates until may 2004 , when he was arrested at the start of us extradition proceedings against him ( see below ) . hamza publicly expressed support for islamist goals such as creating a caliphate , and for osama bin laden . he wrote a paper entitled el ansar ( the victor ) in which he expressed support for the actions of the armed islamic group ( gia ) in algeria , but he later rejected them when they started killing civilians . '' the algerian question '' , algeria : anger of the dispossessed , yale university press , john phillips and martin evans , 2007 , p . 222 . in one sermon relating to the necessity of jihad , he said : '' allah likes those who believe in him who kill those who do not believe in him . allah likes that . so if you muslims do n't like that because you hate the blood , there is something wrong with you . '' salafimedia.com '' join the victorious party ( part l ) '' . he allegedly associated with abdullah el-faisal , a jamaican muslim convert cleric who preached in the uk until he was imprisoned for urging his followers to murder jews , hindus , christians and americans , subsequently being deported to jamaica in 2007 . . arrests , charges and imprisonment . hamza was arrested in december 1980 , during a raid on a soho strip club , for overstaying his tourist visa , which allowed him to stay in the uk for one month . he pleaded guilty to overstay but was allowed to remain in the uk as he was married to a british citizen , valerie fleming . on 26 august 2004 , hamza was arrested by british police under section 41 of the terrorism act 2000 , which covers the instigation of acts of terrorism . charges against him were dropped on 31 august 2004 , but he was kept in jail whilst a us extradition case was developed and british authorities drew up further criminal charges of their own . almost two months later , on 19 october 2004 , hamza was charged with fifteen & nbsp ; offences under the provisions of various british statutes , including encouraging the killing of non-muslims , and intent to stir up racism . the trial commenced on 5 july 2005 , but was adjourned , and not resumed until 9 january 2006 . on 7 february 2006 , he was found guilty on eleven charges and not guilty on four : guilty of six charges of soliciting murder under the offences against the person act 1861 ; not guilty on three further such charges . guilty of three charges related to '' using threatening , abusive or insulting words or behaviour with intent to stir up racial hatred , contrary to section 18 ( 1 ) of the public order act 1986 '' , not guilty on one further such charge . guilty of one charge of '' possession of threatening , abusive or insulting recordings of sound , with intent to stir up racial hatred , contrary to section 23 of the public order act 1986 '' . guilty of one charge of '' possessing a document containing information likely to be useful to a person committing or preparing an act of terrorism '' , under the terrorism act 2000 , s58 . this charge under the terrorism act of 2000 related to his possession of an encyclopedia of afghan jihad , an al qaeda handbook and other propaganda materials produced by abu hamza . in sentencing , mr justice hughes said hamza had '' helped to create an atmosphere in which to kill has become regarded by some as not only a legitimate course but a moral and religious duty in pursuit of perceived justice . '' abu hamza was sentenced to seven years ' imprisonment . in september 2012 , frank gardner revealed that queen elizabeth ii had been upset some years earlier that abu hamza al-masri could not be arrested . the bbc apologised later that day for the revelation . . costs . on 18 january 2007 , lord justice hughes made an order for the recovery of the full costs of the court-appointed defence of the race-hate charges , estimated in excess of £1 million . this judgement was based on his view that '' the story i have been told today ( by abu hamza ) is simply not true '' that he abu hamza had no share in a £220,000 house in greenford , west london . hamza had claimed it belonged to his sister . the court also found that abu hamza was contributing £9,000 a year for private education for his children . . extradition to the united states . on 27 may 2004 , hamza was detained on remand by british authorities and appeared before magistrates at the start of a process to try to extradite him to the united states . yemen also requested his extradition . the united states wanted hamza to stand trial for eleven counts relating to the taking of sixteen hostages in yemen in 1998 , advocating jihad in afghanistan in 2001 , supporting james ujaama in an alleged attempt to establish a '' terrorist training camp '' in late 1999 and early 2000 near bly , oregon , and of providing aid to al-qaeda . ujaama is a us citizen who had met abu hamza in england in 1999 and was indicted in the us for providing aid to al-qaeda , attempting to establish a terrorist training camp , and for running a website advocating global jihad . abu hamza was in britain throughout the relevant period . hamza could not face the death penalty if extradited to the united states because the uk is a signatory to the european convention on human rights ( echr ) . on 15 november 2007 , british courts gave permission for hamza 's extradition to the us . abu hamza appealed against this decision to the european court of human rights ( ecthr ) . in the meantime , hamza was kept in prison after the completion of his sentence . on 8 july 2010 , the ecthr temporarily blocked hamza 's extradition to the united states to face terrorism charges until the court was satisfied that he would not be treated inhumanely . the court based its judgement on echr , which applies to british law . it is an absolute prohibition for a signatory to the echr to remove anyone to a place where they would be subject to inhumane or degrading treatment . in past cases , the ecthr has prevented the uk from deporting suspected foreign terrorists to places where they might be tortured . in hamza 's case , this has been extended to refusing extradition to a country where he might be jailed for life , and where the prison regime is judged too harsh . the court said there should be further legal argument on whether life without parole would be a breach of human rights . the court asked for fresh submissions on whether hamza , and other prisoners awaiting extradition , would face inhumane treatment in the us if they were sent there to stand trial . on 24 september 2012 , the court agreed hamza could be extradited to the us to face terrorism charges . after considering all evidence , statements by officials at adx florence , the court held that '' conditions at adx would not amount to ill-treatment '' and also stated that '' not all inmates convicted of international terrorism were housed at adx and , even if they were , sufficient procedural safeguards were in place , such as holding a hearing before deciding on such a transfer '' and that '' if the transfer process had been unsatisfactory , there was the possibility of bringing a claim to both the federal bureau of prisons ' administrative remedy programme and the us federal courts '' , referring to the administrative remedy program . on 26 september 2012 , a high court judge halted the extradition of hamza to the us on terror charges after the cleric launched a last-ditch appeal . on 5 october 2012 , the high court granted the uk 's government 's request to extradite hamza to the us . the removal process took place that same evening , when hamza was taken from long lartin jail to raf mildenhall in suffolk , where he was placed into the hands of the us marshals . abu hamza arrived in the us on the morning of 6 october 2012 to face eleven charges relating to hostage taking , conspiracy to establish a militant training camp and calling for holy war in afghanistan . he appeared in the united states district court for the southern district of new york on 6 october and was then taken into custody . he appeared in court again on 9 october and pleaded not guilty to eleven charges . on 14 april 2014 , his trial opened with jury selection . his lawyer , joshua dratel , claimed abu hamza cooperated with mi5 and the police to help interact with the british muslim community . on 19 may 2014 , he was found guilty of the terror charges . british home secretary theresa may said that she was '' pleased '' that abu hamza had '' finally faced justice '' . on 9 january 2015 , hamza was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole , and the entire sentence would be served at adx florence in colorado . in u.s . confinement , his hook devices were confiscated and replaced with a prosthetic spork . in late august 2020 , the times reported that abu hamza had filed a lawsuit against the us attorney general william barr over what he described as '' inhumane and degrading '' conditions at adx florence . hamza 's complaints included solitary confinement , the removal of his prosthetic hooks despite his lack of forearms , sustaining rotten teeth from opening food packages , and encountering '' religious stress '' from eating kosher food . . books and booklets . he wrote the following books and booklets : shiraz maher , salafi-jihadism : the history of an idea , oxford university press , 2016 , p . 256 be aware of takfir np , nd . ruling by man made law , is it major or minor kufr ? explaining the words of ibn abbas ( supporters of shariah , 1996 ) . allah ’ s governance on earth . np , 1999 . see also . abu qatada . references . external links . ecthr judgment in the case of abu hamza and others v . uk ( takes a few moments to retrieve from archive . )