District

by country/region . afghanistan . in afghanistan , a district ( persian wuleswali ) is a subdivision of a province . there are almost 400 districts in the country . australia . electoral districts are used in state elections . districts were also used in several states as cadastral units for land titles . some were used as squatting districts . new south wales had several different types of districts used in the 21st century . austria . in austria , the word bezirk is used with different meanings in three different contexts : some of the tasks of the administrative branch of the national and regional governments are fulfilled by the 95 district ( austria ) ( bezirkshauptmannschaften ) . the area a district administrative office is responsible for is often , although informally , called a district ( bezirk ) . a number of statutory cities , currently 15 , are not served by any district administrative office . their respective municipal bureaucracies handle the tasks normally performed by the district administrative office . the cities of vienna and graz are divided into municipal districts ( stadtbezirke ) , assisting the respective municipal governments . in vienna , the constituents of each district elect a district council ( bezirksvertretung ) ; the district council in turn elects a district chairperson ( bezirksvorsteher ) . although the city vests its districts with a limited amount of budgetary autonomy , district councils and chairpersons have little real responsibility . in particular , they do not legislate . most of the districts of vienna were independent municipalities at some point ; district councils and chairpersons symbolize the town councils and mayors they used to have . from the point of view of the judiciary of austria , the country is subdivided into 115 judicial districts ( gerichtsbezirke ) , each corresponding to one of the country 's 115 lowest-level trial courts . azerbaijan . azerbaijan is administratively divided into the following subdivisions : 59 districts ( rayonlar ; sing.– rayon ) , 11 cities ( şəhərlər ; sing.– şəhər ) , 1 autonomous republic ( muxtar respublika ) , which itself contains : 7 districts 1 city the rayons are further divided into municipalities ( bələdiyyə ) . additionally , azerbaijan is subdivided into 9 ( economic ) regions ( i̇qtisadi rayonlar ; sing.– i̇qtisadi rayon ) . this is not an administrative division . each region contains a number of districts . the nakhchivan autonomous republic forms a separate , 10th economic region . 1 . absheron 2 . ganja-qazakh 3 . shaki-zaqatala 4 . lankaran 5 . quba-khachmaz 6 . aran 7 . upper karabakh 8 . kalbajar-lachin 9 . daglig-shirvan 10 . nakhchivan . bangladesh . bangladeshi districts are local administrative units . in all , there are 64 districts in bangladesh . originally , there were 21 greater districts with several subdivisions in each district . in 1984 , the government made all these subdivisions into districts . each district has several sub districts called upazila in bengali with a total 493 upzillas . belgium . in belgium municipalities with more than 100,000 inhabitants , on initiative of the local council , sub-municipal administrative entities with elected councils may be created . as such , only antwerp , having over 460,000 inhabitants , became subdivided into nine districts . the belgian arrondissements ( also in french as well as in dutch ) , an administrative level between province ( or the capital region ) and municipality , or the lowest judicial level , are in english sometimes called districts as well . bhutan . districts of bhutan ( dzongkhag ) are local administrative units consisting of village blocks called gewog . some have subdistricts called dungkhag . bosnia and herzegovina . in bosnia and herzegovina , a district is a self-governing administrative unit . brčko district . brčko district in northeastern bosnia and herzegovina is formally part of both the republika srpska and the federation of bosnia and herzegovina . the assembly of the brčko district has 29 seats . brazil . brazilian municipalities are subdivided into districts . small municipalities usually have only one urban district , which contains the city itself , consisting of the seat of the local government , where the municipality 's prefecture and câmara de vereadores ( city hall and city council , respectively , the executive and legislative local bodies ) are located . the rural districts and groups of urban districts ( mainly in large cities ) may also present a sub local executive body , named subprefecture . brunei . a district is known locally as daerah and it is the first-level administrative division of brunei . there are four districts in the country , namely brunei-muara , tutong , belait and temburong . each district is administered by a jabatan daerah ( district office ) , which is headed by a pegawai daerah ( district officer ) . all district offices are government departments under the ministry of home affairs . canada . . alberta . in alberta , the municipal districts and improvement districts are types of rural municipalities . they are recognized as census subdivisions by statistics canada , which form parts of census divisions . british columbia . in the province of british columbia , there are several kinds of administrative districts by that name . the usual usage is a reference to district municipality , which are a class of municipality in the same hierarchy as city , town , or village . most are styled , e.g . , '' district of mission '' or '' district of wells '' , though some are styled , e.g . , '' corporation of delta '' or '' township of langley '' . within the area of municipal powers , regional districts – which are somewhat analogous to counties in other jurisdictions , a number of municipalities , and unincorporated areas – are always referred to as '' regional districts '' to distinguish them from district municipalities and other kinds of district . other kinds of districts in british columbia are : electoral districts ( some early ridings , as electoral districts are commonly known , included '' district '' in their title , e.g . new westminster district ) forest districts , which are a set of administrative regions of the british columbia ministry of forests land districts , which are the underlying cadastral survey system for the province and are the primary locational reference used in government databases and references . the primary use of '' district '' in combinations such as the lillooet district or new westminster district was a reference to the land district , though sometimes to mining divisions . school districts , also often referred to simply as '' districts '' , when in context . other types of regional subdivision , according to the ministry or agency , are generally styled '' region '' or '' area '' . these include such as ministry of environment regions , health regions and regional management planning areas such as the muskwa-kechika management planning area . mi'kma'ki . situated across the atlantic provinces and the maritimes , the traditional country of the miꞌkmaq organizes itself into historically 7 or 8 districts . these districts are epekwitk & pictou , eske'kewa'ki , kespe'kewa'ki , kespukwitk , sikniktewa'ki , their central fire or capital district unama'ki , and ktaqamkuk . although canada and the provinces hardly recognize the legitimacy of mi'kma'ki , the nation remains and still retains functions as a wabanaki country . . new brunswick . new brunswick has numerous local service districts , 7 school districts , 10 federal electoral districts and 55 provincial electoral districts . northwest territories . in western and northern canada , the federal government created districts as subdivisions of the northwest territories 1870–1905 , partly on the model of the districts created in the province of canada . the first district created was the district of keewatin in 1876 followed by four more districts in 1882 . gradually , these districts became separate territories ( such as yukon ) , separate provinces ( such as alberta and saskatchewan ) or were absorbed into other provinces . ontario . in ontario , a district is a statutory subdivision of the province , but , unlike a county , a district is not incorporated . most districts are composed of unincorporated lands , mostly crown land . originally present-day southern ontario ( then part of the province of quebec and after 1791 , upper canada ) was divided into districts in 1788 districts continued to operation until 1849 when they were replaced by counties by the province of canada . the current ontario districts such as algoma and nipissing were first created by the province of canada in 1858 prior to confederation for the delivery of judicial and provincial government services to sparsely populated areas from the county seat ( e.g . sault ste . marie ) . some districts may have district social service administration boards , which are designed to provide certain social services . the boundaries of a federal census division may correspond to those of a district . quebec . in quebec , districts are municipal electoral subdivisions of boroughs , which are subdivisions of cities . they function in a similar manner to what is elsewhere known as a ward . chile . . mainland china . in mainland china , the district is a subdivision of any of various city administrative units , including municipalities , sub-provincial city and prefecture-level city . districts have county level status . modern districts are a recent innovation . in the context of pre-modern china , the english translation '' district '' is typically associated with xian ( ) is the 3rd level of the administrative division . it is a division of special municipality and provincial city of taiwan province . currently , there are 157 districts in total from 5 special municipalities and 3 provincial cities . thailand . a district ( '' amphoe '' ) is a subdivision of a province ( '' changwat '' ) in thailand . some provinces also contain minor districts , which are smaller than the average district . turkey . in turkey , a district is an administrative subdivision of a province . they are governed by a district governor/official ( kaymakam ) appointed by the ministry of the interior , and a by the local population elected mayor . see also districts of turkey . uganda . . ukraine . in ukraine , districts ( raions ) second level of administrative division of ukraine and are primary the most common division of ukrainian regions , as well as administrative divisions of larger cities ( '' city districts '' ) . united kingdom . . england . districts are the most recognizable form of local government in large parts of england . for those areas that retain two-tier local government , districts usually form the lower tier of that arrangement , with counties forming the upper tier . districts tend to have responsibility for a number of areas including : tax collection ( council tax and non-domestic rates ) leisure services refuse collection housing planning arts & entertainment environmental health each district raises taxes from residents on behalf of itself , and the upper tier authority through the council tax . it also raises income from business through the non-domestic rates system , which is coordinated nationally . wales . there is no official use of the word district in wales . the country is broken up into 22 unitary authority . however , district may be used informally for a whole or unofficial part of a ward in a city . scotland . districts of scotland were local government areas between 1975 and 1996 . between 1930 and 1975 districts were subdivisions of counties , formed under the local government ( scotland ) act 1929 . see list of local government areas in scotland 1930–75 . scotland , since 1996 , has been divided in 32 unitary council areas and districts are no longer used . scotland has had other kinds of administrative areas which might be described as districts : shires of scotland , until 1975 subdivisions of scotland , councils or unitary authorities , from 1996 , pursuant to the local government etc . ( scotland ) act 1994 committee areas , from 1996 , within larger unitary authorities . northern ireland . northern ireland is divided into 11 districts for local government purposes . the councils do not carry out the same range of functions as those in the rest of the united kingdom ; for example they have no responsibility for education , road-building or housing ( although they do nominate members to the advisory northern ireland housing council ) . their functions do include waste and recycling services , leisure and community services , building control and local economic and cultural development . they are not planning authorities , but are consulted on some planning applications . collection of rates ( local tax ) is handled by the rate collection agency . united states . there are several types of districts in the united states . federal district . the washington , dc is the only part of the united states , excluding territories , that is not located within any of the fifty states . legislative constituencies . a constituency with a representative in congress is a congressional district . each state is organized into one or more such districts ; the exact number within each state is based on the most recent census . only voters within each district are allowed to vote in the election for the member of the house of representatives from that district . overall , there are 435 congressional districts in the united states ; each has roughly 630,000 people , with some variance . a constituency with a representative in a state legislature is a legislative district ; the territory over which a federal court has jurisdiction is a federal judicial district . city councils that are not elected at-large may have constituencies called districts or wards . single purpose districts . the united states also has many types of special-purpose districts with limited powers of local government . school districts are the most common , but other types of districts include community college districts , hospital districts , utility districts , irrigation districts , port districts , and public transit districts . many cities in the late 20th century adopted names for non-governmental districts as a way of increasing recognition and identity of these distinct areas and neighborhoods . perhaps most apparently in los angeles , various areas and neighborhoods within the city are specified as districts . for instance , hollywood is a district of los angeles , whereas beverly hills and west hollywood are independent incorporated city , with their own governments and police departments . this can be confusing , as the difference between districts and neighboring cities is usually not readily apparent , for they all make up the metropolitan los angeles . typically , districts may or may not be distinguished at the boundary of the district with a '' district sign '' with the city 's insignia ; whereas at a city boundary , a city limit sign would usually be placed on the street with the city 's name and population , at a minimum , but also often includes its elevation . the important distinction is that areas classified as districts are still part of the parent city and governed by the laws and ordinances of that city . various federal , regional and local agencies such as the national register of historic places recognize historic districts . municipalities . from the late 18th century until the act of consolidation , 1854 in 1854 , districts were politically independent municipalities made up of densely populated neighborhoods adjacent to but outside the legal boundaries of the philadelphia . northern liberties , southwark , and spring garden were among the ten largest municipalities by population in the united states . municipal utility district . a municipal utility district is a special-purpose district or other jurisdiction that provides services ( such as electricity , natural gas , sewage treatment , waste collection/management , wholesale telecommunications , water ) to district residents . local residents may vote to establish a municipal utility district , which is represented by a board of directors elected by constituents . as governmental bodies , they are usually nonprofit . in the us , public utility districts ( pud ) have similar functions to municipal utility districts , but are created by a local government body such as a city or county , and have no authority to levy taxes . they provide public utility to the residents of that district . puds are created by a local government body , such as a city , county , or metropolitan service area ( two or more communities joining together for public utility purposes ) . normally the districts are non-profit . slechta , alfred f . , and gordon l . culp . '' water reclamation studies at the south tahoe public utility district . '' journal ( water pollution control federation ) ( 1967 ) : 787-814 . puds are often governed by a commission , which may be appointed or elected . vietnam . the term district in vietnam refers to the second level administrative unit , below provinces ( tỉnh ) and municipalities ( thành phố trực thuộc trung ương ) . this second level unit is called a '' huyện '' ( counties ) in rural areas , while in urban areas districts are either '' quận '' ( subdivisions of municipalities ) , '' thành phố trực thuộc tỉnh '' ( provincial cities ) or '' thị xã '' ( towns ) . as of 22 april 2020 , vietnam had 707 '' districts '' including 77 provincial cities , 52 towns , 49 urban subdivisions , and 529 rural districts/counties ( including 12 island districts/counties ) . : vi : huyện ( việt nam ) vietnamese districts vary significantly in both population and area . excluding the island districts , the most populous is biên hoà ( provincial city ) with 1,099,943 people ; the least populous is the town of mường lay ( 12,125 ) . similarly , the largest district is tương dương ( 2,812.07 & nbsp ; km 2 ) while the smallest is cồn cỏ with an area of only 2.3 & nbsp ; km 2 .