1998 in literature

events . march 5 – tennessee williams ' 1938 play not about nightingales receives its stage première in london , in a collaboration between the royal national theatre of great britain and corin and vanessa redgrave 's moving theatre . october the death of the poet laureate of the united kingdom ted hughes leaves a gap of several months before a successor , andrew motion , is designated the following spring . kinoko nasu ( 奈須きのこ ) launches the kara no kyōkai series , with five chapters released online . november 18 – alice mcdermott wins the national book award with her novel charming billy . december – the strand magazine title is revived in the united states . . new books . fiction . tariq ali – the book of saladin aaron allston iron fist wraith squadron hanan al-shaykh – i sweep the sun off rooftops ( أكنس الشمس عن السطوح ) martin amis – heavy water and other stories ( most stories previously published ) beryl bainbridge – master georgie iain m . banks – inversions alessandro barbero – romanzo russo . fiutando i futuri supplizi ( translated 2010 as the anonymous novel . sensing the future torments ) julian barnes – england , england greg bear dinosaur summer foundation and chaos raymond benson – the facts of death alfred bester and roger zelazny – psychoshop robert bloch – flowers from the moon and other lunacies roberto bolaño – the savage detectives ( los detectives salvajes ) william boyd – armadillo giannina braschi – yo-yo boing ! anne carson – autobiography of red ( verse novel ) driss chraïbi – muhammad mary higgins clark – all through the night tom clancy – rainbow six paulo coelho – veronika decides to die michael connelly – blood work bernard cornwell – sharpe 's triumph patricia cornwell – point of origin douglas coupland – girlfriend in a coma ann c . crispin – rebel dawn michael cunningham – the hours nelson demille – plum island august derleth the final adventures of solar pons in lovecraft 's shadow peter dickinson – the kin allan w . eckert – return to hawk 's hill bret easton ellis – glamorama giles foden – the last king of scotland diana gabaldon – hellfire neil gaiman – smoke and mirrors ( mainly reprints ) andrew greeley – a midwinter 's tale john grisham – the street lawyer wolf haas – komm , süßer tod ( come , sweet death ) margaret peterson haddix - among the hidden ha jin ( 哈金 ) – waiting tomson highway – kiss of the fur queen nick hornby – about a boy michel houellebecq – atomised ( les particules élémentaires ) marek s . huberath – gniazdo światów ( nest of worlds ) john irving – a widow for one year k . w . jeter the mandalorian armor slave ship wayne johnston – the colony of unrequited dreams stephen king – bag of bones barbara kingsolver – the poisonwood bible dean r . koontz – seize the night joe r . lansdale rumble tumble the boar alain mabanckou – bleu-blanc-rouge patrick mccabe – breakfast on pluto ian mcewan – amsterdam roy maclaren – african exploits steve martin – pure drivel carol matas – greater than angels china miéville – king rat toni morrison – paradise alice munro – the love of a good woman haruki murakami ( 村上 春樹 ) – the wind-up bird chronicle ( ねじまき鳥クロニクル , nejimakidori kuronikuru ) cees nooteboom – all souls ' day ( allerzielen ) sigrid nunez – mitz : the marmoset of bloomsbury tim o'brien – tomcat in love orhan pamuk – my name is red ( benim adım kırmızı ) tom perrotta – election terry pratchett carpe jugulum the last continent fahmida riaz – godavari david adams richards – the bay of love and sorrows josé luis rodríguez pittí – crónica de invisibles philip roth – i married a communist margit sandemo – ensam i världen ( alone in the world ) michael slade – shrink ( also primal scream ) alexander mccall smith – the no . 1 ladies ' detective agency michael stackpole – i , jedi danielle steel the klone and i the long road home mirror image thomas sullivan – the martyring andrew vachss – safe house connie willis – to say nothing of the dog a . n . wilson – dream children tom wolfe – a man in full timothy zahn – vision of the future . children and young people . david almond – skellig october 22 – eric ambler , english spy novelist ( born 1909 ) october 28 – ted hughes , english poet and poet laureate ( born 1930 ) november 3 – bob kane ( robert kahn ) , american comics artist and writer ( born 1915 ) november 8 – rumer godden , english novelist ( born 1907 ) december 16 – william gaddis , american novelist ( born 1922 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : josé saramago europe theatre prize : luca ronconi camões prize : antonio candido . australia . the australian/vogel literary award : jennifer kremmer , pegasus in the suburbs c . j . dennis prize for poetry : coral hull , broken land kenneth slessor prize for poetry : no awards this year mary gilmore prize : emma lew , the wild reply miles franklin award : peter carey , jack maggs . canada . bronwen wallace memorial award : talya rubin see 1998 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists . giller prize : alice munro : the love of a good woman edna staebler award for creative non-fiction : charlotte gray : mrs . king faculty of arts , 1998 , edna staebler award , wilfrid laurier university , previous winners , charlotte gray , retrieved 11/24/2012 . france . prix décembre : michel houellebecq , les particules élémentaires prix goncourt : paule constant , prix médicis french : prix médicis international : – jonathan coe . united kingdom . booker prize : ian mcewan , amsterdam carnegie medal for children 's literature : david almond , skellig james tait black memorial prize for fiction : beryl bainbridge , master georgie james tait black memorial prize for biography : peter ackroyd , the life of thomas more cholmondeley award : roger mcgough , robert minhinnick , anne ridler , ken smith eric gregory award : mark goodwin , joanne limburg , patrick mcguinness , kona macphee , esther morgan , christiania whitehead , frances williams orange prize for fiction : carol shields , larry 's party queen 's gold medal for poetry : les murray 1998 whitbread awards : ted hughes , birthday letters . united states . agnes lynch starrett poetry prize : shara mccallum , the water between us aiken taylor award for modern american poetry : x.j . kennedy american academy of arts and letters gold medals drama : horton foote american book award before columbus foundation : angela davis , blues legacies and black feminism : gertrude '' ma '' rainey , bessie smith , and billie holiday , and ( separately ) allison hedge coke , dog road woman bernard f . connors prize for poetry : sherod santos , '' elegy for my sister '' , and ( separately ) neil azevedo , '' caspar hauser songs '' bobbitt national prize for poetry : frank bidart , desire compton crook award : katie waitman , the merro tree hugo award for best novel : joe haldeman , forever peace frost medal : stanley kunitz nebula award : joe haldeman , forever peace newbery medal for children 's literature : karen hesse , out of the dust pen american center 's pen open book award : giannina braschi , yo-yo boing ! pulitzer prize for drama : paula vogel , how i learned to drive pulitzer prize for fiction : philip roth , american pastoral pulitzer prize for poetry : charles wright , black zodiac wallace stevens award : a . r . ammons whiting awards : : fiction : michael byers , ralph lombreglia ( fiction/nonfiction ) : non-fiction : d . j . waldie , anthony walton : plays : w . david hancock : poetry : nancy eimers , daniel hall , james kimbrell , charles harper webb , greg williamson . elsewhere . international dublin literary award : herta muller , the land of green plums premio nadal : lucía etxebarria , beatriz y los cuerpos celestes . references .