Firefly (TV series)

cult status . in 2005 , new scientist magazine 's website held an internet poll to find '' the world 's best space sci-fi ever '' . firefly came in first place , with its cinematic follow-up serenity in second . in 2012 , entertainment weekly listed the show at no . 11 in the '' 25 best cult tv shows from the past 25 years '' , commenting , '' as it often does , martyrdom has only enhanced its legend . '' '' 25 best cult tv shows from the past 25 years '' . entertainment weekly . august 3 , 2012 , pp . 39-40 . brad wright , co-creator of stargate sg-1 has said that the 200th episode of sg-1 is '' a little kiss to serenity and firefly , which was possibly one of the best canceled series in history '' . in the episode , '' martin lloyd has come to the s.g.c . stargate command because even though 'wormhole x-treme ! ' was canceled after three episodes , it did so well on dvd they 're making a feature film '' . the follow-up film , serenity , was voted the best science fiction movie of all time in an sfx magazine poll of 3,000 fans . firefly was later ranked 25 on tv guides top cult shows ever . the name for the google beta app google wave was inspired by this tv series . in an interview on february 17 , 2011 , with entertainment weekly , nathan fillion joked that : '' if i got 300 million from the california lottery , the first thing i would do is buy the rights to firefly , make it on my own , and distribute it on the internet '' . this quickly gave rise to a fan-run initiative to raising the funds to purchase the rights . on march 7 , 2011 , the organizers announced the closure of the project due to lack of endorsement from the creators , with 1 million pledged at the time it was shut down . joss whedon , tim minear , and cast members nathan fillion , alan tudyk , summer glau , adam baldwin , and sean maher reunited at the 2012 san diego comic-con for a 10th-anniversary panel . ten thousand people lined up to get into the panel , and the panel ended with the entire crowd giving the cast and crew a standing ovation . a tenth anniversary special , browncoats unite , was shown on the science channel on november 11 , 2012 . the special featured whedon , minear , and several of the cast members , in a discussion on the series ' history . according to reasons julian sanchez , fireflys cult following '' seems to include a disproportionate number of libertarians . '' the story themes are often cautionary about too-powerful central authority and its capacity to do bad while being considered by the majority as good . the characters each exhibit traits that exemplify core libertarian values , such as the right to bear arms ( jayne , zoe ) , legal prostitution ( inara ) , freedom of religion ( book ) , logic and reasoning ( simon ) , and anti-conscription ( river ) . joss whedon notes this theme , saying '' mal is , if not a republican , certainly a libertarian , he 's certainly a less-government kinda guy . he 's the opposite of me in many ways . '' . awards . firefly won the following awards : emmy award : outstanding special visual effects for a series , 2003 visual effects society : best visual effects in a television series , 2003 ( episode '' serenity '' ) saturn award : cinescape genre face of the future award , male , 2003 ( nathan fillion ) saturn award : saturn award for best dvd release ( television ) , 2004 syfy genre awards : best series/television , 2006 syfy genre awards : best actor/television nathan fillion , 2006 syfy genre awards : best supporting actor/television adam baldwin , 2006 syfy genre awards : best special guest/television christina hendricks for '' trash '' , 2006 syfy genre awards : best episode/television '' trash '' , 2006 the series was also nominated for the following awards : visual effects society : best compositing in a televised program , music video , or commercial , 2003 motion picture sound editors , usa , '' golden reel award '' : best sound editing in television long form : sound effects/foley , 2003 hugo award : best dramatic presentation , short form , 2003 ( episode '' serenity '' ) hugo award : best dramatic presentation , short form , 2004 ( episodes '' heart of gold '' and '' the message '' , which at that time had not been shown on television in the usa ) golden satellite award : best dvd extras , 2004 . ratings . at the time the series was canceled by fox , it averaged 4.7 million viewers and ranked 98th in nielsen ratings . . in popular culture . on the cbs sitcom , the big bang theory , sheldon cooper is a fan of firefly . when he and leonard hofstadter discuss their roommate agreement , they include a passage in which they dedicate friday nights to watching firefly , as sheldon believes it will last for years . upon its cancellation , he brands rupert murdoch , the owner of fox , a traitor . during the second season of the big bang theory , in episode 17 ( '' the terminator decoupling '' ) , summer glau appears as herself , encountering sheldon , leonard , and their friends on a train to san francisco . when raj tries to hit on her , he says that although he is an astrophysicist , she was actually in space during the shooting of firefly . glau chides him for believing this , and raj backtracks , saying , '' those are crazy people ! '' on the nbc comedy community , the characters troy and abed are fans of the show . they have an agreement that if one of them dies , the other will stage it to look like a suicide caused by the cancellation of firefly , in the hopes that it will bring the show back . in the 2003 battlestar galactica miniseries/pilot , a ship resembling serenity appears in the background of the scene with laura roslin ( mary mcdonnell ) . david bassom ( 2007 ) , battlestar galactica : the official companion , p . 148 serenity is one of several spaceships inserted as cameos into digital effects scenes by zoic studios , the company responsible for digital effects in both firefly and battlestar galactica . the webcomic xkcd commented on fireflys conspicuous absence of asian characters in the 2009 comic '' well '' . when a character drops a coin into '' the uncomfortable truths well '' , it responds , '' for a universe that 's supposed to be half chinese , firefly sure does n't have any asians . '' critics have drawn comparisons and parallels between firefly and the anime outlaw star . the television series castle , where fillion plays the lead character richard castle , has made ongoing homages to firefly . castle has props from firefly as decorative items in his home , has dressed up as a '' space cowboy '' for halloween ( '' you wore that five years ago '' , cracked his daughter ) , speaks chinese that he learned from '' a tv show he loved '' , and has made rapid '' two-by-two '' finger motions while wearing blue surgical gloves . he has been humorously asked if he has ever heard of a spa known as '' serenity '' , and firefly catchphrases such as '' shiny '' , '' special hell '' , and '' i was aiming for the head '' have been used as punchlines during various dramatic scenes in castle . he has worked a murder case at a science fiction convention with suspects being the cast of a long-cancelled space opera that only ran for a season , and has had incidental interaction with people portrayed by firefly cast members . con man , a 2015 comedy web series created by tudyk and co-produced by fillion , draws on the pair 's experiences as cult science fiction actors touring the convention circuit . though it is not autobiographical , the show 's fictional spectrum echoes firefly and tudyk 's and fillion 's roles reflect their own firefly roles . staite , torres and maher made guest appearances . maher played himself as a former firefly actor . . media franchise . the popularity of the short-lived series served as the launching point for a media franchise within the firefly universe , including the feature film serenity , which addresses many plot points left unresolved by the series ' cancellation . additionally , there are serenity ( comics ) , serenity : those left behind ( 3 issues , 104 pages , 2006 ) , serenity : better days ( 3 issues , 80 pages , 2008 ) and a one-shot hardcover serenity : the shepherd 's tale ( 56 pages , 2010 ) , along with the one-shots serenity : downtime and the other half and serenity : float out in which whedon explored plot strands he had intended to explore further in the series . the comics are set , in plot terms , between the end of the tv series and the opening of the feature film . the two mini-series were later published in collected form as hardcover and paperback graphic novels . a six-issue series titled serenity : leaves on the wind began in january 2014 and the series takes place after the events of the film . a six-issue series titled serenity : no power in the 'verse began in october 2016 and the series is set about 1.5 years after leaves on the wind . in july 2018 , boom ! studios announced that they had acquired the comic book and graphic novel publishing license to firefly with plans to release new monthly comic book series , limited series , original graphic novels , and more . in july 2014 , the release of the video game firefly online was announced that planned to have the cast reprise their roles . in january 2018 , titan books announced that they would begin publishing original canon firefly novels . three books have so far been released .