The Hives

history . beginnings of the hives ( 1989–1999 ) . the band claims it was formed in 1993 ( although formed in 1989 under a different name and sound ) under the guidance of randy fitzsimmons . fitzsimmons suggested that they form a garage rock band . he gave each band member a letter asking them to start the band . fitzsimmons allegedly acts as a songwriter and manager for the band . the band recorded a demo titled sounds like sushi in 1994 . the following year they were signed to burning heart records , a swedish independent record label . the following year they released their debut ep oh lord ! when ? how ? almqvist decided to promote the band to burning heart . in 1997 they released an album called barely legal ( an early stage name of guitarist vigilante carlstroem ) , and began touring . the following year they released their second ep a.k.a . i-d-i-o-t . the track '' the stomp '' was featured on the soundtrack of the film rocknrolla . . veni vidi vicious and your new favourite band ( 2000–2002 ) . they released their second studio album veni vidi vicious in april 2000 through burning heart records . the band themselves described the album as being like '' a velvet glove with brass knuckles , both brutal and sophisticated at the same time '' . the album yielded the singles '' hate to say i told you so '' , '' main offender '' , '' die , all right ! '' , and '' supply and demand . '' after seeing the video for '' hate to say i told you so '' on german tv , alan mcgee ( oasis , creation records ) decided to sign the band to his newly formed poptones label . poptones released the 'best of ' compilation your new favourite band in 2001 , which proved to be their breakthrough record , reaching no . & nbsp ; 7 in the uk album charts . following the success of the album , the band re-released singles '' hate to say i told you so '' and '' main offender '' which reach numbers no . & nbsp ; 23 and no . & nbsp ; 24 respectively in the uk singles chart . the band also re-released veni vidi vicious in the us . '' the hives & nbsp ; — introduce the metric system in time '' was included on the punk rock sampler album punk-o-rama volume 5 from epitaph records . it was during the promotion of veni vidi vicious and your new favourite band that the hives signed a record deal with universal music , reportedly worth 50 million . this led to a dispute between the hives and burning heart , who claimed that the hives were still contracted to them for one more album . the track '' main offender '' was featured in the video game rock band while '' die , all right ! '' was released as downloadable content for the game 's music store on xbox 360 , playstation 3 and wii . tyrannosaurus hives ( 2003–2006 ) . after extensive touring , the band retreated to fagersta to record their third album . the result was 2004 's tyrannosaurus hives , their first new material in four years . the album includes the hit singles '' walk idiot walk , '' which debuted at no . & nbsp ; 13 on the uk singles charts , '' two-timing touch and broken bones , '' another top 50 hit , and '' a little more for little you . '' the tracks '' b is for brutus '' and '' uptight '' were featured in the game gran turismo 4 , and '' no pun intended '' was featured in the game ssx on tour . in 2006 , their song '' diabolic scheme '' was used in the vampire film frostbiten , marking the first time a hives song was used in a major motion picture . ( '' hate to say i told you so '' featured in the 2002 'spider-man ' movie starring tobey maguire ) the hives won '' best international band '' and '' best dressed band '' at the 2003 nme awards . the band also won five prestigious swedish grammis for tyrannosaurus hives at the 23rd annual swedish grammis awards , presented on 7 february 2005 for '' artist of the year '' ; '' rock group of the year '' ; '' album of the year '' ; '' producer of the year '' ( with collaborator , pelle gunnerfeldt ) ; and '' walk idiot walk '' took home the mtv '' best music video '' prize . . the black and white album ( 2007–2011 ) . the hives ' official website was overhauled in the second week of august 2007 , with a grungier , '' emergency broadcast '' layout . the new site revealed the album 's cover and the title of the first single , '' tick tick boom '' , with a release date of 14 august in the united states and 8 october in the united kingdom . the release dates for the new record , the black and white album , were 15 october in the uk on polydor and 13 november in the us on a & m/octone in 2007 . it was mostly recorded in oxford , mississippi , miami , and in their native sweden . the hives were featured in a finish line commercial performing '' tick tick boom '' , as well as a nike commercial featuring the song '' return the favour '' . '' tick tick boom '' was also used in many different advertisements including : the 2007 season of the nfl network , commercials for the cbs series jericho , and the usa series burn notice , as well as the films jumper ( 2008 ) , macgruber , and get smart , and was also the official theme song for wwe survivor series 2007 . the hives song '' try it again '' was featured in the trailer for the us film get him to the greek . on 9 january 2008 , the band received the '' best live act '' award at the swedish grammis . the hives performed at the 2008 nhl all-star game in atlanta , georgia , singing '' tick tick boom '' during the players ' presentation . on 2 july 2010 , the band released an ep titled tarred and feathered , which covered '' civilization 's dying '' by zero boys , '' nasty secretary '' by joy rider & avis davis and '' early morning wake up call '' by flash and the pan . tt spektra 24 june 2010 . '' nasty secretary '' is also a song on the us release of the gran turismo 5 soundtrack . on 9 january 2011 , nicholaus arson wrote another short diary entry on the band 's website saying that they had recorded some new songs before christmas , and were planning to continue recording throughout january . the album 's first single , '' tick tick boom '' , was featured in the setlist for the music-simulation video game lego rock band . . lex hives and line-up change ( 2012–present ) . on 12 march 2012 , the band announced their fifth full-length album , lex hives . the album was released on their own label , disque hives on 1 june in sweden/gsa , 4 june in the uk , and 5 june in the us and canada , comprising twelve self-produced tracks , with a deluxe version containing bonus tracks produced by queens of the stone age frontman josh homme . the first single to be released from the album , '' go right ahead , '' was made available for public streaming alongside this announcement . five teaser videos were posted on their official youtube channel , each showing a member of the band playing their part of the song in the lead up to the announcement . the song was also played live at the norwegian/swedish talkshow '' skavlan '' , broadcast on 30 march 2012 . after a run of californian live shows and the two weekends at the coachella valley music and arts festival ( 15 and 22 april ) , the band performed on jimmy kimmel live ! on 23 april 2012 . the music video for '' go right ahead '' was released on 9 may 2012 . since its release , '' come on ! '' has been used as the theme for xbox one 's invitation commercials , as well as in an episode of workaholics and in the documentary the crash reel . the song '' 1000 answers , '' meanwhile , was featured on the soundtrack of the video game by ea sports , fifa 12 . due to health reasons , dr . matt destruction left the band in late 2013 and was replaced by randy bassist johan gustafsson , who then went by the stage name the johan and only . gustafsson replaces bernvall in 2013 as bernvall leaves for health reasons rollingstone.com retrieved:2014-03-29 on 13 february 2015 , the band released the single '' blood red moon '' . the single '' i 'm alive '' was released digitally on 17 may 2019 , with a limited edition 7-inch vinyl available on 28 june . this was followed by another single later that year , '' good samaritan . '' the band toured the us in 2019 alongside fellow swedish band refused , with the run of dates dubbed the scream team tour . chris dangerous took a hiatus from the band to recover from surgery , and was replaced on the tour by former queens of the stone age drummer joey castillo . the hives ' first live album , live at third man records , was released on 25 september 2020 . . collaborations . the hives completed recording vocals and guitar in late november 2006 for a song called '' throw it on me '' , a collaboration with hip-hop producer timbaland . the song was included on his album , timbaland presents shock value , released on 3 april 2007 . they also performed in a music video for the track . the hives also have recently spoken of a collaboration with jack white 's the raconteurs on a song for their new album , originally entitled '' footsteps '' , however it was later revealed that howlin ' pelle had literally recorded footsteps . howlin ' pelle also did a collaboration with swedish rock artist moneybrother , a cover of an operation ivy song '' freeze up '' . they used swedish lyrics and called it '' '' , which translates as '' i wo n't sign anything '' . the band members contributed to '' time for some action '' and '' windows '' on n.e.r.d . 's '' seeing sounds '' album , with pelle almqvist providing guest vocals on '' time for some action '' . on seeing sounds , they are credited with their real names instead of the pseudonyms they use within the band . retrieved on 22 december 2011 retrieved on 22 december 2011 in 2008 the band recorded a christmas duet entitled '' a christmas duel '' with cyndi lauper , which was available as a free download from their website on 28 november 2008 . in a november 2008 interview with leading swedish newspaper dagens nyheter , swedish rapper petter announced that the hives were working on a new version of his track '' repa skivan '' for his upcoming album . . style and onstage performance . all songwriting except covers on the band 's albums are credited to '' randy fitzsimmons '' . the band claim fitzsimmons is an honorary '' sixth hive , '' who along with writing their music , discovered and manages the band . the band has included hidden references to a sixth member of the band , including a hidden sixth pair of legs on the back cover of the tyrannosaurus hives album art . randy fitzsimmons is a registered pseudonym for niklas almqvist . the hives live show has been highly rated , with spin magazine rating them 8th best in rock music . pelle is known for his '' colourful idiocy '' on stage . when asked about their efforts to connect with the audience , chris dangerous replied that '' there are so many bands out there that don ’ t say a word to the crowd . i don ’ t get it . they don ’ t even look at the audience and that ’ s ridiculous '' . the hives always dressed in matching black-and-white tuxedos because '' it makes them look like they belong together '' . . band members . current members pelle almqvist ( per almqvist ) & nbsp ; – singing , piano ( 1989–present ) niklas almqvist ( niklas almqvist ) & nbsp ; – guitar , keyboards , backing vocals ( 1989–present ) vigilante carlstroem ( mikael karlsson ) & nbsp ; – guitar , organ , backing vocals ( 1989–present ) christian grahn ( christian grahn ) & nbsp ; – drums , percussion , backing vocals ( 1989–present ; hiatus 2019 ) randy ( band ) ( johan gustafsson ) & nbsp ; – bass guitar ( 2013–present ) former members dr . matt destruction ( mattias bernvall ) & nbsp ; – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1989–2013 ) former touring musicians joey castillo & nbsp ; – drums ( 2019 ) . discography . studio albums barely legal ( 1997 ) veni vidi vicious ( 2000 ) tyrannosaurus hives ( 2004 ) the black and white album ( 2007 ) lex hives ( 2012 ) extended plays sounds like sushi ep/demo ( 1994 ) oh lord ! when ? how ? ( 1996 ) tarred and feathered ( 2010 ) . references . external links .