James Wolfe

character . wolfe was renowned by his troops for being demanding on himself and on them . he was also known for carrying the same combat equipment as his infantrymen - a musket , cartridge box and bayonet - which was unusual for officers of the period . although he was prone to illness , wolfe was an active and restless figure . amherst reported that wolfe seemed to be everywhere at once . there was a story that when someone in the british court branded the young brigadier mad , king george ii retorted , '' mad , is he ? then i hope he will bite some of my other generals . '' a cultured man , before the battle of quebec ( 1759 ) wolfe is said by john robison to have recited gray 's elegy written in a country churchyard , containing the line '' the paths of glory lead but to the grave '' to his officers , adding : '' gentlemen , i would rather have written that poem than take quebec tomorrow '' . after being stung by rejection , in a letter to his mother in 1751 he admitted he would probably never marry and stated that he believed people could easily live without marrying . an apocryphal story was published after wolfe 's death saying that he had carried a locket portrait of katherine lowther , his supposed betrothed , with him to north america , and that he gave the locket to first lieutenant john jervis the night before he died . the story holds that wolfe had a premonition of his own death in battle , and that jervis faithfully returned the locket to lowther . . legacy . the inscription on the obelisk at quebec city , erected to commemorate the battle on the plains of abraham once read : '' here died wolfe victorious . '' in order to avoid offending french-canadians it now simply reads : '' here died wolfe . '' wolfe 's defeat of the french led to the british capture of the new france department of canada , and his '' hero 's death '' made him a legend in his homeland . the wolfe legend led to the famous painting the death of general wolfe by benjamin west , the anglo-american folk ballad '' brave wolfe '' ( sometimes known as '' bold wolfe '' ) , and the opening line of the patriotic canadian anthem , '' the maple leaf forever '' . in 1792 , scant months after the partition of quebec into the provinces of upper canada and lower canada , the lieutenant-governor of the former , john graves simcoe , named the archipelago at the entrance to the st . lawrence river for the victorious generals : wolfe island , amherst island , howe island , carleton island and gage island , for thomas gage . the last is now known as simcoe island . in 1832 , the first war monument in present-day canada was erected on the site where wolfe purportedly fell . the site is marked by a column surmounted by a helmet and sword . an inscription at its base reads , in french and english , '' here died wolfe – 13 september 1759 . '' it replaces a large stone which had been placed there by british troops to mark the spot . wolfe 's landing national historic site of canada is located in kennington cove , on the east coast of cape breton island , nova scotia . contained entirely within the fortress of louisbourg national historic site of canada , the site is bounded by a rocky beach to the south , and a rolling landscape of grasses and forest to the north , east and west . it was from this site that , during the seven years ' war , british forces launched their successful attack on the french forces at louisbourg . wolfe 's landing was designated a national historic site of canada in 1929 because : '' here , on 8 june 1758 , the men of brigadier general james wolfe 's brigade made their successful landing , leading to the capitulation of louisbourg '' . there is a memorial to wolfe in westminster abbey by joseph wilton . the 3rd duke of richmond , who had served in wolfe 's regiment in 1753 , commissioned a bust of wolfe from wilton . there is an oil painting '' placing the canadian colours on wolfe 's monument in westminster abbey '' by emily warren in currie hall at the royal military college of canada . a statue of wolfe overlooks the royal naval college in greenwich , a spot which has become increasingly popular for its panoramic views of london . a statue also graces the green in his native westerham , kent , alongside one of that village 's other famous resident , sir winston churchill . at stowe landscape gardens in buckinghamshire there is an obelisk , known as wolfe 's obelisk , built by the family that owned stowe as wolfe spent his last night in england at the mansion . wolfe is buried under the church of st alfege , greenwich , where there are four memorials to him : a replica of his coffin plate in the floor ; the death of wolfe , a painting completed in 1762 by edward peary ; a wall tablet ; and a stained glass window . in addition the local primary school is named after him . the house in greenwich where he lived , macartney house , has an english heritage blue plaque with his name on , and a nearby road is named general wolfe road after him . in 1761 , as a perpetual memorial to wolfe , george warde , a friend of wolfe 's from boyhood , instituted the wolfe society , which to this day meets annually in westerham for the wolfe dinner to his '' pious and immortal memory '' . warde paid benjamin west to paint '' the boyhood of wolfe '' which used to hang at squerres court but has recently been donated to the national trust and is now hung at quebec house his childhood home in westerham . warde also erected a cenotaph in squerres park to mark the place where wolfe had received his first commission while visiting the wardes . in 1979 , crayola crayons introduced a wolfe brown colour crayon . it was discontinued the following year . there are several institutions , localities , thoroughfares , and landforms named in honour of him in canada . significant monuments to wolfe in canada exist on the plains of abraham where he fell , and near parliament hill in ottawa . ontario governor john graves simcoe named wolfe island , an island in lake ontario and the saint lawrence river off the coast of kingston ( near the royal military college of canada ) in wolfe 's honour in 1792 . on 13 september 2009 , the wolfe island historical society led celebrations on the occasion of the 250th anniversary of james wolfe 's victory at quebec . a life-size statue in wolfe 's likeness is to be sculpted . mount royal , calgary is home to a james wolfe statue since 2009 , but it was originally located in exchange court in new york city . it was sculpted in 1898 by john massey rhind and moved into storage around 1945 to 1950 , sold in 1967 and relocated to centennial planetarium in calgary , stored 2000 to 2008 and finally installed again in 2009 . a senior girls house at the duke of york 's royal military school is named after wolfe , where all houses are named after prominent figures of the military . there is a james wolfe school for children aged 5–11 down the hill from his house in greenwich , in chesterfield walk , which is just east of general wolfe road . his letters home from the age of 13 until his death as well as his copy of gray 's elegy written in a country churchyard and other items are housed at the thomas fisher rare book library in toronto , ontario . other artefacts and relics owned by wolfe are held at museums in both canada and england , although some have mainly legendary association . wolfe 's cloak worn at louisbourg , quebec and at the plains of abraham is part of the british royal collection . in 2008 it was lent to the maritime museum of the atlantic in halifax , nova scotia for an exhibit on the siege of louisbourg , and in 2009 was loaned to the army museum at the halifax citadel where it remains on display . wolfe crescent , halifax , nova scotia is named after wolfe . point wolfe is located in fundy national park , and the town of wolfeboro , new hampshire is named in honour of wolfe . in montreal , rue wolfe parallels rue montcalm and rue amherst , while in the quebec city neighbourhood of ste-foy , he has given his name to an avenue . see also . general wolfe 's song the maple leaf forever - another canadian song glorifying general wolfe . references . citations . . general references . . further reading . ; also second volume ; third volume ; fourth volume ; fifth volume ; sixth volume . external links . unknown . '' history and chronology of james wolfe '' , in world history database wolfe , james : collection of letters at thomas fisher rare book library . new brunswick museum . '' a national treasure in new brunswick : james barry 's death of general wolfe '' , in new brunswick museum ( web site ) , 2003 nbc . plains of abraham web site , government of canada . ( national battlefields commission ) nbc . 1759 : from the warpath to the plains of abraham , virtual museum canada , the national battlefields commission , 2005