Anagni

geography . overview . anagni still maintains the appearance of a small medieval hill town ( 424 meters above sea level ) , with small twisting streets and steep lanes . it is built inside roman boundary walls . the built-up area initially included only the acropolis ( the north-east zone comprising the cathedral , tufoli gate , and piazza dante ) and partially defended by walls in opus quasi-quadratum ( almost squared work ) . under roman domination , the map of the city changed , starting from the modification of the boundary walls . the archaic inhabited places spread out protected by the so-called servian walls , made with stone blocks placed in alternate lines and dating back to the beginning of the 3rd century bc . most of the boundary walls have been subjected to rebuilding and restoration in the course of the first millennium ad ; but the most remarkable re-arrangement took place in the 16th century . the municipality borders with acuto , ferentino , fumone , gavignano ( rm ) , gorga ( rm ) , montelanico ( rm ) , paliano , piglio and sgurgola . . subdivision . the town is divided into eight districts , or contrade of castello , cerere , colle sant'angelo , piscina , torre , trivio , tufoli and valle sant'andrea . it counts the hamlets ( frazione ) of ara stella , castellone , cucugnano , collacciano , faito , osteria della fontana , pantanello , san filippo , san bartolomeo , san filippo , tufano-vallenova and vignola-monti . history . prehistory and ancient era . the first human settlements date back to more than 700,000 years , according to the dating of some palaeolithic hand-made fragments recently recovered ; while the historical sources ( livy , virgil , servius , silius italicus ) mention anagni only once , the city had already been introduced into the roman orbit . several objects made of bone and flint stone and also two human molars and incisors belonging to fossil homo erectus have been found in fontana ranuccio . the people who lived in those places were of the hernici , migrated - as it seems - from the aniene valley and descendant from the marsi ( marsians ) ( or from the sabines ) , at least according to the ethnical term deriving from the marsian herna ( '' stone '' ) , that is : '' those who live on the stony hills '' . only two words remain of their language : samentum , a strip of sacrificial skin , and bututti , a sort of funeral lament . anagni was an important city and spiritual centre of the hernici . the city was the seat of temples and sanctuaries , where , in the 2nd century ad , many linen codex containing sacred etruscan writings were still well-conserved , according to the testimony of emperor marcus aurelius . of these writings , there is a sole survivor , which is the liber linteus . recent archaeological discoveries have revealed cultural and economic relationships between the hernici and the etruscans around the 7th century bc , perhaps it was commercial center , which conducted trade with magna graecia . it is speculated that , at the foot of the hill on which the city stands , there was the so-called maritime circle , where the hernici held their national council . in 307 bc , the hernici , with the exception of aletrium ( alatri ) , verulae ( veroli ) , and ferentinum ( ferentino ) declared war on rome . after suffering setbacks the hernici offered unconditional surrender . in 306 bc the towns which had not joined the war remained independent , while “ anagnia and such others as had borne arms against the romans were admitted to citizenship without the right to vote . they were prohibited from holding councils and from intermarrying , and were allowed no magistrates save those who had charge of religious rites . ” livy , the history of rome , 9.43.2-7 , 23 anagni preserved her religious autonomy and strategic importance . in imperial times , many emperors spent their summers in anagni to escape the heat of rome , the most notable ones being marcus aurelius , septimius severus , commodus , and caracalla . by the end of the roman empire , a deep political and economic crisis caused the demographic collapse of anagni 's population . the suburban zones , which during the roman age had grown along the most important roads of the area , were depopulated ; the lower parts of the city were abandoned ; vegetation gradually took possession of several spaces , substantiated by the fact that , in the 10th century , an inner zone of anagni was marked by the place-name civitas vetus ( old town ) . middle ages . anagni has been a diocese , the seat of a bishop , since the 5th century . in the 9th century , the first cathedral was built on the ruins of the temple dedicated to the goddess ceres . the agricultural reconquest , begun in the 10th century , was supported by the ecclesiastic power , which allowed the secular lords to exploit the land and to build fortified settlements for their peasants , favouring new economic and demographic growth . during the 10th and the 11th centuries , the city strengthened its link with the papal court : in fact , the popes began to consider the old capital city of the hernici a safer and healthier spot compared to rome , which was the place of frequent epidemic diseases . for this reason , even if the presence of factions inside the town could not be prevented , anagni remained faithful to the roman church , becoming one of the favourite residences of the popes , in the 12th and 13th centuries . as a result , several events connected with the guelphs and ghibellines took place in the city , including some of the most important political events in these two centuries . in 1122 , callistus ii promulgated the basic bull of the concordat of worms ; in 1159 , pope adrian iv received in anagni , during the siege of crema , the legates of milan , brescia , and piacenza ( the building of the civic palace was assigned to the ambassador of brescia , architect jacopo da iseo ) ; adrian died here later the same year . in 1160 , alexander iii excommunicated the emperor frederick barbarossa in the cathedral ; in 1176 , after the battle of legnano , the same pope received the imperial legates , with whom he elaborated the pactum anagninum ( '' anagni 's agreement '' ) , premise to the peace , which was achieved in venice in 1177 . the 13th century was the golden age of the city . in one hundred years , anagni produced four popes , three of them members of the conti family . the first one to ascend to the papal throne was lotarius conti , who , as innocent iii ( 1198–1216 ) , was one of the outstanding personalities of his century , together with frederick ii of whom he favoured the coronation as emperor of germany and saint francis whose first rule he approved . innocent iii is credited with the elaboration and the most complete expression of the theocratic doctrine , the principle according to which absolute rule over every earthly power is ascribed to the pope . he died in 1216 , leaving the church at the historical peak of its power . innocent iii 's efforts were taken up by gregory ix , who belonged to the powerful family of conti di anagni . on september 29 , 1227 in anagni 's cathedral he excommunicated emperor frederick ii , who had abandoned the crusade that the emperor himself had proclaimed . the suggestive ceremony took place by the lights of the torches , firstly shaken , then thrown on the ground and finally blown out by the prelates . in september 1230 , after the reconciliation , gregory ix received frederick ii in anagni , who in the meantime had been able to conquer , without bloodshed but by means of his great diplomatic ability , both jerusalem and nazareth . during his pontificate , alexander iv ( 1254–1261 ) , gregory ix 's relative and anagni 's third pope , had to face the heated ecclesiological dispute raised by the university of paris against the mendicant orders . the leader of this dispute , william of saint-amour , had published an anti-mendicant pamphlet , de periculis novissimorum temporum ( on the dangers of the last days ) between the fall of 1255 and spring of 1256 . alexander officially condemned the work in anagni on october 5 , 1256 . in 1255 clare of assisi was officially canonized in anagni . in 1265 a provincial chapter at anagni of the roman province of the dominican order assigned thomas aquinas as regent master acta capitulorum provincialium , provinciae romanae ordinis praedicatorum , 1265 , n . 12 , in corpus thomisticum , accessed 4-8-2011 “ fr . thome de aquino iniungimus in remissionem peccatorum quod teneat studium rome , et volumus quod fratribus qui stant secum ad studendum provideatur in necessariis vestimentis a conventibus de quorum predicatione traxerunt originem . si autem illi studentes inventi fuerint negligentes in studio , damus potestatem fr . thome quod ad conventus suos possit eos remittere ” thereby transforming the existing studium conventuale at the roman convent of santa sabina into the order 's first studium provinciale featuring as an innovation the study of philosophy ( studia philosophiae ) . this studium is the forerunner of the 16th century college of saint thomas at santa maria sopra minerva , and the pontifical university of saint thomas aquinas marian michèle mulchahey , '' first the bow is bent in study '' : dominican education before 1350 , 1998 , p . 278-279 . accessed 6-30-2011 . outrage of anagni . anagni is connected to the events in the life of boniface viii , the fourth pope to be born in the city , and a member of the powerful caetani family . he was elected after the abdication of celestine v , but opposed by french cardinals and by the powerful colonna family . in 1300 , boniface viii , set up the first jubilee and founded the first roman university , but also began a feud with the king of france , philip the fair , who had assigned himself the right to tax the french clergy . in response , in 1302 boniface delivered the bull unam sanctam , which assigned to the pope absolute supremacy over the earthly power of kings . in anger , philip organized an expedition to arrest and help remove boniface from his office . on 7 september 1303 , the king 's advisor guillaume de nogaret and sciarra colonna led a band of two thousand mercenaries on horse and foot . they joined locals in an attack on the palaces of the pope and his nephew at anagni . the pope 's attendants and his nephew francesco all soon fled ; only the spaniard pedro rodríguez , cardinal of santa sabina , remained at his side . the palace was plundered and boniface was nearly killed ( nogaret prevented sciarra colonna from murdering the pope ) . still , boniface was held prisoner and starved of food and drink for three days . this incident is called the outrage of anagni . according to a legend , during the imprisonment , the pope was slapped by sciarra colonna with his gauntlet : the episode is called the schiaffo di anagni ( '' anagni 's slap '' ) . the imprisonment of the pope inspired dante alighieri in a famous passage of his divine comedy ( purgatory , xx , vv . 85-93 ) , the new pilate has imprisoned the vicar of christ . the people of anagni rose against the invaders and released boniface . the pope pardoned those captured . he returned to rome on 13 september 1303 . despite his stoicism , boniface was clearly shaken by the incident . the old pontiff , already suffering , developed a violent fever and died in rome on 11 october 1303 . in a distant mirror : the calamitous fourteenth century , barbara tuchman states that his close advisors would later maintain that he died of a '' profound chagrin '' . after the death of boniface viii , both the splendor of anagni and the dreams of power of the caetani family collapsed and the doctrine of papal suzerainty of kings was weakened . the transfer of the papal court to avignon marked for anagni the beginning of a long period of decline , which lasted through the entire 15th century . the town was sacked by the troops of duke werner von urslingen in 1348 , and depopulated . later history . in 1556 , anagni became a battlefield in the conflict between pope paul iv and king philip ii of spain , when it was besieged by the spanish army under the duke of alba . after a bombardment by the spanish , the papal troops abandoned their positions and the spanish put the town to the sack on 15 september . the damage suffered by the town , in particular by the town walls , were accentuated by the fortifying works carried out in 1564 under pope pius iv . around 1579 a short period of refluorishing began , thanks to cardinal benedetto lomellino , bishop and governor of the city . the planned works are made under the sign of a recovery of the architectonic structures and the medieval constructive and decorative style . the great architectonic and urbanistic reconstructions began around 1633 . the works concerning the ecclesiastic buildings that determined the present look of the churches in anagni are very interesting . the new architectonic canons that , however , left the existing gothic roman elements untouched are reflected in the transformation of the buildings . also the ancient noble mansions embellished by magnificent portals were restructured and , toward the end of the 19th century , also the cultural level of the city rose again , thanks to the growing welfare . in fact , in this period , other institutions and congregations were born , which , together with the constitution of various schools , made anagni an important centre of study thanks to its long cultural tradition . in 1890 , in the presence of the queen , the queen margaret 's national boarding-house for the education of the orphan-girls of grammar schools teachers was opened . in 1897 , the jesuit collegio leoniano , entitled to the pontiff leo xiii , was also opened . finally , in 1930 , the prince of piedmont 's boarding-house was built for the sons of local body personnel . since world war ii , the territory of anagni has become an important industrial settlement . anagni was also the summer residence of the popes until recently . it was similar to what castel gandolfo in the alban hills is to today 's popes . thumb image : anagni ekron.jpg thumb 250px '' the ark of the covenant in ekron '' ( c . 1225 ) , from the cathedral crypt . thumb thumb . main sights . anagni cathedral . the cathedral , dedicated to saint mary , was built in romanesque style during the years 1071 & ndash ; 1105 , with gothic-style additions in the mid-13th century . the crypt contains the tombs of st magnus of anagni , the patron of the city , and of st secundina of anagni . the frescoes covering all the walls and ceiling are among the best preserved examples of romanesque/byzantine art in italy , and form a single iconography scheme , which includes natural philosophy , saints , the apocalypse , and the old testament ark of the covenant . j . ainaud , romanesque painting . ( london , 1963 ) p . 10 & plates 23–27 the unrestored cosmati floor is in excellent condition . on the same level as the crypt is the oratory of saint thomas ( becket ) , with less well preserved frescoes . the museum possesses a becket casket chasse ( one of around four dozen still around ) and what is claimed to be a becket miter . the western wall has a contemporary statue of pope boniface viii looking out over the piazza innocenzo iii . other . the papal palace ( or boniface viii 's palace ) , the scene of the '' anagni slap '' . the communal palace , built by the brescian architect jacopo da iseo in 1163 . it is made up of two pre-existing edifices connected by a portico supporting the large sala della ragione ( '' reason hall '' ) . the façade sports the coat of arms of the orsini and caetani families . casa gigli , a mediaeval edifice restored in the 19th century by the sweden painter albert barnekow . sant'andrea - medieval church madonna di loreto - medieval church san giacomo- a church built in the 13th century under the papacy of pope innocent iv , and dedicated to st james and st lucy to the south of the town is the imperial villa of villa magna built by antoninus pius , still called villamagna , where a consortium comprising the university of pennsylvania , the british school at rome and the soprintendenza ai beni archeologici del lazio initiated its first campaign of excavation in 2006 . these excavations , which continued in 2007 and 2008 , have begun to reveal a large and highly decorated building devoted to wine production as well as the remains of the monastery of s . pietro in villamagna . language and dialect . the language , or dialect , of anagni ( called anagnino ) can be categorized as northern ciociaro . the definite articles ( the ) are ju-masculine singular ( pronounced like the english word you ) , la-feminine singular , ji-masculine plural ( pronounced yee ) , and le-feminine plural ( pronounced like the english word lay ) . the indefinite articles ( a , an ) are nu-for masculine words and na for feminine words . the final vowel is always pronounced in the plural form and usually in the singular form ( this is in comparison with southern ciociaro and neapolitan where the final vowel of a word is usually slurred , unaccented ) . for those who know italian , the anagnino dialect preserves the u 's found in latin ; for example instead of the italian con ( with ) , the people of anagni use cu from the latin cum . there are many other differences between the italian and anagnino . some examples include the deletion of some n 's , l 's , and r 's commonly found in italian . for linguistic historians , the dialect is especially important for studying pre-roman italic languages and also the formation of italian . like latin , the v 's are pronounced like u 's ; for example vino ( wine in italian ) is uino in anagnino . today 's standard italian is influenced by german , french , arabic , greek , and spanish , while the dialect of anagni and the others of central italy ( south of rome , west of the apennines , and north of campania ) are relatively considered solely latin and pre-italic , due to the limited settlement of foreign people in the area . coat of arms . anagni 's coat of arms include an eagle over the lion and the letters s.p.q.a . the coat of arms symbolizes the forced union of anagni and the roman republic in 306 bc . the lion symbolizes the native hernici people , and the eagle on top of the lion symbolizes the romans conquering the hernici . the letters s.p.q.a . stands for senatus populusque anagninus ( '' the senate and the people of anagni '' ) . it is a model after the ancient acronym s.p.q.r . for rome ( senatus populusque romanus , '' the senate and the people of rome '' ) . the two keys above the eagle signify the city 's papal history . the imperial crown above the crest and the imperial robe signifies anagni was a famous and important residence of the roman emperors . the label is in latin , hernica saxa colvnt qvos dives anagnia pascit . twin towns - sister cities . anagni is twinned with : gniezno , poland l'isle-sur-la-sorgue , france . references . sources . richard stillwell , ed . princeton encyclopaedia of classical sites , 1976 : '' anagnia ( anagni ) , italy '' . external links . official website city of anagni william of hundleby 's contemporary pamphlet , 'the outrage' ferdinand gregorovius ' walks - anagni adrian fletcher ’ s paradoxplace – anagni , innocent iii and boniface viii