Cocos Island

present status and international distinctions . cocos island was declared a costa rican national park by means of executive decree in 1978 and designated a world heritage site by unesco in 1997 . in 2002 , the world heritage site designation was extended to include an expanded marine zone of . in addition , it is included in the list of ramsar wetlands . in 2009 , cocos island was short-listed as a candidate to be declared one of the new7wonders of nature by the new7wonders of the world foundation , ranking second in the islands category . thanks to the great diversity of marine life in its waters , cocos island was named one of the best 10 scuba diving spots in the world by the professional association of diving instructors and a '' must do '' according to diving experts . popular dive spots around the island are bajo alcyone ( hammerhead sharks ) , manuelina garden ( coral garden ) and dos amigos grande ( natural underwater arch formation ) . for many , the main attractions are the large pelagic fish species , which are very abundant in this unique meeting point between deep and shallow waters . the largest schools of hammerhead sharks in the world are consistently reported there . encounters with dozens if not hundreds of these and other large animals are nearly certain in every dive . smaller and colorful species are also abundant in one of the most extensive coral reefs in the southeastern pacific . guzmán , h . m . and cortés , j . ( 1992 ) . cocos island ( pacific of costa rica ) coral reefs after the 2010-83 el niño disturbance . revista de biología tropical 40 : 309–324 . famous oceanographer jacques cousteau visited the island several times and in 1994 called it '' the most beautiful island in the world '' . such accolades have highlighted the urgent need to protect cocos island and its surrounding waters from illegal large-scale fishing , poaching and other threats . the only persons allowed to live on cocos island are costa rican park rangers , who have established two encampments , including one at english bay . access by civilians is very limited ; tourists and ship crew members are allowed ashore only with permission of island rangers , and are not permitted to camp , stay overnight or collect any flora , fauna or minerals from the island . occasional amateur radio dxpeditions are allowed to visit . ti9cf 1970 cocos island ti9a dxpedition to cocos island the island is also very popular in pirate lore . it is said that over 300 expeditions have searched for buried treasure there , such as the hoard of benito bonito , the treasure of lima , and many others . some small caches have been discovered , leading many to believe that the stories of vast pirate treasures are true , though the majority of searches have been unsuccessful . treasure hunting is strictly prohibited by the costa rican government and permits are not being issued . geology and landscape . cocos island is an oceanic island of both volcanic and tectonic origin . it is the only emergent island of the cocos plate , one of the minor tectonic plates . potassium-argon dating established the age of the oldest rocks between 1.91 and 2.44 & nbsp ; million years ( late pliocene ) castillo , p . , batiza , r . , vanko , d . , malavassi , e . , barquero , j . , and fernandez , e . 1988 . anomalously young volcanoes on old hot-spot traces . i . geology and petrology of cocos island . geological society of america bulletin 100 : 1400–1414 . and it is composed primarily of basalt , which is formed by cooling lava . the island is approximately rectangular in shape , measuring about with a perimeter of around . montoya , m . 2007 . conozca la isla del coco : una guía para su visitación . in biocursos para amantes de la naturaleza : conozca el parque nacional isla del coco , la isla del tesoro ( 26 abril al 6 de mayo 2007 ) . ( ed . organization for tropical studies ) . organization for tropical studies . san josé , costa rica . 35–176 . the landscape is mountainous and irregular ; the highest point is cerro iglesias , at . in spite of its mountainous character , there are flatter areas between in elevation in the center of the island , which are said to be a transitional stage of the geomorphological cycle of v-shaped valleys . malavassi , e . 1982 . visita al parque nacional isla del coco . revista geográfica de américa central ( 15–16 ) : 211–216 . cocos island has a number of short rivers and streams that drain abundant rainfall into four bays , three of them on the north side ( wafer , chatham and weston ) . the largest rivers are the genio and the pittier , which drain their water into wafer bay . sheer , cliffs ring much of the island , preventing convenient access except at a few beaches ; the easiest point of entry is at chatham bay . the mountainous landscape and the tropical climate combine to create over 200 waterfalls throughout the island . the island ’ s soils are classified as entisols , which are highly acidic and would be easily eroded by the island ’ s high rainfall on the steep slopes were it not for the dense forest coverage . climate . the climate of cocos island is mostly determined by the latitudinal movement of the intertropical convergence zone , which creates cloudiness and precipitation that is constant throughout the year . herrera , w . 1984 . informe de campo . gira realizada a la isla del coco con el objetivo de recabar información climatológica . san josé , servicio de parques nacionales , 6 p . this makes the climate humid and tropical with an average annual temperature of and an average annual rainfall of over . rainfall remains high throughout the year , although lowers somewhat from january through march and again during late september and october . sinergia 69 . 2000 . volumen 2 . aspectos meteorológicos y climatológico del acmic y su área de influencia . san josé , proyecto gef/pnud conocimiento y uso de la biodiversidad del acmic , 184 p . numerous oceanic currents from the central pacific ocean , particularly the equatorial counter current , converge on the island and also have an important influence . the island has a tropical rainforest climate ( köppen : af ) . ecology . cocos island is home to dense tropical moist forests . it is the only oceanic island in the eastern pacific region with such rain forests and their characteristic types of flora and fauna . the cloud forests present at its higher elevations are also unique in the eastern pacific . the island was never linked to a continent , so the flora and fauna arrived via long-distance dispersal from the americas , and the island therefore has a high proportion of endemic species . flora . the island has 235 known species of flowering plants , of which 70 are endemic . a good comprehensive study on the flora of the island is provided in the journal proceedings of the california academy of sciences . trusty , j.l . , kesler , h.c . and haug-delgado , g . 2006 . vascular flora of isla del coco , costa rica . proceedings of the california academy of sciences ( fourth series ) 57 ( 7 ) : 247–355 . additionally , 74 species of ferns and fern allies ( lycopodiophytes and pteridophytes gomez , l.d . 1975 . the ferns and fern-allies of cocos island , costa rica . american fern journal 65 ( 4 ) : 102–104 . ) , 128 species of mosses and liverworts , dauphin g . 1999 . bryophytes of cocos island , costa rica : diversity , biogeography and ecology . revista de biología tropical . 47:309–328 90 species of fungi and 41 species of slimemolds rojas , c . and stephenson , s.l . 2008 . myxomycete ecology along an elevation gradient on cocos island , costa rica . fungal diversity 29 : 119–129 . have been reported . nevertheless , more exhaustive investigations are expected to reveal many more species . the island has three main plant communities . the coastal forests extend from the coast up to elevation . purple coral tree ( erythrina fusca ) , coconut palm ( cocos nucifera ) , and pond-apple ( annona glabra ) are the predominant trees , with an understory of ferns , shrubs of the rubiaceae and solanaceae families , sedges and grasses , and herbaceous plants of the leguminosae and malvaceae families . the inland forests extend from elevation . '' palo de hierro '' or huriki ( sacoglottis holdridgei ) , '' avocado '' ( ocotea insularis ) and the endemic cecropia pittieri are the most common canopy trees . the trees are festooned at all levels with epiphytic plants , including orchids , ferns , bromeliads and mosses . the understory includes sedges such as hypolitrum amplum and various species of ferns and tree ferns , including cyathea armata and danaea media . the palm euterpe precatoria is also common . cloud forests are found at the highest elevations , over , where melastoma spp . are predominant . the general vegetation of cocos island has greatly changed since the island was first named and described by europeans . captain wafer , who visited the island in 1685 and whose name was given to the landing place , describes extensive coconut groves extending inland into the interior of the island . thor heyerdahl posited that it was very unlikely that these groves developed naturally , and that pre-european man must once have cleared considerable areas in the ravine bottoms and interior plateaus and ridges , utilizing the clearings for coconut plantations of substantial extent . heyerdahl theorized that these plantations were used to provide fresh liquid and food for pre-columbian voyages ( made by balsa rafts using guara navigation ) between guatemala and northwestern south america . after the spanish conquest and its consequences , these voyages ended and the tropical jungle recovered the land that had been laboriously cleared by early human hands . heyerdahl , t . 1978 . early man and the ocean . doubleday & company , new york . fauna . . terrestrial . the island has over 400 known species of insects , of which 65 ( 16 % ) are endemic . the greatest diversity is found among the lepidoptera and formicidae . over 50 species of other arthropods have been described ( spiders , centipedes , millipedes , and isopods ) . two species of lizard are found on the island , an anole ( anolis townsendii ) and a gecko ( sphaerodactylus pacificus ) ; both are endemic . no amphibians have been reported . nearly 90 bird species have been reported . the island and neighboring rocks are home to large nesting colonies of migratory seabirds , including the brown booby ( sula leucogaster ) , red-footed booby ( sula sula ) , great frigatebird ( fregata minor ) , white tern ( gygis alba ) and brown noddy ( anous stolidus ) . seven species of land birds inhabit the island , including three endemics : the cocos cuckoo ( coccyzus ferrugineus ) , cocos flycatcher ( nesotriccus ridgwayi ) and cocos finch ( pinaroloxias inornata ) . the island has been designated an important bird area ( iba ) by birdlife international . the island has no native land mammal species , though five inhabit the island in modern times : pigs , deer , goats , cats , and rats , all of which were introduced by humans . the costa rican government has vowed to control the populations of these animals , as they are harmful to the local ecosystems . . marine . the rich coral reef , volcanic tunnels , caves , massifs and deeper waters surrounding cocos island are home to more than 30 species of coral , 60 species of crustaceans , 600 species of molluscs and over 300 species of fish . these include large populations of yellowfin tuna ( thunnus albacares ) , giant mantas ( manta birostris ) , sailfish ( istiophorus platypterus ) and sharks , such as whitetip reef shark ( triaenodon obesus ) and scalloped hammerhead shark ( sphyrna lewini ) . the largest of all species of fish is also present , the whale shark ( rhincodon typus ) . in december 2017 , a female tiger shark ( a species that returned to the waters of isla del coco in 2012 , after 30 years of not being seen in the area ) killed new yorker rohina bhandari while she was scuba diving in manuelita in the isla del coco national park . other large marine animals include humpback whales ( megaptera novaeangliae ) , orcas ( orcinus orca ) , pilot whales ( globicephala macrorhynchus ) , bottlenose dolphins ( tursiops truncatus ) and sea lions ( zalophus californianus ) . annie . 2012 . orca whales . costa rica scuba.com . retrieved on august 25 , 2017 dyer z . 2014 . video : killer whales hunt tiger shark near costa rica 's cocos island . the tico times . retrieved on august 25 , 2017 there are also reptiles : hawksbill turtles ( eretmochelys imbricata ) , green turtles ( chelonia mydas ) and olive ridley turtles ( lepidochelys olivacea ) . habitats threatened . the island 's largely unperturbed habitats are , nonetheless , under growing human pressure . illegal poaching of large marine species in and around its protected waters has become a main concern . growing local and worldwide demand for tuna , shark fin soup and other seafood is threatening the island 's fragile ecosystems . the government of costa rica has been openly accused of passivity and even benefiting corruptly from illegal shark fin and other seafood trade to large markets , such as china and other asian countries . the government has shown some willingness to protect the island 's natural riches and prosecute poachers . however , efforts to effectively patrol the waters and enforce environmental laws face big financial and bureaucratic difficulties , as well as being prone to the corruption of local , national and international authorities . recent events show that large-scale illegal poaching keeps happening . despite initial hope in stopping and charging poachers , who have been caught with abundant evidence , they have often been quickly released under suspicious circumstances . also , efforts to raise funds for protection have been dwarfed . marvin orlando cerdas , a judge with the local puntarenas court of justice , obscurely allowed 22 poachers caught red-handed to escape the country . also under highly suspicious and allegedly corrupt circumstances , district attorney michael morales molina stopped the auction for public benefit of confiscated goods immediately after the spokesman of the large illegal poaching ship tiuna simply made the request . . history . discovery and early cartography . in his historia general y natural de las indias ( 1535 , expanded in 1851 from his previously unpublished papers ) , gonzalo fernández de oviedo y valdés discusses the discovery of the island by his contemporary , spanish navigator juan de cabezas ( also known as juan de grado ) , in 1526 . j . lines , diario de costa rica , may 12 , 1940 d . lievre , una isla desierta en el pacífico ; la isla del coco in los viajes de cockburn y lievre por costa rica ( 1962 : 134 ) tells that the first document with the name '' isle de coques '' is a map painted on parchment , called that of henry ii , that appeared in 1542 during the reign of francis i of france . the planisphere of nicolas desliens ( 1556 , dieppe ) places this ysle de coques about one and a half degrees north of the equator ( see also mario a . boza and rolando mendoza , los parques nacionales de costa rica , madrid , 1981 ) . willem blaeu 's grand atlas , originally published in 1662 , has a colour world map on the back of its front cover which shows i . de cocos right on the equator . frederik de witt 's atlas , 1680 shows it similarly . the hondius broadside map of 1590 shows i . de cocos at 2 degrees and 30 minutes north latitude , while in 1596 theodore de bry showed the galápagos islands near 6 degrees north of the equator . emanuel bowen , in a complete system of geography , volume ii ( london , 1747 : 586 ) , states that the galápagos islands stretch 5 degrees north of the equator . administrative history . cocos island was annexed by costa rica in 1832 by decree no . 54 of the constitutional assembly of the newly independent country . whalers stopped regularly at cocos island until the mid-19th century , when inexpensive kerosene started to replace whale oil for lighting . in october 1863 , the ship adelante marooned 426 tongan former slaves on the island when it was discovered that they had contracted smallpox and were a danger to her crew . by the time the vessel tumbes arrived to rescue them one month later , only 38 survivors were found , the rest having perished from smallpox ( see ʻata ) . in 1897 , the costa rican government named the german adventurer and treasure hunter august gissler the first governor of cocos island and allowed him to establish a short-lived colony there . on may 12 , 1970 , the insular territory of cocos island was incorporated administratively by means of executive decree no . 27 , making it the eleventh district of puntarenas canton of the puntarenas province . as a district , the island has the postal code of 60110 . the island 's 33 residents , all of them costa rican park rangers , were allowed to vote for the first time in 2006 costa rican general election . however , the rangers are not considered permanent residents of the district , therefore the census data considers the island to be uninhabited . . piracy and hidden treasures . cocos island has featured heavily in many tales of pirate lore and buried treasure . the first claims of treasure buried on the island came from a woman named mary welch , who claimed that 350 tons of gold ( about 16 billion in today 's money ) raided from spanish galleons had been buried on the island by captain bennett graham , a naval officer who had become a pirate in 1818 . she had been a member of a pirate crew led by captain bennett graham , and was transported to an australian penal colony for her crimes . she possessed a chart showing where graham 's treasure was supposed to be hidden . on her release , she returned to the island with an expedition but had no success in finding anything , as the points of reference in the chart had disappeared . another pirate supposed to have buried treasure on the island was the portuguese benito bonito , who began terrorizing the west coast of the americas around 1818 . though bonito was hunted down and executed , his treasure was never retrieved . perhaps the best-known of the treasure legends tied to the island is that of the fabled treasure of lima . pirates of the collection : and the quest for the 'treasure of lima ' in 1820 , with the army of josé de san martín approaching lima , viceroy josé de la serna is supposed to have entrusted treasure from the city to british trader captain william thompson for safekeeping until the spaniards could secure the country . instead of waiting in the harbor as they were instructed , thompson and his crew killed the viceroy 's men and sailed to cocos , where they allegedly buried the treasure . shortly afterwards , they were apprehended by a spanish warship . all of the crew except thompson and his first mate were executed for piracy . the two said they would show the spaniards where they had hidden the treasure in return for their lives , but after landing on cocos , they escaped into the forest and were never recaptured . hundreds of attempts to find treasure on the island have failed . several early expeditions were mounted on the basis of claims by a man named keating , who was supposed to have befriended thompson . on one trip , keating was said to have retrieved gold and jewels from the treasure . macinnis , pp . 29–30 . german adventurer august gissler lived on the island for most of the period from 1889 until 1908 , hunting the treasure with the small success of finding a few gold coins . an art project called treasure of lima : a buried exhibition , where a container with artwork by different artists was buried in a secret location , took place on the island in 2014 . in fiction . the book desert island robinson crusoe enterprises , north vancouver , 1996 proposed the highly detailed theory that daniel defoe used the isla del coco as an accurate model for his descriptions of the island inhabited by the marooned robinson crusoe . however , defoe placed crusoe 's island not in the pacific , but rather off the coast of venezuela in the atlantic ocean . see discussion page for further details . robinson 's neighbouring terra firma is shown on the colour map of joannes jansson ( amsterdam ) depicting the northeastern corner of south america , entitled terra firma et novum regnum granatense et popayan . it belongs to the early group of plates printed by willem blaeu from 1630 onwards . the property called terra firma was the isthmus of darien . bowen , 1747 : 593 , and charles theodore middleton , a new and complete system of geography , volume ii , london , printed for j . cooke , 1777–1778 , page 448 crusoe 's two references to mexico are against a south american island as well .