Constitutional crisis

africa . democratic republic of the congo . president joseph kasavubu and prime minister patrice lumumba attempted to dismiss each other in september 1960 . general mobutu sese seko deposed both in a coup later that month , then restored kasavubu as president . . egypt . egypt experienced a constitutional crisis when president hosni mubarak was removed in the egyptian revolution . the country was left without a president until president mohamed morsi was elected and then again when morsi was arrested by the egyptian armed forces in a 2013 coup d'etat until president abdel fattah el-sisi took office . . malawi . a constitutional crisis occurred in malawi in 2012 with regard to the succession of bingu wa mutharika . the president and vice-president were from different parties which led to deliberations over who the rightful successor would be and the constitutional crisis . vice-president joyce banda eventually succeeded wa mutharika . republic of the gambia . following the victory of adama barrow in the 2016 presidential election , president yahya jammeh rejected the results and refused to step down . on 17 january , jammeh declared a 90-day state of emergency in an attempt to extend his term of office . senegal , ghana and nigerian forces entered the gambia on 19 january to enforce the election results . on 21 january , jammeh stepped down and left the country . rhodesia . amid demands from british politicians to no independence before majority rule , the white minority government of ian smith unilaterally declared independence in 1965 . the uk rejected the declaration and continued to claim sovereignty over rhodesia until a framework for independence and black enfranchisement was negotiated in the 1979 lancaster house agreement . . south africa . the coloured vote constitutional crisis ( 1951–55 ) : the national party government disputed a supreme court decision overturning its separate representation of voters act to disenfranchise coloured voters in the cape province . its attempt to reverse the decision in an ad hoc court was also overturned , after which the party used reforms to the senate to pass the measure legally . asia . iran . mohammed reza pahlavi 's 1953 dismissal of prime minister mohammed mossadegh and mossadegh 's subsequent refusal to quit the office . malaysia . 1966 sarawak constitutional crisis started by a group of politicians who were dissatisfied towards stephen kalong ningkan 's leadership as chief minister . ningkan was later removed from the chief minister post by the governor of sarawak in june 1966 . the 1983 malaysian constitutional crisis saw prime minister mahathir pushing forward an amendment of article 66 of the federal constitution , which set the time limit of the malaysian monarch to veto a law within 30 days . the proposals generated a great deal of controversy between the government and the monarchy , of which the former had to launch a public campaign to pressure the monarchy to assent to the amendments . the 1988 malaysian constitutional crisis was a series of events that began with the united malays national organisation ( umno ) party elections in 1987 and ended with the suspension and the eventual removal of lord president of the supreme court tun salleh abas from his seat . the 1993 amendments to the constitution of malaysia ( by some interpretations a constitutional crisis ) involved the limitation of monarchs ' legal immunity in malaysia . prime minister mahathir bin mohamad successfully amended the constitution to make the monarchies more accountable to their actions . the 2009 perak constitutional crisis occurred in the malaysian state of perak when party switching caused the state ruling coalition , pakatan rakyat , to lose its majority in the state assembly . the sultan of perak refused to dissolve the state assembly when requested and dismissed the menteri besar ( chief minister ) in the absence of a no confidence vote . the 2020 malaysian constitutional crisis was a series of events that began when prime minister mahathir mohamad and associates attempted to replace his coalition partners and form a unity government supported by opposition parties . pakistan . supreme court chief justice sajjad ali shah clashed repeatedly with prime minister nawaz sharif in late 1997 , accusing him of undermining the court 's independence . after ali shah suspended a constitutional amendment that prevented dismissal of the prime minister , sharif ordered president farooq leghari to appoint a new chief justice . when leghari refused , sharif considered impeaching him , but backed down after a warning from the armed forces . faced with a choice of accepting sharif 's demands or dismissing him , leghari resigned . ali shah resigned shortly afterward , establishing sharif 's dominance . thailand . in march 2006 , 60 seats of the national assembly of thailand could not be elected , and prime minister thaksin shinawatra refused to resign . the judicial system did not lead up to supreme court as the top arbitrator so there were inconsistent rulings from the civil , criminal , administrative , and constitutional courts . sri lanka . on the 26th of october 2018 , president maithripala sirisena appointed former president mahinda rajapaksa as prime minister and dismissed incumbent prime minister ranil wickremesinghe . ranil wickremesing refused to accept the dismissal while stating that it was unconstitutional and undemocratic . europe . belgium . the royal question over the status of king leopold iii began when he acted against ministerial advice during the battle of belgium and refused to join the government in exile . deported to germany before liberation of belgium , leopold 's return was narrowly approved in a 1950 referendum but a subsequent general strike prompted him to abdicate the following year . in 1990 , king baudouin refused routine royal assent to the law on abortion in belgium . the issue was resolved by ( constitutionally but controversially ) having baudouin temporarily declared incapable of reigning , the council of ministers giving assent as provided for in the belgian constitution , and baudouin declared capable again . denmark . the easter crisis of 1920 , when king christian x of denmark dismissed the country 's cabinet . england . eleven southern slave states who feared lincoln would outlaw slavery in the western territories responded by seceding from the union and forming the confederate states of america . the federal government refused to recognize the secession and the american civil war began after confederate forces fired on and captured fort sumter in charleston , south carolina . the war , which would be the deadliest military conflict in american history , ended after four years with the complete collapse of the confederacy and the reincorporation of the states back into the union under reconstruction . 1876 presidential election : republicans and democrats disputed voting results in three states . an ad hoc electoral commission , created by congress , voted along party lines in favor of republican candidate rutherford b . hayes , in exchange for withdrawing federal troops from the south and ending reconstruction . the 1952 steel strike : president harry s . truman nationalized the country 's steel industry on the basis of his inherent powers in order to prevent a strike by the united steelworkers that would impede the korean war . this action reopened the '' great debate '' of 1950–51 regarding the extent of truman 's authority to counter the spread of communism . the supreme court enjoined truman 's order in youngstown sheet & tube co . v . sawyer , holding that presidential actions must proceed from constitutional or legislative authority . truman used the threat of a second nationalization to push steel workers and management to an agreement . in the watergate scandal ( 1972–1974 ) , president richard nixon and his staff obstructed investigations into their political activities . nixon resigned , under threat of impeachment , after the release of an audio tape showing that he had personally approved the obstruction . congressional moves to restrain presidential authority continued for years afterward . 2000 presidential election : the electoral college results ended too close to call and depended on the results in florida , which the republican candidate texas governor george w . bush narrowly led over his democratic rival vice president al gore . over the next few weeks numerous electronic recounts occurred as the gore campaign requested a hand recount . there were controversies over the '' butterfly ballot '' design of palm beach county and whether undervotes and '' hanging chads '' constituted a legal vote . the florida supreme court ordered a hand recount in all 67 counties but the decision was appealed to the u.s . supreme court . the court ruled in the controversial bush v . gore decision that the recounts were unconstitutional because there were no standards for the ballots and the problem could not be remedied . the florida recounts were also controversial because bush 's brother jeb bush served as governor of florida while his state campaign manager katherine harris served as florida secretary of state . . oceania . australia . the 1936 edward viii abdication crisis , when king edward viii proposed to marry divorcee wallis simpson against the advice of his ministers . the 1975 australian constitutional crisis saw the prime minister gough whitlam and his government dismissed by the nation 's governor-general sir john kerr , in response to a prolonged budget deadlock in parliament . whitlam 's labor government had the confidence of the lower house , the house of representatives . in the australian constitution , the senate has equal powers with the house of representatives , except it may not initiate or amend a supply bill . it can , however , reject or defer consideration of such a bill , and that is what it did on this occasion . the constitution permits the governor-general to dismiss the government if they can not command the confidence of parliament and will not call an election . though the government lacked the confidence of the senate , they commanded the confidence of the lower house , where government is formed and confidence motions introduced . whitlam also stated his intention to call an election , but kerr nonetheless dismissed him without prior warning and installed malcolm fraser as prime minister , despite fraser 's inability to command the confidence of either house of parliament . after fraser 's liberal government passed several important appropriations bills kerr declared a double dissolution and the 1975 federal election , which fraser won in a landslide . in 2017 , the 2017 australian parliamentary eligibility crisis to sit in the parliament of australia was called into question because of their actual or possible dual citizenship . the issue arises from section 44 of the constitution of australia , which prohibits members of either house of the parliament from having allegiance to a foreign power . several mps resigned in anticipation of being ruled ineligible , and five more were forced to resign after being ruled ineligible by the high court of australia , including national party leader and deputy prime minister barnaby joyce . this became an ongoing political event referred to variously as a '' constitutional crisis '' or the '' citizenship crisis '' . . fiji . in the 1977 fijian constitutional crisis , the winning party in a general election failed to name a government due to internal conflicts . the governor-general intervened , appointing a prime minister from the opposition party . new zealand . the 1936 edward viii abdication crisis , when king edward viii proposed to marry divorcee wallis simpson against the advice of his ministers . the new zealand constitutional crisis , 1984 was caused by prime minister rob muldoon 's refusal to devalue the new zealand dollar as per the instructions of the prime minister-elect , david lange . the outgoing cabinet rebelled against muldoon , who relented . the crisis led to the passage of the constitution act , which patriated the constitution from the united kingdom . papua new guinea . the 2011–2012 papua new guinean constitutional crisis was caused by a disagreement , involving every branch of government including the supreme court , as to who the legitimate prime minister was . specifically , whether prime minister michael somare 's dismissal by the speaker of the national parliament while he was in hospital had been lawful . after ten months , the crisis was resolved peacefully by a general election . tuvalu . the tuvaluan constitutional crisis occurred when prime minister willy telavi sought to continue governing after having lost his parliamentary majority . he deferred allowing parliament to sit , and his ally speaker kamuta latasi did not allow a motion of no confidence to be tabled when it finally did sit . the opposition accused the government of acting unconstitutionally , and governor general sir iakoba italeli intervened , removing the prime minister from office so that parliament could decide who should form the government . telavi sought in vain to ask the queen of tuvalu , elizabeth ii , to remove the governor general . parliament elected opposition leader enele sopoaga to the premiership . south america . chile . 1973 chilean coup d'état : accusing salvador allende 's government of increasing authoritarianism , the supreme court , comptroller general and chamber of deputies acuerdo de la cámara de diputados sobre el grave quebrantamiento del orden constitucional y legal de la república declared him out of order , and the chamber urged the military to put an end to constitutional breaches . the military deposed allende a few weeks later and abolished the constitution . peru . peruvian constitutional crisis of 1992 : president alberto fujimori , with the support of the armed forces , dissolved the congress after it rejected his proposal for stronger action against shining path and mrta . then , he called for elections for a democratic constitutional congress to write the 1993 peruvian constitution . until the new constitution was written , he ruled by decree . venezuela . 2017 venezuelan constitutional crisis : the constitutional chamber of the supreme tribunal of justice ruled that the country 's legislature , the national assembly , was operating in contempt of the constitution due to prior rulings that some members had been improperly elected , and assumed legislative power for itself . politicians opposed to the government of president nicolás maduro , as well as maduro 's prosecutor general , denounced the ruling for undermining the constitutional order , and the tribunal rescinded it the following day . maduro summoned a constituent assembly , nominally to draft a new constitution , but in practice to assert his authority against that of the national assembly . as of 2020 the crisis remains unresolved , with national assembly president juan guaidó claiming the presidency in opposition to maduro . see also . cabinet crisis . references .