1954 in literature

events . january – kingsley amis 's first novel , the comic campus novel lucky jim , is published by victor gollancz ltd in london . january 7 – the georgetown–ibm experiment is the first public demonstration of a machine translation system , held in new york at the ibm head office . january 25 – dylan thomas 's radio play under milk wood is first broadcast in the u.k . on the bbc third programme , two months after its author 's death , with richard burton as '' first voice '' . february – the london magazine is revived as a literary magazine , with john lehmann as editor . march 31 – a . l . zissu is sentenced in bucharest to life imprisonment for '' conspiring against the social order '' . this has been a focal point in the anti-zionist clampdown in communist romania . may 29 – the rediscovered and restored early 17th-century corral de comedias de almagro in spain is re-inaugurated with a play by calderon de la barca . . june 16 – the first public celebration of '' bloomsday '' takes place in dublin : writers flann o'brien , patrick kavanagh and anthony cronin travel in a horse-drawn coach , stopping at numerous bars to retrace the steps of the characters from james joyce 's novel ulysses . june 22 – in the parker–hulme murder case , the 15-year-old julia hulme , a future writer of english historical detective fiction as anne perry , takes part in the murder of her best friend 's mother in christchurch , new zealand . july – the first volume of j . r . r . tolkien 's epic the lord of the rings – the fellowship of the ring – is published in london by george allen & unwin . the two towers follows on november 11 and publication will be completed in 1955 . by 2007 , 150 million copies will have been sold worldwide . september 1 – lawrence quincy mumford becomes the u.s.librarian of congress . september 17 – william golding 's first novel , the allegorical dystopian lord of the flies , is published by faber and faber in london . september 22 – terence rattigan 's two linked plays separate tables is first performed , at st james 's theatre , london . october 30 – john updike 's first story for the new yorker , '' friends from philadelphia '' , is published . he graduates from harvard with a thesis on george herbert , and begins a year 's frank knox memorial fellowship to the ruskin school of drawing and fine art at england 's university of oxford . november 19 – brendan behan 's first play , the quare fellow is premièred at the pike theatre , dublin . unknown date – jack kerouac reads dwight goddard 's a buddhist bible ( 1932 , found in san jose library ) , which will influence him greatly . new books . fiction . kingsley amis – lucky jim poul anderson – the broken sword isaac asimov – the caves of steel james baldwin – go tell it on the mountain hamilton basso – the view from pompey 's head john bingham – the third skin boileau-narcejac – the living and the dead ( d'entre les morts ) lucy m . boston – yew hall pierre boulle – the bridge over the river kwai ( le pont de la rivière kwaï ) taylor caldwell – never victorious , never defeated john dickson carr the third bullet and other stories the exploits of sherlock holmes ( with adrian conan doyle ) agatha christie – destination unknown robertson davies – leaven of malice simone de beauvoir – the mandarins ( les mandarins ) daphne du maurier – mary anne ian fleming – live and let die max frisch – i 'm not stiller ( stiller ) william golding – lord of the flies richard gordon – the captain 's table hergé – explorers on the moon ( on a marché sur la lune ) hwang sun-won – the descendants of cain ( 카인의 후예 ) mac hyman – no time for sergeants hammond innes – the strange land randall jarrell – pictures from an institution : a comedy yasunari kawabata ( 川端 康成 ) – the sound of the mountain ( yama no oto ; serialization concludes ) frances parkinson keyes – the royal box kalki krishnamurthy amara thara ponniyin selvan ( பொன்னியின் செல்வன் , '' the son of ponni '' ; publication concludes ) manuel mujica láinez – la casa ( the house ) jacques laurent – mata hari 's daughter camara laye – le regard du roi ira levin – a kiss before dying astrid lindgren – mio , my son compton mackenzie – ben nevis goes east kamala markandaya – nectar in a sieve john masters – bhowani junction richard matheson – i am legend john metcalfe – the feasting dead james a . michener – sayonara paul morand – hecate and her dogs alberto moravia – il disprezzo ( a ghost at noon ) iris murdoch – under the net louis pauwels – l'amour monstre j . b . priestley – the magicians marcel proust – jean sauteuil ( posthumously published ) ellery queen – the glass village pauline réage ( anne desclos ) – story of o ( histoire d ' o ) mordecai richler – the acrobats lillian roth – i 'll cry tomorrow françoise sagan – bonjour tristesse no . 41 in le mondes 100 books of the century . ahmed sefrioui – la boîte à merveilles anya seton – katherine margit söderholm – clouds over hellesta john steinbeck – sweet thursday irving stone – love is eternal rex stout the black mountain three men out edward streeter – mr . hobbs takes a vacation ahmet hamdi tanpınar – saatleri ayarlama enstitüsü ( the time regulation institute ) morton thompson – not as a stranger j . r . r . tolkien the lord of the rings : the fellowship of the ring the lord of the rings : the two towers amos tutuola – my life in the bush of ghosts tarjei vesaas – spring night gore vidal – messiah douglass wallop – the year the yankees lost the pennant monique watteau – la colère végétale frank yerby – benton 's row . children and young people . viola bayley – paris adventure ( first in the adventure series of 16 books ) lucy m . boston – the children of green knowe ( first in the green knowe series of six books ) eleanor cameron – the wonderful flight to the mushroom planet meindert dejong – the wheel on the school ( illustrated by maurice sendak ) rumer godden – impunity jane : the story of a pocket doll joseph krumgold – . and now miguel c . s . lewis – the horse and his boy dr . seuss – horton hears a who ! rosemary sutcliff – the eagle of the ninth henry treece legions of the eagle the eagles have flown ronald welch – knight crusader . drama . tawfiq al-hakim – el aydi el na'mah ( soft hands ) brendan behan – the quare fellow dharamvir bharati – andha yug ( the blind age ) peter jones – the party spirit saunders lewis – siwan ronald millar – waiting for gillian terence rattigan – separate tables reginald rose – twelve angry men ( original version as live teleplay ) dylan thomas – under milk wood ( radio play ) thornton wilder – the matchmaker herman wouk – the caine mutiny court-martial . poetry . tomas tranströmer – 17 poems ( 17 dikter ) . non-fiction . gordon allport – the nature of prejudice l . sprague de camp – lost continents rodney collin – the theory of celestial influence albert einstein – ideas and opinions gerald gardner – witchcraft today aldous huxley – the doors of perception arthur koestler – the invisible writing d . r . matthews – the social background of political decision-makers mervyn peake – figures of speech a . j . p . taylor – the struggle for mastery in europe 1848–1918 alice b . toklas – the alice b . toklas cookbook william kurtz wimsatt , jr . – verbal icon : studies in the meaning of poetry ( collected essays including '' the intentional fallacy '' and '' the affective fallacy '' , cowritten with monroe beardsley ) barbara woodhouse dog training my way talking to animals ( autobiography ) . births . january 5 – lászló krasznahorkai , hungarian novelist and screenwriter january 15 – jose dalisay , jr . , filipino writer january 29 – oprah winfrey , american actress and talk show host january – cao wenxuan ( 曹文軒 ) , chinese children 's book writer and academic february 2 – moniza alvi , pakistani-british poet and writer march 4 – irina ratushinskaya , russian writer may 6 – nicholas crane , english writer , geographer and broadcaster march 16 – s . a . griffin , american actor and poet march 20 – louis sachar , american children 's author april 14 – bruce sterling , american science-fiction writer may 5 – hamid ismailov , uzbek writer may 23 – anja snellman , finnish writer june 6 – cynthia rylant , american children 's author and poet june 28 – a . a . gill , british journalist and critic ( died 2016 ) july 17 – j . michael straczynski , american author august 1 – james gleick , american non-fiction author august 15 – mary jo salter , american poet and academic august 17 – anatoly kudryavitsky , russian-irish writer september 14 – mikey smith , jamaican dub poet ( killed 1983 ) november 8 – kazuo ishiguro , japanese-born english novelist and nobel laureate november 10 – marlene van niekerk , south african novelist november 11 – mary gaitskill , american novelist , essayist and short story writer november 12 – christopher pike ( kevin christopher mcfadden ) , american children 's author december 3 – grace andreacchi , american author december 7 – mark hofmann , american rare book dealer , forger and murderer december 20 – sandra cisneros , american writer unknown dates esther delisle , french canadian author and historian ibrahim nasrallah , jordanian/palestinian poet and novelist roma tearne ( roma chrysostom ) , sri lankan novelist and artist . deaths . january 1 – duff cooper ( 1st viscount norwich ) , english poet , biographer and politician ( born 1890 ) january 21 – e . k . chambers , english literary scholar ( born 1866 ) january 25 – m . n . roy , indian philosopher and politician ( born 1887 ) february 2 – hella wuolijoki , estonian-born finnish writer ( born 1886 ) february 6 – maxwell bodenheim , american poet and novelist ( born 1892 ; murdered ) march 28 – francis brett young , english novelist and poet ( born 1884 ) april 8 juan álvarez , argentinian historian ( born 1878 ) winnifred eaton , canadian author ( born 1875 ) c . fox smith , english poet and nautical writer ( born 1882 ) april 19 – russell davenport , american journalist and publisher ( born 1899 ) may 3 – earnest hooton , american writer on anthropology ( born 1887 ) june 18 – constantin beldie , romanian literary promoter and memoirist ( born 1887 ) july 13 – grantland rice , american sportswriter ( born 1880 ) july 14 – jacinto benavente , spanish dramatist and nobel laureate ( born 1866 ) august 2 – julián padrón , venezuelan novelist , journalist and lawyer ( born 1910 ) august 3 – colette , french novelist ( born 1873 ) september 19 – miles franklin , australian novelist ( born 1879 ) september 29 – w . j . gruffydd , welsh-language journal editor ( born 1881 ) october 22 – oswald de andrade , brazilian poet and polemicist ( born 1890 ) november 17 – ludovic dauș , romanian novelist and dramatist ( born 1873 ) december 6 – lucien tesnière , french grammarian ( born 1893 ) december 20 – james hilton , english novelist ( born 1900 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : ronald welch , knight crusader james tait black memorial prize for fiction : c . p . snow , the new men and the masters james tait black memorial prize for biography : keith feiling , warren hastings newbery medal for children 's literature : joseph krumgold , . and now miguel nobel prize for literature : ernest hemingway premio nadal : francisco alcántara , la muerte sienta bien a villalobos prix goncourt : simone de beauvoir , the mandarins pulitzer prize for drama : john patrick , the teahouse of the august moon pulitzer prize for fiction : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : theodore roethke : thewaking queen 's gold medal for poetry : ralph hodgson . references .