Bibliography

etymology . the word was used by greek writers in the first three centuries ce to mean the copying of books by hand . in the 12th century , the word started being used for '' the intellectual activity of composing books . '' the 17th century then saw the emergence of the modern meaning , that of description of books . blum , rudolf . bibliographia , an inquiry into its definition and designations . translated by mathilde v . rovelstad . chicago , ill . : american library association ; folkestone , kent , england : dawson , 1980 . p . 12 . currently , the field of bibliography has expanded to include studies that consider the book as a material object . studies in bibliography . bibliography , in its systematic pursuit of understanding the past and the present through written and printed documents , describes a way and means of extracting information from this material . bibliographers are interested in comparing versions of texts to each other rather than in interpreting their meaning or assessing their significance . o'hagan hardy , m . ( 2017 ) . bibliographic enterprise and the digital age : charles evans and the making of early american literature . american literary history , 29 ( 2 ) , 331-351 . . field of study . bibliography is a specialized aspect of library science ( or library and information science , lis ) and documentation science . it was established by a belgian , named paul otlet ( 1868–1944 ) , who was the founder of the field of documentation , as a branch of the information sciences , who wrote about '' the science of bibliography . '' otlet , p . ( 1903 ) . les sciences bibliographiques et la documentation . bruxelles , institut international de bibliographie . otlet , p . ( 1903 ) . '' the science of bibliography and documentation '' 2 . in rayward , w.b . ( trans . and ed . ) , ( 1990 ) , international organisation and dissemination of knowledge : selected essays of paul otlet . fid , amsterdam : elsevier . however , there have recently been voices claiming that '' the bibliographical paradigm '' is obsolete , and it is not today common in lis . a defence of the bibliographical paradigm was provided by hjørland ( 2007 ) . hjørland , b . ( 2007 ) . '' arguments for 'the bibliographical paradigm ' . some thoughts inspired by the new english edition of the udc '' , information research , 12 ( 4 ) paper colis06 . available at the quantitative study of bibliographies is known as bibliometrics , which is today an influential subfield in lis gow , a . s . f . a . e . housman : a sketch . cambridge : cambridge university press , 2011 . print and is used for major collection decisions such as the cancellation of big deals , through data analysis tools like unpaywall journals . . branches . carter and barker describe bibliography as a twofold scholarly discipline—the organized listing of books ( enumerative bibliography ) and the systematic description of books as physical objects ( descriptive bibliography ) . these two distinct concepts and practices have separate rationales and serve differing purposes . innovators and originators in the field include w . w . greg , fredson bowers , philip gaskell and g . thomas tanselle . bowers ( 1949 ) refers to enumerative bibliography as a procedure that identifies books in “ specific collections or libraries , ” in a specific discipline , by an author , printer , or period of production ( 3 ) . he refers to descriptive bibliography as the systematic description of a book as a material or physical artefact . analytical bibliography , the cornerstone of descriptive bibliography , investigates the printing and all physical features of a book that yield evidence establishing a book 's history and transmission ( feather 10 ) . it is the preliminary phase of bibliographic description and provides the vocabulary , principles and techniques of analysis that descriptive bibliographers apply and on which they base their descriptive practice . descriptive bibliographers follow specific conventions and associated classification in their description . titles and title pages are transcribed in a quasi-facsimile style and representation . illustration , typeface , binding , paper , and all physical elements related to identifying a book follow formulaic conventions , as bowers established in his foundational opus , the principles of bibliographic description . the thought expressed in this book expands substantively on w . w . greg 's groundbreaking theory that argued for the adoption of formal bibliographic principles ( greg 29 ) . fundamentally , analytical bibliography is concerned with objective , physical analysis and history of a book while descriptive bibliography employs all data that analytical bibliography furnishes and then codifies it with a view to identifying the ideal copy or form of a book that most nearly represents the printer 's initial conception and intention in printing . in addition to viewing bibliographic study as being composed of four interdependent approaches ( enumerative , descriptive , analytical , and textual ) , bowers notes two further subcategories of research , namely historical bibliography and aesthetic bibliography . fredson bowers , '' four faces of bibliography '' papers of the bibliographical society of canada 10 ( 1971 ) :33-4 . both historical bibliography , which involves the investigation of printing practices , tools , and related documents , and aesthetic bibliography , which examines the art of designing type and books , are often employed by analytical bibliographers . d . f . mckenzie extended previous notions of bibliography as set forth by greg , bowers , gaskell and tanselle . he describes the nature of bibliography as '' the discipline that studies texts as recorded forms , and the processes of their transmission , including their production and reception '' ( 1999 12 ) . this concept broadens the scope of bibliography to include '' non-book texts '' and an accounting for their material form and structure , as well as textual variations , technical and production processes that bring sociocultural context and effects into play . mckenzie 's perspective contextualizes textual objects or artefacts with sociological and technical factors that have an effect on production , transmission and , ultimately , ideal copy ( 2002 14 ) . bibliography , generally , concerns the material conditions of books as well as other texts how they are designed , edited , printed , circulated , reprinted , collected . philip gaskell , a new introduction to bibliography ( 2000 ) . bibliographic works differ in the amount of detail depending on the purpose and can generally be divided into two categories : enumerative bibliography ( also called compilative , reference or systematic ) , which results in an overview of publications in a particular category and analytical or critical bibliography , which studies the production of books . belanger , terry . '' descriptive bibliography '' bibliographical society of america , 2003 . excerpted from jean peters , ed . , book collecting : a modern guide ( new york and london : r . r . bowker , 1977 ) , 97–101 . harris , neil . analytical bibliography : an alternative prospectus . chapter 1 . definitions of bibliography , and in particular of the variety called analytical . institut d'histoire du livre , 2004 . in earlier times , bibliography mostly focused on books . now , both categories of bibliography cover works in other media including audio recordings , motion pictures and videos , graphic objects , databases , cd-roms harmon , robert b . elements of bibliography : a simplified approach . rev . ed . metuchen , n.j . : scarecrow press , 1989 . p . 4 . and websites . enumerative bibliography . an enumerative bibliography is a systematic list of books and other works such as journal articles . bibliographies range from '' works cited '' lists at the end of books and articles , to complete and independent publications . a notable example of a complete , independent publication is gow 's a . e . housman : a sketch , together with a list of his classical papers ( 1936 ) . as separate works , they may be in bound volumes such as those shown on the right , or computerized bibliographic databases . a library catalog , while not referred to as a '' bibliography , '' is bibliographic in nature . bibliographical works are almost always considered to be tertiary sources . enumerative bibliographies are based on a unifying principle such as creator , subject , date , topic or other characteristic . an entry in an enumerative bibliography provides the core elements of a text resource including a title , the creator ( s ) , publication date and place of publication . belanger ( 1977 ) distinguishes an enumerative bibliography from other bibliographic forms such as descriptive bibliography , analytical bibliography or textual bibliography in that its function is to record and list , rather than describe a source in detail or with any reference to the source 's physical nature , materiality or textual transmission . the enumerative list may be comprehensive or selective . one noted example would be tanselle 's bibliography that exhaustively enumerates topics and sources related to all forms of bibliography . a more common and particular instance of an enumerative bibliography relates to specific sources used or considered in preparing a scholarly paper or academic term paper . citation styles vary . an entry for a book in a bibliography usually contains the following elements : creator ( s ) title place of publication publisher or printer date of publication an entry for a journal or periodical article usually contains : creator ( s ) article title journal title volume pages date of publication a bibliography may be arranged by author , topic , or some other scheme . annotated bibliography give descriptions about how each source is useful to an author in constructing a paper or argument . these descriptions , usually a few sentences long , provide a summary of the source and describe its relevance . reference management software may be used to keep track of references and generate bibliographies as required . bibliographies differ from library catalogs by including only relevant items rather than all items present in a particular library . however , the catalogs of some national library effectively serve as national bibliography , as the national libraries own almost all their countries ' publications . . descriptive bibliography . fredson bowers described and formulated a standardized practice of descriptive bibliography in his principles of bibliographical description ( 1949 ) . scholars to this day treat bowers ' scholarly guide as authoritative . in this classic text , bowers describes the basic function of bibliography as , '' providing sufficient data so that a reader may identify the book described , understand the printing , and recognize the precise contents '' ( 124 ) . descriptive bibliographies as scholarly product . descriptive bibliographies as a scholarly product usually include information on the following aspect of a given book as a material object : format and collation/pagination statement—a conventional , symbolic formula that describes the book block in terms of sheets , folds , quires , signatures , and pages : : : according to bowers ( 193 ) , the format of a book is usually abbreviated in the collation formula : : : : :broadsheet : i° or b.s . or bs . : : : :folio : 2° or fol . : : : :quarto : 4° or 4to or q° or q : : : :octavo : 8° or 8vo : : : :duodecimo : 12° or 12mo : : : :sexto-decimo : 16° or 16mo : : : :tricesimo-secundo : 32° or 32mo : : : :sexagesimo-quarto : 64° or 64mo : : : the collation , which follows the format , is the statement of the order and size of the gatherings . : : : :for example , a quarto that consists of the signed gatherings : : : : ::2 leaves signed a , 4 leaves signed b , 4 leaves signed c , and 2 leaves signed d : : : :would be represented in the collation formula : : : : ::4° : a 2 b-c 4 d 2 binding—a description of the binding techniques ( generally for books printed after 1800 ) title page transcription—a transcription of the title page , including rule lines and ornaments contents—a listing of the contents ( by section ) in the book paper—a description of the physical properties of the paper , including production process , an account of chain-line measurements , and a description of watermarks ( if present ) illustrations—a description of the illustrations found in the book , including printing process ( e.g . woodblock , intaglio , etc . ) , measurements , and locations in the text presswork—miscellaneous details gleaned from the text about its production copies examined—an enumeration of the copies examined , including those copies ' location ( i.e . belonging to which library or collector ) . analytical bibliography . this branch of the bibliographic discipline examines the material features of a textual artefact—such as type , ink , paper , imposition , format , impressions and states of a book—to essentially recreate the conditions of its production . analytical bibliography often uses collateral evidence—such as general printing practices , trends in format , responses and non-responses to design , etc.—to scrutinize the historical conventions and influences underlying the physical appearance of a text . the bibliographer utilizes knowledge gained from the investigation of physical evidence in the form of a descriptive bibliography or textual bibliography . descriptive bibliography is the close examination and cataloging of a text as a physical object , recording its size , format , binding , and so on , while textual bibliography ( or textual criticism ) identifies variations—and the aetiology of variations—in a text with a view to determining '' the establishment of the most correct form of a text '' ( bowers 4981 ) . bibliographers . a bibliographer is a person who describes and lists books and other publications , with particular attention to such characteristics as authorship , publication date , edition , typography , etc . a person who limits such efforts to a specific field or discipline is a subject bibliographer . '' a bibliographer , in the technical meaning of the word , is anyone who writes about books . but the accepted meaning since at least the 18th century is a person who attempts a comprehensive account—sometimes just a list , sometimes a fuller reckoning—of the books written on a particular subject . in the present , bibliography is no longer a career , generally speaking ; bibliographies tend to be written on highly specific subjects and by specialists in the field . the term bibliographer is sometimes—in particular subject bibliographer—today used about certain roles performed in libraries and bibliographic databases . one of the first bibliographers was conrad gessner who sought to list all books printed in latin , greek and hebrew in bibliotheca universalis ( 1545 ) . non-book material . systematic lists of media other than books can be referred to with terms formed analogously to bibliography : discography—recorded music filmography—films webography ( or webliography ) —websites arachniography is a term coined by nasa research historian andrew j . butrica , which means a reference list of urls about a particular subject . it is equivalent to a bibliography in a book . the name derives from arachne in reference to a spider and its web .