Sybaris

geography . strabo and diodorus siculus write that the city was situated close to the sea and lay between the crathis and sybaris rivers ( from which the city derives its name ) . most modern research places the city on a coastal ridge near a wetland lagoon . in the present the rivers are known as the crati and coscile . today the coscile feeds into the crati about five kilometers from its mouth , which then passes just south of the archaeological site of the city . when sybaris was still populated the coscile pursued a direct course into the gulf of taranto , probably at a short distance to the north . the city lay on a plain that was renowned for its fertility . history . foundation in 720 bc . sybaris was founded in 720 & nbsp ; bc according to pseudo-scymnus . strabo mentions it was an achaean colony and that its oekist ( founder ) was is of helike , a city in achaea . aristotle writes the achaeans were accompanied by a number of troezenian citizens , but they were eventually expelled by the more numerous achaeans . according to legend the city was founded by sagaris , the son of oïlean ajax . the authenticity of the name of the oekist is uncertain . strabo is the only source for the name of the oekist , which might be a corruption of sagaris or sybaris . further complicating the issue is the appearance of the letters wiis on coins of paestum . this has been interpreted as a confirmation of strabo 's account because poseidonia is thought to be a colony of sybaris . prosperity in the 7th and 6th century bc . diodorus siculus describes how sybaris had amassed great wealth and a huge population as a result of its fertile farming land and its policy of admitting aliens to its citizenry . he calls it the largest city in italy and states that it had 300,000 inhabitants . this number of inhabitants was certainly exaggerated but sybaris was nonetheless a linchpin of magna graecia . ephorus gives a figure of 100,000 inhabitants , which is perhaps closer to the truth . strabo writes that its inhabitants on the crathis occupied a circuit of fifty stadia ( over . furthermore , he explains that sybaris was a dominant power in the region which ruled over four tribes and twenty-five subject cities . the inhabited area of the city occupied approximately . the oenotrian city pandosia was one of the settlements which seems to have been controlled by sybaris . in the second half of the seventh century bc the sybarites apparently took over the sanctuary of athena on the timpone della motta from the oenotrians . they celebrated large festivals regularly on this hill , which was located 15 kilometers to the northwest of their city . sybaris extended its dominion across the peninsula to the tyrrhenian sea , where it is thought to have founded its colonies paestum , laüs and scidrus . poseidonia was founded in approximately 600 bc , but it is unknown when the latter two colonies were founded . descriptions of the wealth and luxury of sybaris are plenty in the ancient literature . smindyrides was a prominent citizen who is claimed by herodotus to have surpassed all other men in refined luxury . diodorus describes him as the wealthiest suitor for the daughter of cleisthenes of sicyon . he sailed from sybaris to sicyon in a ship of fifty oars manned by his own slaves and surpassed even cleisthenes himself in luxury . athenaeus makes the claim that his entourage consisted of thousand slaves , fisherman , bird-catchers and cooks . however , his information must be false because he claims to cite herodotus , who does not mention such a number . claudius aelianus even alleges that smyndirides could not sleep on a bed of rose petals because it gave him blisters . another sybarite who is known by name is alcimenes . a pseudo-aristotle mentions that it was said he dedicated a very expensive cloak as a votive offering at the temple of lacinian hera . here athenaeus distorts the information too : he treats the story as genuine rather than hearsay and attributes it to the real aristotle . justin mentions an alliance of sybaris with the other achaean colonies metapontum and kroton against the ionian colony siris . this resulted in the conquest of siris in the middle of the sixth century bc . in the second half of the sixth century bc sybaris started minting its first coins , of which the oldest have been dated to approximately 530 bc . these coins employed the achaean weight standard which was shared with the other achaean colonies kroton , caulonia and metapontum . subjugation by kroton in 510/09 bc . diodorus siculus writes that the oligarchy government of the city was overthrown in 510/09 & nbsp ; bc by a popular leader named telys ( herodotus describes him as a tyrant . he persuaded the sybarites to exile the 500 richest citizens and confiscate their wealth . the exiled citizens took refuge at the altars of kroton . telys demanded the krotoniates return the exiles under threat of war . the krotoniates were inclined to surrender the exiles to avoid war , but pythagoras convinced them to protect the suppliants . as a consequence the sybarites marched with 300,000 men upon the krotoniates , whose army led by milo numbered 100,000 . the army sizes given by diodorus ( shared with strabo ) must have been even more exaggerated than the population size . even though they were greatly outnumbered , the krotoniates won the battle and took no prisoners , killing most of the sybarites . after their victory they plundered and razed sybaris . according to strabo either two months or nine days elapsed between the battle and the sack . most likely the sybarites executed telys and his supporters during this time . walter burkert questions the veracity of the account given by diodorus siculus . it would have been illogical for telys to banish his opponents first and then to demand their return . he argues that the elements of the story resemble fictional tragedy . the version of herodotus is more brief and does n't involve pythagoras , but does claim that the krotoniates received help from dorieus . strabo claims that the krotoniates diverted the course of the river crathis to submerge sybaris . the crati transports coarse sand and pebbles in its channel . if strabo 's claim is true , that material would have been deposited as sediment above the city when the river submerged it . an analysis of core samples taken from the site did not find such river deposits directly above the former city . the burial of sybaris more likely resulted from natural processes such as fluvial overbank alluvium . continued struggle with kroton . after its destruction the surviving inhabitants took refuge at their colonies laüs and scidrus . it is assumed some also fled to poseidonia , because in the early fifth century poseidonia 's coins adopted the achaean weight standard and the bull seen on sybarite coins . a . j . graham thinks it was plausible that the number of refugees was large enough for some kind of synoecism to have occurred between the poseidonians and the sybarites , possibly in the form of a sympolity . sybaris was not completely destroyed , as diodorus and strabo claimed , but became a dependent '' ally '' of kroton . '' alliance '' coins show the tripod symbol of kroton on one side and the bull symbol of sybaris on the other side . literary evidence from aristoxenus attests of pythagoreans who apparently moved to sybaris after its subjugation by kroton . diodorus siculus mentions that kroton besieged sybaris again in 476/5 & nbsp ; bc . the sybarites appealed to the tyrant hiero i of syracuse for help . hiero put his brother polyzelos in command of an army to relieve the sybarites , expecting that he would be killed by the krotoniates . polyzelos suspected this , refused to lead the campaign and took refuge with the tyrant theron of acragas . diodorus makes no further mention of hiero 's plan to relieve sybaris , indicating that the sybarites were defeated again . however , according to timaeus and two scholia polyzelos was successful in relieving the siege of sybaris and fled to acragas later when he was accused of plotting revolution . regardless of the results of the siege of 476 & nbsp ; bc , it seems the sybarites had to leave their city at some point between that year and 452/1 & nbsp ; bc . diodorus writes that the sybarites refounded their city at its former site in 452/1 & nbsp ; bc under the leadership of a thessalian . it is thought that poseidonia had a major share in this because the coins of the new city have a great resemblance to those of poseidonia . possibly a treaty of friendship between sybaris , its allies and the serdaioi ( an unknown people ) dates to this new foundation , because poseidonia was the guarantor of this treaty . ultimately the sybarites were again driven off by the krotoniates from their new city in 446/5 & nbsp ; bc . final expulsion in 445 & nbsp ; bc . what happened next is again uncertain . according to diodorus the sybarites requested sparta and athens to help them reoccupy their city . with the help of athens and some other cities in the peloponnese they founded the city of thurii not far from the site of sybaris . soon a conflict arose between the sybarites and the other colonists of thurii over the privileges the sybarites enjoyed . practically all of the sybarites were killed by the other colonists , who were more numerous and powerful . some of the sybarites managed to flee and founded sybaris on the traeis shortly after 444 & nbsp ; bc . the request for help from the sybarites must have been made after the conclusion of the thirty years ' peace in the early spring of 445 & nbsp ; bc , for it would not have made sense to ask for help while sparta and athens were still at war with each other . while diodorus identifies only one expedition for the foundation of thurii , strabo writes that the athenian and other greek colonists first lived in sybaris and only founded thurii after the expulsion of the sybarites . modern scholarship corroborates strabo 's account and identifies two expeditions . in 446/5 & nbsp ; bc athens sent its expedition to reinforce the existing population of sybaris . in the summer of 445 & nbsp ; bc the collision between the two groups led to the downfall of the sybarites . in 444/3 & nbsp ; bc the athenians and other new colonists then turned the city into a new foundation called thurii . the city received a new democratic constitution which made provisions for ten tribes , but which did not include the sybarites . legacy . unlike herodotus , diodorus and earlier ancient greek writers , later authors from the roman period denounced the sybarites . aelianus , strabo and especially athenaeus saw the destruction of sybaris as divine vengeance upon the sybarites for their pride , arrogance , and excessive luxury . athenaeus is the richest source for anecdotes about the sybarites . according to him they invented the chamber pot and pioneered the concept of intellectual property to ensure that cooks could exclusively profit from their signature dishes for a whole year . they always traveled in chariots , but would still take three days for a journey of one day . the roads to villas in the countryside were roofed over and canals transported wine from vineyards to cellars near the sea . a fragment of the comedian metagenes he quotes has a sybarite boasting about literal rivers of food flowing through the city metagenes , testimonia and fragments not only does athenaeus provide a great deal of examples to show the decadence of sybarites , he also argues that their excessive luxury and sins led to their doom . according to athenaeus ambassadors of the sybarites ( one of whom was named amyris ) consulted the pythia , who prophesied that war and internal conflict awaited them if they would honor man more than the gods . later he cites phylarchus , who would have written that the sybarites invoked the anger of hera when they murdered thirty ambassadors from kroton and left them unburied . he also cites herakleides as attributing the divine wrath to the murder of supporters of telys on the altars of the gods . herakleides supposedly mentioned that the sybarites attempted to supplant the olympic games by attracting the athletes to their own public games with greater prizes . the most direct link between luxury and corruption is evident in atheneaus ' anecdote about the defeat of the sybarites : to amuse themselves the sybarite cavalrymen trained their horses to dance to flute music . when the krotoniate army had their flute players make music the horses of the sybarites ran over to the krotoniates along with their riders . strabo gives the '' luxury and insolence '' of the sybarites as the reason for their defeat . claudius aelianus attributes the fall of sybaris to its luxury and the murder of a lutenist at the altar of hera . vanessa gorman gives no credence to these accounts because grave sins followed by divine retribution were stock elements of fictions at the time . furthermore , she and robert gorman point to athenaeus as the origin of the embellished accounts rather than the historians he cited . he altered details of the original accounts , disguised his own contributions as those of past historians and invented new information to fit his argument that luxury leads to catastrophe . this concept was called tryphé and was a popular belief in his time , at the turn of the 2nd century ad . peter green likewise argues that these accounts are most likely the inventions of moralists . he points out the vast natural wealth of the city was the more likely reason it was attacked by kroton . this association of sybaris with excessive luxury transferred to the english language , in which the words '' sybarite '' and '' sybaritic '' have become bywords for opulent luxury and outrageous pleasure seeking . one story , mentioned in samuel johnson 's a dictionary of the english language , alludes to aelianus ' anecdote about smindyrides . it mentions a sybarite sleeping on a bed of rose petals , but unable to get to sleep because one of the petals was folded over . archaeology . the earliest archaeological exploration in the last quarter of the 19th century failed to find the location of sybaris . finding the location was difficult because the site had been buried over time by more than four meters of alluvial sediment from the crati delta . the location of the city was found only after a massive core drilling project had been undertaken from the early to mid-1960s . the archaeological site is located about 2.5 & nbsp ; kilometers west of the present gulf of taranto coastline . the excavations were difficult because the human structures lay below groundwater level . it was found that the later cities of thurii and copia were built partially above sybaris . an archaeological museum was built near the site . see also . list of ancient greek cities . notes .