HMCS Bonaventure

description . initially laid down as hms powerful as part of the second batch of the colossus class during the world war ii , the vessel 's construction was halted following the end of the war and the constructed hull was laid up . powerful was purchased by the royal canadian navy in 1952 and the hull was taken to the harland & wolff shipyard in belfast , northern ireland to be completed to a modernized design of the majestic subclass . the ship measured long overall with a maximum beam of and a draught of . the vessel had a displacement ( ship ) of and at full load . bonaventure was propelled by two geared steam turbines driving two shafts powered by steam from four admiralty boilers rated at . the steam pressure of the engines were rated at . the aircraft carrier had a maximum speed of and carried of fuel oil . the ship had a complement of 1,370 officers and ratings . for additional protection to the magazines , mantlets were placed over them . the aircraft carrier was armed with four twin-mounted /50 calibre mk 33 guns and four single saluting guns . the american 3-inch/50 calibre guns were chosen over 40 mm guns . bonaventure had a distinct appearance compared to her sister ships as she had a tall lattice mast , raked funnel and large sponson where the 3-inch guns were situated . adding to her distinct appearance , was that bonaventure was completed with united states navy radar , specifically the sps-8a height finder and the sps-12 air search radar . aircraft . as part of the modernized design , bonaventure was equipped with three relatively new technologies in relation to her air complement . the majestic subclass ' design allowed for heavier aircraft , those up to landing at , to be launched and recovered . bonaventure improved on that limit , able to land aircraft of up to . the aircraft lifts were enlarged to in order to accommodate larger aircraft . the new design also incorporated an angled flight deck , steam catapults , and optical landing system . the angled flight deck increased the carrier 's landing area without limiting space for aircraft parking and allowed for the removal of antiquated crash barriers . during her service life , bonaventure carried five squadrons . the aircraft carrier 's initial air group was composed of sixteen mcdonnell f2h banshee jet fighters and eight grumman cs2f tracker anti-submarine warfare ( asw ) aircraft . the banshee , flown by vf 870 and vf 871 , and tracker , operated by vs 880 and vs 881 , were flown from bonaventure , along with sikorsky ho4s asw helicopters operated by hs 50 . the banshees were a tight fit , with bonaventure barely able to accommodate them . the trackers did not become fully operational aboard until 1959 . despite this , bonaventure conducted sustained around-the-clock operations , keeping four trackers and two ho4ss in the air at all times , while monitoring an area of . the ho4ss were equipped with dipping sonar and , beginning in 1958 , mark 43 torpedoes . the banshees were retired in 1962 but were not replaced . the ship 's role then changed to one of pure asw and the air wing was modified , dropping the fighters but keeping the eight trackers , and increasing the number of ho4ss to fourteen . in 1963 , the aircraft carrier began a refit in order to allow her operate the new sikorsky chss-2 sea king helicopters , which had been ordered to replace the ho4ss . when bonaventure was retired , her former aircraft continued to operate from shore installations , including cfb shearwater . history . construction and acquisition . the british government ordered a second hull constructed of what would become the majestic class on 16 october 1942 once a dock opened at harland & wolff 's shipyard in belfast , northern ireland . the aircraft carrier 's keel was laid down on 21 november 1943 with the yard number 1229 and the british admiralty chose the name powerful for the ship . powerful was launched on 27 february 1945 . work was suspended in may 1946 following the end of the second world war , and the hull was laid up incomplete at belfast . in 1952 , the royal canadian navy was looking to replace their existing aircraft carrier . on 23 april , the canadian government authorized the expenditure of 21 million to acquire powerful . the royal canadian navy had also been offered a hermes-class aircraft carrier by the united kingdom but found it too costly and two s on loan from the united states navy , also considered too costly . the choice of powerful was made due to cost considerations as well as financial support for the united kingdom . agreement on the purchase of powerful was reached on 29 november but was back-dated to 12 july . work on powerful resumed , this time to a modernized design incorporating recent carrier operation developments , such as the angled flight deck and steam catapults . the design changes cost a further 10 million . other changes that were incorporated were american radar and armament . construction was completed on 17 january 1957 , and the vessel was commissioned into the royal canadian navy at belfast , renamed bonaventure with captain h.v . gross in command . the vessel was christened by the wife of the canadian minister of national defence , ralph campney . early service . bonaventure was named for bonaventure island , a bird sanctuary in the gulf of st . lawrence and was the first aircraft carrier owned outright by canada . initially tasked with trade protection . in march 1957 , the aircraft carrier began trials in the english channel with her aircraft . bonaventure sailed for canada on 19 june and arrived at her home port , halifax , nova scotia , on 26 june , carrying the experimental hydrofoil to canada on her flight deck . in october , the aircraft carrier began further trials with her air group composed of vf 870 ( banshee ) , vs 881 ( tracker ) and one ho4s helicopter in the caribbean sea that lasted until early 1958 . this included cross-deck operations with the royal navy aircraft carrier . on 2 october , a banshee fighter flying from bonaventure to the naval air base cfb shearwater was lost at sea . the resulting search did not find the plane or the pilot . captain william landymore became the ship 's senior officer on 15 january 1958 . on 25 february 1958 , a banshee crashed into the sea after takeoff and the pilot was killed . on 4 march , a banshee suffered another fatal crash , as the aircraft made a normal deck landing , an apparent brake failure caused the fighter to flip over the port side of the aircraft carrier , killing the pilot . later in the year , bonaventure participated in the naval exercises new broom ix and sharp squall iv . during sharp squall iv a banshee was lost off the bow of the ship during takeoff . this time , the pilot was recovered by the destroyer . in november 1958 , while operating off the grand banks of newfoundland , bonaventure and her escorts made contact with a soviet navy submarine while patrolling around a group of russian fishing trawlers . the aircraft carrier ended the year with a visit to the united kingdom before going into refit at saint john , new brunswick . on 12 september 1959 , captain john o'brien took command of the ship . in 1960 , nato reorganized their defence of the north atlantic and the canadian contribution to the new plan centred around an asw hunter-killer group led by bonaventure . the aircraft carrier rejoined the fleet in november 1960 , embarking vf 870 ( banshee ) , vs 880 ( tracker ) and hs 50 ( ho4s ) squadrons . beginning in february 1961 , bonaventure took part in the naval exercise toput droit , followed by a period spent training with the united states atlantic fleet in the summer and further naval exercises in october . captain f.c . frewer took over command of the ship on 30 august 1961 . in april 1962 , bonaventure had her 10,000th deck landing by an aircraft ( a tracker ) . on 30 september 1962 , canada withdrew the banshee fleet and bonaventures mission changed to a purely anti-submarine warfare one . the air group was then composed solely of vs 880 and hs 50 squadrons . on 13 october 1962 , at the onset of the cuban missile crisis , bonaventure and the 1st canadian escort squadron were sailing through united kingdom territorial waters . as the crisis deepened , bonaventure and her escorts were recalled to canada . the ship returned to her homeport following the crisis and in january 1963 , began a refit at saint john . during the refit , the ship was modified for the operation of the sea king helicopters . the aircraft carrier rejoined the fleet in may , but suffered a boiler explosion while in port at halifax . repairs took six weeks to complete . on 7 august , captain robert timbrell took command of the vessel . that year bonaventure took part in the sharp squall naval exercise and in september , participated in testing asw defences in the greenland-iceland gap . that was followed by cross-deck operations with the aircraft carrier . mid-life refit and fate . the 1964 navy estimates called for the major refit of bonaventure in order to extend the aircraft carrier 's service life . while the canadian naval board planned the carrier 's upcoming refit , bonaventure participated in the naval exercise gooey duck which included training off bermuda in january and in february , sailed to the mediterranean sea . while there , bonaventure was recalled to canada to embark troops from the canadian royal 22nd regiment for service in a united nations peacekeeping venture . called operation snow goose , 95 soldiers , 54 vehicles and 400 tons of stores were loaded aboard the aircraft carrier and the ship disembarked them at famagusta , cyprus on 30 march . bonaventure then returned to canada before sailing to norfolk , virginia , for trials with the a-4 skyhawk , a possible replacement for the banshee . however , due to financial considerations , the skyhawk was not purchased . in december , bonaventure began sea trials with the sea king helicopter . in january 1965 , bonaventures air group was composed of vs 880 ( tracker ) , hs 50 ( sea king ) , an ho4s plane guard from hu 21 squadron and a cod tracker from vu 32 squadron . from february to march 1965 , bonaventure took part in naval exercises and in may , visited the united kingdom . on 2 april 1965 , captain henry porter became the commanding officer of the aircraft carrier . in june , bonaventure visited the joint anti-submarine school at derry and took part in joint operations in the southwest approaches with and hnlms karel doorman . the following year in january , bonaventure , along with six escorts , took part in the largest canadian naval activity in the caribbean sea and south american waters . during the exercise , the ship visited rio de janeiro in february and in march , returned to halifax . beginning in april 1966 , the carrier began a mid-life refit at davie shipbuilding in lauzon , quebec . the initial estimate for the refit was 8 million . however , during the refit , numerous issues with the ship , which had been present since construction , were found and led to cost overruns and delays . in the end , the refit took 18 months and cost 17 million , both behind schedule and well over budget . the refit was complete in august 1967 . during her refit , captain a . t . brice became the ship 's commanding officer on 1 august 1966 . bonaventure rejoined the fleet in november 1967 with a new commanding officer , captain r . h . falls , who had taken command on 21 november 1966 . following the 1968 unification of the canadian forces , the royal canadian navy ceased to exist and bonaventure and naval aviation were merged with the rest of the canadian armed forces , with naval aviation no longer under the jurisdiction of the navy . in february 1968 , bonaventure took part in a naval exercise in which a sea king ditched into the sea . the crew were recovered alive and the helicopter was salvaged . in march , the ship visited new orleans , louisiana , before spending the next two months in military exercises . 1969 was spent training with the united states navy and participating in the naval exercise peace keeper off ireland . on 9 april 1969 , captain j . m . cutts became the senior officer aboard the aircraft carrier . bonaventure visited portsmouth before sailing to canada on 22 october 1969 . as the canadian military sought to cut spending , bonaventure was deemed surplus and the last night deck landing took place on 28 october , followed by a visit to boston , massachusetts , before the last deck landing aboard bonaventure took place on 12 december 1969 . a few last missions were left for bonaventure . on 9 january 1970 , captain h . w . vondette became the final commanding officer of bonaventure . in january 1970 , the aircraft carrier ( minus her aircraft ) was sent to carry troops of the royal 22nd regiment to jamaica for training exercises . in february , bonaventure was used as a replenishment oiler to replenish the fuel stores of frigates taking part in exercise maple spring . during this operation , bonaventure had six sea kings of hs 50 aboard . in april the ship was sent to recover canadian forces from narvik , norway , after a military exercise and made a final visit to portsmouth on the way back to canada . bonaventure was decommissioned at halifax on 3 july 1970 , and sold for disposal . the vessel was purchased by tung chen s steel company of taiwan for scrap and broken up in 1971 . components from bonaventure steam catapult were used to rebuild the catapult aboard australian aircraft carrier , another majestic-class carrier . commemoration . bonaventure had two ships ' anchors . one anchor is preserved at point pleasant park in halifax as the bonaventure anchor memorial . the monument was dedicated in 1973 initially to aircrew lost at sea , but later to all naval personnel who died in service . the monument consists of the anchor and chains , along with a small chain running from the monument into the water to make the connection between monument and the sea . the anchor faces the mouth of the harbour . the names of navy and air force personnel who died during peacetime are etched into plaques beside the anchor . her starboard anchor , donated by maritime command on 6 may 1998 , is on display at royal military college saint-jean . her two saluting guns are mounted at in vancouver 's stanley park . the ship 's bell is preserved at the shearwater aviation museum in dartmouth , nova scotia , which also hosts a large model and exhibit about the carrier . . notes . citations . bibliography . . external links . hms powerful royal canadian air force website