1960 in literature

events . february–october – astounding magazine is renamed analog . spring – august derleth launches the poetry magazine , hawk and whippoorwill in the united states . march 22 – joan henry 's play look on tempests is premièred at the comedy theatre in london 's west end , as the first play dealing openly with homosexuality to be passed for performance by the lord chamberlain in britain . april 27 – harold pinter 's play the caretaker is premièred at the arts theatre in london 's west end , transferring to the duchess theatre the following month , where it runs for 444 performances before departing from london for broadway , pinter 's first significant commercial success . alan bates and donald pleasence star in the original production . july 11 – harper lee 's southern gothic bildungsroman to kill a mockingbird is published in the united states . she completes no later novel before her death in 2016 . september 5 – welsh poet waldo williams is imprisoned for six weeks for non-payment of income tax ( a protest against defence spending ) . october 3 – the lilly library is opened on the campus of indiana university bloomington , based on the collections of josiah k . lilly , jr . october 6 and december 16 – dalton trumbo , one of the hollywood ten , receives full screenwriting credit for his work on the films spartacus and exodus , released in the united states on these dates . c . october – vasily grossman submits his novel life and fate ( жизнь и судьба ) for publication , resulting in confiscation of the manuscript and all related material by the kgb in the soviet union . chandler , robert ( 1985 ) . introduction to life and fate . new york review of books classics . p . xv . november – rita rait-kovaleva 's russian translation of the catcher in the rye is published in the soviet literary magazine inostrannaya literatura as над пропастью во ржи ( '' over the abyss in rye '' ) . november 2 – r v penguin books ltd : penguin books is found not guilty of obscenity for publishing lady chatterley 's lover in the united kingdom . november 8 – richard wright delivers a polemical lecture , '' the situation of the black artist and intellectual in the united states '' , to students and members of the american church in paris , a few weeks before his death there from heart attack aged 52 . november 10 – lady chatterley 's lover sells 200,000 copies in one day following its publication in the u.k . since being banned in 1928 . november 17 – michael foot is re-elected to the parliament of the united kingdom and relinquishes the editorship of tribune . november 19 – american novelist norman mailer stabs his wife , the artist adele morales . november 24 – raymond queneau founds oulipo in france . unknown dates dutch mathematician hans freudenthal invents the artificial language lincos , intended for communication with extraterrestrial intelligence . francophone african scholar djibril tamsir niane publishes the novelization soundjata , ou l'epopée du manding in paris , the first extended transcription of the 13th-century epic of sundiata from mandinka oral tradition and its first translation into a western language . . new books . fiction . chinua achebe – no longer at ease j . r . ackerley – we think the world of you kingsley amis – take a girl like you poul anderson – the high crusade lynne reid banks – the l-shaped room stan barstow – a kind of loving john barth – the sot-weed factor hamilton basso – the light infantry ball augusto roa bastos – hijo de hombre charles beaumont – night ride and other journeys robert bloch – pleasant dreams : nightmares algis budrys – rogue moon anthony burgess the doctor is sick the right to an answer dino buzzati – larger than life ( il grande ritratto ) morley callaghan – the many colored coat john dickson carr – in spite of thunder carlo cassola – bébo 's girl ( la ragazza di bube ) louis-ferdinand céline – north ( nord ) agatha christie – the adventure of the christmas pudding barry crump – a good keen man roald dahl – kiss kiss ( short stories ) l . sprague de camp the bronze god of rhodes the glory that was l . sprague de camp and fletcher pratt – wall of serpents carmen de icaza – the house across the street ( la casa de enfrente ) philip k . dick dr . futurity vulcan 's hammer e . l . doctorow – welcome to hard times lawrence durrell – clea ( final volume of the alexandria quartet , begun 1957 ) henry farrell – what ever happened to baby jane ? gabriel fielding – through streets broad and narrow ian fleming – for your eyes only ( james bond short stories ) per anders fogelström – city of my dreams ( mina drömmars stad ) richard gordon – doctor in clover graham greene – a burnt-out case arthur hailey – in high places donald hamilton – death of a citizen wilson harris – palace of the peacock james leo herlihy – all fall down vintilă horia – god was born in exile ( dieu est né en exil ) jabra ibrahim jabra al-ḥurrīyah wa-al-tūfān hunters in a narrow street hammond innes – the doomed oasis greye la spina – invaders from the dark hubert lampo – de komst van joachim stiller ( the coming of joachim stiller ) anna langfus – le sel et le soufre ( salt and suffering ) jean lartéguy – les centurions harper lee – to kill a mockingbird clarice lispector – family ties ( laços de família ) ( short story collection ) david lodge – the picturegoers john masters – the venus of konpara richard matheson – the beardless warriors judith merrill – the tomorrow people walter m . miller – a canticle for leibowitz nancy mitford – do n't tell alfred alberto moravia – la noia ( the empty canvas ) edna o'brien – the country girls flannery o'connor – the violent bear it away scott o'dell – island of the blue dolphins wilder penfield – the torch frederik pohl – drunkard 's walk anthony powell – casanova 's chinese restaurant james h . schmitz – agent of vega nevil shute ( posthumously ) – trustee from the toolroom clark ashton smith – the abominations of yondo muriel spark – the ballad of peckham rye alan sillitoe – the general david storey – this sporting life rex stout three at wolfe 's door too many clients william styron – set this house on fire john updike – rabbit , run irving wallace – the chapman report john edward williams – butcher 's crossing raymond williams – border country john wyndham – trouble with lichen . children and young people . hans baumann – ich zog mit hannibal ( i marched with hannibal , 1961 ) sheila burnford – the incredible journey p . d . eastman – are you my mother ? michael ende – jim button and luke the engine driver ( jim knopf und lukas der lokomotivführer ) alan garner – the weirdstone of brisingamen jean craighead george – my side of the mountain rumer godden – candy floss elinor lyon – cathie runs wild scott o'dell – island of the blue dolphins georges prosper remi ( as hergé ) – tintin au tibet ( book publication ) dr . seuss green eggs and ham one fish two fish red fish blue fish barbara sleigh – carbonel series maría elena walsh la mona jacinta la familia polillal tutú marambá . drama . arthur adamov – le printemps '71 ( spring 1871 ) tawfiq al-hakim – el sultan el-ha'er ( the sultan perplexed ) edward albee – the death of bessie smith and the sandbox ( first performances ) samuel beckett – the old tune ( first broadcast ) robert bolt – a man for all seasons ( stage version ) and the tiger and the horse marc camoletti – boeing-boeing noël coward – waiting in the wings beverley cross – strip the willow witold gombrowicz – the marriage ( ślub , first performance ) eugène ionesco – rhinocéros ira levin – critic 's choice stephen lewis and theatre workshop – sparrers ca n't sing bruce mason – the end of the golden weather tad mosel – all the way home harold pinter the caretaker ( first performed and published ) the room ( first professional performance ) a night out ( first broadcast ) terence rattigan – ross barry reckord – you in your small corner nelson rodrigues – beijo no asfalto ( the asphalt kiss ) wole soyinka – a dance of the forests gore vidal – the best man maruxa vilalta – ( the disoriented ones ) keith waterhouse and willis hall – billy liar orson welles ( adaptation ) – chimes at midnight tennessee williams – period of adjustment . poetry . douglas livingstone – the skull in the mud sylvia plath – the colossus and other poems alan sillitoe – the rats and other poems jan twardowski – znaki ufności . non-fiction . joy adamson – born free kingsley amis – new maps of hell philippe ariès – centuries of childhood ( l'enfant et la vie familiale sous l'ancien régime ) peg bracken – the i hate to cook book albert camus ( posthumously ) – resistance , rebellion , and death ( selected essays ) aimé césaire – toussaint louverture : la révolution française et le problème colonial jean-paul desbiens – les insolences du frère untel ( the insolences of brother anonymous ) hans-georg gadamer – truth and method ( wahrheit und methode ) john howard griffin – black like me helen keller – light in my darkness arthur koestler – the lotus and the robot jessica mitford – hons and rebels a . s . neill – summerhill ( book ) louis pauwels and jacques bergier – the morning of the magicians ( le matin des magiciens ) r . c . majumdar – an advanced history of india jean-paul sartre – critique of dialectical reason ( critique de la raison dialectique ) william l . shirer – the rise and fall of the third reich h . h . smythe and m . m . smythe – the new nigerian elite w . t . stace – the teachings of the mystics elie wiesel – night ( la nuit , 1958 ) . births . january 18 – mark rylance , english actor and theater director january 23 – andré verbart , dutch poet january 28 – robert von dassanowsky , austrian-american historian and academic february 19 – helen fielding , english novelist and screenwriter march 8 – jeffrey eugenides , american fiction writer april 28 – ian rankin , scottish crime novelist april 29 – andrew miller , english novelist may 4 – kate saunders , english author and children 's writer may 21 – john o'brien , american novelist ( died 1994 ) june 2 – julie myerson , english novelist and columnist july 13 – ian hislop , welsh-born satirist august 4 – tim winton , australian novelist october 2 – joe sacco , maltese-born graphic author october 18 – hồ anh thái , vietnamese author november 10 – neil gaiman , english author december 10 – kenneth branagh , northern irish actor and screenwriter unknown dates malcolm pryce , anglo-welsh detective novelist alexis stamatis , greek novelist , playwright and poet d . j . taylor , english literary critic and biographer . deaths . january 4 – albert camus , french pied-noir novelist ( car accident , born 1913 ) january 9 – elsie j . oxenham ( elsie jeanette dunkerley ) , english girls ' story writer ( born 1880 ) january 12 – nevil shute , english-born novelist ( stroke , born 1899 ) january 14 – ralph chubb , english poet , printer and artist ( born 1892 ) january 28 – zora neale hurston , african-american anthropologist and author ( born 1891 ) may 30 – boris pasternak , russian novelist , poet and translator ( born 1890 ) july 27 leonora eyles , english feminist writer and novelist ( born 1889 ) ethel lilian voynich , anglo-irish novelist and composer ( born 1864 ) july 28 – kassian bogatyrets , rusyn priest , politician and historian ( born 1868 ) august 19 – frances cornford , english poet ( born 1886 ) august 29 – vicki baum , austrian-born novelist writing in german and english ( born 1888 ) october 31 – h . l . davis , american fiction writer and poet ( born 1894 ) november 20 – ya'akov cohen , russian-born israeli poet ( born 1881 ) november 28 – richard wright , african-american novelist and poet ( born 1908 ) december 26 – tetsuro watsuji ( 和辻 哲郎 ) , japanese philosopher and historian of ideas ( born 1889 ) . awards . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for criticism : e . b . white carnegie medal for children 's literature : ian wolfran cornwall , the making of man eric gregory award : christopher levenson james tait black memorial prize for fiction : rex warner , imperial caesar james tait black memorial prize for biography : canon adam fox , the life of dean inge kate greenaway medal : gerald rose , old winkle and the seagulls miles franklin award : elizabeth o'conner , the irishman newbery medal for children 's literature : joseph krumgold , onion john nobel prize for literature : saint-john perse premio nadal : ramiro pinilla , ciegas hormigas pulitzer prize for drama : jerome weidman , george abbott for book , jerry bock for music , and sheldon harnick for lyrics , fiorello ! pulitzer prize for fiction : allen drury , advise and consent pulitzer prize for poetry : w . d . snodgrass , heart 's needle queen 's gold medal for poetry : john betjeman . references .