Baildon

economy . baildon has a modest town centre with most everyday amenities including independent traders , estate agents and family law solicitors . there is a co-op supermarket and a small tesco on the outskirts . the centre is home to many independent shops including pickles delicatessen , westgate general stores , seasons home , finesse gifts and baildon interiors . there are also several independently owned hair dressers and beauty salons and a variety of restaurants and take-aways . there are some eight public houses and bars in baildon . . charlestown . charlestown in south east baildon is the area of baildon with the highest concentration of industry . the area is in the valley bottom between otley road and the river aire , and includes the acorn park industrial estate and the butterfield industrial estate . notable companies established in charlestown include manor coating systems and denso marston radiators . further north east in charlestown there are plans for a 'baildon business park ' and hotel on a green field site near buck lane , at a cost of £25 & nbsp ; million but there is opposition to the move . ; another industrial area is the tong park industrial estate off otley road in eastern baildon . landmarks . one & nbsp ; of & nbsp ; the main monuments in baildon is the frances ferrand memorial fountain , known locally as the 'potted meat stick ' . this was built by baron amphlett of somerset as a memorial to his mother-in-law , frances ferrand . it still stands today to the eastern side of browgate . in 1925 the monument was put at threat when plans were produced to replace in with a bus terminus . in the 1960s the monument was removed and dismantled ; however , in 1986 the mechanics institute raised funds to take it out of storage and restore it . to the north of towngate roundabout in front of glendale house is a concrete paved open area created in the 1960s containing what remains of the stocks and a sandstone pillar thought to be the remains of a mediaeval cross , both grade ii listed . on glen road on the edge of baildon moor , close to shipley glen , is bracken hall countryside centre and museum , a free-to-visit children 's museum , natural history education centre and nature centre . baildon 's war memorials are situated on browgate and in tong park . north of upper coach road in shipley is shipley glen tramway , a narrow-gauge funicular railway . the railway takes passengers between the valley floor near titus salt school to the bottom of prod lane , a short walking distance from shipley glen . ; ; ; . churches . the church of st . & nbsp ; james in charlestown is a painted tongue and groove timber building , now a grade & nbsp ; ii listed building . it was moved to baildon from great warley , essex in 1905 . the reverend n . & nbsp ; r . & nbsp ; bailey , rector of great warley , had property in baildon and hoped to retire there . however his obituary was published in november 1900 before he retired . in 2007/2008 the church was moved again , but only by a few yards . this allowed the surrounding land to be sold by the diocese for development . rotten timbers were replaced and underground heat pump system installed to make the building more eco-friendly . the church of st . john the evangelist designed by mallinson & healey , was built in 1848 though the south tower was not added until 1928 . the east window designed by powell & sons was added in 1870 . ; . transport . the village is served by baildon railway station on the electrified wharfedale line with connections to bradford forster square and ilkley . there is however , no service to leeds owing to its position on the curve between the two lines . passengers must instead change at shipley or the nearby guiseley ( shipley having more services ) . baildon is served by the west yorkshire metro 626 , 649 , and 656–659 first and yorkshire tiger bus services . the main road through baildon is the a6038 road while the b6151 baildon road / brow gate goes the short distance from otley road up to browgate roundabout . education . there were a large number of first and middle schools in the area , including fernihurst first school , tong park first school , belmont middle school & ladderbanks middle school , before the 1998 bradford education reform which returned the area to a two-tier school system . currently , there are four local primary schools : sandal primary school to the north on west lane , baildon church of england school to the east off langley lane , hoyle court primary school in charlestown and glenaire primary school to the south on thompson lane . the nearest secondary school for the area is titus salt school on higher coach road , overlooking roberts park , saltaire . there is dispute as to which town the school actually is in , some classing it as baildon and some as saltaire . sport . within baildon there are sports clubs for cricket , football , golf , rugby and running . ; ; ; ; . culture and events . for nearly a quarter of a century the bank holiday weekend saw over 500 harley-davidson riders arrive in baildon as part of the annual uk rally of the harley-davidson riders club of great britain fundraising rally . the hdrcgb ran the rally up to 2001 when it moved to berkshire . in 2003 , harley-davidson 's centenary year , the hdrcgb hosted the event for the last time in baildon . the rally is now organised by the shipley harley-davidson club . in 2008 430 riders were given a police escort down browgate towards hollins hill , from where most riders travelled to harewood house . cultural references . . film and television . billy liar ( 1963 ) – locations : midland road ; hinchliffe avenue ( number 37 is the fisher household ) monty python 's the meaning of life ( 1983 ) – locations : baildon moor damon & debbie ( 1987 ) – locations : st anne 's terrace ; threshfield rita , sue & bob too ( 1987 ) – locations : bramham drive ( number 5 is bob 's house ) ; baildon moor ; baildon village . where the heart is ( 1997 ) – locations : ferniehurst first school , cliffe lane west & baildon green . music . british music duo aquilo ( band ) refer to baildon in their 2015 song good girl baildon moor is mentioned in the song ls43 by new model army baildon orchestra is an amateur orchestra which was formed in the mid 1940s and still meets on a weekly basis throughout the year . website baildonorchestra.weebly.com . notable people . zayn malik from the band one direction grew up in east bowling . the late journalist and countdown tv game show presenter richard whiteley was a native of baildon , and austin mitchell , labour mp for great grimsby from 1977 until 2015 , was born in baildon . mountaineer ian clough was born in baildon . after he was killed on an expedition to the himalayan mountain annapurna in 1970 , ian clough hall , a meeting-place and arts venue , was established in baildon in his memory . in the 1960s , clough and close friend chris bonington were known to have practised their climbing techniques on baildon bank - a , , ex-quarry rock-face that looks out towards bradford . in 1962 , clough and bonington were the first britons to successfully scale the treacherous north face of the eiger in the swiss alps . former football goalkeeper bert hoyle was also born in baildon . coventry city football manager aidy boothroyd and veteran sports television commentator john helm are from baildon . ex-yorkshire & england cricket captain brian close , born in nearby rawdon , settled in the village , and died there in 2015 after a long battle with cancer . ex-yorkshire and england cricket fast bowler matthew hoggard , though originally from pudsey , has lived in baildon for some years and is a member of baildon cricket club . england rugby player dan scarbrough currently resides in baildon . see also . listed buildings in baildon