Cockpit

etymology . the word cockpit seems to have been cockpit ( sailing ) in the 17th century , without reference to cock fighting . it referred to an area in the rear of a ship where the cockswain 's station was located , the cockswain being the pilot of a smaller '' boat '' that could be dispatched from the ship to board another ship or to bring people ashore . the word '' cockswain '' in turn derives from the old english terms for '' boat-servant '' ( coque is the french word for '' shell '' ; and swain was old english for boy or servant ) . roderick bailey the midshipmen and master 's mates were later berthed in the cockpit , and it served as the action station for the ship 's surgeon and his mates during battle . thus by the 18th century , '' cockpit '' had come to designate an area in the rear lower deck of a warship where the wounded were taken . the same term later came to designate the place from which a sailing vessel is steered , because it is also located in the rear , and is often in a well or '' pit '' . oxford english dictionary online , cockpit . s . a . cavell however , a convergent etymology does involve reference to cockfight . according to the barnhart concise dictionary of etymology , the buildings in london where the king 's cabinet worked ( the treasury and the privy council ) were called the '' cockpit '' because they were built on the site of a theater called the cockpit ( torn down in 1635 ) , which itself was built in the place where a '' cockpit '' for cock-fighting had once stood prior to the 1580s . thus the word cockpit came to mean a control center . robert barnhart , barnhart concise dictionary of etymology , new york : harper collins , 1995 . the original meaning of '' cockpit '' , first attested in the 1580s , is '' a pit for fighting cocks '' , referring to the place where cockfights were held . this meaning no doubt influenced both lines of evolution of the term , since a cockpit in this sense was a tight enclosure where a great deal of stress or tension would occur . from about 1935 , cockpit came to be used informally to refer to the driver 's cabin , especially in high performance cars , david levinson and karen christensen and this is official terminology used to describe the compartment that the driver occupies in a formula one car . in an airliner , the cockpit is usually referred to as the flight deck , the term deriving from its use by the raf for the separate , upper platform in large flying boats where the pilot and co-pilot sat . by david d . allyn in the us and many other countries , however , the term cockpit is also used for airliners . the seat of a powerboat racing craft is also referred to as the cockpit . bob wartinger . ergonomics . the first airplane with an enclosed cabin appeared in 1912 on the avro type f ; however , during the early 1920s there were many passenger aircraft in which the crew remained open to the air while the passengers sat in a cabin . military biplanes and the first single-engined fighters and attack aircraft also had open cockpits , some as late as the second world war when enclosed cockpits became the norm . the largest impediment to having closed cabins was the material used to make the windows . prior to perspex becoming available in 1933 , windows were either safety glass , which was heavy , or nitrocellulose , which yellowed quickly and was extremely flammable . in the mid-1920s many aircraft manufacturers began using enclosed cockpits for the first time . early airplanes with closed cockpits include the 1924 fokker f.vii , the 1926 german junkers w 34 transport , the 1926 ford trimotor , the 1927 lockheed vega , the spirit of st . louis and the passenger aircraft manufactured by the douglas and boeing companies during the mid-1930s . open-cockpit airplanes were almost extinct by the mid-1950s , with the exception of training planes , crop-dusters and homebuilt aircraft designs . cockpit windows may be equipped with a sun shield . most cockpits have windows that can be opened when the aircraft is on the ground . nearly all glass windows in large aircraft have an anti-reflective coating , and an internal heating element to melt ice . smaller aircraft may be equipped with a transparent aircraft canopy . in most cockpits the pilot 's control column or joystick is located centrally ( centre stick ) , although in some military fast jets the side-stick is located on the right hand side . in some commercial airliners ( i.e . : airbus—which features the glass cockpit concept ) both pilots use a side-stick located on the outboard side , so captain 's side-stick on the left and first-officer 's seat on the right . except for some helicopters , the right seat in the cockpit of an aircraft is the seat used by the co-pilot . the captain or pilot in command sits in the , so that they can operate the throttles and other pedestal instruments with their handedness . the tradition has been maintained to this day , with the co-pilot on the right hand side . the layout of the cockpit , especially in the military fast jet , has undergone standardisation , both within and between aircraft , manufacturers and even nations . an important development was the '' basic six '' pattern , later the '' basic t '' , developed from 1937 onwards by the royal air force , designed to optimise pilot instrument scanning . human factors and ergonomics concerns are important in the design of modern cockpits . the layout and function of cockpit displays controls are designed to increase pilot situation awareness without causing information overload . in the past , many cockpits , especially in fighter aircraft , limited the size of the pilots that could fit into them . now , cockpits are being designed to accommodate from the 1st percentile female physical size to the 99th percentile male size . in the design of the cockpit in a military fast jet , the traditional '' knobs and dials '' associated with the cockpit are mainly absent . instrument panels are now almost wholly replaced by electronic displays , which are themselves often re-configurable to save space . while some hard-wired dedicated switches must still be used for reasons of integrity and safety , many traditional controls are replaced by multi-function re-configurable controls or so-called '' soft keys '' . controls are incorporated onto the stick and throttle to enable the pilot to maintain a head-up and eyes-out position – the hands on throttle and stick or hotas concept , . these controls may be then further augmented by control media such as head pointing with a helmet-mounted display or direct voice input ( dvi ) . advances in auditory displays allow for direct voice output of aircraft status information and for the spatial localisation of warning sounds for improved monitoring of aircraft systems . the layout of control panels in modern airliners has become largely unified across the industry . the majority of the systems-related controls ( such as electrical , fuel , hydraulics and pressurization ) for example , are usually located in the ceiling on an overhead panel . radios are generally placed on a panel between the pilot 's seats known as the pedestal . automatic flight controls such as the autopilot are usually placed just below the windscreen and above the main instrument panel on the glareshield . a central concept in the design of the cockpit is the design eye position or '' dep '' , from which point all displays should be visible . most modern cockpits will also include some kind of bitching betty . in a 2013 comparative study of a number of novel methods for cockpit-user interaction , touchscreen produced the largest number of '' best scores '' . stanton , n . a . , harvey , c . , plant , k . l . and bolton , l . , 2013 , '' to twist , roll , stroke or poke . a study of input devices for menu navigation in the cockpit '' , ergonomic abstracts , vol . 56 ( 4 ) , pp . 590–611 . flight instruments . in the modern electronic cockpit , the electronic flight instruments usually regarded as essential are mfd , pfd , nd , eicas , fms/cdu and back-up instruments . mfd . a multi-function display , usually a long narrow panel located centrally in front of the pilot , may be used to control heading , speed , altitude , vertical speed , vertical navigation and lateral navigation . it may also be used to engage or disengage both the autopilot and the autothrottle . the panel as an area is usually referred to as the '' glareshield panel '' . mfd is a boeing designation ( that has been informally adopted as a generic name for the unit/panel ) for a unit that allows for the selection and parameter setting of the different autoflight functions , the same unit on an airbus aircraft is referred to as the fcu ( flight control unit ) . pfd . the primary flight display is usually located in a prominent position , either centrally or on either side of the cockpit . it will in most cases include a digitized presentation of the attitude indicator , air speed and altitude indicators ( usually as a tape display ) and the vertical speed indicator . it will in many cases include some form of heading indicator and ils/vor deviation indicators . in many cases an indicator of the engaged and armed autoflight system modes will be present along with some form of indication of the selected values for altitude , speed , vertical speed and heading . it may be pilot selectable to swap with the nd . nd . a navigation display , which may be adjacent to the pfd , shows the route and information on the next waypoint , wind speed and wind direction . it may be pilot selectable to swap with the pfd . eicas/ecam . the engine indication and crew alerting system ( used for boeing ) or electronic centralized aircraft monitor ( for airbus ) will allow the pilot to monitor the following information : values for n1 , n2 and n3 , fuel temperature , fuel flow , the electrical system , cockpit or cabin temperature and pressure , control surfaces and so on . the pilot may select display of information by means of button press . fms . the flight management system/control unit may be used by the pilot to enter and check for the following information : flight plan , speed control , navigation control , and so on . back-up instruments . in a less prominent part of the cockpit , in case of failure of the other instruments , there will be a battery-powered integrated standby instrument system along with a magnetic compass , showing essential flight information such as speed , altitude , attitude and heading . aerospace industry technologies . in the u.s . the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) have researched the ergonomic aspects of cockpit design and have conducted investigations of airline industry accidents . cockpit design disciplines include cognitive science , neuroscience , human–computer interaction , human factors engineering , anthropometry and ergonomics . aircraft designs have adopted the fully digital '' glass cockpit '' . in such designs , instruments and gauges , including navigational map displays , use a user interface markup language known as arinc 661 . this standard defines the interface between an independent cockpit display system , generally produced by a single manufacturer , and the avionics equipment and user applications it is required to support , by means of displays and controls , often made by different manufacturers . the separation between the overall display system , and the applications driving it , allows for specialization and independence .