Tattoo machine

history . the predecessor to the tattoo machine was the electric pen invented by thomas alva edison and patented under the title stencil-pens in newark , new jersey , united states in 1876 . it was originally intended to be used as a duplicating device , but in 1891 , samuel o'reilly discovered that edison 's machine could be modified and used to introduce ink into the skin , and later patented a tube and needle system to provide an ink reservoir . while o'reilly 's machine was based on the tattoo rotary technology of edison 's device , modern tattoo machines use electromagnets . the first machine based on this technology was a single coil machine patented by thomas riley of london , just twenty days after o'reilly filed the patent for his rotary machine . for his machine , riley placed a modified doorbell assembly in a brass box . the modern two-coil configuration was patented by alfred charles south , also of london . because it was so heavy , a spring was often attached to the top of the machine and the ceiling to take most of the weight off the operator 's hand . ″to move tattooing forward , german tattoo artist manfred kohrs had to take a look backward.″ in 1978 kohrs '' introduced the first new design for a rotary machine in nearly a century . his machine was functionally similar to o ’ reilly ’ s except an electric dc motor , rather than electrified magnets , drove the needles . this slimmer and streamlined version became lighter , quieter , and more portable . it also gave artists more control while ensuring the operator ’ s hands and fingers cramped less . while some artists gravitated to this rotary revival , others preferred to stick with their trusty coil machines . '' courtney linder : getting ink : the entire history of tattooing popularmechanics.com 7 . february 2021 . tattoo nation - tattoo magazine , issue 1 , july 10 2014 , page 35/64 tattoo nation nepal 's first tattoo magazine - july 2014 , issue 1 , page 35 . most modern tattoo machines can control needle depth , speed , and force of application , which has allowed tattooing to become a very precise art form . such advances in precision have also produced a style of facial tattooing that has attained mainstream popularity in america called dermapigmentation , or '' permanent makeup '' creating results such as addition/removal of freckles , beauty spots and scars . gallery . image : pat196747.png thumb 180px , stencil-pens image : set - rotary gun 1978 k - manfred kohrs.jpg thumb 180px rotary-set „ kohrs 1978 “ image : tattoo maschine nadel.jpg thumb 120px manfred kohrs 1978 - rotary tattoo machine image : dermographe.jpg thumb 120px two-coil tattoo machine . classification . there are many types of machines . liners and shaders are the more common machines from a technical standpoint . mechanically , there are coil tattoo machines ; also pneumatic machines , and rotary , or linear , tattoo machines . rotary tattoo machines were the original machines , based on rotary technology , which was invented by samuel o'reilly and improved by the tattoo artists through the years . rotary type machines use an electric motor to drive the needles . some recent upgrades include using an armature bar to increase efficiency , a characteristic of coil machines . john reardon : the complete idiot 's guide to getting a tattoo . penguin 2008 , , p . & nbsp ; 70 . recently , there have been improvements to make this type of machine pneumatic , in place of the electric motor used now . coil tattoo machines are the most commonly seen and used . these machines use an electromagnetic circuit to move the needle grouping . there are many variations , from single-coiled machines to triple-coiled machines . they can be made from many different materials and in many different sizes and shapes . dual-coiled machines are considered to be standard . the coils generally range from 8 to 10 wrap . the coils create the impedance , or resistance , used to properly regulate the machine 's speed and power . this causes less trauma to the skin . c . r . jordan : basic fundamentals of modern tattoo : tattoo apprentice basics . tattoo books online llc 2009 , . liner tattoo machine : the purpose of a liner machine is to lay the ink in the skin in one single pass to create a dominant line . it uses a short contact circuit ( about 1.5mm–2mm ) , which causes the machine to cycle faster . shader tattoo machine : the shader machine is commonly used to shade black or variants of black ink , though colors other than black are also used in this type of machine . the saturation level of this machine is low . it uses a bigger contact gap than a liner ( about 2mm–3.5mm ) to make it cycle slightly slower . this machine is also used for sculpting lines . some artists will use this type of machine for all lines , as it allows the lines to be retraced with less trauma to the skin . pneumatic tattoo machine : tattoo artist carson hill in the year 2000 invented the first pneumatic tattoo machine and began the patent process . a pneumatic tattoo machine is powered by an air compressor and is extremely lightweight . pneumatic tattoo machines use pressurized air to drive the needles up and down . margo demello : inked : tattoos and body art around the world . abc-clio 2014 , , p . & nbsp ; 370 . these tattoo machines are easily sterilised as the entire machine can be placed in an autoclave without any major disassembly ( unlike traditional coil machines which require complete disassembly before being placed in an autoclave ) . according to tattoo artist , it did n't live up to its hype . tattoo machines are not limited to just these types . a common variant is having a '' cutback '' , which uses stiffer front springs . this is more commonly used in liners , but is known to be used on shader machines , more typically for portrait work . machines are usually categorized into long stroke and short stroke varieties . the longer-stroked machines are good for coloring and shading , as well as sculpting lines , while doing less damage to clients ' skin . shorter-stroke machines are commonly used for lining in a single pass style , and also in a shader setup to achieve a more subtle gradation of black such as would be found in portraits . length , width , tension , angle , and stiffness of the spring varies the functionality of the machine . the contact gaps , as well as capacitors and even the style of machine and its angles of deflection , can also all be variants in machine tuning . the proper tuning of the machine is essential for the type of machine being used , also for the type of tattoo the artist is doing . selected bibliography . victoria groß : hautgravuren – zur individualisierung des körpers . grin verlag 2006 , . anne fuest : die tätowierung – geschichte und bedeutung in afrika und deutschland : eine kulturanthropologische untersuchung . grin verlag 2008 , . matthias friederich : tätowierungen in deutschland : eine kultursoziologische untersuchung . band 14 von quellen und forschungen zur europäischen ethnologie , königshausen & neumann 1993 , . erick alayon : the craft of tattooing . createspace independent publishing platform 2006 , . references .