Aguascalientes City

education . eight out of the 100 best colleges in mexico are in aguascalientes . there are 25 universities and colleges for only 1 million inhabitants . this ranks as first place per capita in mexico . the escuela japonesa de aguascalientes ( アグアスカリエンテス日本人学校 aguasukarientesu nihonjin gakkō ) , an nihonjin gakko , is in aguascalientes . '' home . '' escuela japonesa de aguascalientes . retrieved on may 10 , 2014 . '' avenida del lago 161 , jardines del parque , aguascalientes , ags , c.p.20276 , mexico '' as of 2013 , the city contains 59 primary schools and 13 junior high schools . '' visita a la escuela japonesa de aguascalientes '' ( archive ) . la jornada aguascalientes . retrieved on october 1 , 2013 . . transport . cycling . aguascalientes is known as one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in mexico . the municipality is also developing a system of interconnected green bicycle routes , greenways , the aim being to facilitate fast , safe , and pleasant bicycle transport from one end of the city to the other . . roads . aguascalientes has a large network of roads connecting different municipalities of the city together and to other cities . airport . lic . jesús terán peredo international airport serves the city , with four daily non-stop international flights from los angeles , dallas and houston . urban development . aguascalientes is a strategically planned city , having been pioneers in urban development regulation since 1936 . the city is planned around three beltway loops , which is unique in mexico . the third beltway loop will be fully operational in 2022 . . fiber optic infrastructure . aguascalientes has the same fiber-optic and voice/data communication infrastructure as mexico city , guadalajara , and monterrey . . culture and recreation . , which takes place from the middle of april to the beginning of may . the celebration was held originally in the san marcos church , neighborhood , and its magnificent neoclassical garden ; since then , it has greatly expanded to cover a huge area of exposition spaces , bullrings , nightclubs , theaters , performance stages , theme parks , hotels , convention centers , and other attractions . it attracts almost 7 million visitors to aguascalientes every year . the old part of the city revolves around downtown and the four original neighborhoods from which the city expanded . the most notable building here is the baroque government palace , dating from 1664 and constructed out of red volcanic stone ; it is known for its one hundred arches . the prominent baroque cathedral , begun in 1575 , is the oldest building in the city . the tall column in the center of the main square dates from colonial times ; it held a statue of a spain 's viceroy , which was toppled when the country gained independence ; the current sculpture on its summit commemorates mexican independence . neighborhoods and tradition . the city of aguascalientes is made up of four traditional neighborhoods , all of which grew up around the central plaza de la patria : guadalupe , san marcos , el encino and la estación . the neighborhood of guadalupe , a traditional producer of pottery , centers around its local temple . located in the heart of guadalupe , this religious sanctuary , the second most important in the city and dating back to the late 18th century , has a baroque façade and a large dome covered in traditional talavera tiles . inside it has many flower and angel motifs . the next is san marcos , founded in 1604 and once home to natives of tlaxcala state who fled persecution . today , the area hosts the traditional san marcos fair in springtime . there is san marcos gardens , a charming green spot where paths and trees are abundant . the gardens are traditionally frequented by poets , artists and lovers on lazy afternoons . directly in front of the gardens , you 'll see the baroque san marcos temple , its tiled dome glinting in the sun . in el encino or la triana , head for the encino gardens with their tile-decorated central fountain is full of tranquility . while in the area , the josé guadalupe posada museum – showcasing the work of an extraordinary cartoonist and engraver born in aguascalientes – is well worth a visit . the museum houses two permanent exhibition rooms and another for temporary exhibitions . last but not least , the neighborhood of la estación takes its name from the old railway station , inaugurated in 1911 and one of aguascalientes ' architectural and historical treasures . aguascalientes historic downtown is home to several outstanding museums including the aguascalientes museum ( museo de aguascalientes ) , the city 's art museum , housed in a classical-style building designed by the beloved self-trained architect refugio reyes ; the guadalupe posada museum ( museo guadalupe posada ) , located in the historic nationhood of triana , exhibits the life and work of josé guadalupe posada ; and the state history museum , which is housed in an elegant art nouveau mansion typical of the porfirian period with and ornate patio and dining room with vegetable motifs in a mediterranean style , with a french academism façade , and interior columns and an arcade of pink stone characteristic of porfirian eclecticism . , a renowned architect of the period considered to be one of the most famous artists in mexico in the 1770s . the camarin of the immaculate in the church of san diego is considered by historians to be the last baroque building in the world ; it links the baroque and neoclassical styles ; it is the largest of the fewer than ten of these type of structures built in the whole continent . aguascalientes is also home to some of the country 's leading provincial theaters . examples are the morelos theater , historically important for its role during the mexican revolution as a convention site ; architecturally , the building is notable for its facade and interior , which houses a small museum . the teatro aguascalientes is the city 's premier theatre and opera house . is the city 's art museum . the gothic structure of the los arquitos cultural center used to be one of the first bathhouses in the city , declared a historic monument in 1990 . the ojocaliente is also an original bathhouse still in use today , and fed with thermal springs . la estacion historic area ( the old train station complex ) contains the old train station and railway museum historic complex , which at some point in 1884 formed the largest rail hub and warehouses in all latin america . the complex is adorned with dancing fountains , a railway plaza and original locomotives and monuments . it was in this complex that the first locomotive completely manufactured in mexico was made . it symbolizes the progress of the city and its transformation from the rural to an emergent industrial economy . the rail factories supplied with railways and locomotives to whole of mexico and central america . the train station is also historic due to its unusual ( for mexico ) english architectural style . the alameda avenue , the railway hangars , the factory complexes , and its surrounding housing have been proposed to be placed in the list of unesco world heritage sites . media . radio . metroaguascalientes was one of the radio stations for the city of aguascalientes . television state-owned radio y televisión de aguascalientes ( ryta ) offers local programming as well as news shows . notable residents . william yarbrough , mexican-born american soccer player who plays for liga mx club león and the united states national team wendolly esparza , american-born mexican television personality best known for winning miss mexico 2014 and placing top 15 in miss universe 2015 . josé maría bocanegra , lawyer , interim president of mexico in december 1829 , minister in the national government 1833–44 manuel m . ponce , musician josé guadalupe posada , artist guillermo ulises ruiz-esparza , physician and scientist in the field of medical nanotechnology . saturnino herrán , artist yadhira carrillo , telenovela actress ernesto alonso , telenovela director/actor jaime humberto hermosillo , film director josé maría napoleón , singer/composer luis gerardo méndez , actor violeta retamoza , golfer gabriela palacio , beauty pageant titleholder karina gonzález , beauty pageant titleholder . sports . soccer . club de fútbol gallos hidrocálidos de aguascalientes was a football club from aguascalientes , mexico . the club was founded in 1994 , when salvador lópez monroy , a restaurant business owner from los angeles , bought a second division franchise which he relocated to aguascalientes where there was no professional football club . the club played its last tournament in 2000–2001 when the governor of aguascalientes bought first division club necaxa , with its national following , and relocated it from mexico city . gallos de aguascalientes was then sold to chivas , which changed its name to f.c . tapatio de guadalajara , affiliated to chivas . the city is home to the soccer team club necaxa , which plays in mexican first division . the club left mexico city and relocated to aguascalientes following the 2003 opening of estadio victoria , which is now the club 's home venue and one of the best stadiums in the country . basketball . panteras de aguascalientes its part of the mexican basketball league liga nacional de baloncesto profesional ( lnbp ) . in 2003 , the panteras won the championship of the lnbp . the panteras play their home games at the gimnasio hermanos carreón . baseball . the baseball team rieleros de aguascalientes , returned to the mexican league in 2012 . the team previously won the championship in 1978 . cycling . the aguascalientes bicentenary velodrome , designed by peter junek , hosted the 2010 pan american track championships . at an elevation of 1887m , the velodrome is a frequent location for attempts at breaking the cycling hour record . in popular culture . aguascalientes was the hometown of esperanza ortega in the book esperanza rising . the festival de calaveras , is a tribute made to the la catrina created by josé guadalupe posada , this colorful festival arises with the aim of rescuing and preserving the traditions of the día de muertos mexican engraver , illustrator and caricaturist josé guadalupe posada was born in the city of aguascalientes mexican painter saturnino herrán was born in the city of aguascalientes in 2016 , american comedian , actress , television host , and producer chelsea handler visited aguascalientes with a piñata effigy of donald trump for her netflix original talk show . references . bibliography . external links . municipal website fotos , mensajes , y mas de aguascalientes link to tables of population data from census of 2005 inegi : instituto nacional de estadística , geografía e informática