John of Salisbury

early life and education . born at salisbury , england , he was of anglo-saxon rather than of norman extraction , and therefore apparently a clerk from a modest background , whose career depended upon his education . beyond that , and that he applied to himself the cognomen of parvus , meaning '' short '' or '' small '' , few details are known regarding his early life . from his own statements it is gathered that he crossed to france about 1136 , and began regular studies in paris under peter abelard , guilfoy , kevin , '' john of salisbury '' , the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( spring 2015 edition ) , edward n . zalta ( ed . ) . who had for a brief period re-opened his famous school there on montagne sainte-geneviève . his vivid accounts of teachers and students provide some of the most valuable insights into the early days of the university of paris . cantor 1992:324 . when abelard withdrew from paris , john studied under master alberic and robert of melun . in 1137 , john went to chartres , where he studied grammar under william of conches , and rhetoric , logic and the classics under richard l'evêque , a disciple of bernard of chartres . john of salisbury . frivolities of courtiers and footprints of philosophers , ( joseph b . pike , trans . ) , university of minnesota , 1938 bernard 's teaching was distinguished partly by its pronounced platonic tendency , and partly by the stress laid upon literary study of the greater latin writers . the influence of the latter feature is noticeable in all of john of salisbury 's works . around 1140 john returned to paris to study theology under gilbert de la porrée , then under robert pullus and simon of poissy , supporting himself as a tutor to young noblemen . in 1148 , he resided at the abbey of moutiers-la-celle in the diocese of troyes , with his friend peter of celle . he was present at the council of reims in 1148 , presided over by pope eugene iii . it is conjectured that while there , he was introduced by st . bernard of clairvaux to theobald , whose secretary he became . . secretary to the archbishop of canterbury . john of salisbury was secretary to archbishop theobald for seven years . while at canterbury he became acquainted with thomas becket , one of the significant potent influences in john 's life . during this period he went on many missions to the papal see ; it was probably on one of these that he made the acquaintance of nicholas breakspear , who in 1154 became pope adrian iv . the following year john visited him , remaining at benevento with him for several months . he was at the court of rome at least twice afterward . during this time john composed his greatest works , published almost certainly in 1159 , the policraticus and the metalogicon , writings invaluable as storehouses of information regarding the matter and form of scholastic education , and remarkable for their cultivated style and humanist tendency . the policraticus also sheds light on the decadence of the 12th-century court manners and the lax ethics of royalty . the idea of contemporaries '' standing on the shoulders of giants '' of antiquity first appears in written form in the metalogicon . after the death of theobald in 1161 , john continued as secretary to his successor , thomas becket , and took an active part in the long disputes between that primate and his sovereign , henry ii , who looked upon john as a papal agent . norman f . cantor , 1993 . the civilization of the middle ages , 324–326 . john 's letters throw light on the constitutional struggle then agitating england . in 1163 , john fell into disfavor with the king for reasons that remain obscure , and withdrew to france . the next six years he spent with his friend peter of la celle , now abbot of st . remigius at reims . here he wrote '' historia pontificalis '' . coffey , peter . '' john of salisbury . '' the catholic encyclopedia vol . 8 . new york : robert appleton company , 1910 . 20 jul . 2015 in 1170 , he led the delegation charged with preparing for becket 's return to england , and was in canterbury at the time of becket 's assassination . in 1174 , john became treasurer of exeter cathedral . bishop of chartres . in 1176 , he was made bishop of chartres , where he passed the remainder of his life . in 1179 , he took an active part in the third council of the lateran . he died at or near chartres on 25 october 1180 . . scholarship and influences . john 's writings are excellent at clarifying the literary and scientific position of 12th-century western europe . though he was well versed in the new logic and dialectical rhetoric of the university , john 's views also imply a cultivated intelligence well versed in practical affairs , opposing to the extremes of both nominalism and realism a practical common sense . his doctrine draws on the literary scepticism of cicero , for whom he had unbounded admiration and on whose style he based his own . his view that the end of education was moral , rather than merely intellectual , became one of the prime educational doctrines of western civilization . this moral vision of education shares more in common with the tradition of monastic education which preceded his own scholastic age , and with the vision of education which re-emerges in the worldview of renaissance humanism . cantor 1993:325f . of greek writers he appears to have known nothing at first hand , and very little in translations , but he was one of the best latinists of his age . the timaeus of plato in the latin version of chalcidius was known to him as to his contemporaries and predecessors , and probably he had access to translations of the phaedo and meno . of aristotle he possessed the whole of the organon in latin ; he is , indeed , the first of the medieval writers of note to whom the whole was known . he first coined the term theatrum mundi , a notion that influences the theater several centuries later . in several chapters of the third book of his policraticus , he meditates on the fact that '' the life of man on earth is a comedy , where each forgetting his own plays another 's role '' . john gillies , shakespeare and the geography of difference , volume 4 of cambridge studies in renaissance literature and culture , cambridge university press , 1994 . pages 76-77 . . fictional portrayals . john was portrayed by actor alex g . hunter in the 1924 silent film becket , based on the becket ( tennyson play ) by alfred lord tennyson . works . ; latin text metalogicon , edited by j.b . hall & katharine s.b . keats-rohan , corpus christianorum continuatio mediaevalis ( cccm 98 ) , turnhout , brepols 1991 . ; latin text and english translations anselm & becket . two canterbury saints ' lives by john of salisbury , ronald e . pepin ( transl . ) turnhout , 2009 , brepols publishers , the letters of john of salisbury , 2 vols . , ed . and trans . w . j . millor and h . e . butler ( oxford : oxford university press , 1979–86 ) historia pontificalis , ed . and trans . marjorie chibnall ( oxford : oxford university press , 1986 ) john of salisbury 's entheticus maior and minor , ed . and trans . jan van laarhoven studien und texte zur geistesgeschichte des mittelalters 17 ( leiden : brill , 1987 ) ; english translations ( full text on internet archive ) somewhat abridged ( full text on internet archive ) the statesman ’ s book of john of salisbury ; being the fourth , fifth , and sixth books , and selections from the seventh and eighth books , of the policraticus , trans . john dickinson ( new york : knopf , 1927 ) the metalogicon , a twelfth-century defense of the verbal and logical arts of the trivium , trans . daniel mcgarry ( berkeley : university of california press , 1955 ) metalogicon , translated by j.b . hall , corpus christianorum in translation ( cct 12 ) , turnhout , brepols , 2013 . ; studies a companion to john of salisbury , ed . christophe grellard and frédérique lachaud , leiden , brill , brill 's companions to the christian tradition , 57 , 2014 ( copyright 2015 ) , 480 p . michael wilks ( ed . ) , the world of john of salisbury , oxford , blackwell , 1997 . john d . hosler , john of salisbury : military authority of the twelfth-century renaissance , leiden , brill , 2013 , 240 p . ; english excerpts of john 's political theory policraticus , iv , selections policraticus , vi , 24