Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Biography

lead section . the lead section must summarise the life and works of the person with due weight . when writing about controversies in the lead section of a biography , relevant material should neither be suppressed nor allowed to overwhelm : always pay scrupulous attention to reliable sources , and make sure the lead correctly reflects the entirety of the article . write clinically , and let the facts speak for themselves . these concerns are especially pressing at biographies of living persons . well-publicized recent events affecting a subject , whether controversial or not , should be kept in historical perspective . what is most recent is not necessarily what is most noteworthy : new information should be carefully balanced against old , with due weight accorded to each . when a subject dies , the lead need not be radically reworked ; wikipedia is not a memorial site . unless the cause of death is itself a reason for notability , a single sentence describing the death is usually sufficient , and often none is included in the lead at all , just a death date . opening paragraph . mos guidelines for opening paragraphs should generally be followed , and the opening paragraph of a biographical article should establish notability , neutrally describe the person , and provide context . the opening paragraph should usually state : name ( s ) and title ( s ) , if any . handling of the subject 's name is covered below in gives : & nbsp ; joe bloggs this ensures that readers who hover over the initials see the target article 's url as a hint and in the status bar at the bottom of the window . this manual formatting is only needed for cases where does not handle the abbreviation in question . if there is nothing to link to , and a redlink is unlikely to result in eventual creation of an article , use the template to explain the acronym . because there is an accessibility issue with relying exclusively on such tooltip cues ( touch-sensitive devices and assistive technologies generally do not utilize mouse-cursor hovering ) , a link is preferred when available . post-nominals should not be added except to a biography subject 's own lead sentence , in an infobox parameter for post-nominals , when the post-nominals themselves are under discussion in the material , and in other special circumstances such as a list of recipients of an award or other honor . for example , '' { { ! xt '' should not appear in an article like warwickshire county cricket club . honorifics . honorifics and styles of nobility should normally be capitalized , e.g . , , . they are not usually used in running text , though some may be appropriate in the lead sentence of a biographical article , as detailed below , or in a section about the person 's titles and styles . honorific prefixes . in general , honorific prefixes—styles and honorifics in front of a name—in wikipedia 's own voice should not be included , but may be discussed in the article . in particular , this applies to : styles and honorifics derived from a title , position or activity , including the most noble , the most honourable , the right honourable , and the honourable ; styles and honorifics related to royalty , clergy , and sainthood , such as majesty , his holiness , the reverend , and the venerable . clergy should be named as described in wikipedia : naming conventions ( clergy ) . there are some exceptions : where an honorific is so wp : commonname that the name is rarely found in english wp : rs without it , it should be included . for example , the honorific may be included for mother teresa . where a female historical figure is consistently referred to using the name of her husband and her birth name is unknown . for example , an honorific may be used for '' mrs . alfred jones '' . the prenominals sir , dame , lord and lady are discussed in . in burmese names , honorifics may be preserved if they are part of the normal form of address , even for ordinary people . see u thant for an example . the turkish honorific suffix pasha is normally included in a notable person 's name . the inclusion of some honorific prefixes and styles is controversial . see wikipedia : naming conventions ( royalty and nobility ) for use in article titles . knighthoods , lordships , and similar honorific titles . the honorific titles sir , dame , lord and lady are included in the initial reference and infobox heading for the subject of a biographical article , but are optional after that . the infobox heading includes pre-nominals , name and post-nominals as separate elements . the title is placed in bold in the first use of the name . except for the initial reference and infobox , do not add honorific titles to existing instances of a person 's name where they are absent , because doing so implies that the existing version is incorrect ( similar in spirit to the wikipedia : manual of style ( spelling ) ) . similarly , honorific titles should not be deleted when they are used throughout an article unless there is consensus . where the use of an honorific title is widely misunderstood , this can be mentioned in the article ; see , for example , bob geldof . honorific titles used with forenames only ( such as '' sir elton '' , '' sir david '' , '' dame judi '' ) should be avoided unless this form is so heavily preferred in popular usage that the use of the surname alone would render the entire name unrecognizable . honorary knights and dames are not entitled to '' sir '' or '' dame '' , only the post-nominal letters . not all non-honorary inductees into an order of chivalry are entitled to use the pre-nominal titles , either , and may receive distinct post-nominals . for example , the order of the british empire has five classes , each with different post-nominals ; only the senior two are entitled to sir/dame . titles signifying honours awarded by the united kingdom ( i.e . sir , dame ) may be used as soon as they are gazetted . investiture is not necessary . tense . wp : blp should generally be written in the present tense , and biographies of deceased persons in the past tense . when making the change upon the death of a subject , the entire article should be reviewed for consistency . if a person is living but has retired , use or rather than the past tense . correct – correct – incorrect – historical events should be written in the past tense in all biographies : the present tense may be used when discussing the work of a writer or philosopher , even if they are dead : . the general rule is to describe statements made in literature , philosophy , and art in the eternal present . past tense should be used for news and marketing materials , public statements , and any other quoted or paraphrased material which is not itself a subject of consideration as a lasting work : ( not . out-of-date material . it is best to avoid time-dependent statements , which can often be creatively rewritten anyway . when making any statements about current events , use the '' as of '' template ; for example , '' as of april 2011 '' or '' in april 2011 '' . if you 're giving a precise date range from the past to the present , as with a living person 's age or career , you may use the '' age '' template . the article subject 's age can also be calculated in the infobox . there is no need to add '' deceased '' to a person 's article , or those in which they are mentioned . if they have their own article , this should already be sourced . otherwise , it is unnecessary . '' survived by '' and '' survivors '' , phrasings commonly found in obituaries , should not be used . order of events . in general , present a biography in chronological order , from birth to death , except where there is good reason to do otherwise . within a single section , events should almost always be in chronological order . sexuality . care should be taken to avoid placing wp : undue on sexuality . a person 's sexual orientation or activities should usually not be mentioned in the article lead unless related to the person 's notability . authority control . place at the foot of biographies ( immediately above , if present ) . add authority control identifiers ( viaf , isni , orcid , etc . ) in the subject 's wikidata entry , from where they will be automatically transcluded into the template . see also . wikipedia : biography dos and don'ts ( information page summarizing the key points of this guideline ) wikipedia : autobiography wikipedia : wikiproject biography wikipedia : categorization of people wikipedia : naming conventions ( people ) wikipedia : biographies of living persons . notes .