Byblos

history . located about north of beirut , byblos is attractive to archaeologists because of the successive layers of debris resulting from centuries of human habitation . it was first excavated by ernest renan in 1860 , as published in his mission de phénicie ( 1865–1874 ) , then by pierre montet from 1921 until 1924 , followed by maurice dunand from 1925 over a period of forty years . renan 's expedition was to '' provide the evidence that the city did not move and that gebeil is byblos '' original french : '' d ’ abord , le site de byblos était fixé sans conteste possible . le passage où strabon définit byblos une ville située sur une colline à quelque distance de la nier , avait égaré les savants . renan lui-même avait songé à jieh , mais il comprit vite que cette colline était trop peu importante pour avoir été le siège d ’ une ville telle que byblos . l ’ abondance des fragments antiques recueillis aux environs de la citadelle , la situation des nécropoles au nord et au sud de l ’ enceinte franque prouvent jusqu ' à l ’ évidence que la ville ne s ’ est pas déplacée et que gebeil recouvre byblos . '' english translation : '' first , the site of byblos was fixed without question possible . the passage where strabon defines byblos as a city situated on a hill some distance away from it , had misled the scientists . renan himself had thought of jieh , but he soon realized that this hill was too small to have been the seat of a city such as byblos . the abundance of ancient fragments collected around the citadel , the situation of the necropolises to the north and south of the frankish enclosure provide the evidence that the city did not move and that gebeil is byblos . '' the site first appears to have been settled during the pre-pottery neolithic b period , approximately 8800 to 7000 bc . vogel , j.c . waterbolk , h.t . , groningen radiocarbon dates x , radiocarbon , 14 , 6–110 / 105 , 1972 . neolithic remains of some buildings can be observed at the site . according to the writer philo of byblos ( quoting sanchuniathon , and quoted in eusebius ) , byblos founded by the phoenician shrine god el , ( whom the greeks identified with their god cronus ) . during the 3rd millennium bc , the first signs of a town can be observed , with the remains of well-built houses of uniform size . this was the period when the canaanite civilization began to develop . neolithic and chalcolithic levels . jacques cauvin published studies of flint tools from the stratified neolithic and chalcolithic sites in 1962 . cauvin , jacques . , les industries lithiques du tell de byblos ( liban ) , l'anthropologie , vol . 66 , 5–6 , 1962 . remains of humans found in chalcolithic burials have been published by henri victor vallois in 1937 . vallois , h.v . , note sur les ossements humains de la nécropole énéolithique de byblos ( avec 2 planches ) . bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome i , 1937 . beyrouth . tombs from this era were discussed by emir maurice chehab in 1950 . chehab , emir m . , tombes des chefs d'époque énéolithique trouvés à byblos , bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome ix , 1949–1950 , beyrouth . early pottery found at the tell was published by e.s . boynton in 1960 with further studies by r . erich in 1954 and van liere and henri de contenson in 1964 . boynton , e.s . , the ceramic industry of ancient lebanon . ( available in ms in american university of beirut and in microfilm in harvard library ) 1960 . erich , r . , relative chronologies in old world archaeology , chicago , 1954 . van liere , w . and contenson , henri de , '' holocene environment and early settlement in the levant '' , annales archéologiques de syrie , volume 14 , pp . 125–128 , 1964 . . five levels stratigraphy . prehistoric settlements at byblos were divided up by dunand into the following five periods , which were recently expanded and re-calibrated by yosef garfinkel to correlate with tell es-sultan ( jericho ) : early neolithic ( early phase ) corresponding to the pre-pottery neolithic b ( ppnb ) of jericho , represented by plastered floors and naviforme technology , dated between 8800 and 7000 bc ; early neolithic ( late phase ) corresponding to the pna of tell es-sultan ( jericho ) ix ( also yarmukian ) between 6400 and 5800 bc represented by pottery , sickle blades , figurines and small points , dated between 6400 and 5800 bc ; middle neolithic corresponding to the pnb of tell es-sultan ( jericho ) viii and represented by pottery , dated between 5800 and 5300 bc ; late neolithic corresponding to the middle chalcolithic of beth shean and represented by pottery , stone vessels , silos , chamber tombs and seals , dated between 5300 and 4500 bc ; early chalcolithic corresponding to the late chalcolithic of ghassulian , represented by jar burials , pierced flint , churn and a violin figurine , dated to between 4500 and 3600 bc and , late chalcolithic corresponding to the early bronze age , represented by architecture and cylinder seal impressions , dated to between 3600 and 3100 bc . the early neolithic was a later settlement than others in the beqaa valley such as labweh and ard tlaili . it was located on the seaward slope of the larger of the two hills that used to compose ancient byblos , with a watered valley in between . the original site spread down into the valley and covered an area of providing fertile soils and a protected landing place for boats . dunand discovered around twenty houses although some of the settlement was suggested to have been lost to the sea , robbed or destroyed . dunand , maurice . , rapport préliminaire sure les fouilles de byblos en 1948 , 1949 , bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome ix , 1949–1950 , beyrouth . dunand , maurice . , fouilles de byblos , vol ii , atlas , paris , 1950d ( also part i , 1954 – part ii , 1958 ) dunand , maurice . , chronologie des plus anciennes installations de byblos , revue biblique , vol . 57 , 1950b dunand , maurice . , rapport préliminaire sure les fouilles de byblos en 1950 , 1951 & 1952 , bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome xii , 1955 , beyrouth . dunand , maurice . , rapport préliminaire sure les fouilles de byblos en 1954 , 1955 , bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome xiii , 1956 , beyrouth . fleisch , henri . , préhistoire au liban en 1950 , bulletin de la société préhistorique français , vol . 48 , 1–2 , p . 26 . ( contains report on byblos presented by maurice dunand to the 3rd c.i.s.e.a . , brussels , 1948 ) , 1951 . dwellings were rectangular with plastered floors , pottery was usually dark faced burnished ware with some shell impressions . dunand , maurice . , rapport préliminaire sure les fouilles de byblos en 1960 , 1961 & 1962 , bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome xvii , 1964 , beyrouth . the middle neolithic was a smaller settlement of no more than adjacent to the older site . the pottery was more developed with red washes and more varied forms and elaborate decorations , buildings were poorer with unplastered floors . the late neolithic period showed development from the middle in building design , a wider range of more developed flint tools and a far larger variety of pottery with fabrication including silica . the late chalcolithic featured developments of '' canaanean blades '' and fan scrapers . adult burials in jars started to appear along with metal in the form of one copper hook , found in a jar . some jars were lined with white plaster that was applied and self-hardened after firing . dunand , maurice . , rapport préliminaire sure les fouilles de byblos en 1957 , 1958 & 1959 , bulletin du musée de beyrouth . tome xvi , 1961 , beyrouth . copper appeared more frequently in the late chalcolithic period along with multiple burials in tombs and jar handles with impressed signs . early bronze age remains were characterized by the development of byblos combed ware and a lithic assemblage studied by jacques cauvin . fleisch , henri . , néolithique du proche-orient , bulletin de la société préhistorique français , vol . 49 , 5–6 , p . 212 . ( contains report on byblos excavations of 1951 by maurice dunand ) , 1952 . according to lorenzo nigro , byblos moved from being a fishermen 's village to its earlier urban form at the beginning of the third millennium bc . fragments attributed to the semi-legendary pre-homeric phoenician priest sanchuniathon say byblos was the first city erected in phoenicia and was established by the god cronus . ( cronus was considered the nearest equivalent to the canaanite baal or baal hammon in interpretatio graeca used by the ancient greeks and romans . ) . egyptian period . watson mills and roger bullard suggest that during the old kingdom of egypt , byblos was virtually an egyptian colony . the growing city was evidently a wealthy one and seems to have been an ally ( among '' those who are on his waters '' ) of egypt for many centuries . first dynasty tombs used timbers from byblos . one of the oldest egyptian words for an oceangoing boat was '' byblos ship '' . archaeologists have recovered egyptian-made artifacts as old as a vessel fragment bearing the name of the second dynasty ruler khasekhemwy , although this '' may easily have reached byblos through trade and/or at a later period '' . wilkinson , toby , 1999 , early dynastic egypt p.78 . objects have been found at byblos naming the 13th dynasty egyptian king neferhotep i , and the rulers of byblos maintained close relationships with the new kingdom pharaohs of ancient egypt . around 1350 bc , the amarna letters include 60 letters from rib-hadda and his successor ili-rapih who were rulers of byblos , writing to the egyptian government . this is mainly due to rib-hadda 's constant pleas for military assistance from akhenaten . they also deal with the conquest of neighboring city-states by the habiru . it appears egyptian contact peaked during the 19th dynasty , only to decline during the 20th and 21st dynasties . in addition , when the new kingdom collapsed in the 11th century bc , byblos ceased being a colony and became the foremost city of phoenicia . '' byblos '' in : encyclopædia britannica , vol . 2 , p . 692 . encyclopædia britannica , inc . , 1992 . although the archaeological evidence seems to indicate a brief resurgence during the 22nd and 23rd dynasties , it is clear after the third intermediate period the egyptians started favoring tyre and sidon instead of byblos . shaw , ian : '' the oxford history of ancient egypt '' , page 321 . oxford university press , 2000 . archaeological evidence at byblos , particularly the five byblian royal inscriptions dating back to around 1200–1000 bc , shows existence of a phoenician alphabet of twenty-two characters ; an important example is the ahiram sarcophagus . the use of the alphabet was spread by phoenician merchants through their maritime trade into parts of north africa and europe . one of the most important monuments of this period is the temple of the obelisks , dedicated to the canaanite war god resheph , but this had fallen into ruins by the time of alexander the great . ancient history . in the assyrian period , sibittibaal of byblos became tributary to tiglath-pileser iii in 738 bc , and in 701 bc , when sennacherib conquered all phoenicia , the king of byblos was urumilki . byblos was also subject to assyrian kings esarhaddon ( r . 681–669 bc ) and ashurbanipal ( r . 668–627 bc ) , under its own kings milkiasaph and yehawmelek . in the achaemenid empire ( 538–332 bc ) , byblos was the fourth of four phoenician vassal kingdoms established by the persians ; the first three being sidon , tyre , and arwad . hellenistic rule came with the arrival of alexander the great in the area in 332 bc . coinage was in use , and there is abundant evidence of continued trade with other mediterranean countries . during the greco-roman period , the temple of resheph was elaborately rebuilt , and the city , though smaller than its neighbours such as tyre and sidon , was a center for the cult of adonis . in the 3rd century , a small but impressive theater was constructed . with the rise of christianity , a bishopric was established in byblos , and the town grew rapidly . although a sasanian colony is known to have been established in the region following the early muslim conquests of 636 , there is little archaeological evidence for it . trade with europe effectively dried up , and it was not until the coming of the first crusade in 1098 that prosperity returned to byblos , known then as gibelet or giblet . crusader , mamluk , ottoman period . in the 12th and 13th century byblos became part of the county of tripoli , a crusader state connected to , but largely independent from , the crusader kingdom of jerusalem . as gibelet or giblet , it came under the rule of the genoa embriaco family , who created for themselves the lord of gibelet , first as administrators of the city in the name of the republic of genoa , and then as a hereditary fief , undertaking to pay an annual fee to genoa and to the genoa cathedral ( genoa 's cathedral ) . the embriaco family 's residence , the byblos castle , along with the fortified town , served as an important military base for the crusaders . the remains of the castle are among the most impressive architectural structures now visible in the town centre . the town was taken by saladin in 1187 , re-taken by the crusaders , conquered by baibars in 1266 , but it remained in the possession of the embriacos until around 1300 . having voluntarily surrendered to the mamluks , the city was relatively spared from looting following its capture . its fortifications were subsequently restored . from 1516 until 1918 , the town and the whole region became part of the ottoman empire . contemporary history . byblos and all of lebanon was placed under french mandate from 1920 until 1943 when lebanon achieved independence . the 2006 lebanon war negatively affected the ancient city by covering its harbor and town walls with an oil slick that was the result of an oil spill from a nearby power-plant . this however has been cleared and the coastal area has since then become a destination for beach goers , especially in the late spring and throughout the summer season . demographics . byblos 's inhabitants are predominantly christians , mostly maronites , with minorities of armenian apostolic , greek orthodox , and greek catholics . there is also a minority of shia islam . it is said that the city of bint jbeil ( '' daughter of byblos '' ) in southern lebanon was founded by those shia muslims . byblos has three representatives in the parliament of lebanon : two maronites and one shia . . education . byblos is home to the professional schools of the lebanese american university . the lau byblos campus houses the medical school , the engineering school , the school of architecture and design , the pharmacy school , which offers the only pharm.d . program outside the united states accredited by the accreditation council for pharmacy education , the school of business , and the school of arts and sciences . the campus is situated on a hill overlooking the city and the mediterranean sea . tourism . byblos is re-emerging as an upscale touristic hub . with its ancient port , phoenician , roman , and crusader ruins , sandy beaches and the picturesque mountains that surround it make it an ideal tourist destination . the city is known for its fish restaurants , open-air bars , and outdoor cafes . yachts cruise into its harbor today as they did in the 1960s and 1970s when marlon brando and frank sinatra were regular visitors to the city . byblos was crowned as the '' arab tour capital '' for the year 2016 by the lebanese minister of tourism in the grand serail in beirut . byblos was chosen by condé nast traveler as the second best city in the middle east for 2012 , beating tel aviv and dubai , and by the world tourism organization as the best arab tourist city for 2013 . . the byblos archaeological site . ain el-malik or king ’ s spring , about 20 m deep , is a large cavity accessible by spiral stairs . once it supplied the city with water . according to plutarch ’ s version of the egyptian osiris myth , the king ’ s servants met isis on the stairs of the spring and took her to the royal palace , where she found the body of her husband osiris embedded in one of the palace pillars . the l-shaped temple was erected about 2700 bc . the temple of the obelisks , originally built in 1600–1200 bc on top of the “ l-shaped temple , ” was moved by archaeologists to its present location . the many small obelisks found in this temple were used as religious offerings . the sanctuary contained a large number of human figurines made of bronze covered with gold leaf , which are now displayed in the national museum of beirut . the necropolis dates back to the second millennium bc and contains tombs of the byblos kings , including king ahiram . the roman theater was built around ad 218 . other historic buildings . byblos wax museum the byblos wax museum displays wax statues of characters whose dates of origin range from phoenician times to current days . byblos fossil museum the byblos fossil museum has a collection of fossilized fish , sharks , eel , flying fish , and other marine life , some of which are millions of years old . medieval city wall the old medieval part of byblos is surrounded by walls running about 270m from east to west and 200m from north to south . byblos castle byblos castle was built by the crusaders in the 12th century . it is located in the archaeological site near the port . st john the baptist church work on the church started during the crusades in 1116 . it was considered a cathedral and was partially destroyed during an earthquake in 1176 ad . when islamic forces captured the city , it was transformed into a set of stables . it was later given to the maronites as a gift by prince yusuf shihab of lebanon in the mid-1700s , after they aided him in capturing the city . sultan abdul majid mosque the old mosque by the castle dates back to mamlouk times in mid 1600 , and adopted the name of sultan abdul majid after he renovated it . historic quarter and souks in the southeast section of the historic city , near the entrance of the archaeological site , is an old market where tourists can shop for souvenirs and antiques , or simply stroll along the old cobblestone streets and enjoy the architecture . byblos international festival this summer music festival is an annual event that takes place in the historic quarter . temple of baalat gebal . international relations . ; twin towns – sister cities byblos is twinned with : patras , greece tripoli , greece sparta , greece orange , france tripoli , lebanon valletta , malta cádiz , spain i̇zmir , turkey . further reading .