The Legend of Zelda (video game)

impact and legacy . the legend of zelda is considered a spiritual forerunner of the modern action role-playing video game ( rpg ) genre . though it is often not considered part of the genre since it lacked key rpg mechanics such as experience points , it had many features in common with rpgs and served as the template for the action role-playing game genre . the game 's fantasy setting , musical style and action-adventure gameplay were adopted by many rpgs . its commercial success helped lay the groundwork for involved , non-linear games in fantasy settings , such as those found in successful rpgs , including crystalis , soul blazer , square 's seiken densetsu series , alundra , and brave fencer musashi . the popularity of the game also spawned several clones trying to emulate the game . an example is a clone for the trs-80 color computer iii called '' the quest for thelda '' , written by eric a . wolf and licensed to sundog systems . the legend of zelda spawned a solitary sequel , many prequels and spin-offs and is one of nintendo 's most popular series . it established important characters and environments of the zelda universe , including link , princess zelda , ganon , impa , and the triforce as the power that binds hyrule together . the overworld theme and distinctive '' secret found '' jingle have appeared in nearly every subsequent zelda game . the theme has also appeared in various other games featuring references to the zelda series . an arcade system board , called the triforce , was developed jointly by namco , sega , and nintendo , with the first games appearing in 2002 . the name '' triforce '' is a reference to nintendo 's the legend of zelda series of games , and symbolized the three companies ' involvement in the project . gamespot featured the legend of zelda as one of the 15 most influential games of all time , for being an early example of open world , nonlinear gameplay , and for its introduction of battery backup saving , laying the foundations for later action-adventure games like metroid and role-playing video games like final fantasy , while influencing most modern games in general . in 2009 , game informer called the legend of zelda '' no less than the greatest game of all time '' on their list of '' the top 200 games of all time '' , saying that it was '' ahead of its time by years if not decades '' . in 2011 , nintendo celebrated the game 's 25th anniversary in a similar vein to the super mario bros . 25th anniversary celebration the previous year . this celebration included a free mailout club nintendo offer of the ocarina of time soundtrack to owners of the 3ds version of that particular game , the first digital for nintendo eshop release of link 's awakening dx , special posters that are mailed out as rewards through club nintendo , and a special stage inspired by the original legend of zelda in the video game super mario 3d land for the nintendo 3ds . re-releases . the legend of zelda was first re-released in cartridge format for the famicom in 1994 . the cartridge version slightly modified the title screen of the disk card version of the game , such that it displayed the number 1 at the end of the title . in 2001 , the original game was re-released in the gamecube game animal crossing . the only way to unlock the game is by using an action replay . an official re-release was included in 2003 's the legend of zelda : collector 's edition for the gamecube , and the game was again re-released on the game boy advance in 2004 along with its sequel , the adventure of link , as part of the classic nes series . in 2006 , it was released on the wii 's virtual console , and a timed demo of the game was released for the 2008 wii game super smash bros . brawl , available in the vault section . all re-releases of the game are virtually identical to the original , though the gamecube , game boy advance , and virtual console versions have been altered slightly to correct several instances of incorrect spelling from the original , most notably in the intro story . a tech demo called classic games was shown for the nintendo 3ds at e3 2010 , showcasing more than a dozen classic games using 3d effects , including the legend of zelda . it was announced by reggie fils-aimé , president of nintendo , that the games were slated for release on the 3ds , including the legend of zelda , mega man 2 , and super mario world 2 : yoshi 's island and would possibly make use of some of the 3ds 's features , such as 3d effects , analog control , or camera support . the legend of zelda was released to the nintendo 3ds virtual console on september 1 , 2011 as a part of the nintendo 3ds ambassador program , and was later released to the nintendo eshop on december 22 , 2011 in japan , april 12 , 2012 in europe and july 5 , 2012 in north america . the version released to the japanese 3ds virtual console was the cartridge version . the game was released for the nintendo switch as part of the nintendo switch online - nintendo entertainment system service on september 18 , 2018 . a special '' living the life of luxury ! '' edition of the game , which grants players all equipment and extra items at the start of the game , was added to the service on october 10 , 2018 . . sequels . there have also been a few substantially altered versions of the game that have been released as pseudo-sequels , and ura- or gaiden-versions . as part of a promotional advertisement campaign for their noodles , released a version of the original the legend of zelda in 1986 , keef . ファミコン ディスクシステム . yuri sakazaki museum . 2009 . . kahf , a . ファミコン非売品リスト . no enemy in our way ! retrieved 22 april 2009 . day , ashley . the ultimate guide to . 06 the legend of zelda : the versions of zelda - zelda no densetsu : teikyou charumera ( 1986 ) . retro gamer . issue 90 . pg.62 . may 2011 . it is one of the rarest video games available on the second-hand collector 's market , and copies have sold for over . the rarest and most valuable nes games . digital press ( via racketboy ) . 25 may 2010 . from august 6 , 1995 , to september 2 , 1995 , nintendo , in collaboration with the st.giga satellite radio network , began broadcasts of a substantially different version of the original the hyrule fantasy : legend of zelda for a super famicom peripheral , the satellaview—a satellite modem add-on . the game , , was released for download in four episodic , weekly installments which were rebroadcast at least four times between the game 's 1995 premier and january 1997 . bs zelda was the first satellaview game to feature a '' soundlink '' soundtrack—a streaming audio track through which , every few minutes , players were cautioned to listen carefully as a voice actor narrator , broadcasting live from the st.giga studio , would give them plot and gameplay clues . in addition to the soundlink elements , bs zelda also featured updated 16-bit graphics , a smaller overworld , and different dungeons . link was replaced by one of the two satellaview avatars : a boy wearing a backward baseball cap or a girl with red hair . between december 30 , 1995 , and january 6 , 1996 , a second version of the game , , was broadcast to the satellaview as the functional equivalent of the original the legend of zeldas second quest . map 2 was rebroadcast only once , in march 1996 . . notes . references . . external links .