Single (music)

early history . the origins of the single are in the late 19th century , when music was distributed on phonograph cylinders that held two to four minutes ' worth of audio . these were then superseded by disc phonograph records , which initially also had a short duration of playing time per side . in the first two to three decades of the 20th century , almost all commercial music releases were , in effect , singles ( the exceptions were usually for classical music pieces , where multiple physical storage media items were bundled together and sold as an album ) . phonograph records were manufactured with a range of playback speeds ( from 16 to 78 rpm ) and in several sizes ( including . by about 1910 , however , the , 78-rpm shellac disc had become the most commonly used format . the inherent technical limitations of the gramophone disc defined the standard format for commercial recordings in the early 20th century . the relatively crude disc-cutting techniques of the time and the thickness of the needles used on phonographs limited the number of grooves per inch that could be inscribed on the disc surface , and a high rotation speed was necessary to achieve acceptable recording and playback fidelity . 78 rpm was chosen as the standard because of the introduction of the electrically powered synchronous motor in 1925 , which ran at 3,600 rpm with a 46:1 gear ratio , resulting in a rotation speed of 78.26 rpm . with these factors applied to the 10-inch format , songwriters and performers increasingly tailored their output to fit the new medium . the three-minute single remained the standard into the 1960s , when the availability of microgroove recording and improved mastering techniques enabled recording artists to increase the duration of their recorded songs . the breakthrough came with bob dylan 's '' like a rolling stone '' : although columbia records tried to make the record more '' radio-friendly '' by cutting the performance into halves and separating them between the two sides of the vinyl disc , both dylan and his fans demanded that the full six-minute take be placed on one side , and that radio stations play the song in its entirety . greil marcus , 2005 , like a rolling stone , p . 145 . . types of physical singles . singles have been issued in various formats , including , 10-inch , and 12-inch discs , usually playing at 45 & nbsp ; rpm ; 10-inch shellac discs , playing at 78 & nbsp ; rpm ; maxi singles ; 7-inch plastic flexi discs ; cassettes ; and cd singles . other , less common , formats include singles on digital compact cassette , dvd , and laserdisc , as well as many non-standard sizes of vinyl disc , , etc . ) . 7-inch format . the most common form of the vinyl single is the '' 45 '' or '' 7-inch '' . the names are derived from its play speed , 45 & nbsp ; rpm , and the standard diameter , 7 & nbsp ; inches . the 7-inch 45 & nbsp ; rpm record was released 31 march 1949 by rca victor as a smaller , more durable and higher-fidelity replacement for the 78 rpm shellac discs . the first 45 & nbsp ; rpm records were monaural , with recordings on both sides of the disc . as stereo recordings became popular in the 1960s , almost all 45 & nbsp ; rpm records were produced in stereo by the early 1970s . columbia records , which had released the & nbsp ; rpm 12-inch vinyl lp in june 1948 , also released & nbsp ; rpm 7-inch vinyl singles in march 1949 , but they were soon eclipsed by the rca victor 45 . the first regular production 45 & nbsp ; rpm record pressed was '' peewee the piccolo '' rca victor 47-0146 pressed 7 december 1948 at the sherman avenue plant in indianapolis , r.o . price , plant manager . indiana state museum document no . 71.2010.098.0001 the claim made that 48-0001 by eddy arnold was the first 45 is evidently incorrect ( even though as of this writing 48-0000 has not turned up ) since all 45s were released simultaneously with the 45 player on the 29 march date . there was plenty of information 'leaked ' to the public about the new 45 rpm system through front-page articles in billboard magazine on 4 december 1948 and again on 8 january 1949 . rca was trying to blunt the lead columbia had established in releasing their & nbsp ; lp system back in june 1948 . billboard to compete with columbia , rca released albums as boxes of 45 rpm 7-inch singles that could be played continuously like a lp on their record changer . in the early era rca were also releasing 7-inch singles pressed in different colours for different genres , making it easy for customers to find their preferred music . the novelty of multicoloured singles however only lasted a few years , by 1952 all of rca 's singles were pressed in black vinyl . spencer drate 45 rpm : a visual history of the seven-inch record , princeton architectural press , 2002 , p.9 the lightweight and inexpensive 45 rpm discs introduced by rca were quickly popular and in the early 1950s all major us labels had begun manufacturing 7-inch singles . spencer drate 45 rpm : a visual history of the seven-inch record , princeton architectural press , 2002 , p.10 in some regions ( e.g . us ) , the default hole size fitted the original rca 1.5 inch hub which , due to a format war , was incompatible with the 0.25 inch spindle of a columbia-system 33 1/3 rpm 12 inch lp player . in other regions ( e.g . uk ) , the default was a small hole compatible with a multi-speed 0.25 inch spindle player , but with a '' knock out '' that was removed for usage on a larger hub player . one could play a large-hole record on a player with a 0.25 inch spindle by use of a single puck or by inserting an adapter . 12-inch format . although 7 inches remained the standard size for vinyl singles , 12-inch singles were introduced for use by djs in discos in the 1970s . the longer playing time of these singles allowed the inclusion of extended dance mixes of tracks . in addition , the larger surface area of the 12-inch discs allowed for wider grooves ( larger amplitude ) and greater separation between grooves , the latter of which results in less cross-talk . consequently , they are less susceptible to wear and scratches . the 12-inch single is still considered a standard format for dance music , though its popularity has declined in recent years . digital era . as digital downloading and audio streaming have become more prevalent , it has become possible for every track on an album to also be available separately . nevertheless , the concept of a single for an album has been retained as an identification of a more heavily promoted or more popular song ( or group of songs ) within an album collection . the demand for music downloads skyrocketed after the launch of apple 's itunes store ( then called itunes music store ) in january 2001 and the creation of portable music and digital audio players such as the ipod . in september 1997 , with the release of duran duran 's '' electric barbarella '' for paid downloads , capitol records became the first major label to sell a digital single from a well-known artist . previously , geffen records also released aerosmith 's '' get a grip '' digitally for free . in 2004 , recording industry association of america ( riaa ) introduced digital single certification due to significant sales of digital formats , with gwen stefani 's '' hollaback girl '' becoming riaa 's first platinum digital single . in 2013 , riaa incorporated on-demand streams into the digital single certification . single sales in the united kingdom reached an all-time low in january 2005 , as the popularity of the compact disc was overtaken by the then-unofficial medium of the music download . recognizing this , on 17 april 2005 , uk singles chart added the download format to the existing format of physical cd singles . gnarls barkley was the first act to reach no.1 on this chart through downloads alone in april 2006 , for their debut single '' crazy '' , which was released physically the following week . on 1 january 2007 digital downloads ( including unbundled album tracks ) became eligible from the point of release , without the need for an accompanying physical . sales gradually improved in the following years , reaching a record high in 2008 that still proceeded to be overtaken in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . in the late 2010s , artists began a trend of releasing multiple singles before eventually releasing a studio album . an unnamed a & r representative confirmed to rolling stone in 2018 that '' an artist has to build a foundation to sustain '' and added that '' when artists have one big record and go run with that , it doesn ’ t work because they never had a foundation to begin with . '' the same article cited examples such as cardi b , camila cabello and jason derulo releasing four or more singles prior to their album releases . . culture . the sales of singles are recorded in record charts in most countries in a top 40 format . these charts are often published in magazines and numerous television shows and radio programs count down the list . in order to be eligible for inclusion in the charts the single must meet the requirements set by the charting company , usually governing the number of songs and the total playing time of the single . in popular music , the commercial and artistic importance of the single ( as compared to the ep or album ) has varied over time , technological development , and according to the audience of particular artists and genres . singles have generally been more important to artists who sell to the youngest purchasers of music ( younger teenagers and pre-teens ) , who tend to have more limited financial resources . starting in the mid-sixties , albums became a greater focus and more important as artists created albums of uniformly high quality and coherent themes , a trend which reached its apex in the development of the concept album . over the 1990s and early 2000s , the single generally received less and less attention in the united states as albums , which on compact disc had virtually identical production and distribution costs but could be sold at a higher price , became most retailers ' primary method of selling music . singles continued to be produced in the uk and australia , surviving the transition from compact disc to digital download . the discontinuation of the single has been cited as a major marketing mistake by the record companies considering it eliminated an inexpensive recording format for young fans to use to become accustomed to purchasing music . in its place was the predominance of the album which alienated customers by the expense of purchasing an expensive format for only one or two songs of interest . this in turn encouraged interest in file sharing software on the internet like napster for single recordings initially which began to seriously undercut the music recording market . dance music , however , has followed a different commercial pattern , and the single , especially the 12-inch vinyl single , remains a major method by which dance music is distributed . a curious development has been the popularity of mobile phone ringtones based on pop singles ( on some modern phones , the actual single can be used as a ringtone ) . in september 2007 , sony bmg announced they would introduce a new type of cd single , called '' ringles '' , for the 2007 holiday season . the format included three songs by an artist , plus a ringtone accessible from the user 's computer . sony announced plans to release 50 ringles in october and november , while universal music group expected to release somewhere between 10 and 20 titles . in a reversal of this trend , a single has been released based on a ringtone itself . the crazy frog ringtone , which was a cult hit in europe in 2004 , was released as a mashup with '' axel f '' in june 2005 amid a massive publicity campaign and subsequently hit no . 1 on the uk charts . the term single is sometimes regarded as a misnomer , since one record usually contains two songs : the a-side and b-side . in 1982 , cbs marketed one-sided singles at a lower price than two-sided singles . . in south korea . in south korean music , the terminology for '' albums '' and '' singles '' is unique and includes an additional term , the '' single album '' , a category of releases that is not found outside of south korea . in english , the word '' album '' in ordinary usage refers to an lp-length music release with multiple tracks . by contrast , the korean word for '' album '' denotes a musical recording of any length released on physical media ; it is closer in meaning to the english words '' record '' or '' release '' . although the terms '' single albums '' and '' singles '' are similar and sometimes may even overlap in meaning , depending on context , they are considered two distinct release types in south korea . a '' single album '' refers to a physical release ( like cd , lp , or some other media ) collecting one or more singles , while a '' single '' is only a song itself , typically as a downloaded file or streamable song . the gaon album chart tracks sales of all '' offline '' albums released as physical media , meaning that single albums compete alongside full-length studio albums ( and all other albums ) . the gaon digital chart , which tracks downloads and streams , is regarded as the official '' singles '' chart . as a distinct release type , the single album developed during the cd era in the 1990s . single albums , typically including about two or three songs , were marketed as a more affordable alternative to a full-length cd album . the term '' single album '' is sometimes used to refer to a release that would simply be called a '' single '' in western contexts , such as a 7-inch 45rpm record released before the advent of downloadable music . to give an example of the differences between full-length albums , single albums , and singles : the k-pop boy band big bang has a full-length studio album , titled made , which was originally released as a series of four single albums : m , a , d , and e . two singles were included on each of these single albums ; the first in the series , m , contains the singles '' loser '' and '' bae bae '' .