Max Delbrück

early and personal life . delbrück was born in berlin , german empire . his mother was granddaughter of justus von liebig , an eminent chemist , while his father hans delbrück was a history professor at the university of berlin . in 1937 , delbrück left nazi germany for america—first california , then tennessee—becoming a us citizen in 1945 . in 1941 , he married mary bruce . they had four children . delbrück 's brother justus , a lawyer , as well as his sister emmi bonhoeffer were active along with his brothers-in-law klaus bonhoeffer and dietrich bonhoeffer in resistance to nazism . found guilty by the people 's court for roles in the 20 july plot , dietrich and klaus were executed in 1945 by the rsha . justus died in soviet custody that same year . education . delbrück studied astrophysics , shifting towards theoretical physics , at the university of göttingen . after completing his ph.d . there in 1930 , '' max delbrück '' . encyclopaedia britannica . britannica.com . retrieved january 27 , 2019 . he traveled through england , denmark , and switzerland . he met wolfgang pauli and niels bohr , who interested him in biology . career and research . delbrück returned to berlin in 1932 as an assistant to lise meitner , who was collaborating with otto hahn on irradiation of uranium with neutrons . delbrück wrote a few papers , including one in 1933 on gamma rays ' scattering by a coulomb field 's polarization of a vacuum . though theoretically tenable , his conclusion was misplaced , whereas hans bethe some 20 years later confirmed the phenomenon and named it '' delbrück scattering '' . in 1935 , delbrück published a collaboration with nikolay timofeev-ressovsky and karl zimmer the major work , über die natur der genmutation und der genstruktur . it was considered to be a major advance in understanding the nature of gene mutation and gene structure . timofeeff-ressovky , n . w . , k . g . zimmer , and m . delbrück '' über die natur der genmutation und der genstruktur '' ( weidmannsche buchhandlung , 1935 ) . nachrichten göttingen - '' über die natur der genmutation und der genstruktur '' ( 1935 ) . the work was a keystone in the formation of molecular genetics . it was also an inspirational starting point for erwin schrödinger thinking , a course of lectures in 1943 , and the eventual writing of the book what is life ? the physical aspect of the living cell . erwin schrödinger what is life ? the physical aspect of the living cell ( cambridge university press , 1944 ) . in 1937 , he attained a fellowship from rockefeller foundation—which was launching the molecular biology research program—to research genetics of the fruit fly , drosophila melanogaster , in california institute of technology 's biology department , '' mdc celebrates centennial of max delbrück '' . max delbrück center for molecular medicine berli-buch . september 4 , 2006 . where delbrück could blend interests in biochemistry and genetics . while at caltech , delbrück researched bacteria and their viruses ( bacteriophages or phages ) . in 1939 , with emory ellis , he coauthored '' the growth of bacteriophage '' , a paper reporting that the viruses reproduce in one step , not exponentially as do cellular organisms . although delbrück 's rockefeller foundation fellowship expired in 1939 , the foundation matched him up with vanderbilt university in nashville , tennessee , where from 1940 to 1947 he taught physics , yet had his laboratory in the biology department . '' max delbrück at vanderbilt , 1940–1947 '' , vanderbilt university , web access november 6 , 2013 . in 1941 , delbrück met salvador luria of indiana university who began visiting vanderbilt . in 1942 , luria–delbrück experiment on bacterial resistance to virus infection mediated by random mutation . alfred hershey of washington university began visiting in 1943 . the luria–delbrück experiment , also called the fluctuation test , demonstrated that darwin 's theory of natural selection acting on random mutations applies to bacteria as well as to more complex organisms . the 1969 nobel prize in physiology or medicine was awarded to both scientists in part for this work . to put this work in its historical perspective , lamarck in 1801 first presented his theory of inheritance of acquired characteristics , which stated that if an organism changes during life in order to adapt to its environment ( for example stretches its neck to reach for tall trees ) , those changes are passed on to its offspring . he also said that evolution happens according to a predetermined plan . darwin published his theory of evolution in his 1859 book on the origin of species with compelling evidence contradicting lamarck . darwin said that evolution is not predetermined but that there are inherent variations in all organisms , and that those variations that confer increased fitness are selected by the environment and passed on to the offspring . in the feud between lamarck and darwin , darwin talked of pre-existing changes , but the nature of these changes was not known and had to await the science of genetics by gregor mendel 's experiments on pea plants published in 1866 . support for darwin 's theory was provided when thomas hunt morgan discovered that a mutated white-eyed fruit fly among red-eyed flies was able to reproduce true white-eyed offspring . the most elegant and convincing support for darwin 's ideas , however , was provided by the luria-delbruck experiment , which showed that mutations conferring resistance of the bacterium e . coli to t1 bacteriophage ( virus ) existed in the population prior to exposure to t1 and were not induced by adding t1 . in other words , mutations are random events that occur whether or not they prove to be useful , while selection ( for t1 resistance upon challenge with t1 in this case ) provides the direction in evolution by retaining those mutations that are advantageous , discarding those that are harmful ( t1 sensitivity in this case ) . this experiment dealt a blow to lamarckian inheritance and set the stage for tremendous advances in genetics and molecular biology , launching a tsunami of research that eventually led to the discovery of dna as the hereditary material and to cracking the genetic code . of course , by then avery , along with mccloud ( and earlier , mccarty ) was well on the way to showing the genetic capability of dna . in 1945 , delbrück , luria , and hershey set up a course in bacteriophage genetics at cold spring harbor laboratory in long island , new york . this phage group spurred molecular biology 's early development . j.d . watson ( 2012 ) . '' james d watson : chancellor emeritus '' , cold spring harbor laboratory . delbrück received the 1969 nobel prize in physiology or medicine , shared with luria and hershey '' for their discoveries concerning the replication mechanism and the genetic struct ure of viruses '' . the committee also noted that '' the honour in the first place goes to delbrück who transformed bacteriophage research from vague empiricism to an exact science . he analyzed and defined the conditions for precise measurement of the biological effects . together with luria he elaborated the quantitative methods and established the statistical criteria for evaluation which made the subsequent penetrating studies possible . delbrück 's and luria 's forte is perhaps mainly theoretical analysis , whereas hershey above all is an eminently skillful experimenter . the three of them supplement each other well also in these respects . '' that year , delbrück and luria were also awarded by columbia university the louisa gross horwitz prize . in late 1947 , as vanderbilt lacked the resources to keep him , delbrück had returned to caltech as a professor of biology , and remained there for the rest of his career . meanwhile , he set up university of cologne 's institute for molecular genetics . awards and honours . in addition to the nobel prize , delbrück was elected a list of fellows of the royal society elected in 1967 . he was elected an embo member in 1970 . the max delbruck prize , formerly known as the biological physics prize , is awarded by the american physical society and named in his honour . the max delbrück center , in berlin , germany , national research center for molecular medicine of the helmholtz association also bears his name . later life and legacy . delbrück helped spur physical sciences ' interest in biology . his inferences on genes ' susceptibility to mutation was relied on by physicist erwin schrödinger in his 1944 book what is life ? , which conjectured genes were an '' aperiodic crystal '' storing codescript and influenced francis crick and james d . watson in their 1953 identification of cellular dna 's molecular structure as a double helix . m . p . murphy and l . a . j . o'neill ( 1997 ) . what is life ? the next fifty years : speculations on the future of biology . cambridge university press . p 2 . horace freeland judson ( 1996 ) the eighth day of creation : makers of the revolution in biology . cold spring harbor laboratory press . in 1977 , he retired from caltech , remaining a professor of biology emeritus . he became interested in the behavioral sciences and spent some unfruitful effort on mold behavior in the 1960s . max delbrück died , at age 74 , on the evening of monday , march 9 , 1981 , at huntington memorial hospital in pasadena , california . on august 26 to 27 , 2006—the year delbrück would have turned 100—family and friends gathered at cold spring harbor laboratory to reminisce on his life and work . kiryn haslinger . max delbruck 100 . ht winter 2007 . although delbrück held some anti-reductionism views ; he conjectured that ultimately a paradox—akin perhaps to the waveparticle duality of physics—would be revealed about life . his view however , was later refuted upon the discovery of the nucleic acid double helix . . references . external links . delbrück page at cold spring harbor laboratory website . letter from jim watson – delbrück was instrumental in getting fellowship support for watson so that he could stay in cambridge , play tennis , and discover the rules of nucleotide base pairing in dna . this is a letter from watson to delbrück that describes the discovery . interview with max delbrück oral history project , california institute of technology archives , pasadena , california . caltech photo archives of max delbrück the official site of louisa gross horwitz prize key participants : max delbrück – linus pauling and the race for dna : a documentary history national academy of sciences biographical memoir