Enoch (ancestor of Noah)

enoch in the book of genesis . enoch appears in the book of genesis of the pentateuch as the seventh of the ten pre-deluge patriarchs . genesis recounts that each of the pre-flood patriarchs lived for several centuries . genesis 5 provides a genealogy of these ten figures ( from adam to noah ) , providing the age at which each fathered the next , and the age of each figure at death . enoch is considered by many to be the exception , who is said to '' not see death '' . furthermore , states that enoch lived 365 years , which is shorter than his peers , who are all recorded as dying at over 700 years of age . the brief account of enoch in genesis 5 ends with the cryptic note that '' he was not ; for god took him '' . genesis 5:24 , kjv . apocryphal books of enoch . three extensive apocrypha are attributed to enoch : book of enoch , composed in ancient ethiopian semitic language and preserved in ge'ez , first brought to europe by james bruce from ethiopia and translated into english by august dillmann and reverent schoode – recognized by the orthodox tewahedo churches and usually dated between the third century bc and the first century ad . second book of enoch or the book of the secrets of enoch , written in old church slavonic , first translated in english by william morfill – usually dated to the first century ad . 3 enoch , a rabbinic text in hebrew usually dated to the fifth century ad . these recount how enoch was taken up to heaven and was appointed guardian of all the celestial treasures , chief of the archangels , and the immediate attendant on the throne of god . he was subsequently taught all secrets and mysteries and , with all the angels at his back , fulfils of his own accord whatever comes out of the mouth of god , executing his decrees . much esoteric literature like the 3 enoch identifies enoch as the metatron , the angel which communicates god 's word . in consequence , enoch was seen , by this literature , and the rabbinic kabbalah of jewish mysticism , as having been the one which communicated god 's revelation to moses , in particular , the dictator of the book of jubilees . enoch in book of giants . the book of giants is a jewish pseudepigraphal work from the third century bc and resembles the book of enoch . fragments from at least six and as many as eleven copies were found among the dead sea scrolls collections . . septuagint . the third-century bc translators who produced the septuagint in koine greek rendered the phrase '' god took him '' with the greek verb metatithemi 5:24 καὶ εὐηρέστησεν ενωχ τῷ θεῷ καὶ οὐχ ηὑρίσκετο ὅτι μετέθηκεν αὐτὸν ὁ θεός meaning moving from one place to another . lsj metatithemi sirach 44:16 , from about the same period , states that '' enoch pleased god and was translated into paradise that he may give repentance to the nations . '' the greek word used here for paradise , paradeisos , was derived from an ancient persian word meaning '' enclosed garden '' , and was used in the septuagint to describe the garden of eden . later , however , the term became synonymous for heaven , as is the case here . g3857 παράδεισος strong 's greek lexicon . retrieved 2015-08-01 strong 's greek 3857_ παράδεισος ( paradeisos ) – a park , a garden , a paradise retrieved 2015-08-01 . enoch in classical rabbinical literature . in classical rabbinical literature , there are various views of enoch . one view regarding enoch that was found in the targum pseudo-jonathan , which thought of enoch as a pious man , taken to heaven , and receiving the title of safra rabba ( great scribe ) . after christendom was completely separated from judaism , this view became the prevailing rabbinical idea of enoch 's character and exaltation . according to rashi rashi 's commentary on . see also commentary of ibn ezra . from genesis rabbah 25:1 , '' enoch was a righteous man , but he could easily be swayed to return to do evil . therefore , the holy one , blessed be he , hastened and took him away and caused him to die before his time . for this reason , scripture changed the wording in the account of his demise and wrote , 'and he was no longer ' in the world to complete his years . '' among the minor midrashim , esoteric attributes of enoch are expanded upon . in the sefer hekalot , rabbi ishmael is described as having visited the seven heavens , where he met enoch , who claims that earth had , in his time , been corrupted by the demons shammazai , and azazel , and so enoch was taken to heaven to prove that god was not cruel . similar traditions are recorded in sirach . later elaborations of this interpretation treated enoch as having been a pious ascetic , who , called to mix with others , preached repentance , and gathered ( despite the small number of people on earth ) a vast collection of disciples , to the extent that he was proclaimed king . under his wisdom , peace is said to have reigned on earth , to the extent that he is summoned to heaven to rule over the sons of god . enoch in christianity . new testament . the new testament contains three references to enoch . the first is a brief mention in one of the genealogies of the ancestors of jesus by luke ( luke 3:37 ) . the second mention is in hebrews 11 : 5 ( kjv ) which says , '' by faith enoch was translated that he should not see death ; and was not found , because god had translated him : for before his translation he had this testimony , that he pleased god . '' this suggests he did not experience the mortal death ascribed to adam 's other descendants which is consistent with genesis 5:24 ( kjv ) , which says , '' and enoch walked with god : and he was not ; for god took him . '' the third mention is in the epistle of jude ( 1:14–15 ) where the author attributes to '' enoch , the seventh from adam '' a passage not found in catholic and protestant canons of the old testament . the quotation is believed by most modern scholars to be taken from 1 enoch 1:9 which exists in greek , in ge'ez ( as part of the ethiopian orthodox canon ) , and also in aramaic among the dead sea scrolls . 4q enoch ( 4q2044qenar ) col i 16–18 clontz , t.e . and j . , '' the comprehensive new testament with complete textual variant mapping and references for the dead sea scrolls , philo , josephus , nag hammadi library , pseudepigrapha , apocrypha , plato , egyptian book of the dead , talmud , old testament , patristic writings , dhammapada , tacitus , epic of gilgamesh '' , cornerstone publications , 2008 , p . 711 , though the same scholars recognise that 1 enoch 1:9 itself is a midrash of the words of moses '' he came from the ten thousands of holy ones '' from deuteronomy 33:2 . '' the initial oracle in chapters 1–5 is a paraphrase of part of deuteronomy 33,24 '' george w . e . nickelsburg , the nature and function of revelation 1 enoch , jubilees and some qumranic documents , 1997 lars hartman , asking for a meaning : a study of 1 enoch 1–5 conbib nt series 12 lund gleerup , 1979 22–26 . george we nickelsburg & james c vanderkam , 1 enoch , fortress 2001 r.h . charles , the book of enoch , london spck , 1917 e . isaac , 1 enoch , a new translation and introduction in old testament pseudepigrapha ed . charlesworth , doubleday 1983–85 the introductory phrase '' enoch , the seventh from adam '' is also found in 1 enoch ( 1 en . 60:8 ) , though not in the old testament . richard bauckham jude and the relatives of jesus in the early church p206 etc . in the new testament this enoch prophesies '' to '' ungodly men , that god shall come with his holy ones to judge and convict them . influence in christianity . in early christianity , use of the book of enoch as a divinely inspired text was widespread , since the canon had not yet been established definitively in the church . church fathers such as justin martyr , athenagoras of athens , irenaeus , clement of alexandria , origen , tertullian , and lactantius all speak highly of enoch and contain many allusions to the book of enoch as well as in some instances advocating explicitly for the use of the book of enoch as scripture . because of the letter of jude 's citation of the book of enoch as prophetic text , this encouraged acceptance and usage of the book of enoch in early christian circles . the main themes of enoch about the watchers corrupting humanity were commonly mentioned in early literature . this positive treatment of the book of enoch was associated with millennialism which was popular in the early church . when amillennialism began to be common in christianity , the book of enoch , being incompatible with amillennialism , started to be rejected widespread , and with the split of the oriental orthodox from the catholic church in the 5th century , use of the book of enoch was limited primarily to the oriental orthodox church . eventually , the usage of the book of enoch became limited to ethiopian circles of the oriental orthodox church . another common element that some church fathers , like john of damascus , spoke of , was that they considered enoch to be one of the two witnesses mentioned in the book of revelation . this view still has many supporters today in christianity . in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints theology . among the latter day saint movement and particularly in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints , enoch is viewed as having founded an exceptionally righteous city , named zion , in the midst of an otherwise wicked world . this view is encountered in the standard works , the pearl of great price and the doctrine and covenants , which states that not only enoch , but the entire peoples of the city of zion , were translation ( latter day saints ) , because of their piety . ( zion is defined as '' the pure in heart '' and this city of zion will return to the earth at the second coming of jesus . ) the doctrine and covenants further states that enoch prophesied that one of his descendants , noah , and his family , would survive a great flood and thus carry on the human race and preserve the scripture . the book of moses in the pearl of great price includes chapters that give an account of enoch 's preaching , visions , and conversations with god . they provide details concerning the wars , violence and natural disasters in enoch 's day , but also reference the miracles performed by enoch . the book of moses is itself an excerpt from joseph smith 's translation of the bible , which is published in full , complete with these chapters concerning enoch , by community of christ , in the joseph smith translation of the bible , where it appears as part of the book of genesis . d & c 104:24 ( cofc ) / ( lds ) states that adam ordained enoch to the higher priesthood ( now called the melchizedek , after the great king and high priest ) at age 25 , that he was 65 when adam blessed him , and that he lived for an additional 365 years until he and his city were translated , making enoch 430 years old at the time that '' he was not , for god took him '' ( genesis 5:24 ) . additionally in lds theology , enoch is implied to be the scribe who recorded adam 's blessings and prophecies at adam-ondi-ahman , as recorded in d & c ( lds ) / d & c 104:29b ( cofc ) . enoch in islam . in islam , enoch is commonly identified with idris , as for example by the history of al-tabari interpretation and the meadows of gold . alexander philip s . biblical figures outside the bible p.118 ed . michael e . stone , theodore a . bergren 2002 p118 '' twice in the qur'an . was commonly identified by muslim scholars with the biblical enoch , and that this identification opened the way for importing into islam a substantial body of postbiblical jewish legend about the character and . '' the quran contains two references to idris ; in surah al-anbiya ( the prophets ) verse number 85 , and in surah maryam ( mary ) verses 56–57 : ( the prophets , 21:85 ) : '' and the same blessing was bestowed upon ismail and idris and zul-kifl , because they all practised fortitude . '' ( mary 19:56–57 ) : '' and remember idris in the book ; he was indeed very truthful , a prophet . and we lifted him to a lofty station '' . idris is closely linked in muslim tradition with the origin of writing and other technical arts of civilization , history of prophets in islam and judaism , b . m . wheeler , enoch including the study of astronomical phenomena , both of which enoch is credited with in the testament of abraham . nonetheless , although some muslims view enoch and idris as the same prophet while others do not , many muslims still honor enoch as one of the earliest prophets , regardless of which view they hold . lives of the prophets , l . azzam , s . academy publishing . family tree . see also . adam and eve ( lds church ) entering heaven alive hermes trismegistus metatron . notes . references . external links . the descendants of adam , the legacy of cain , the souls elijah and enoch catholic encyclopedia henoch ( 1914 ) andrei a . orlov essays on 2 enoch : enoch as the heavenly priest , enoch as the expert in secrets , enoch as the scribe and enoch as the mediator ed . philip p . wiener dictionary of the history of ideas : cosmic voyages ( 1973 ) dr . reed c . durham , jr . comparison of masonic legends of enoch and mormon scriptures description of enoch ( 1974 )