Wikipedia:Search engine test

some search engine tests . popularity – see google 's trending tool below . usage – identify a term 's notability . ( see for example //books.google.com/ngrams google 's ngram tool . ) genuineness – identify a spurious hoax or an urban legend . notability – decide whether a page should be nominated for deletion . existence – discover what sources ( including websites ) actually exist for possible presentation . information – review the reliability of facts and citations . names and terminology – identify the names used for things ( including alternative names and terminology ) . copyrighting – identify whether material is copied , and if so , check the licensing . this page describes both these web search tests and the web search tools that can help develop wikipedia , and it describes their biases and their limitations . the advantages of a specific search engine can be distinguished by using a variety of common search engines . the distinct advantages of each are their user interface and , less obviously , their algorithms for compiling and searching their own indexes . because a web crawler can be blocked & mdash ; specific ones or just in general & mdash ; different search engines can list different web sites , and there are more web sites available by url than are indexed in any database . the most common search engines are at google , bing , and yahoo . specialized search engines exist for medicine , science , news and law amongst others . several generalized search engines exist . these adapt your query to many search engines . see below . this page mostly uses google instead of bing or yahoo , but aims for generality where it can . for example , it describes google groups ( usenet groups ) , google scholar ( academia ) , google news , and google books . good-faith googling : a rule of thumb . if an unsourced addition to an article appears plausible , consider taking a moment to use a suitable search engine to find a reliable source before deciding whether to revert . search engine tests . depending on the subject matter , and how carefully it is used , a search engine test can be very effective and helpful , or produce misleading or non-useful results . in most cases , a search engine test is a first-pass heuristic or '' rule of thumb '' . what a search test can do , and what it can't . a search engine can index pages and text which others have placed on the internet , just like a big index at the back of a book . search engines can : provide information and lead to pages that assist with the above goals confirm '' who 's reported to have said what '' according to sources ( useful for neutral citing ) often provide full cited copies of source documents confirm roughly how popularly referenced an expression is . for example , a google search for '' the green goldfish '' , with quotes , currently initially reports around 22,700 results , yet on paging through to the last search results page shows the returned number of hits to be 370 . see also here to calculate statistical significance . for example , if there are 16 hits at google books under one name , and 24 under another , there is only a 70 % confidence that the second name is actually more common . search more specifically within certain websites , or for combined and alternative phrases ( or excluding certain words and phrases that would otherwise confuse the results ) . search engines can not : guarantee the results are reliable or '' true '' ( search engines index whatever text people choose to put online , true or false ) . guarantee why something is mentioned a lot , and that it is n't due to marketing , reposting as an internet meme , spamming , or self-promotion , rather than importance . guarantee that the results reflect the uses you mean , rather than other uses . ( e.g . , a search for a specific john smith may pick up many '' john smiths '' who are n't the one meant , many pages containing '' john '' and '' smith '' separately , and also miss out all the useful references indexed under '' j . smith '' or , if the term is put in quotes , '' john michael smith '' and '' smith , john '' ) guarantee you are n't missing crucial references through choice of search expression . guarantee that little-mentioned or unmentioned items are automatically unimportant . guarantee that a particular result is the original instance of a piece of text and not a reprint , excerpt , quotation , misquotation , or copyright violation . and search engines provide the latest research in depth to the same extent as journals and books , for rapidly developing subjects . be wp : npov . a search engine test the work of interpreting results and deciding what they really show . appearance in an index alone is not usually proof of anything . search engine tests and wikipedia policies . verifiability . search engine tests may return results that are fictitious , biased , hoaxes or similar . it is important to consider whether the information used derives from wp : rs before using or citing it . less reliable sources may be unhelpful , or need their status and basis clarified , so that other readers gain a neutral and informed understanding to judge how reliable the sources are . neutrality . google ( and other search systems ) do not aim for a wp : npov . wikipedia does . google indexes self-created pages and media pages which do not have a neutrality policy . wikipedia has a neutrality policy that is mandatory and applies to all articles , and all article-related editorial activity . as such , google is specifically a source of neutral titles – only of popular ones . neutrality is mandatory on wikipedia ( including deciding what things are called ) even if not elsewhere , and specifically , neutrality trumps popularity . google groups archives usenet . because it covers over twenty years , it one of the oldest archives on record , going back to the beginning of the web . specialized search engines . google scholar works well for fields that are paper-oriented and have an online presence in all ( or nearly all ) respected venues . this search engine is a good complement for the commercially available thompson isi web of knowledge , especially in the areas which are not well covered in the latter , including books , conference papers , non-american journals , the general journals in the field of strategy , management , international business , harzing , a . w . k . ; van der wal , r . ( 2008 ) . google scholar as a new source for citation analysis ? ethics in science and environmental politics , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 62–71 english language education and educational technology . van aalst , jan . ( 2010 ) using google scholar to estimate the impact of journal articles in education . educational researcher 39 : 387 . the analysis of the pagerank algorithm utilised by google scholar demonstrated that this search engine , as well as its commercial analogs , provides an adequate information about popularity of some concrete source , maslov , s . ; redner , s . ( 2008 ) . promise and pitfalls of extending google ’ s pagerank algorithm to citation networks . journal of neuroscience , 28 , 11103–11105 although that does not automatically reflect the real scientific contribution of concrete publication . medline , now part of pubmed , is the original broadly based search engine , originating over four decades ago and indexing even earlier papers . thus , especially in biology and medicine , pubmed '' associated articles '' is a google scholar proxy for older papers with no on-line presence . e.g . , the journal stroke puts papers on-line back through 1970s . for this 1978 paper google scholar lists 100 citing articles , while pubmed lists 89 associated articles there are a large number of law library online , in many countries , including : library of congress , library of congress ( thomas ) , indiana supreme court , findlaw ( us ) ; kent university law library and sources ( uk ) . see also this list of search engines . generalized search engines . several generalized search engines exist . these adapt your query to many search engines . web browsers offer a choice of search engines to choose to employ for the search box , and these can be used one at a time to experiment with search results . meta-search engines use several search engines at once . ten popular ones from about.com offer reviews . a web browser plugin can add a search engine or a meta-search engine to your list of choices . see also . wikipedia : advanced source searching , a template designed to help with google books , news archive and scholar searches meta : mirror filter , a way to filter sites from google search to remove sites which mirror wikimedia content wikipedia : google searches and numbers wikipedia : you ca n't fix google through wikipedia - for addressing errors in google knowledge panels . references . further reading . —meert observes that '' the temptation to find a quick retort means that , many times , people do n't bother to check the source carefully . '' and that '' people will look for a specific phrase that may be taken out-of-context to support their argument '' . he states that it is '' dangerous and irresponsible to think that we can google away a complex discussion '' and that he has '' learned long ago that there is no substitute for detailed research on a topic '' . —turner points out that '' that something gets hits on google does not make it correct '' and gives several examples of things that are incorrect that garner thousands of hits on google search results . thelwall , m . ( 2008 ) . quantitative comparisons of search engine results , journal of the american society for information science and technology , 59 ( 11 ) , 1702–1710 . thelwall , m . ( 2008 ) . extracting accurate and complete results from search engines : case study windows live . journal of the american society for information science and technology , 59 ( 1 ) , 38–50 . gomes , et al . ( 2000 ) . detecting query-specific duplicate documents . thelwall , m . ( 2008 ) . quantitative comparisons of search engine results , journal of the american society for information science and technology , 59 ( 11 ) , 1702–1710 . nakov , preslav and hearst , marti ( 2005 ) . a study of using search engine page hits as a proxy for n-gram frequencies , proceedings of recent advances in natural language processing 2005 baroni , marco and ueyama , motoko ( 2006 ) building general- and special-purpose corpora by web crawling , proceedings of the 13th nijl international symposium language corpora their compilation and application .