Morley, West Yorkshire

history . morley is first mentioned in the domesday book in 1086 as morelege , morelei and moreleia . morley means '' open ground by a moor '' , from old english mōr '' moor , clearing , pasture '' + lēah '' open ground , clearing '' . it also gave its name to morelei wapentac , a wapentake which probably met at tingley . victor watts ( ed . ) , the cambridge dictionary of english place-names , based on the collections of the english place-name society ( cambridge : cambridge university press , 2004 ) , s.v . morley wyorks . the town was later famous for its textile industry , notably the cloth , shoddy , which was worn by both sides in the american civil war . governance . historically , morley was the centre of one of two divisions of the wapentake of agbrigg and morley . morley became a municipal borough in 1889 and under the local government act 1972 , was incorporated into the city of leeds metropolitan borough . morley is represented on leeds city council by three wards ( namely morley north , morley south and ardsley and robin hood ) each with three councillors . at the 2010 general election , morley and outwood was won by ed balls of the labour party , who had been mp for normanton since 2005 , and served as labour 's shadow chancellor of the exchequer from 2011 until 2015 . balls narrowly lost the seat at the 2015 general election to conservative andrea jenkyns . a town council was established in 2000 , though it does not cover drighlington , gildersome , tingley and east and west ardsley - areas formerly part of the municipal borough . following a review of parliamentary representation in west yorkshire , the morley and rothwell parliamentary constituency was abolished at the 2010 election and replaced by the morley and outwood constituency . the town 's coat of arms featured the symbolic principal industries of the municipal borough : textile manufacturing , coal mining and quarrying . geography . present . morley town hall is sometimes used for music recordings . television programmes , heartbeat and emmerdale have used its disused magistrates court and a cobblestoned street to one side . it hosts concerts by local schools and performances by the morley amateur operatic society , whose pantomimes have taken place at the alexandra hall for many years . morley annually holds one of the largest st george 's day parades in the country and has been named '' the most patriotic town in england '' . morley market has been a feature since the town was formed . the market building has a large trading hall split up into units housing , butchers , fashion shops and a café . supermarkets in morley include morrisons , wilkinsons , home bargains and b & m in the town centre and there is also a 24-hour asda superstore . scatcherd park in the centre of morley , by the morley leisure centre , has a large playing field , a skate park , children 's park , bowling green and memorial gardens , including the town 's war memorial . events are held on the adjoining field in the summer months . on 21 february 2010 , a statue of ernie wise was erected outside morley post office to divided opinion and unveiled by his widow , doreen . wise had performed in the old nearby cinema , just around from the post office , which is now a wetherspoons . on 25 june 2012 , the olympic torch paused at the morley academy on its tour of britain ahead of the london 2012 . transport . morley railway station is half a mile ( 800 m ) from the town centre on the huddersfield line . there is a service seven days a week to and from leeds , but on sundays , the service is less frequent . buses go to leeds , bradford , wakefield and other west yorkshire towns from bus stops near the town hall . the m621 motorway runs to the west of the town and the m62 motorway to the south . junctions 27 and 28 of the m62 are closest to morley . education . there are numerous primary schools in morley including morley newlands academy , churwell primary , seven hills primary school , morley victoria primary school , asquith primary , fountain primary and st francis catholic primary school . it also has an independent preparatory school ; queenswood school . three secondary schools serve pupils from morley : the morley academy ( formerly morley high school and morley grammar ) , bruntcliffe academy and woodkirk academy ( technically in west ardsley but has a large proportion of students from morley due to its catchment area ) . sport . morley r.f.c . was founded in 1878 . when the northern union clubs broke away from the rfu to form the rugby league , the morley representatives missed the train to huddersfield due to being in the pub . the club 's heyday was in the 1970s when it won the yorkshire cup on five occasions . in april 2005 the club won the powergen intermediate cup at twickenham . morley cc cricket club plays in the bradford league , morley town afc ( currently of yorkshire fa premier division ) and morley amateur fc are the towns football club and morley borough play rugby league . morley leisure centre is newly built after undergoing a £33 & nbsp ; million joint project with armley leisure centre completed 22 june 2010 boasting a main 25-metre swimming pool , 10-metre learner pool , 150-station bodyline gym , numerous sports halls , a dance studio and a cafe . independent wrestling company dynamic pro wrestling ( dpw ) is based in morley and put on shows at ackroyd street working mens club and around west yorkshire until its closure in 2011 . morley was the home of seven times world cycling champion beryl burton . scatcherd park bowling club compete in 9 leagues . filmography . morley is a setting for david peace 's red riding quartet novel and red riding which explore west yorkshire police corruption during the 1970s , and 1980s . emmerdale often use morley for filming court and wedding scenes in the town hall . twin towns . siegen , germany , since 1966 continuation of partnership with amalgamated city of leeds as of 1974 . notable people . natives of the town refer to themselves as morleians . notable morleians include : brian bedford , actor , nominated for 7 tony awards , disney 's voice of robin hood , veteran shakespearian actor h . h . asquith , british prime minister titus salt , the creator of saltaire joseph harrop , mayor alice cliff scatcherd , pioneer for women 's rights and philanthropist who donated scatcherd park to the town . scatcherd is buried in st mary in the wood churchyard , morley . jack popplewell , playwright , composer helen fielding , author of bridget jones ' diary ben kaye , harlequins rl player aaron murphy , huddersfield giants player nick scruton , professional rugby league player lee smith , leeds rlfc player jonathan howson , professional footballer mark crook , professional footballer ernie wise , comedian john r . womersley , mathematician and computer scientist stevie ward , leeds rhinos player beverley callard , actress . location grid . references . external links . beyond church at st peter 's morley - morley parish church morley town council west yorkshire archaeology service morley was in this parish morley community archives scatcherd mausoleum scatcherd collection , morley library