Conisbrough Castle

20th – 21st centuries . conisbrough castle was bought by the conisbrough local council in the 1940s , who placed the castle into the guardianship of the ministry of public works in 1949 , but retained the freehold ownership of the land . two sets of archaeological excavations were carried out on the site between 1967 and 1969 , exposing the foundations of the buildings in the inner bailey , and then from 1973 to 1977 , examining options for future visitor facilities . ; by 1984 , when the government agency english heritage took over the management of the property , the condition of the visitor services was unsatisfactory and the industrial character of the surrounding area was discouraging tourists . in response , english heritage and doncaster council formed a three-way agreement in 1988 with the ivanhoe trust , a local charity designed to generate new employment in the region . under this agreement the trust would manage the site , english heritage would maintain the historic fabric of the castle , while the council would construct a new visitors ' centre . ; a new , controversial visitor 's centre was built in the style of a collection of jousting tents , while the floors and roof of the keep were reinstalled between 1993 and 1995 with european union funding , in an attempt to limit the erosion of the castle stonework . ; ; visitor numbers following the investments fell far short of expectations , however , and by 2006 had settled at around 30,000 each year , only slightly above the level in the early 1980s . ; the external facilities did not age well and funding shortages led to the new audio-visual effects in the keep being turned off to save money . discussions between the three partners about the future of the castle took place , but relations broke down and english heritage resumed the direct management of the castle in 2008 . the castle was closed for a £1.1 million programme of renovations in 2013 , funded by the heritage lottery fund , as part of which a new visitors ' centre and visitor facilities were constructed . ; the castle is protected under uk law as a grade i listed building and as a scheduled ancient monument . . architecture . inner and outer baileys . conisbrough castle has an outer and an inner bailey , approximately and across respectively . ; the castle was entered through the outer bailey , a rectangular enclosure protected by earthworks , which would have contained the castle 's barns , stables , and other service facilities . a drawbridge on the northern side of the outer bailey , now replaced by an earth causeway , linked it with the inner bailey . the oval inner bailey was formed by scarping and counter-scarping the natural contours of the hill , producing a bank , now largely destroyed , and a protective ditch . the early 13th-century curtain wall is mostly of roughly dressed , coursed stone , up to thick and high , with two sections repaired with ashlar facings . ; ; the wall was defended by six mural towers along its southern and western sides , of which three still survive reasonably intact , and strengthened with pilaster buttresses along the northern edge . the bases of the walls and the towers were splayed , spreading their weight out more broadly , but their footings are only deep in places . ; a barbican protected the link from the drawbridge to the gatehouse of the inner bailey , complete with an additional corner turret . the remains of the collapse of the curtain wall are still visible in the ditch . various buildings were constructed along the inside of the inner bailey wall of similar rough stonework to the curtain wall , but only their foundations remain today . in the south-west corner was the solar block , containing the solar and various chambers . along the north side was the hall , pushed into an awkward corner of the curtain wall , in size and originally probably built two storeys high . initially constructed with a central hearth , a fireplace was added into the outer wall in the later 13th century . alongside the hall were a kitchen and pantry , the former with a cellar . on the south-east side of the inner bailey was the castle chapel , across . . keep . conisbrough 's keep was positioned on the north-east side of the inner bailey . it is an important medieval survival : the historian sidney toy considered it to be '' one of the finest keeps in england '' , the archaeologist oliver creighton describes it as an '' architectural gem '' and stephen johnson as '' one of the finest examples of late norman defensive architecture '' . ; ; the keep comprises a central circular tower , in diameter , with six , large solid buttresses projecting outwards to form an hexagonal design , unique in england . it was made from magnesian limestone and tall with walls up to thick in places . ; ; it has four floors : a ground floor that serves as a basement and a vaulted stone support for the chamber above ; the first floor , through which the keep was accessed ; two upper floors and a roof walk , which was probably covered by a pentice and defended by battlements . the current concrete stairs to the keep are modern , and the original medieval stairway , made from timber and stone , would have incorporated a drawbridge just before the castle doors . ; the basement contained a well , which could also be drawn from the 1st floor through a hole in the stone floor . the keep was designed as a private tower for hamelin plantagenet , rather than a grander residence . as a result , it was not designed to accommodate several different households and its layout was simpler than that seen at the contemporary keep of orford castle , for example . the 2nd and the 3rd floor would have served as the main chamber and the lord 's private chamber , forming a vertical sequence of rooms , with a vaulted , hexagonal chapel leading off the private chamber , cut into one of the buttresses . ; most of the castle would have been very dark due to the lack of natural light . the main chamber , however , had a large window , by , with deep recesses to allow for the thickness of the walls ; two carved seats sat alongside the window . ; a similar window was placed above it in the private chamber . the keep had relatively advanced fireplaces and flues for this period , the fireplace in the main chamber being exceptionally large and decorated with stone columns and carved capitals . ; conisbrough castle was probably similar to two other castles owned by the warren earls . hamelin plantagenet was also responsible for the development of mortemer castle in france , where a similar keep was built on top of a motte , and conisbrough might also have had resemblances to sandal castle in the north of england , also owned by the earls . the design of the keep was poor from a military perspective . the central circular tower provided defensive advantages but the buttresses introduced 12 vulnerable corners into the stonework , and the keep itself had no arrow slots to permit the defenders to fire on any attackers . rather than being designed primarily for military defence , it was constructed to symbolise and reinforce hamelin 's lordship and new social status .