Belt (clothing)

history . belts have been documented as male clothing since the bronze age . both sexes have used them off and on , depending on the fashion trends . in the western world , belts have been more common for men , with the exception of the early middle ages , late 17th century mantua , and skirt/blouse combinations between edwardian era . art nouveau belt buckles are now collectors ' items . in the latter half of the 19th century and until the world war i , the belt was a decorative as well as utilitarian part of military uniform , particularly among officers . in the armed forces of prussia , russian empire , and other eastern european nations , it was common for officers to wear extremely tight pressing into their stomachs and gutting them up , wide belts around the waist , on the outside of the uniform , both to support a saber and for aesthetic reasons . these tightly cinched belts served to draw in the waist and give the wearer a trim physique , emphasizing wide shoulders and a pouting chest . often the belt served only to emphasize the waist made small by a corset worn under the uniform , a practice which was common especially during the crimean wars and was often noted by soldiers from the western front . political cartoonists of the day often portrayed the tight waist-cinching of soldiers to comedic effect , and some cartoons survive showing officers being corseted by their inferiors , a practice which surely was uncomfortable but was deemed to be necessary and imposing . in modern times , men started wearing belts in the 1920s , as trouser waists fell to a lower line . before the 1920s , belts served mostly a decorative purpose , and were associated with the military . moreover , prior to that trousers did not even have belt loops . as sportswear , trousers with belt loops were already present in the 19th century . see pictures : file : ny metropolitans.jpg or : file:1868 reds.jpg for instance . today it is common for men to wear belts with their trousers . in the us military belts are worn snugly at dress events or at inspection so as convey impressions of fitness and discipline . from 1989 onward the us military standards regarding belt tightness during normal duty and non-duty activities have been somewhat more relaxed to prevent deleterious effects of prolonged excessive abdominal constriction . in some countries , a father 's belt could be associated with corporal punishment . as belts are constructed out of materials like leather that are both strong and light , a belt can be easily wielded to produce intense pain by using it as a whip to strike the buttocks of a misbehaving child . moreover , belts were convenient disciplinary tools , as they are generally immediately available for use . the belt can symbolize fatherly authority and paternal responsibility for one 's children 's behavior and moral development , but corporal punishment is not recommended for use in modern society as it was in the past . since the 1980s and more commonly in the mid-1990s , the practice of sagging the pants , in which the waistbands ( usually secured by a cinched belt ) of trousers or ( typically long ) shorts are worn at or below the hips , thereby exposing the top part of any underwear not obscured by an upper-body garment , has been seen among young men and boys , especially among those who are black and consanguine with hip-hop culture and fashion . this practice is sometimes ( incorrectly ) believed to have originated with prison gangs and the prohibition of belts in prison ( due to their use as weapons and as devices for suicide ) -- historically , including in the latter part of the 20th century , gang-affiliated young men and boys were expected to wear their belts fastened tightly . . materials . belts are commonly made from cowhide leather . leather grades is the highest quality cowhide leather available , and is recommended for its longevity even with daily use . calfskin is the soft and supple , making a full-grain calfskin belt one of the highest quality available . belts are also available in a range of other materials , including braided leather , tooled leather , suede , leather-backed ribbon , canvas , webbing , rope , vinyl , and others . . fashion and formality . belts have transformed from a strictly utilitarian item , to a fashion accessory in today 's modern era . there are several unspoken rules for belts when it comes to belt shape and color , especially for men wearing suits , vs . a woman 's choice of belt that is rooted in fashion trend , and not out always out of necessity . formal . belts for formal dress pants/attire are usually 28–32 & nbsp ; mm wide ( a little under 1 & nbsp ; inch ) . these belts offer specialty accents such as trapunto straps , beveled edges , fine stitch gauge , and a tapered tip . the leather , if it is made of leather , is commonly in a semi or high-shine finish ( ex : spazzalato leather ) , with a tight grain , and a smooth leather backing . dress belts typically have a buckle in a polished metal finish . when wearing a formal belt , the leather of your belt and shoes should match , and the metals of the buckle and accessories ( like watches ) should match . . casual . casual belts commonly worn with denim are usually between 35 & nbsp ; mm and 42 & nbsp ; mm wide ( a little under 1 & nbsp ; inch ) . these are typically made out of a one-piece leather construction with a textured appearance , with a belt buckle in an antiqued finish , wider , thicker stitching , or bar-tacking , to ensure a strong construction . gallery . chape et boucle ceinture lastours.jpg belt buckle medieval belt loop . ( findid 114251 ) . jpg belt buckle loop belt plate ( front ) ( findid 514984 ) . jpg belt plate stud ( findid 494030 ) . jpg belt stud post-medieval strap fitting ( sword belt fitting ) ( findid 639564 ) . jpg belt fitting belt mount met dp30089.jpg belt mount . half-belt . see also . utility or tool belt : an example of a utility belt is a police duty belt . a notable fictional example is batman 's utility belt . studded belt : a studded belt is typically made of leather or similar materials , and is decorated with metal studs ( see gallery above ) . studded belts are often a part of punk/emo scene , rave , skater , goth and metal fashion . japanese video game designer tetsuya nomura has used extra belts in character designs for video game characters such as lulu from final fantasy x and sora in kingdom hearts ii to create fantasy clothing . armband bandolier baldric belt buckle belting ( beating ) black belt ( martial arts ) championship belt cummerbund drawstring girdle haramaki ( clothing ) obi sash stable belt strap waistband . references .