Royal Mile

geography . retreating ice sheets , many millennia ago , deposited their glacial debris behind the hard volcanic plug of the castle rock on which edinburgh castle stands , resulting in a distinctive crag and tail formation . running eastwards from the crag on which the castle sits , the royal mile sits upon the ridge of the tail which slopes gently down to holyrood palace . steep closes ( or alleyways ) run between the many tall lands ( or tenement buildings ) off the main thoroughfare . the route runs from an elevation of above sea level at the palace to at the castle , giving an average gradient of 4.1 % . castle esplanade and castlehill . the castle esplanade was laid out as a parade ground , in 1753 , using spoil from the building of the royal exchange ( now the city chambers ) . it was formalised in 1816 when it was widened and provided with decorative railings and walls . the esplanade with its several monuments has been a-listed by historic scotland . it is the venue of the annual edinburgh military tattoo at which time specially designed temporary grandstands are erected . cannonball house has a cannonball lodged in the wall , often said to have been accidentally fired from the castle but which actually marks the elevation of comiston springs , three miles to the south of the castle , which fed a cistern on castlehill , one of the first piped water supplies in scotland . from the castle esplanade , the short section of road entitled castlehill is dominated by the former tolbooth-highland-st john 's church ( on the south side at the foot of this section ) , now the headquarters of the edinburgh international festival society - the hub , and on the north side by the outlook tower . the assembly hall of the church of scotland and new college are further down on the same side . the scottish parliament met in the assembly hall between 1999 and 2004 . lawnmarket . the lawnmarket is a separately named part of the high street . addresses are a continuation of the high street numbers . it runs from the west bow to st giles street . a charter of 1477 designated this part of the high street as the market-place for what was called '' inland merchandise '' - items such as yarn , stockings , coarse cloth and other similar articles . in later years , linen was the main product sold . as a result , it became known as the land market which was later corrupted to lawn market . today , the majority of shops in the street are aimed at tourists . on the north side is the preserved 17th century merchant 's townhouse gladstone 's land owned by the national trust for scotland . the lower end of the lawnmarket is intersected by george iv bridge on the right ( south ) and bank street on the left ( north ) , leading to the mound and the new town . the view down bank street is closed by the baroque headquarters of the bank of scotland . on the south-west corner of this intersection , with its entrance on george iv bridge , is a modern hotel , replacing the former lothian regional council offices . this building is of controversial design , winning both best building awards and the carbuncle cup in 2009/10 . between bank street and st giles street , marking the end of the lawnmarket , the high court of justiciary , scotland 's supreme criminal court , is housed in what was formerly the sheriff court . high street . on the south side , about one-third of the way down from the castle toward the palace is parliament square , named after the old parliament house which housed both the law courts and the old parliament of scotland between the 1630s and 1707 ( when its existence was ended by the act of union ) . parliament house now houses the court of session , courts of scotland . st giles ' cathedral , the high kirk of edinburgh , also stands in parliament square . by the west door of st giles ' is the heart of midlothian , a heart-shaped pattern built into the '' setted '' road , marking the site of the old tolbooth , formerly the centre of administration , taxation and justice in the burgh . the prison was described by sir walter scott as the '' heart of midlothian '' , and soon after demolition the city fathers marked the site with a heart mosaic . locals have traditionally spat upon the heart 's centre as a sign of contempt for the prison . on the north side , opposite st giles ' , stand edinburgh city chambers , where the city of edinburgh council meets . on the south side , just past the high kirk , is the mercat cross from which royal proclamations are read and the summoning of parliament announced . the whole south side of buildings from st giles to the tron kirk had to be rebuilt or refaced in the 1820s following the great edinburgh fire of 1824 . this was done in a georgian style , stepping down the hill . the central focus of the royal mile is a major intersection with the bridges . north bridge runs north over waverley station to the new town 's princes street . south bridge ( which appears at street level to be simply a road with shops on either side—only one arch is visible from below ) spans the cowgate to the south , a street in a hollow below , and continues as nicolson street past the old college building of the university of edinburgh . at john knox house the high street narrows to a section of the street formerly known as the netherbow , which , at its crossroads with jeffrey street ( north ) and st mary 's street ( south ) , marked the former city boundary . at this point stood the netherbow port , a fortified gateway between edinburgh and the canongate ( until 1856 a separate burgh ) , which was removed in 1764 to improve traffic flow . the scottish storytelling centre is a modern extension to john knox house , owned by the church of scotland . it opened in 2006 , replacing the former netherbow arts centre , which itself replaced the moray-knox church in the 1960s . following the english victory over the scots at the battle of flodden in 1513 , a city wall was built around edinburgh known as the flodden wall , some parts of which survive . the netherbow port was a gateway in this wall and brass studs in the road mark its former position . on the corner of st mary 's street is the world 's end pub which takes its name from the adjacent world 's end close , whimsically so named because this was in former times the last close in edinburgh before entering the canongate . . canongate . beyond the crossroads , the royal mile continues down the canongate , meaning literally '' the canons ' way '' when it was used in former times by the augustinian canons of holyrood abbey . the street continues downhill past moray house ( now the main academic offices of moray house school of education of the university of edinburgh ) , the canongate tolbooth ( now a museum of social history called the people 's story ) , the kirk of the canongate ( the canongate 's parish church and a thriving congregation of the church of scotland ) and the new scottish parliament building to holyrood palace and the ruined abbey . until 1856 the canongate was not merely a street , but the name of the surrounding burgh , separate from edinburgh and outside the flodden wall . abbey strand . this street is the short approach to holyrood palace at the foot of the canongate . one of the buildings on the north side was the house of lucky spence , a notorious brothel madam , remembered in allan ramsay 's poem , lucky spence 's last advice . on the south side is the queen 's gallery , used to exhibit items in the royal collection , in the shell of the former holyrood free church and duchess of gordon 's school . there are also the remains of the gatehouse of holyrood palace built by james iv , with a copy of the royal coat-of-arms of james v set in the wall . royal mile today . today , the royal mile is an eclectic mix of shops , restaurants , pubs and visitor attractions . during the annual edinburgh fringe , the high street becomes crowded with tourists , entertainers and buskers . parliament square is at the heart of scotland 's legal system , being the home of both the high court of justiciary and the court of session . . see also . list of closes on the royal mile moubray house museum of childhood royal mile police box writers ' museum . references . external links . city of edinburgh council edinburgh old town association