The Ruling Class (film)

plot . following the death from accidental asphyxiation of ralph gurney , the 13th earl of gurney ( harry andrews ) , jack gurney ( peter o'toole ) becomes the 14th earl of gurney . jack , a paranoid schizophrenia , thinks he is jesus christ and shocks his family and friends with his talk of returning to the world to bring it love and charity , not to mention his penchant for breaking out into song and dance routines and sleeping upright on a cross . when faced with unpalatable facts ( such as his identity as the 14th earl ) , jack puts them in his '' galvanized pressure cooker '' and they disappear . his unscrupulous uncle , sir charles ( william mervyn ) , marries him to his mistress , grace ( carolyn seymour ) , in hopes of producing an heir and putting his nephew in an institution ; the plan fails , however , when grace falls in love with jack . jack gains another ally in sir charles ' wife , lady claire ( coral browne ) , who hates her husband and befriends jack just to spite him . she also begins sleeping with jack 's psychiatrist , dr . herder ( michael bryant ) , to persuade him to cure jack quickly . herder attempts to cure him through intensive psychotherapy , to no avail ; jack so thoroughly believes that he is the '' god of love '' that he dismisses any suggestion to the contrary as insane . the night his wife goes into labour , herder makes a last effort at curing jack ; he introduces jack to mckyle ( nigel green ) , a patient who also believes himself to be christ—or as the patient puts it , '' the high voltage messiah '' —who subjects an unwitting jack to electroshock therapy . the plan works , and as grace is delivered of a healthy baby boy , jack proclaims '' i 'm jack , i 'm jack '' . his family takes this to mean that he has returned to his senses , but in reality he now believes himself to be jack the ripper . sir charles sends for a court-appointed psychiatrist ( graham crowden ) to evaluate jack , confident that his nephew will be sent to an asylum for life . he is once again thwarted when the psychiatrist discovers that jack was a fellow old etonian , bonds with him and declares him sane . jack murders lady claire in a fit of rage when the aging woman tries to seduce him . he frames the communist family butler , tucker ( arthur lowe ) , for the murder . sir charles suffers a debilitating stroke shortly afterward , and dr . herder has a nervous breakdown upon realizing what jack has done . jack assumes his place in the house of lords with a fiery speech in favour of capital and corporal punishment . his colleagues applaud wildly , completely unaware the speech is the ranting of a lunatic . when seen through his eyes , his colleagues - singing onward , christian soldiers - appear to be rotting corpses . their enthusiasm contrasts with the unfavourable reaction when jack believed he was christ . that night , he murders grace for expressing her love for him . her terrified scream is matched by the sound of a baby cooing '' i 'm jack , i 'm jack '' , suggesting that their son has inherited jack 's madness . cast . peter o'toole – jack gurney , 14th earl of gurney coral browne – lady claire william mervyn – sir charles james villiers – dinsdale , sir charles and lady claire 's son arthur lowe – tucker alastair sim – bishop lampton carolyn seymour – grace michael bryant – dr . herder graham crowden – dr . truscott harry andrews – ralph gurney , 13th earl of gurney hugh owens – the toastmaster hugh burden – matthew peake henry woolf , griffith davies , oliver mcgreevy – inmates kay walsh – mrs . piggott-jones patsy byrne – mrs . treadwell nigel green – mckyle cyril appleton , leslie schofield – mckyle 's assistants joan cooper – nurse brice declan mulholland – a poacher james grout – inspector brockett james hazeldine – fraser ronald adam , julian d'albie , llewellyn rees – lords kenneth benda – lord chancellor . production . o'toole held the rights to barnes 's play ; peter medak approached o'toole repeatedly about exercising those rights . according to medak , the project got started one night that he and o'toole were returning from the theatre , which '' meant stopping at every pub between soho and hampstead , and it did n't matter if it was after closing hour because he would knock on the door and just say 'peter 's here , ' and every door opened for him '' . later on , at o'toole 's apartment , the deeply inebriated actor phoned his manager and said , '' i 'm with the crazy hungarian and i know i 'm drunk but i give you 24 hours to set this movie up . '' the next day , medak received a call from united artists and a deal was put together to shoot the ruling class . peter barnes adapted the screenplay from his 1968 original , with few major changes . filmed at the sprawling estate of harlaxton manor , with the interiors reconstructed on sound stages , the production cost 1.4 million , with o'toole working for free ( he was instead paid a great deal for the big-budget man of la mancha , released by the same studio later the same year ) . the ruling class was the official british entry at the 1972 cannes film festival . reception . the film divided critics . the new york times described it as '' fantastic fun '' and variety called it '' brilliantly caustic '' , but the los angeles times called it '' snail-slow , shrill and gesticulating '' and newsweek said it was a '' sledgehammer satire '' . jay cocks called the screenplay a '' snarling , overwrought and somewhat parochial satire on aristocracy and privileged morality '' ; he called the film '' wretchedly photographed.as if it were shot under floodlights '' . in contrast cocks praised the performances by lowe , mervyn , browne , alastair sim and james villiers , but reserved most of his praise for o'toole , saying his performance is of '' such intensity that it may trouble sleep as surely as it will haunt memory . all actors can play insanity ; few play it well . o'toole begins where other actors stop , with the unfocused gaze , the abrupt bursts of frenzied high spirits and precipitous depressions . funny , disturbing , finally devastating , o'toole finds his way into the workings of madness , revealing the anger and consuming anguish at the source . '' despite mixed critical reaction to the film , o'toole 's performance was universally praised and garnered numerous prestigious awards and prizes , including an academy award nomination for best actor . reportedly , when united artists , its north american distributor , told producer jules buck that it would be cutting the film extensively for us release , buck punched the company 's london representative and bought the film back . avco embassy then bought the distribution rights and cut the film 's 154-minute running time by six minutes . the film was banned by the south african publications control board . in a review nearly 30 years after the ruling class was first released , ian christie said the film is '' unashamedly theatrical , and it emerges from a particularly interesting period in english culture when theatre and cinema together were mining a rich vein of flamboyant self-analysis . many stage works of this period cry out for filmic extension—in fact , medak had just filmed a very different play that mingled fantasy and reality by a writer often bracketed with barnes , peter nichols ’ a day in the death of joe egg . but what makes the ruling class exceptional ( and difficult for some ) are its outrageous mixing of genres and its sheer ambition . not only are there allusions to shakespeare and marlowe , but also to wilde and whitehall farce ; to the gentility of ealing studios , with a plot that distantly evokes that other great black comedy kind hearts and coronets , and to hammer 's gore-fests . '' . awards and nominations . national board of review awards 1972 - won nbr award ( best actor ) - peter o'toole 1972 cannes film festival - nominated for the palme d'or 45th academy awards - nominated for the academy award for best actor - peter o'toole 30th golden globe awards - nominated for the golden globe for best english language foreign film . subsequent history . in 1974 , following an earlier-than-normal tv screening of the film on bbc tv that broke a gentlemen 's agreement allowing a 'window ' of theatrical distribution before any tv screening , the uk 's cinema exhibitors ' association ( the theatrical distributors ' association ) recommended its members blacklist all future movies produced by jules buck . embassy pictures re-released the film in may 1983 . . references . external links . a grade one , galilee miracle from yoism.org , with a film clip in which the o'toole character claims that he is jesus christ and presents a '' miracle '' the ruling class an essay by ian christie at the criterion collection