Axiomatic system

properties . an axiomatic system is said to be consistent if it lacks contradiction . that is , it is impossible to derive both a statement and its negation from the system 's axioms . consistency is a key requirement for most axiomatic systems , as the presence of contradiction would allow any statement to be proven ( principle of explosion ) . in an axiomatic system , an axiom is called independent if it is not a theorem that can be derived from other axioms in the system . a system is called independent if each of its underlying axioms is independent . unlike consistency , independence is not a necessary requirement for a functioning axiomatic system — though it is usually sought after to minimize the number of axioms in the system . an axiomatic system is called complete if for every statement , either itself or its negation is derivable from the system 's axioms ( equivalently , every statement is capable of being proven true or false ) . . relative consistency . beyond consistency , relative consistency is also the mark of a worthwhile axiom system . this describes the scenario where the undefined terms of a first axiom system are provided definitions from a second , such that the axioms of the first are theorems of the second . a good example is the relative consistency of absolute geometry with respect to the theory of the real number . lines and points are undefined terms ( also called primitive notions ) in absolute geometry , but assigned meanings in the theory of real numbers in a way that is consistent with both axiom systems . models . a model for an axiomatic system is a well-defined set , which assigns meaning for the undefined terms presented in the system , in a manner that is correct with the relations defined in the system . the existence of a concrete model proves the consistency of a system . a model is called concrete if the meanings assigned are objects and relations from the real world , as opposed to an abstract model which is based on other axiomatic systems . models can also be used to show the independence of an axiom in the system . by constructing a valid model for a subsystem without a specific axiom , we show that the omitted axiom is independent if its correctness does not necessarily follow from the subsystem . two models are said to be isomorphic if a one-to-one correspondence can be found between their elements , in a manner that preserves their relationship . an axiomatic system for which every model is isomorphic to another is called categorial ( sometimes categorical ) . the property of categoriality ( categoricity ) ensures the completeness of a system , however the converse is not true : completeness does not ensure the categoriality ( categoricity ) of a system , since two models can differ in properties that can not be expressed by the semantics of the system . example . as an example , observe the following axiomatic system , based on first-order logic with additional semantics of the following countably infinitely many axioms added ( these can be easily formalized as an axiom schema ) : : \exist x_1 : \exist x_2 : \lnot ( x_1 x_2 ) ( informally , there exist two different items ) . : \exist x_1 : \exist x_2 : \exist x_3 : \lnot ( x_1 x_2 ) \land \lnot ( x_1 x_3 ) \land \lnot ( x_2 x_3 ) ( informally , there exist three different items ) . : . informally , this infinite set of axioms states that there are infinitely many different items . however , the concept of an infinite set can not be defined within the system — let alone the cardinality of such as set . the system has at least two different models – one is the natural numbers ( isomorphic to any other countably infinite set ) , and another is the real numbers ( isomorphic to any other set with the cardinality of the continuum ) . in fact , it has an infinite number of models , one for each cardinality of an infinite set . however , the property distinguishing these models is their cardinality — a property which can not be defined within the system . thus the system is not categorial . however it can be shown to be complete . axiomatic method . stating definitions and propositions in a way such that each new term can be formally eliminated by the priorly introduced terms requires primitive notions ( axioms ) to avoid infinite regress . this way of doing mathematics is called the axiomatic method . '' set theory and its philosophy , a critical introduction s.6 ; michael potter , oxford , 2004 a common attitude towards the axiomatic method is logicism . in their book principia mathematica , alfred north whitehead and bertrand russell attempted to show that all mathematical theory could be reduced to some collection of axioms . more generally , the reduction of a body of propositions to a particular collection of axioms underlies the mathematician 's research program . this was very prominent in the mathematics of the twentieth century , in particular in subjects based around homological algebra . the explication of the particular axioms used in a theory can help to clarify a suitable level of abstraction that the mathematician would like to work with . for example , mathematicians opted that rings need not be commutative , which differed from emmy noether 's original formulation . mathematicians decided to consider topological spaces more generally without the separation axiom which felix hausdorff originally formulated . the zermelo-fraenkel axioms , the result of the axiomatic method applied to set theory , allowed the '' proper '' formulation of set-theory problems and helped avoid the paradoxes of naive set theory . one such problem was the continuum hypothesis . zermelo–fraenkel set theory , with the historically controversial axiom of choice included , is commonly abbreviated zfc , where '' c '' stands for '' choice '' . many authors use zf to refer to the axioms of zermelo–fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice excluded . today zfc is the standard form of axiomatic set theory and as such is the most common foundation of mathematics . history . mathematical methods developed to some degree of sophistication in ancient egypt , babylon , india , and china , apparently without employing the axiomatic method . euclid of alexandria authored the earliest extant axiomatic presentation of euclidean geometry and number theory . many axiomatic systems were developed in the nineteenth century , including non-euclidean geometry , the foundations of real analysis , cantor 's set theory , frege 's work on foundations , and hilbert 's 'new ' use of axiomatic method as a research tool . for example , group theory was first put on an axiomatic basis towards the end of that century . once the axioms were clarified ( that inverse elements should be required , for example ) , the subject could proceed autonomously , without reference to the transformation group origins of those studies . issues . not every consistent body of propositions can be captured by a describable collection of axioms . in recursion theory , a collection of axioms is called recursive if a computer program can recognize whether a given proposition in the language is a theorem . gödel 's incompleteness theorems then tells us that there are certain consistent bodies of propositions with no recursive axiomatization . typically , the computer can recognize the axioms and logical rules for deriving theorems , and the computer can recognize whether a proof is valid , but to determine whether a proof exists for a statement is only soluble by '' waiting '' for the proof or disproof to be generated . the result is that one will not know which propositions are theorems and the axiomatic method breaks down . an example of such a body of propositions is the theory of the natural numbers , which is only partially axiomatized by the peano axioms ( described below ) . in practice , not every proof is traced back to the axioms . at times , it is not even clear which collection of axioms a proof appeals to . for example , a number-theoretic statement might be expressible in the language of arithmetic ( i.e . the language of the peano axioms ) and a proof might be given that appeals to topology or complex analysis . it might not be immediately clear whether another proof can be found that derives itself solely from the peano axioms . any more-or-less arbitrarily chosen system of axioms is the basis of some mathematical theory , but such an arbitrary axiomatic system will not necessarily be free of contradictions , and even if it is , it is not likely to shed light on anything . philosophers of mathematics sometimes assert that mathematicians choose axioms '' arbitrarily '' , but it is possible that although they may appear arbitrary when viewed only from the point of view of the canons of deductive logic , that appearance is due to a limitation on the purposes that deductive logic serves . example : the peano axiomatization of natural numbers . the mathematical system of natural numbers 0 , & thinsp ; 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , . is based on an axiomatic system first devised by the mathematician giuseppe peano in 1889 . he chose the axioms , in the language of a single unary function symbol s ( short for '' successor '' ) , for the set of natural numbers to be : there is a natural number 0 . every natural number a has a successor , denoted by sa . there is no natural number whose successor is 0 . distinct natural numbers have distinct successors : if a ≠ b , then sa ≠ sb . if a property is possessed by 0 and also by the successor of every natural number it is possessed by , then it is possessed by all natural numbers ( '' induction axiom '' ) . axiomatization . in mathematics , axiomatization is the process of taking a body of knowledge and working backwards towards its axioms . it is the formulation of a system of statements ( i.e . axioms ) that relate a number of primitive terms — in order that a consistent body of propositions may be derived deductively from these statements . thereafter , the proof of any proposition should be , in principle , traceable back to these axioms .