Armillaria

description . the basidiocarp ( reproductive structure ) of the fungus is a mushroom that grows on wood , typically in small dense clumps or tufts . their caps ( mushroom tops ) are typically yellow-brown , somewhat sticky to touch when moist , and , depending on age , may range in shape from conical to convex to depressed in the center . the stipe ( stalk ) may or may not have a ring . all armillaria species have a white spore print and none have a volva ( cup at base ) ( compare amanita ) . similar species include pholiota spp . which also grow in cespitose ( mat-like ) clusters on wood and fruit in the fall . pholiota spp . are separated from armillaria by its yellowish to greenish-yellow tone and a dark brown to grey-brown spore print . mushroom hunters need to be wary of galerina spp . which can grow side by side with armillaria spp . on wood . galerina have a dark brown spore print and are deadly poisonous ( alpha-amanitin ) – see : mushroom poisoning . plant pathology . honey fungus is a '' white rot '' fungus , which is a pathogenic organism that affects trees , shrubs , woody climbers and , rarely , woody herbaceous perennials . honey fungus can grow on living , decaying , and dead plant material . honey fungus spreads from living trees , dead and live roots and stumps by means of reddish-brown to black rhizomorphs ( root-like structures ) at the rate of approximately a year , but infection by root contact is possible . infection by spores is rare . rhizomorphs grow close to the soil surface ( in the top and invade new roots , or the root collar ( where the roots meet the stem ) of plants . an infected tree will die once the fungus has girdled it , or when significant root damage has occurred . this can happen rapidly , or may take several years . infected plants will deteriorate , although may exhibit prolific flower or fruit production shortly before death . initial symptoms of honey fungus infection include dieback or shortage of leaves in spring . rhizomorphs ( also called mycelial cords ) appear under the bark and around the tree , and mushrooms grow in clusters from the infected plant in autumn and die back after the first frost . however these symptoms and signs do not necessarily mean that the pathogenic strains of honey fungus are the cause , so other identification methods are advised before diagnosis . thin sheets of cream colored mycelium , beneath the bark at the base of the trunk or stem indicated that honey fungus is likely the pathogen . it will give off a strong mushroom scent and the mushrooms sometimes extend upward . on conifers honey fungus often exudes a gum or resin from cracks in the bark . taxonomy . the linkage of morphological , genetic , and molecular characters of armillaria over the past few decades has led to the recognition of intersterile groups designated as “ biological species ” . data from such studies , especially those using molecular diagnostic tools , have removed much uncertainty for mycologists and forest pathologists . new questions remain unanswered regarding the phylogeny of north american armillaria species and their relationships to their european counterparts , particularly within the “ armillaria mellea complex ” . some data suggest that north american and european a . gallica isolates are not monophyletic . although north american and european isolates of a . gallica may be interfertile , some north american isolates of a . gallica are more closely related to the north american taxon a . calvescens than to european isolates of a . gallica . the increase in genetic divergence has not necessarily barred inter-sterility between isolated populations of a . gallica . although the relationships among some groups in the genus seem clearer , the investigation of geographically diverse isolates has revealed that the relationship between some north american species is still unclear ( hughes et al . 2003 ) . hughes , m.b . ; weir , a . ; rogers , s.o . 2003 . phylogenetic reconstruction of north american armillaria species and related european taxa based on nuclear ribosomal dna internal transcribed spacers . p . 32 in laflamme , g . ; bérubé , j.a . ; bussières , g . ( eds . ) , root and butt rots of forest trees . proc . 10th international conference of root and butt rots , iufro working party 7.02.01 , quebec qc , sept . 2001 . nat . resour . can . , can . for . serv . , inf . rep . lau-x-126 . 450 p . intersterile species of armillaria occurring in north america ( north american biological species nabs ) were listed by mallett ( 1992 ) : mallett , k.i . 1992 . armillaria root rot in the canadian prairie provinces . for . can . , northwest region , north . for . centre , edmonton ab , inf . rep . nor-x-329 . 22 p . i armillaria ostoyae ( romagn . ) herink ii armillaria gemina bérubé & dessureault iii armillaria calvescens bérubé & dessureault v armillaria sinapina bérubé & dessureault vi armillaria mellea ( vahl . : fries ) kummer vii armillaria gallica ( marxmüller & romagn . ) ix armillaria nabsnona t.j . volk & burds . , ( 1996 ) x armillaria altimontana brazee , b . ortiz , banik & d.l . lindner ( 2012 ) and xi taxonomically undescribed nabs i , v , vii , ix , x , and xi have been found in british columbia ; i , iii , v have been found in the prairie provinces , with i and v occurring in both the taiga and montane ecology ; i , iii , v , and vii have been found in ontario ; and i , ii , iii , v , and vi have been found in quebec . armillaria ostoyae is the species most commonly found in all canadian provinces surveyed ( mallett 1990 ) . mallett , k.i . 1990 . armillaria root rot pathogens of the canadian prairie provinces . can . j . for . res . 20:1859–1863 . armillaria root rot occurs in the northwest territories , and was identified on white spruce at pine point on great slave lake prior to nabs findings . edibility . honey fungus are regarded in ukraine , russia , poland , germany and other european countries as one of the best wild mushrooms . they are commonly ranked above morels and chanterelles and only the cep/porcini is more highly prized . however , honey fungus must be thoroughly cooked as they are mildly poisonous raw . one of the four uk species can cause sickness when ingested with alcohol . for those unfamiliar with the species , it is advisable not to drink alcohol for 12 hours before and 24 hours after eating this mushroom to avoid any possible nausea and vomiting . however , if these rules are followed this variety of mushroom is a delicacy with a distinctive mushroomy and nutty flavour . reference texts for identification are collins complete british mushrooms and toadstools for the variety of field pictures in it , and roger philips ' mushrooms for the quality of his out of field pictures and descriptions . in norway , few mycologists have started to regard honey fungus as poisonous , because the norway health department is moving away from the parboiling practice . . hosts . potential hosts include conifers and various monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous trees , shrubs , and herbaceous species , ranging from asparagus and strawberry to large forest trees ( patton and vasquez bravo 1967 ) . patton , r.f . ; vasquez bravo , r . 1967 . armillaria root rot armillaria mellea ( vahl ex fr . ) kummer . p . 37–38 in davidson , a.g . ; prentice , r.m . ( compilers and eds . ) . important forest insects and diseases of mutual concern to canada , the united states , and mexico . can . dep . for . rural devel . , ottawa on , pub . 1180 . armillaria root rot enters hosts through the roots . in alberta , 75 % of trap logs ( mallett and hiratsuka 1985 ) inserted into the soil between planted spruce became infected with the distinctive white mycelium of armillaria within one year . of the infestations , 12 % were a . ostoyae , and 88 % were a . sinapina ( blenis et al . 1995 ) . blenis , p . ; titus , s . ; mallet , k . 1995 . impact of armillaria root rot in intensively managed white spruce/asspen stands . nat . resour . can./alberta land and for . serv . , edmonton ab , can./alberta for . resour . devel . agree . ( frda ) , project a5023-129 rep . 5 p . reviews of the biology , diversity , pathology , and control of armillaria in fox ( 2000 ) fox , r.t.v . 2000 . armillaria root rot : biology and control of honey fungus . intercept , andover , hants . , england . 222 p . are useful .