Regency era

society . the regency is noted for its elegance and achievements in the fine arts and architecture . this era encompassed a time of great social , political , and economic change . war was waged with napoleon and on other fronts , affecting commerce both at home and internationally , as well as politics . however , despite the bloodshed and warfare , the regency was also a period of great refinement and cultural achievement , which shaped and altered the societal structure of britain as a whole . one of the greatest patrons of the arts and architecture was the prince regent himself ( the future george iv ) . upper-class society flourished in a sort of mini-renaissance of culture and refinement . as one of the greatest patrons of the arts , the prince regent ordered the costly building and refurbishing of the beautiful and exotic brighton pavilion , the ornate carlton house , as well as many other public works and architecture ( see john nash , james burton , and decimus burton ) . naturally , this required dipping into the treasury , and the regent , and later , the king 's exuberance often outstripped his pocket , at the people 's expense . parissien , steven . ( 2001 ) . george iv : inspiration of the regency . new york : st . martin 's press . p . 117 . society during that period was considerably stratified . in many ways , there was a dark counterpart to the beautiful and fashionable sectors of england of this time . in the dingier , less affluent areas of london , thievery , womanising , gambling , the existence of rookeries , and constant drinking ran rampant . low , donald a . ( 1999 ) . the regency underworld . gloucestershire : sutton . p . x . the population boom—comprising an increase from just under a million in 1801 to one and a quarter million by 1820 —created a wild , roiling , volatile , and vibrant scene . according to robert southey , the difference between the strata of society was vast indeed : the squalor that existed beneath the glamour and gloss of regency society provided sharp contrast to the prince regent 's social circle . poverty was addressed only marginally . the formation of the regency after the retirement of george iii saw the end of a more pious and reserved society , and gave birth of a more frivolous , ostentatious one . this change was influenced by the regent himself , who was kept entirely removed from the machinations of politics and military exploits . this did nothing to channel his energies in a more positive direction , thereby leaving him with the pursuit of pleasure as his only outlet , as well as his sole form of rebellion against what he saw as disapproval and censure in the form of his father . smith p . 14 . driving these changes were not only money and rebellious pampered youth , but also significant technological advancements . in 1814 , the times adopted steam printing . by this method it could now print 1,100 sheets every hour , not 200 as before—a fivefold increase in production capability and demand . morgan , marjorie . ( 1994 ) . manners , morals , and class in england , 1774–1859 . new york : st . martin 's press . p . 34 . this development brought about the rise of the wildly popular fashionable novels in which publishers spread the stories , rumours , and flaunting of the rich and aristocratic , not so secretly hinting at the specific identity of these individuals . the gap in the hierarchy of society was so great that those of the upper classes could be viewed by those below as wondrous and fantastical fiction , something entirely out of reach yet tangibly there . events . ; 1811 : george augustus frederick , prince of wales , began his nine-year tenure as regent and became known as the prince regent . this sub-period of the georgian era began the formal regency . the duke of wellington held off the french at fuentes de oñoro and albuhera in the peninsular war . the prince regent held a fête at 9:00 & nbsp ; p.m . 19 june 1811 , at carlton house in celebration of his assumption of the regency . luddite uprisings . glasgow weavers riot . ; 1812 : assassination of spencer perceval in the house of commons . the final shipment of the elgin marbles arrived in england . sarah siddons retired from the stage . shipping and territory disputes started the war of 1812 between the united kingdom and the united states . the british were victorious over french armies at the battle of salamanca . gas company ( gas light and coke company ) founded . charles dickens , english writer and social critic of the victorian era , was born on 7 february 1812 . ; 1813 : pride and prejudice by jane austen was published . william hedley 's puffing billy , an early steam locomotive , ran on smooth rails . quaker prison reformer elizabeth fry started her ministry at newgate prison . robert southey became poet laureate . ; 1814 : invasion of france by allies led to the treaty of paris , ended one of the napoleonic wars . napoleon abdicated and was exiled to elba . the duke of wellington was honoured at burlington house in london . british soldiers burn the white house . last river thames frost fair was held , which was the last time the river froze . gas lighting introduced in london streets . ; 1815 : napoleon i of france defeated by the hundred days at the battle of waterloo . napoleon was exiled to st . helena . the english corn laws restricted corn imports . sir humphry davy patented the miners ' safety lamp . john loudon macadam 's road construction method adopted . ; 1816 : income tax abolished . a '' year without a summer '' followed a volcanic eruption in indonesia . mary shelley wrote frankenstein . william cobbett published his newspaper as a pamphlet . the british returned indonesia to the dutch . regent 's canal , london , phase one of construction . beau brummell escaped his creditors by fleeing to france . ; 1817 : antonin carême created a spectacular feast for the prince regent at the royal pavilion in brighton . the death of princess charlotte ( the prince regent 's daughter ) from complications of childbirth changed obstetrical practices . elgin marbles shown at the british museum . captain bligh died . ; 1818 : queen charlotte died at kew . manchester cotton spinners went on strike . riot in stanhope , county durham between lead miners and the bishop of durham 's men over weardale game rights . piccadilly circus constructed in london . frankenstein published . emily brontë born . ; 1819 : peterloo massacre . princess alexandrina victoria ( future queen victoria ) was christened in kensington palace . ivanhoe by walter scott was published . sir stamford raffles , a british administrator , founded singapore . first steam-propelled vessel ( the ss savannah ) crossed the atlantic and arrived in liverpool from savannah , georgia . ; 1820 : death of george iii and the accession of the prince regent as george iv . the house of lords passed a bill to grant george iv a divorce from queen caroline , but because of public pressure , the bill was dropped . john constable began work on the hay wain . cato street conspiracy failed . royal astronomical society founded . venus de milo discovered . places . the following is a list of places associated with the regency era : the adelphi theatre almack's angelo 's , a fencing parlor astley 's amphitheatre attingham park bath , somerset brighton pavilion brighton and hove brooks's burlington arcade bury st edmunds carlton house , london chapel royal , st . james's cheltenham , gloucestershire circulating libraries , 1801–25 covent garden custom office , london docks doncaster races drury lane floris of london fortnum & mason gretna green gentleman jackson 's saloon , a pugilist 's parlor by bare-knuckle champion john jackson hatchard's haymarket theatre her majesty 's theatre holland house houses of parliament hyde park , london jermyn street kensington gardens king of clubs ( whig club ) list of london 's gentlemen 's clubs lloyd 's of london london dock london institution london post office lyme regis marshalsea , closed in 1811 , new site opened in 1811 where white lion prison had been . primarily a debtors ' prison , also housed seditionists and political prisoners mayfair , london newgate prison newmarket racecourse the old bailey old bond street opera house pall mall , london the pantheon ranelagh gardens regent 's park regent street royal circus royal opera house royal parks of london rundell and bridge jewellery firm savile row st george 's , hanover square st . james's sydney gardens , bath temple of concord , st . james 's park tattersalls the thames tunnel tunbridge wells vauxhall gardens west end of london watier's white's . important people . for more names see newman ( 1997 ) . rudolph ackermann arthur aikin henry addington , 1st viscount sidmouth william arden , 2nd baron alvanley elizabeth armistead jane austen charles babbage joseph banks richard barry , 7th earl of barrymore william blake beau brummell mary brunton lord frederick beauclerk henrietta ponsonby , countess of bessborough marguerite gardiner , countess of blessington bow street runners caroline of brunswick frances burney james burton decimus burton lord byron george campbell , 6th duke of argyll robert stewart , viscount castlereagh george canning george cayley georgiana cavendish , duchess of devonshire princess charlotte augusta of wales john clare william cobbett samuel taylor coleridge patrick colquhoun john constable elizabeth conyngham , marchioness conyngham tom cribb george cruikshank john dalton humphry davy john disney david douglas maria edgeworth pierce egan thomas bruce , 7th earl of elgin grace elliott maria fitzherbert elizabeth fry david garrick george iv of the united kingdom , prince of wales , prince regent then king james gillray frederick robinson , 1st viscount goderich william grenville , 1st baron grenville charles grey , 2nd earl grey emma , lady hamilton william harcourt , 3rd earl harcourt william hazlitt william hedley leigh hunt isabella ingram-seymour-conway , marchioness of hertford john jackson edward jenner sarah , countess of jersey edmund kean john keats lady caroline lamb charles lamb emily lamb , countess cowper sir thomas lawrence , pra dorothea lieven mary linwood robert jenkinson , 2nd earl of liverpool ada lovelace john loudon mcadam lord melbourne hannah more john nash horatio nelson , 1st viscount nelson george ormerod henry paget , 1st marquess of anglesey thomas paine john palmer , royal mail sir robert peel spencer perceval william pitt the younger jane porter hermann , fürst von pückler-muskau thomas de quincey thomas raikes humphry repton samuel rogers thomas rowlandson james sadler walter scott richard sharp ( politician ) percy bysshe shelley mary shelley richard sheridan sarah siddons john soane adam sedgwick robert stewart , viscount castlereagh john wedgwood arthur wellesley , 1st duke of wellington amelia stewart , viscountess castlereagh benjamin thompson , count rumford joseph mallord william turner henry vassall-fox , 3rd baron holland benjamin west william wilberforce william hyde wollaston mary wollstonecraft william wordsworth jeffry wyattville thomas young . newspapers , pamphlets , and publications . ackermann 's repository the gentleman 's magazine british journalists 1750–1820 newspapers in the regency era the times the observer weekly political register , william cobbett la belle assemblée . gallery . file : neckclothitania-1818.gif '' neckclothitania '' , 1818 file : astley 's amphitheatre microcosm edited.jpg astley 's amphitheatre , 1808-1811 file : brighton pavilion from views of the royal pavilion ( 1826 ) edited.jpg brighton pavilion , 1826 file : carltonhousefacade.jpg carlton house , pall mall london . file : vauxhall garden edited.jpg vauxhall gardens , 1808–1811 file : church of all souls-2.jpg church of all souls , architect john nash , 1823 file : regent 's canal limehouse1823.jpg regent 's canal , limehouse , 1823 file : frost fair of 1814 by luke clenell.jpg frost fair , thames river , 1814 file : burlington_arcade_by_thomas_hosmer_shepherd_1827-28.jpg the piccadilly entrance to the burlington arcade , 1819 file : princess charlotte augusta of wales and leopold i after george dawe.jpg princess charlotte augusta of wales and prince leopold of saxe-coburg-saalfeld , 1817 file : morning-dress-ackermanns-ca1820.png morning dress , ackermann , 1820 file : humphry repton01.jpg water at wentworth , humphry repton , 1752–1818 file : hanover square horwood 1819.jpg hanover square , horwood map , 1819 file : brummelldighton1805.jpg beau brummell , 1805 file : battle of waterloo 1815.png battle of waterloo , 1815 file : almack 's assembly rooms inside.jpg almack 's assembly room , 1805–1825 file : drury lane interior 1808.jpg drury lane interior . 1808 file : james sadler - 12 aug 1811 ascent.jpg balloon ascent , james sadler , 1811 file : rowlandson - the anatomist.jpg the anatomist , thomas rowlandson , 1811 file : regent 's park london from 1833 schmollinger map.jpg regent 's park , schmollinger map , 1833 file : national gallery at 100 pall mall.jpg 100 pall mall , former location of national gallery , 1824–1834 file : cognocenti-antique-gillray.jpeg cognocenti , gillray cartoon , 1801 file : custom office london dock.jpg custom office , london docks , 1811-1843 file : london dock custom and excise 1820.jpg custom and excise , london docks , 1820 file : mailcoach.jpg mail coach , 1827 file : assassination-of-spencer-perceval.jpg assassination of spencer perceval , 1812 file : pillory charing cross edited.jpg the pillory at charing cross , ackermann 's microcosm of london , 1808–11 file : covent garden theatre 1827-28.jpg covent garden theatre , 1827–28 . see also . regency architecture regency fashions regency dance régence , the period of the early 18th-century regency in france society of dilettanti . references . further reading . bowman , peter james . the fortune hunter : a german prince in regency england . oxford : signal books , 2010 . david , saul . prince of pleasure the prince of wales and the making of the regency . new york : atlantic monthly press , 1998 . knafla , david , crime , punishment , and reform in europe , greenwood publishing , 2003 lapp , robert keith . contest for cultural authority – hazlitt , coleridge , and the distresses of the regency . detroit : wayne state up , 1999 . marriott , j . a . r . england since waterloo ( 1913 ) online morgan , marjorie . manners , morals , and class in england , 1774–1859 . new york : st . martin 's press , 1994 . morrison , robert . the regency years : during which jane austen writes , napoleon fights , byron makes love , and britain becomes modern . 2019 , new york : w . w . norton , london : atlantic books online review online review ; 904pp ; 1121 short articles on britain by 250 experts parissien , steven . george iv inspiration of the regency . new york : st . martin 's p , 2001 . pilcher , donald . the regency style : 1800–1830 ( london : batsford , 1947 ) . rendell , jane . the pursuit of pleasure : gender , space & architecture in regency london ( bloomsbury , 2002 ) . smith , e . a . george iv . ( yale up , 1999 ) . webb , r.k . modern england : from the 18th century to the present ( 1968 ) online widely recommended university textbook wellesley , lord gerald . '' regency furniture '' , the burlington magazine for connoisseurs 70 , no . 410 ( 1937 ) : 233–41 . white , r.j . life in regency england ( batsford , 1963 ) . crime and punishment . emsley , clive . crime and society in england : 1750-1900 ( 2013 ) . innes , joanna and john styles . '' the crime wave : recent writing on crime and criminal justice in eighteenth-century england '' journal of british studies 25 4 ( 1986 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 380–435 [ online . low , donald a . the regency underworld . gloucestershire : sutton , 1999 . morgan , gwenda , and peter rushton . rogues , thieves and the rule of law : the problem of law enforcement in north-east england , 1718-1820 ( 2005 ) . primary sources . simond , louis . journal of a tour and residence in great britain , during the years 1810 and 1811 online . external links . greenwood 's map of london , 1827 horwood map of london , 1792 – 1799 results of the 1801 and 1811 census of london , the european magazine and london review , 1818 , p . & nbsp ; 50 the bluestocking archive end of an era : 1815–1830 new york public library , england – the regency style regency style furniture