Power metal

origins . image : kai hansen.jpg 180px thumb kai hansen of gamma ray during a show in barcelona , spain . hansen is regarded as one of the biggest influences in the early development of power metal . anthropologist sam dunn traced the origins of power metal back to the late 1970s , when the groundwork for power metal lyrical style was laid down by ronnie james dio . the fantasy-oriented lyrics he wrote for rainbow , concentrated around medieval , renaissance , folk , and science fiction themes , directly influenced modern power metal bands . metal – a headbanger 's journey , dvd , asin b000fs9ozy ( 2005 ) . it is mentioned that songs '' stargazer '' and '' a light in the black '' , from the 1976 album rising and 1978 's long live rock ' n ' roll , '' kill the king '' and '' lady of the lake '' , respectively , might be among the earliest examples of power metal . in his 2011 documentary series metal evolution , dunn further explained how rob halford of judas priest created a blueprint for power metal vocal delivery . his almost constant high-pitched singing became one of the main characteristics of power metal . the twin-guitar sound promoted by duo of k . k . downing and glenn tipton highly influenced this subgenre . another pioneer in the power metal genre is jon mikl thor , who was a strong inspiration to the american band manowar . another british band , iron maiden , brought epic and melodic sensibility to metal , creating anthemic , singalong music , an approach widely embraced by modern power metal musicians . the emergence of the early german power-metal scene in particular was made possible by scorpions and accept . swedish guitarist yngwie malmsteen made a significant impact on many future power metal guitarists , with his accurate and fast neo-classical style . his bandmate jens johansson modernized the keyboard sound of deep purple 's jon lord , which was further incorporated into the genre . manowar 's mythological sword and sorcery lyrics influenced a number of power metal bands . throughout the early 1980s especially in the years 1982 and 1983 , a us power metal style first emerged from traditional heavy metal , the new wave of british heavy metal ( nwobhm ) , and thrash/speed metal influences . the exact first origin is often contested , but bands such as cirith ungol , jag panzer , manilla road , omen , riot , savatage , and warlord are thought to have influenced the earliest development of the style . more concretely , in 1987 german band helloween released their second album , keeper of the seven keys : part i , cited by allmusic as '' a landmark recording that remains arguably the single most influential power metal album to date . its volatile combination of power and melody would inspire an entire generation of metal bands '' . helloween – biography this release influenced a european power metal style to evolve , which proliferated throughout the globe and since the start of the 1990s is still the most commonly heard style of power metal . musical characteristics . power metal is today associated with fast tempo and melodic harmonies , the sound tempered by characteristics of speed metal , power metal 's musical forerunner . vocals . power metal is highly focused on the vocalist , with '' clean '' vocals being much more prevalent than the growling vocals often associated with extreme metal . inspired by ronnie james dio , bruce dickinson , rob halford , geoff tate , and other rock and heavy metal vocalists , power metal vocals are often in a high register , and the singer 's vocal range is usually wide . what is power metal ? ( about.com ) the majority of the genre 's vocalists sing in the tenor range and are capable of hitting very high notes , for example timo kotipelto of stratovarius , tony kakko of sonata arctica , michael kiske ( helloween ) and andre matos ( ex-angra ) . there are many exceptions who sing in either baritone or bass range . some vocalists sing in a harsh , thrash metal style , including chris boltendahl of grave digger , kai hansen of gamma ray , peavy wagner of rage , and wintersun 's jari mäenpää . many power metal vocalists , most notably hansi kürsch of blind guardian , record multi-layered vocals reminiscent of queen creating a choral effect . helloween cover queen 's song 'sheer heart attack ' ( blabbermouth net ) . lyrical themes . themes that frequently feature throughout other metal subgenres , such as religion and politics , are comparatively rare in power metal - albeit not unheard of . power metal 's lyrical themes often focus on fantasy and mythology , camaraderie and hope , personal struggles and emotions , war and death , or combinations of the aforementioned . for example , finnish band sonata arctica have been known for focusing their lyrics of their songs on fantasy but also have many songs based on reality , love and relationships . many power metal bands based their concept albums on fantasy books and national epics ; blind guardian based nightfall in middle-earth on tolkien 's the silmarillion , while kamelot based epica and the black halo on goethe 's faust . some bands have even written their own imaginary stories , like rhapsody of fire 's emerald sword saga and the dark secret saga , iced earth 's something wicked saga , or avantasia by edguy 's tobias sammet . historical themes have also seen usage in the works of bands , most famously sabaton , whose lyrics extensively focus on historical wars , battles , and individuals that received notable recognition for their wartime accomplishments . examples include world war i , world war ii , vikings , samurai , and much more from around the world including the american , swedish and german militaries . serenity , an austrian ( symphonic ) power metal band , focuses mainly on historical figures and events , including francis drake , marco polo , galileo , beethoven , and napoleon . contrary to traditional power metal music , powerwolf focuses on transylvanian werewolf and vampire legends and dark myths . the lyrics of the band are characterized by the treatment of christianity and ancient romanian legends . powerwolf , however , do not consider themselves a religious band , but rather call themselves spiritual . instrumentation . power metal guitarists and bassists generally play rapid streams of notes , but change chords comparatively slowly , with a harmonic tempo of once per measure or slower . fast and technically demanding guitar solos , however , are almost guaranteed . the slow changing of chords is significant in defining power metal just as the fast rapid chord changes often define traditional thrash metal . power metal often makes use of major chord progressions as well as circle progressions . some of the most influential and acclaimed power metal guitarists are kai hansen of gamma ray , michael weikath of helloween , and timo tolkki formerly of stratovarius . it is a common trait in power metal for the bass guitar to take a back seat , so to speak ; often simply providing the chord root notes and being drowned out by the more prevalent rhythm guitars . however , some power metal bands incorporate bass that is more audible with colorful patterns distinct from the rhythm guitars , such as helloween , hibria , and symphony x . many power metal drummers play double bass patterns with either two bass drums , or utilize a double bass pedal ; using them to play a constant stream of sixteenth note with snare drum accents on the beat , a style not restricted to , but most often associated with , power metal . the style was used by drummer ingo schwichtenberg of helloween , setting a blueprint for many other drummers to follow . others , such as the drummers of blind guardian and iced earth , use a more thrash metal style of drumming with rapid bursts of double bass that involve three to six beats with the double kick . power metal bands often incorporate keyboards into their musical arrangements , something popularized by jens johansson of stratovarius , though their usage varies from subtle accents to a full-blown melody line . some power metal bands also record with symphonic elements , and as such , they utilize a full orchestra to fill the role usually played by the keyboardist . styles . american style . the american branch of power metal emerged in early 1980s in the united states , drawing influence primarily from traditional metal and the nwobhm . though very close to its roots , us power metal ( often abbreviated uspm ) is often faster and more energetic than traditional heavy metal , with a more riff-driven approach and a relative lack of keyboard usage compared to its later european counterpart . however , it is often more melodic than thrash metal , with a greater emphasis on guitar leads . uspm is also notable for its widespread ( but not universal ) use of high-register operatic vocals , a trend which would continue with the rise of european power metal in the late 1980s and early 1990s . this style is not exclusive to north america , as european bands such as sacred steel , majesty , and australian band pegazus later adopted a style inspired by uspm bands in the 1990s . the early releases of progressive metal bands queensrÿche and fates warning , such as the warning ( 1984 ) and the spectre within ( 1985 ) , heavily influenced a number of bands that were to develop a common sound towards the late 1980s . among the better known representatives of the style , such as manowar , vicious rumors , virgin steele , riot , or jag panzer , a small number of bands enriched their sound with progressive and epic elements ( the most obvious examples being crimson glory , savatage , sanctuary and the epic doom metal band cirith ungol ) ; or even with thrash metal elements , e.g . , iced earth . power-progressive metal ( american style ) ( progarchives.com ) us power metal saw a sharp decline in popularity at the beginning of the 1990s , though the style has rebounded somewhat in the past decade , with bands such as liege lord or heir apparent reforming for live performances '' reunited liege lord to headline next year 's keep it true xvi festival '' . and some , like helstar and omen still releasing new material . european style . european power metal originated from speed metal and the nwobhm , emerging in late 1980s , particularly in germany , with helloween , running wild , rage , grave digger , and blind guardian . the second and third helloween albums ; keeper of the seven keys : part i ( 1987 ) and part ii ( 1988 ) are usually considered the first proper european power metal albums . what is power metal ? , by dan marsicano ( about.com ) alongside the early german bands came finland 's stratovarius in late 1980s . these bands pioneered the genre , but took it in somewhat different directions . helloween , followed by early gamma ray , mixed fast palm muted speed metal riffs with high-pitched clean vocals , and with a strong focus on melody and uplifting , positive themes . stratovarius further developed this melodic direction by making heavy use of keyboards , with lyrics dealing with emotions and personal issues . blind guardian utilized the technique of vocal and guitar overdubbing to create an epic atmosphere , with lyrical content strongly based on fantasy novels , myths and legends . the symphonic and neo-classical elements also found their way through power metal with bands like rhapsody of fire ( italy ) , serenity ( austria ) and nightwish ( finland ) . at the same time , bands such as hammerfall simplified their power metal to bring it closer to traditional heavy metal . over the late 90s and early 00s , power metal spread over europe especially as well as the rest of the world , often incorporating new influences . italy 's elvenking , sweden 's falconer , spain 's mägo de oz , and denmark 's wuthering heights integrated elements of folk music with power metal . angra , kamelot , and especially symphony x are known for combining progressive and power metal . some bands are known for combining power metal with more aggressive musical forms ; children of bodom were one of the earliest who combined elements of power metal and an early form of melodic death metal . european style power metal became widespread in comparison with us style as of the mid 1990s , with numerous north american bands such as theocracy , borealis , forgotten tales , avian , pharaoh , circle ii circle , and kamelot demonstrating the style . this european style of power metal is sometimes considered the '' second wave '' of power metal since its spread was in the late 1980s and especially the mid-late 1990s rather than proliferating throughout the 1980s , and the widespread influence and development of the genre that came in its tow while us '' first wave '' style markedly declined . see also . list of power metal bands neoclassical metal progressive metal symphonic metal . references . bibliography . . external links . power metal at allmusic power metal radio