Halibut

species of the genus hippoglossus . species of the genus hippoglossus atlantic halibut , hippoglossus hippoglossus – lives in the north atlantic pacific halibut , hippoglossus stenolepis – lives in the north pacific ocean . physical characteristics . the atlantic halibut is the world 's largest flatfish . the igfa record was apparently broken off the waters of norway in july 2013 by a , fish . this was awaiting certification as of 2013 . 515-pound halibut caught by marco leibenow near norway may be world record woods ' n water magazine , 19 august 2013 . in july 2014 , a pacific halibut was caught in glacier bay , alaska ; this is , however , discounted from records because the halibut was shot and harpooned before being hauled aboard . halibut are dark brown on the top side with an off-white underbelly and have very small scales invisible to the naked eye embedded in their skin . pacific halibut ( hippoglossus stenolepis ) , alaska department of fish and game . adfg.state.ak.us . retrieved 19 august 2012 . halibut are symmetrical at birth with one eye on each side of the head . then , about six months later , during larval metamorphosis one eye migrates to the other side of the head . the eyes are permanently set once the skull is fully ossified . at the same time , the stationary-eyed side darkens to match the top side , while the other side remains white . this color scheme disguises halibut from above ( blending with the ocean floor ) and from below ( blending into the light from the sky ) and is known as countershading . diet . halibut feed on almost any fish or animal they can fit into their mouths . juvenile halibut feed on small crustaceans and other bottom-dwelling organisms . animals found in their stomachs include sand lance , octopus , crab , salmon , hermit crabs , lamprey , sculpin , cod , pollock , herring , and flounder , as well as other halibut . halibut live at depths ranging from a few meters to hundreds of meters , and although they spend most of their time near the bottom , halibut may move up in the water column to feed . in most ecosystems , the halibut is near the top of the marine food chain . in the north pacific , common predators are sea lions , killer whales , salmon sharks and humans . halibut fishery . the north pacific commercial halibut fishery dates to the late 19th century and today is one of the region 's largest and most lucrative . in canadian and us waters , long-line fishing predominates , using chunks of octopus ( '' devilfish '' ) or other bait on circle hook attached at regular intervals to a weighted line that can extend for several miles across the bottom . the fishing vessel retrieves the line after several hours to a day . the effects of long-line gear on habitats are poorly understood , but could include disturbance of sediments , benthic structures , and other structures . international management is thought to be necessary , because the species occupies waters of the united states , canada , russia , and possibly japan ( where the species is known to the japanese as ohyo ) , and matures slowly . halibut do not reproduce until age eight , when about long , so commercial capture below this length prevents breeding and is against us and canadian regulations supporting sustainability . pacific halibut fishing is managed by the international pacific halibut commission . for most of the modern era , halibut fishery operated as a derby . regulators declared time slots when fishing was open ( typically 24–48 hours at a time ) and fisherman raced to catch as many pounds as they could within that interval . this approach accommodated unlimited participation in the fishery while allowing regulators to control the quantity of fish caught annually by controlling the number and timing of openings . the approach led to unsafe fishing , as openings were necessarily set before the weather was known , forcing fisherman to leave port regardless of the weather . the approach limited fresh halibut to the markets to several weeks per year , when the gluts would push down the price received by fishermen . individual fishing quotas . in 1995 , us regulators allocated individual fishing quotas ( ifqs ) to existing fishery participants based on each vessel 's documented historical catch . ifqs grant to holders a specific proportion of each year 's total allowable catch ( tac ) . the fishing season is about eight months . the ifq system improved both safety and product quality by providing a stable flow of fresh halibut to the marketplace . critics of the program suggest , since holders can sell their quota and the fish are a public resource , the ifq system gave a public resource to the private sector . the fisheries were managed through a treaty between the united states and canada per recommendations of the international pacific halibut commission , formed in 1923 . a significant sport fishing in alaska and british columbia has emerged , where halibut are prized game and food fish . sport fisherman use large rods and reels with line , and often bait with herring , large jigs , or whole salmon heads . halibut are strong and fight strenuously when exposed to air . smaller fish will usually be pulled on board with a gaff and may be clubbed or even punched in the head to prevent them from thrashing around on the deck . in both commercial and sport fisheries , standard procedure is to shoot or otherwise subdue very large halibut over before landing them . alaska 's sport fishery is an element of the state 's tourism economy . as food . nutrition . raw pacific or atlantic halibut meat is 80 % water and 19 % protein , with negligible fat and no carbohydrates ( table ) . in a reference amount , raw halibut contains rich content ( 20 % of more of the daily value , dv ) of protein , selenium ( 65 % dv ) , phosphorus ( 34 % dv ) , vitamin d ( 32 % dv ) , and several b vitamins : niacin , vitamin b6 , and vitamin b12 ( 42-46 % dv ) . cooked halibut meat – presumably through the resulting dehydration – has relatively increased protein content and reduced b vitamin content ( per 100 grams ) , while magnesium , phosphorus , and selenium are rich in content . . food preparation . halibut yield large fillets from both sides of the fish , with the small round cheeks providing an additional source of meat . halibut are often boiled , deep-fried or grilled while fresh . smoking is more difficult with halibut meat than it is with salmon , due to its ultra-low fat content . eaten fresh , the meat has a clean taste and requires little seasoning . halibut is noted for its dense and firm texture . halibut have historically been an important food source to alaska natives and canadian first nations , and continue to be a key element to many coastal subsistence economies . accommodating the competing interests of commercial , sport , and subsistence users is a challenge . as of 2008 , the atlantic population was so depleted through overfishing that it might be declared an endangered species . according to seafood watch , consumers should avoid atlantic halibut . most halibut eaten on the east coast of the united states is from the pacific . in 2012 , sportfishermen in cook inlet reported increased instances of a condition known as '' mushy halibut syndrome '' . the meat of affected fish has a '' jelly-like '' consistency . when cooked it does not flake in the normal manner of halibut but rather falls apart . the meat is still perfectly safe to eat but the appearance and consistency are considered unappetizing . the exact cause of the condition is unknown but may be related to a change in diet . smith , brian mushy halibut syndrome reported by inlet fishermen peninsula clarion/anchorage daily news 30 june 2012 alaska department of fish and game mushy halibut syndrome . other species sometimes called '' halibut '' . of the same family ( pleuronectidae ) as proper halibut kamchatka flounder , atheresthes evermanni – sometimes called '' arrowtooth halibut '' shotted halibut , eopsetta grigorjewi – often called '' shotted halibut '' greenland turbot , reinhardtius hippoglossoides – often called '' greenland halibut '' spotted halibut , verasper variegatus family paralichthyidae california flounder , paralichthys californicus – sometimes called '' california halibut '' olive flounder , paralichthys olivaceus – sometimes called '' bastard halibut '' family psettodidae indian spiny turbot – sometimes called '' indian halibut '' family carangidae ( jack family , not a flatfish ) black pomfret , parastromateus niger – sometimes called '' australian halibut '' . references . further reading . clover , charles . 2004 . the end of the line : how overfishing is changing the world and what we eat . ebury press , london . fishwatch – pacific halibut , fisheries , us national oceanic and atmospheric administration , 2019 . external links . international pacific halibut commission alaska department of fish & game