Chelmer and Blackwater Navigation

route . the navigation runs from springfield basin in chelmsford to the sea lock at heybridge basin near maldon . it has six bridges and drops through 12 locks from the basin to the sea . there is also a set of flood gates at beeleigh , which prevents water from the river blackwater flooding the cut to heybridge basin . the navigation meanders in a broadly west to east direction between chelmsford and maldon , through countryside which is largely arable , and although it passes near to a number of villages , all of them are set back some distance from the waterway . history . prior to the actual construction of the navigation , there had been almost 120 years of proposals for such a scheme , and opposition from the port of maldon , which anticipated that its revenues would fall if vessels could travel to chelmsford . the first such scheme was proposed in 1677 by andrew yarranton , who published his idea in a work entitled england 's improvements by sea and land . maldon objected and the scheme came to nothing . in july 1733 , john hore , who was involved in the kennet , stroudwater , and the avon navigation at bristol , proposed two schemes , one to make the river navigable , and another to create a new cut between chelmsford and maldon . despite the projected extra costs for a canal , hore favoured the canal scheme , as he believed there would be less objection from the millers along the river route . maldon again objected on commercial grounds , and the scheme was dropped . the next schemes were proposed in 1762 , when the canal engineers john smeaton and thomas yeoman both carried out surveys for a possible route . yeoman produced a second plan in 1765 , and this was presented to parliament . yeoman had a high standing as a civil engineer , and the opponents to the scheme tried to engage a suitable engineer to counter the proposal , but many of the obvious choices , including james brindley , declined because they were too busy . eventually , ferdinando and william stratford took on the task , but both caught ague and fever , from which ferdinando died , while william was ill for a year but then recovered . an act of parliament to authorise the plan was passed on 6 june 1766 , with the stipulation that the work must be completed within 12 years , and that no work could start until 25 per cent of the capital had been raised . the scheme foundered because the required capital had not been subscribed . peter muilman called a meeting in chelmsford on 2 october 1772 , to propose improvements to the river , but a subsequent meeting decided that a new cut would be a better solution . muilman announced that this scheme would probably not require any locks , and advocated that he should build it once robert whitworth had surveyed it , but nothing came of this . finally in 1792 , with navigations in other parts of the country bringing increased prosperity to the towns they served , the people of chelmsford decide to avoid the opposition of maldon by bypassing it , and terminating the navigation at heybridge , on the river blackwater below maldon . under the direction of john rennie charles wedge surveyed the route in 1792 and matthew hall surveyed it in 1793 . the new route would increase the length of the navigation by about , but this plan formed the basis of a parliamentary bill . despite spirited opposition by maldon , the bill became an act of parliament on 17 june 1793 , creating the company of the proprietors of the chelmer and blackwater navigation , with powers to raise £40,000 by the issuing of shares , and a further £20,000 if required . work started soon afterwards , and although john rennie was officially chief engineer , the project was managed by richard coates , who had also assisted rennie on the ipswich and stowmarket navigation . the grave of richard coates stands in springfield churchyard , while rennie 's original survey book for the canal has been preserved . the port of maldon now tried to mitigate their loss , and with advice from benjamin latrobe , produced a plan to improve the blackwater through maldon to its junction with the chelmer at beeleigh , which was submitted to parliament in 1793 . realising that this would make the final cut to heybridge redundant , the navigation company opposed the bill , and it was defeated . latrobe submitted a revised scheme in april 1795 , which was also defeated . this marked the end of his engineering career in britain , as he emigrated to america shortly afterwards . work continued on the navigation , with the first section from heybridge basin to little baddow opening in april 1796 and the navigation opening throughout on 3 june 1797 . the final cost was around £50,000 . operation . when completed , the length of the navigation was . 12 locks lowered the level of the navigation by from springfield basin in chelmsford to the sea lock at heybridge basin . an additional stop lock protected the new cut from flooding at beeleigh . here , the navigation left the course of the river chelmer , and joined that of the river blackwater , before entering the final of cut to heybridge basin . the waters of the river blackwater were diverted into the chelmer , flowing over a weir between beeleigh lock and the stop gates . the navigation was constructed with only of water , which was the lowest statutory draught for any of the english commercial waterways . the maximum headroom is 6 feet 3 inches ( 1.9 m ) . the locks were constructed to take barges which were and each could carry around 25 tons . they were horse-drawn , and remained so until the 1960s , when diesel outboard motors were fitted . the only branch was a cut to langford mill , built privately by mr westcomb . it was well used until the 1870s , but was unused after 1881 . a community developed around heybridge basin , with richard tovee , a sawyer by trade , and thomas malden , a coal merchant , both buying plots of land to further their trade . the navigation company built a granary , which was used to store perishable goods , while rope-makers and boat builders also established themselves nearby . soon a pub and a brewery appeared , and the settlement steadily grew in size . the navigation experienced some teething problems , with floods in 1797 creating shoals which prevented the passage of barges . these got steadily worse , until rennie was called back in 1799 to address the problem . rennie was again recalled in 1805 , when the mill owners complained about leakage through the locks and requested damages . further improvements were made , including the rebuilding of heybridge sea lock by james green , and trade developed steadily . the first inland gasworks in britain was built in chelmsford in 1819 , using coal brought up the navigation . besides coal , bricks , stone , timber and general cargo was carried from heybridge to chelmsford , and the major cargo in the reverse direction was grain and flour . local wharfs served the communities of little baddow , boreham , ulting and heybridge . at its peak in the mid 19th century , the canal was carrying over 60,000 tons of cargo per year . locks . the twelve locks on the navigation are : . decline . the eastern counties railway reached chelmsford in 1843 , and a branch line from witham reached maldon in 1848 , but there was never a direct line between the two towns . although trade declined , the impact of the railways was less significant than on many canals . following the second world war , the sea lock into heybridge basin was extended to , so that coasters carrying timber from the continent could enter the basin to transfer their cargo to barges . traffic slowly declined until the last load of timber was delivered to browns yard ( now travis perkins ) on springfield basin in 1972 . although commercial traffic ceased , the navigation continued to derive income from water abstraction and from the sale of wood from the willows which grow along the banks . the willow is used for making cricket bats , and the trees were first planted in the 1880s when one of the directors saw the need for alternative sources of income . the navigation is unusual in that it was not nationalised in 1948 when most of the other waterways in the uk were , and remained under the control of the original company of proprietors of the chelmer & blackwater navigation ltd . leisure era . prior to the cessation of commercial traffic in 1972 , pleasure craft were prohibited from using the locks , and for a short period , the only boats to use the navigation were the company work boats and canoes . leisure boats used the navigation for the first time in 1973 , when the inland waterways association ( iwa ) organised a rally at kings head meadow , chelmsford . subsequently , leisure boats were moored at paper mill lock and hoe mill lock . springfield basin became unusable after the gates were damaged by vandals in the late 1970s , and gradually silted up . the basin was restored to use in 1992 , when the iwa co-ordinated various bodies to undertake the work . the national rivers authority dredged the basin , essex county council repaired the lock bridge , riparian owners repaired wharves , and members of the iwa and the waterway recovery group repaired the lock and the feeder system to the basin . a boat rally was held in 1993 , and the project won the '' shell best of britain award . '' the construction of housing and restaurants around the springfield basin site took place , including coates quay and waterfront place , which meant that the basin became accessible to the public for the first time , and lockside marina was built just above springfield lock . however , the navigation company was unable to pay its way , and went into administration in 2003 . although british waterways were approached , they declined to take over the navigation . after negotiations with the administrator , the inland waterways association ( iwa ) signed a maintenance and operating agreement in november 2005 to take over responsibility for the running of the navigation through a wholly owned subsidiary called essex waterways ltd . waterways , issue 223 , ( spring 2009 ) , inland waterways association while essex waterways manage the navigation from day to day , it is still owned by the company of proprietors . the towpath from maldon to chelmsford has been designated as a public footpath , and is maintained in good order . narrow boats can be hired from paper mill lock , and the infrastructure is being steadily upgraded . access to the navigation from the river blackwater is only possible at certain states of the tide , and advance booking to use the sea lock is required . almost the entire canal is now a conservation area , after chelmsford so designated the part within their jurisdiction in 1991 , and maldon and braintree district councils took similar action subsequently . on 18 february 2016 , the chelmsford civic society held a meeting at the essex record office to consider the option of extending the canal from springfield basin to a new destination nearer to the town centre . over 100 people attended the meeting , at which the idea of a new cut from the basin was aired . the cut would avoid a weir and low bridge to rejoin the river system where the river can and chelmer merge , and a new waterside area would be constructed in the town centre . although the leader of the council actively opposed the concept , the idea of a better destination for the navigation had been a long standing dream , having first been proposed in 1985 in a report by the iwa , and embraced by the council in 2002 . the link was downgraded to an '' aspiration '' following a 2008 planning enquiry , although it remained on the town centre development plans , and the replacement essex record office building was sited so that it would overlook the link . the link ceased to be a favoured option in 2020 , after decisions to build a new link road between parkway and the site of the old gas works , which was being redeveloped as housing . an alternative would be to use the course of the chelmer . navigation is prevented by a large weir structure , which was installed in the 1960s as part of a flood defence scheme . its principal function is to maintain water levels in the rivers within the city , which would otherwise become muddy ditches at some times of the year . since 1995 , it had been maintained by the environment agency , but they decided that they could no longer justify the costs of maintaining the structure , which consists of two radial gates at either side of a central tilting gate , with a control building on the north bank of the river . chelmsford city council commissioned a feasibility study , which proposed that the automatic gates could be replaced , and a navigation lock built alongside the new structure , on the north side of the river . it is estimated that the project would take two years to complete at a cost of around £6 million , much of which would be provided by community infrastructure levy money , from the housing developments taking place in the vicinity . some 970 new homes are expected to be provided in the chelmsford waterside neighbourhood , and the council has obtained a grant of £10.7 million from the government ’ s housing infrastructure fund , enabling it to address issues of access , contamination of the land , and the presence of gas mains which currently hinder the development . much of the maintenance is carried out by local volunteers as well as volunteers from waterway recovery group , which is also part of the iwa . regular working parties help to keep the waterway , including the towpath , locks and other structures well maintained , and many of the recent improvements have been undertaken by the volunteers . in february 2016 , the two groups worked together to upgrade of towpath near papermill lock , where a section of muddy towpath was given an all-weather surface by using 150 tons of road planings . the material was donated by essex highways , after it had been removed from roads during resurfacing work . . heybridge sea lock . the navigation is connected to the tidal river blackwater by heybridge sea lock . its maintenance is unusual , in that the northumbrian water group has a statutory obligation to maintain the mitre gates and the sea gate at the eastern end of the lock . the construction of hanningfield reservoir was authorised in 1950 as a joint project between southend waterworks company and the south essex waterworks company , both of which are now part of essex and suffolk water , which is itself part of the northumbrian water group . when the hanningfield water order 1950 was passed by parliament , it included a clause that made the water companies responsible for the lock gates , because water from the navigation would be pumped to the reservoir , and they needed to esnure that it would not become contaminated with salt . this arrangement was modified by the chelmer navigation agreement 1964 , which moved the responsibility for carrying out repairs to the chelmer and blackwater company , but required the water companies to fund the work once its extent was agreed . the lock was originally constructed of masonry , but in the mid-1960s , its was extended at the seaward end , when a steel caisson gate was installed in a reinforced concrete structure . the gate was designed by halcrow group , and weighed 58 tons . it was moved into place by electric motors driving chains , and had a hollow centre , making it partially buoyant , with the buoyancy being adjusted by the addition of ballast . over time , the steelwork degraded , and the mechanism for controlling the flow of water into and out of the gate to alter its buoyancy ceased to operate , resulting in the rollers on which it moved seizing up . in 2014 northumbrian water agreed that the structure was beyond economic repair , and due to the complexity of the work , decided to manage the replacement project themselves . options were somewhat constrained by the fact that the lock is a grade ii listed structure , the site is designated as a site of special scientific interest , a special protection area , a ramsar site and is next to a marine conservation zone . after carrying out a feasibility study in october 2014 , the sea gate was dismantled and removed in november 2015 . having checked its dimensions , northumberland water commissioned mwh global and kenneth grub to design a new gate which would fit into the existing pocket , so that no modification of the lock structure would be required . the new gate would incorporate a number of improvements over the old . the chain drive was replaced by hydraulic rams , and the gate was no longer a buoyant structure . this reduced its weight to 26 tons , while the seals were mounted in sub-frames , allowing them to be more easily replaced . the gate moved along a rail , rather than over rollers , and featured an infilled hand-rail , effectively increasing its height . this gives greater protection to the inner timber gates from wave action . a re-usable stop-log dam was constructed , to enable the lock to be isolated while the installation of the new gate was carried out and for future maintenance . while the lock was isolated , it was decided that the upper timber gates would also be replaced , and new gates were manufactured from sustainably sourced oak and ekki . each gate weighed 5.5 tonnes , and they were craned into position in february 2017 . the rails and sills for the sea gate were fitted in march , and the lock was then re-opened on 31 march for the summer season , with the sea gate expected to be fitted in november . the lock was drained in october 2017 for the sea gate to be fitted , and the intermediate mitre gates were also replaced . the sea gate had been tested and commissioned sufficiently for the lock to be reopened at the end of march 2018 , with final commissioning and reinstatement of the footpath taking place in april and may . . points of interest . gallery . image : blackwater and chelmer canal 1.jpg blackwater and chelmer canal image : papermill lock essex2.jpg papermill lock , little baddow image : papermill lock essex1.jpg papermill lock , little baddow . bibliography . . references . . external links . the chelmer & blackwater navigation ltd history of the chelmer and blackwater navigation the chelmer canal trust