Jean de La Bruyère

early years . jean de la bruyère was born in paris , in today 's essonne département , in 1645 ) . his family was middle class , and his reference to a certain '' geoffroy de la bruyère '' , a crusader , is only a satirical illustration of a method of self-ennoblement then common in france , as in some other countries . indeed , he always signed his surname as delabruyère in one word , as evidence of this disdain . la bruyère could trace his family back on his father 's side at least as far as his great-grandfather , who along with his grandfather had been dedicated members of the catholic league . his great-grandfather had been exiled from france when henri iv came to the throne and catholics fell into disfavor . la bruyère 's father also had been active in the league under the duke of guise in 1584 . his father was controller general of finance to the hôtel de ville , and despite the turmoil in the country , was able to pay for la bruyère 's education and to leave him a considerable sum as an inheritance . he was educated by the oratorians and at the university of orléans . he was called to the bar , and in 1673 bought a post in the revenue department at caen , which gave him status and an income . his predecessor in the post was a relation of jacques benigne bossuet , and it is thought that the transaction of the change was the cause of la bruyère 's introduction to the great orator , bossuet , who , from the date of his own preceptorship of the dauphin , was a kind of agent-general for tutorships in the royal family , and , in 1684 , who introduced la bruyère to the household of louis , prince of condé ( 1621–1686 ) . la bruyère became tutor to the prince 's grandson , louis , as well as to the prince 's child-bride , mlle de nantes , a natural child of louis xiv . the rest of his life was passed in the household of the prince or else at court , and he seems to have profited by the inclination that the entire condé family had for the society of men of letters . very little is known of the events of this part — or , indeed , of any part — of his life . the impression derived from the few notices of him is of a silent , observant , but somewhat awkward man , resembling in manners joseph addison . his critical book , caractères appeared in 1688 . it garnered numerous enemies , but despite that , most notations about him are favorable—notably that of saint-simon , an acute judge and one bitterly prejudiced against commoners generally . a curious passage in a letter by boileau to racine exists , however , in which the writer regrets that '' nature has not made la bruyère as agreeable as he would like to be . '' . literary activity . when la bruyère 's caractères appeared in 1688 , nicolas de malézieu predicted at once , that it would bring '' bien des lecteurs et bien des ennemis '' ( many readers and many enemies ) . that proved to be true . foremost among the critics were thomas corneille , bernard le bovier de fontenelle , and isaac de benserade , who were clearly critical of the book . they were joined by innumerable others , men and women of letters as well as of society , who are identifiable by manuscript '' keys '' compiled by the scribblers of the day . the friendship of bossuet and protection of the condés sufficiently defended the author , however , and he continued to insert fresh portraits of his contemporaries in each new edition of his book , especially in the fourth edition ( 1689 ) . those whom he had attacked were powerful in the académie française , however , and numerous defeats awaited la bruyère before he could make his way into becoming a member among their ranks . he was defeated thrice in 1691 , and on one memorable occasion , he had but seven votes , five of which were those of bossuet , boileau , racine , paul pellisson , and bussy-rabutin . it was not until 1693 that he was elected , and even then , an epigram , which , considering his admitted insignificance in conversation , was not of the worst , haeret lateri : : '' quand la bruyère se présente : pourquoi faut il crier haro ? : pour faire un nombre de quarante : ne falloit il pas un zéro ? '' his unpopularity was , however , chiefly confined to the subjects of his sarcastic portraiture and to the hack writers of the time , of whom he was wont to speak with a disdain only surpassed by that of alexander pope . his description of the mercure galant as '' immédiatement au dessous de rien '' ( immediately below nothing ) is the best-remembered specimen of these unwise attacks ; and would , of itself , account for the enmity of the editors , fontenelle and the younger corneille . la bruyère 's discourse of admission at the academy , one of the best of its kind , was , like his admission itself , severely criticized , especially by the partisans of the '' moderns '' in the '' ancient and modern '' quarrel . la bruyère died very suddenly , and not long after his admission to the academy . he is said to have been struck dumb in a gathering of his friends , and , being carried home to the hôtel de condé , to have expired of apoplexy a day or two afterward . it is not surprising that , considering contemporary panic about poisoning , the bitter personal enmities that he had excited , and the peculiar circumstances of his death , suspicions of foul play should have been entertained , but there was apparently no foundation for them . the caractères , a translation of theophrastus , and a few letters mostly addressed to the prince de condé , complete the list of his literary work , with the addition of one curious , and much-disputed , posthumous treatise . two years after his death , a certain dialogues sur le quiétisme appeared , alleged to have been found among his papers , incomplete , and to have been completed by its editor . as these dialogues are far inferior in literary merit to la bruyère 's other works , their genuineness has been denied . a straightforward and circumstantial account of their appearance was given by the editor , the abbé du pin , however . he was a man of acknowledged probity and he knew of the intimacy of la bruyère with bossuet , whose views in his contest with fénelon these dialogues are designed to further , at so short a time after the alleged author 's death , and without a single protest on the part of his friends and representatives , all of which seems to have been decisive in the acceptance of authorship . the caractères . although it is permissible to doubt whether the value of the caractères has not been somewhat exaggerated by traditional french criticism , they deserve beyond all question , a high place . the plan of the book is thoroughly original , if that term may be accorded to a novel , and skillful combination of elements exists in it . the treatise of theophrastus may have furnished the concept , but it gave little more . with the ethical generalizations and social dutch paintings accompanying his original , la bruyère combined the peculiarities of the montaigne essais , of the pensées , and maximes of which pascal and la rochefoucauld are the masters respectively , and lastly of that peculiar seventeenth-century product , the '' portrait '' or elaborate literary picture of the personal and mental characteristics of an individual . the result was quite unlike anything that had been seen previously , and , it has not been exactly reproduced since , although the essay of addison and steele resembles it very closely , especially in the introduction of fancy portraits . la bruyère 's privileged position at chantilly provided him with a unique vantage point from which he could witness the hypocrisy and corruption of the court of louis xiv . as a christian moralist , he aimed at reforming people 's manners and ways by publishing records of his observations of aristocratic foibles and follies , which earned him many enemies at the court . in the titles of his work , and in its extreme desultoriness , la bruyère reminds the reader of montaigne , but he aimed too much at sententiousness to attempt even the apparent continuity of the great essayist . the short paragraphs of which his chapters consist are made up of maxims proper , of criticisms literary and ethical , and above all , of the celebrated sketches of individuals baptized with names taken from the plays and romances of the time . these last are the greatest feature of the work and that which gave it its immediate , if not its enduring , popularity . they are wonderfully piquant , extraordinarily lifelike in a certain sense , and must have given great pleasure or ( more frequently ) exquisite pain to the apparent subjects , who in many cases were unmistakable and most recognizable .