Saturnalia

origins . in roman mythology , saturn was an agricultural deity who was said to have reigned over the world in the golden age , when humans enjoyed the spontaneous bounty of the earth without labour in a state of innocence . the revelries of saturnalia were supposed to reflect the conditions of the lost mythical age . the greek equivalent was the kronia , which was celebrated on the twelfth day of the month of hekatombaion , which occurred from around mid-july to mid-august on the attic calendar . the greek writer athenaeus also cites numerous other examples of similar festivals celebrated throughout the greco-roman world , including the crete festival of hermaia in honor of hermes , an unnamed festival from troezen in honor of poseidon , the thessaly festival of peloria in honor of zeus pelorios , and an unnamed festival from babylon . he also mentions that the custom of masters dining with their slaves was associated with the athenian festival of anthesteria and the spartan festival of hyacinthia . the argive festival of hybristica , though not directly related to the saturnalia , involved a similar reversal of roles in which women would dress as men and men would dress as women . the ancient roman historian justinus credits saturn with being a historical king of the aborigines ( mythology ) : . role reversal . saturnalia was characterized by role reversals and behavioral license . slaves were treated to a banquet of the kind usually enjoyed by their masters . ancient sources differ on the circumstances : some suggest that master and slave dined together , seneca , epistulae 47.14 ; carlin a . barton , the sorrows of the ancient romans : the gladiator and the monster ( princeton university press , 1993 ) , p . 498 . while others indicate that the slaves feasted first , or that the masters actually served the food . the practice might have varied over time . saturnalian license also permitted slaves to disrespect their masters without the threat of a punishment . it was a time for free speech : the augustan poet horace calls it '' december liberty '' . horace , satires 2.7.4 , libertas decembri ; in two satires set during the saturnalia , horace has a slave offer sharp criticism to his master . horace , satires , book 2 , poems 3 and 7 ; catherine keane , figuring genre in roman satire ( oxford university press , 2006 ) , p . 90 ; maria plaza , the function of humour in roman verse satire : laughing and lying ( oxford university press , 2006 ) , pp . 298–300 et passim . everyone knew , however , that the leveling of the social hierarchy was temporary and had limits ; no social norms were ultimately threatened , because the holiday would end . barton , the sorrows of the ancient romans , passim . the toga , the characteristic garment of the male roman citizen , was set aside in favor of the greek synthesis , colourful '' dinner clothes '' otherwise considered in poor taste for daytime wear . ( especially note 59 ) . romans of citizen status normally went about bare-headed , but for the saturnalia donned the pilleus , the conical felt cap that was the usual mark of a freedman . slaves , who ordinarily were not entitled to wear the pilleus , wore it as well , so that everyone was '' pilleated '' without distinction . the participation of freeborn roman women is implied by sources that name gifts for women , but their presence at banquets may have depended on the custom of their time ; from the late republic onward , women mingled socially with men more freely than they had in earlier times . female entertainers were certainly present at some otherwise all-male gatherings . role-playing was implicit in the saturnalia 's status reversals , and there are hints of mask-wearing or '' guising '' . at the beginning of horace 's satire 2.3 , and the mask in the saturnalia imagery of the calendar of philocalus , and martial 's inclusion of masks as saturnalia gifts no theatrical events are mentioned in connection with the festivities , but the classicist erich segal saw roman comedy , with its cast of impudent , free-wheeling slaves and libertine seniors , as imbued with the saturnalian spirit . erich segal , roman laughter : the comedy of plautus ( oxford university press , 1968 , 2nd ed . 1987 ) , pp . 8–9 , 32–33 , 103 et passim . . gambling . gambling and dice-playing , normally prohibited or at least frowned upon , were permitted for all , even slaves . coins and nuts were the stakes . on the calendar of philocalus , the saturnalia is represented by a man wearing a fur-trimmed coat next to a table with dice , and a caption reading : '' now you have license , slave , to game with your master . '' citing suetonius , life of augustus 71 ; martial 1.14.7 , 5.84 , 7.91.2 , 11.6 , 13.1.7 ; 14.1 ; lucian , saturnalia 1 . see a copy of the actual calendar rampant overeating and drunkenness became the rule , and a sober person the exception . , citing cato the elder , de agricultura 57 ; aulus gellius 2.24.3 ; martial 14.70.1 and 14.1.9 ; horace , satire 2.3.5 ; lucian , saturnalia 13 ; scriptores historiae augustae , alexander severus 37.6 . seneca looked forward to the holiday , if somewhat tentatively , in a letter to a friend : '' it is now the month of december , when the greatest part of the city is in a bustle . loose reins are given to public dissipation ; everywhere you may hear the sound of great preparations , as if there were some real difference between the days devoted to saturn and those for transacting business . … were you here , i would willingly confer with you as to the plan of our conduct ; whether we should eve in our usual way , or , to avoid singularity , both take a better supper and throw off the toga . '' seneca the younger , epistulae 18.1–2 . some romans found it all a bit much . pliny describes a secluded suite of rooms in his laurentum villa , which he used as a retreat : '' . especially during the saturnalia when the rest of the house is noisy with the licence of the holiday and festive cries . this way i do n't hamper the games of my people and they do n't hinder my work or studies . '' pliny the younger , letters 2.17.24 . horace similarly sets satire 2.3 during the saturnalia but in the countryside , where he has fled the frenzied pace . . gift-giving . the sigillaria on 19 december was a day of gift-giving . macrobius , saturnalia 1.10.24 , seems to indicate that the sigillaria was a market that occurred at the end of saturnalia , but the gallo-roman scholar-poet ausonius ( eclogues 16.32 ) refers to it as a religious occasion ( sacra sigillorum , '' rites of the sigillaria '' ) . because gifts of value would mark social status contrary to the spirit of the season , these were often the pottery or wax figurines called sigillaria made specially for the day , candles , or '' gag gifts '' , of which augustus was particularly fond . suetonius , life of augustus 75 ; , pointing to the cronosolon of lucian on the problem of unequal gift-giving . children received toys as gifts . beryl rawson , '' adult-child relationships in ancient rome , '' in marriage , divorce , and children in ancient rome ( oxford university press , 1991 ) , p . 19 . in his many poems about the saturnalia , martial names both expensive and quite cheap gifts , including writing tablets , dice , knucklebones , moneyboxes , combs , toothpicks , a hat , a hunting knife , an axe , various lamps , balls , perfumes , pipes , a pig , a sausage , a parrot , tables , cups , spoons , items of clothing , statues , masks , books , and pets . martial , epigrams 13 and 14 , the xenia and the apophoreta , published 84–85 ad . gifts might be as costly as a slave or exotic animal , citing martial 5.18 , 7.53 , 14 ; suetonius , life of augustus 75 and life of vespasian 19 on the range of gifts . but martial suggests that token gifts of low intrinsic value inversely measure the high quality of a friendship . ruurd r . nauta , poetry for patrons : literary communication in the age of domitian ( brill , 2002 ) , pp . 78–79 . patrons or '' bosses '' might pass along a gratuity ( sigillaricium ) to their poorer clients or dependents to help them buy gifts . some emperors were noted for their devoted observance of the sigillaria . , citing macrobius , saturnalia 1.10.24 and 1.11.49 ; suetonius , life of claudius 5 ; scriptores historiae augustae hadrian 17.3 , caracalla 1.8 and aurelian 50.3 . see also in a practice that might be compared to modern greeting cards , verses sometimes accompanied the gifts . martial has a collection of poems written as if to be attached to gifts . martial , book 14 ( apophoreta ) ; williams , martial : epigrams , p . 259 ; nauta , poetry for patrons , p . 79 et passim . catullus received a book of bad poems by '' the worst poet of all time '' as a joke from a friend . catullus , carmen 14 ; robinson ellis , a commentary on catullus ( oxford : clarendon press , 1876 ) , pp . 38–39 . gift-giving was not confined to the day of the sigillaria . in some households , guests and family members received gifts after the feast in which slaves had shared . king of the saturnalia . imperial sources refer to a saturnalicius princeps ( '' ruler of the saturnalia '' ) , who ruled as master of ceremonies for the proceedings . he was appointed by lot , and has been compared to the medieval lord of misrule at the feast of fools . his capricious commands , such as '' sing naked ! '' or '' throw him into cold water ! '' , had to be obeyed by the other guests at the convivium : he creates and ( mis ) rules a chaotic and absurd world . the future emperor nero is recorded as playing the role in his youth . by tacitus , annales 13.15 . since this figure does not appear in accounts from the roman republic , the princeps of the saturnalia may have developed as a satiric response to the new era of rule by a princeps , the title assumed by the first emperor augustus to avoid the hated connotations of the word '' king '' ( rex ) . art and literature under augustus celebrated his reign as a new golden age , but the saturnalia makes a mockery of a world in which law is determined by one man and the traditional social and political networks are reduced to the power of the emperor over his subjects . in a poem about a lavish saturnalia under domitian , statius makes it clear that the emperor , like jupiter , still reigns during the temporary return of saturn . statius , silvae 1.6 ; nauta , poetry for patrons , p . 400 . . io saturnalia . the phrase io saturnalia was the characteristic shout or salutation of the festival , originally commencing after the public banquet on the single day of 17 december . the interjection io ( greek ἰώ , ǐō ) is pronounced either with two syllables ( a short i and a long o ) or as a single syllable ( with the i becoming the latin consonantal j and pronounced yō ) . it was a strongly emotive ritual exclamation or invocation , used for instance in announcing triumph or celebrating bacchus , but also to punctuate a joke . entry on io , oxford latin dictionary ( oxford : clarendon press , 1982 , 1985 reprinting ) , p . 963 . . on the calendar . as an observance of state religion , saturnalia was supposed to have been held ante diem xvi kalendas ianuarias , sixteen days before the kalends of january , on the oldest roman calendar , which the romans believed to have been established by the legendary founder romulus and his successor numa pompilius . it was a dies festus , a legal holiday when no public business could be conducted . the day marked the dedication anniversary ( dies natalis ) of the temple to saturn in the roman forum in 497 bc . when julius caesar had the julian calendar because it had fallen out of synchronization with the solar year , two days were added to the month , and saturnalia fell on 17 december . it was felt , however , that the original day had thus been moved by two days , and so saturnalia was celebrated under augustus as a three-day official holiday encompassing both dates . macrobius , saturnalia 1.10.23 ; ; fowler , roman festivals , p . 268 ; carole e . newlands , '' the emperor 's saturnalia : statius , silvae 1.6 , '' in flavian rome : culture , image , text ( brill , 2003 ) , p . 505 . by the late republic , the private festivities of saturnalia had expanded to seven days , macrobius , saturnalia 1.10.3 , citing the atellane composers novius and mummius but during the imperial period contracted variously to three to five days . miller , '' roman festivals , '' in the oxford encyclopedia of ancient greece and rome , p . 172 . caligula extended official observances to five . suetonius , life of caligula 17 ; cassius dio 59.6.4 ; ; fowler , roman festivals , p . 268 , citing mommsen and cil i.337 . the date 17 december was the first day of the capricorn ( astrology ) , the house of saturn named for the god . fowler , roman festivals , p . 268 , note 3 ; roger beck , '' ritual , myth , doctrine , and initiation in the mysteries of mithras : new evidence from a cult vessel , '' journal of roman studies 90 ( 2000 ) , p . 179 . its proximity to the winter solstice ( 21 to 23 december on the julian calendar ) was endowed with various meanings by both ancient and modern scholars : for instance , the widespread use of wax candles ( cerei , singular cereus ) could refer to '' the returning power of the sun 's light after the solstice '' . fowler , roman festivals , p . 272 . fowler thought the use of candles influenced the christmas rituals of the latin church , and compared the symbolism of the candles to the yule log . . ancient theological and philosophical views . roman . the saturnalia reflects the contradictory nature of the deity saturn himself : '' there are joyful and utopian aspects of careless well-being side by side with disquieting elements of threat and danger . '' as a deity of agricultural bounty , saturn embodied prosperity and wealth in general . the name of his consort ops meant '' wealth , resources '' . her festival , opalia , was celebrated on 19 december . the temple of saturn housed the state treasury ( aerarium ) and was the administrative headquarters of the quaestors , the public officials whose duties included oversight of the mint . it was among the oldest cult sites in rome , and had been the location of '' a very ancient '' altar ( ara ) even before the building of the first temple in 497 bc . fowler , roman festivals , p . 271 . the romans regarded saturn as the original and autochthonous ruler of the capitolium , the capitolium had thus been called the mons saturnius in older times . and the first king of latium or even the whole of italy . at the same time , there was a tradition that saturn had been an immigrant deity , received by janus after he was usurped by his son jupiter ( zeus ) and expelled from greece . the roman theologian varro listed saturn among the sabine gods . his contradictions—a foreigner with one of rome 's oldest sanctuaries , and a god of liberation who is kept in fetters most of the year—indicate saturn 's capacity for obliterating social distinctions . roman mythology of the golden age of saturn 's reign differed from the greek tradition . he arrived in italy '' dethroned and fugitive '' , versnel , '' saturnus and the saturnalia , '' p . 143 . but brought agriculture and civilization and became a king . as the augustan poet virgil described it : '' he gathered together the unruly race of fauns and nymphs scattered over mountain heights , and gave them laws … . under his reign were the golden ages men tell of : in such perfect peace he ruled the nations . '' virgil , aeneid 8 . 320–325 , as cited by the third century neoplatonic philosopher porphyry took an allegorical view of the saturnalia . he saw the festival 's theme of liberation and dissolution as representing the '' freeing of souls into immortality '' —an interpretation that mithraists may also have followed , since they included many slaves and freedmen . porphyry , de antro 23 , following numenius , as cited by roger beck , '' qui mortalitatis causa convenerunt : the meeting of the virunum mithraists on june 26 , a.d . 184 , '' phoenix 52 ( 1998 ) , p . 340 . one of the speakers in macrobius 's saturnalia is vettius agorius praetextatus , a mithraist . according to porphyry , the saturnalia occurred near the winter solstice because the sun enters capricorn , the house ( astrology ) of saturn , at that time . beck , roger , '' ritual , myth , doctrine , and initiation in the mysteries of mithras : new evidence from a cult vessel , '' journal of roman studies 90 ( 2000 ) , p . 179 . in the saturnalia ( macrobius ) , the proximity of the saturnalia to the winter solstice leads to an exposition of solar monotheism , the belief that the sun ( see sol invictus ) ultimately encompasses all divinities as one . roel van den broek , '' the sarapis oracle in macrobius sat . , i , 20 , 16–17 , '' in hommages à maarten j . vermaseren ( brill , 1978 ) , vol . 1 , p . 123ff . . jewish . the mishna and talmud ( avodah zara 8a ) describe a pagan festival called saturnura which occurs for eight days before the winter solstice . it is followed for eight days after the solstice with a festival called kalenda culminating with the kalends of january . the talmud ascribes the origins of this festival to adam , who saw that the days were getting shorter and thought it was punishment for his sin . he was afraid that the world was returning to the chaos and emptiness that existed before creation . he sat and fasted for eight days . once he saw that the days were getting longer again he realized that this was the natural cycle of the world , so made eight days of celebration . the talmud states that this festival was later turned into a pagan festival . later on in the page , the talmud calls it saturnalia . a portion of avodah zarah 8 , quoted in menachem leibtag 's chanuka – its biblical roots – part two , hosted on the tanach study center a portion of avodah zarah 8 , quoted in ebn leader 's the darkness of winter – environmental reflections on hanukah , hosted on the kibbutz institute for holidays and jewish culture . see christmas talmudic_hypothesis . influence . unlike several roman religious festivals which were particular to cult sites in the city , the prolonged seasonal celebration of saturnalia at home could be held anywhere in the empire . greg woolf , '' found in translation : the religion of the roman diaspora , '' in ritual dynamics and religious change in the roman empire . proceedings of the eighth workshop of the international network impact of empire ( heidelberg , july 5–7 , 2007 ) ( brill , 2009 ) , p . 249 . see aulus gellius 18.2.1 for romans living in athens and celebrating the saturnalia . saturnalia continued as a secular celebration long after it was removed from the official calendar . michele renee salzman , '' religious koine and religious dissent , '' in a companion to roman religion ( blackwell , 2007 ) , p . 121 . as william warde fowler notes : '' saturnalia has left its traces and found its parallels in great numbers of medieval and modern customs , occurring about the time of the winter solstice . '' fowler , roman festivals , p . 268 . the actual date of jesus 's birth is unknown , but , in the fourth century ad , pope julius i ( 337–352 ) formalized that it should be celebrated on 25 december , around the same time as the saturnalia celebrations . some have speculated that part of the reason why he chose this date may have been because he was trying to create a christian alternative to saturnalia . another reason for the decision may have been because , in 274 ad , the roman emperor aurelian had declared 25 december the birthdate of sol invictus and julius i may have thought that he could attract more converts to christianity by allowing them to continue to celebrate on the same day . he may have also been influenced by the idea that jesus had died on the anniversary of his conception ; because jesus died during passover and , in the third century ad , passover was celebrated on 25 march , he may have assumed that jesus 's birthday must have come nine months later , on 25 december . as a result of the close proximity of dates , many christians in western europe continued to celebrate traditional saturnalia customs in association with christmas and the surrounding holidays . like saturnalia , christmas during the middle ages was a time of ruckus , drinking , gambling , and overeating . the tradition of the saturnalicius princeps was particularly influential . in medieval france and switzerland , a boy would be elected '' boy bishop '' on 28 december ( the feast of the holy innocents ) and would issue decrees much like the saturnalicius princeps . the boy bishop 's tenure ended during the evening vespers . this custom was common across western europe , but varied considerably by region ; in some places , the boy bishop 's orders could become quite rowdy and unrestrained , but , in others , his power was only ceremonial . in some parts of france , during the boy bishop 's tenure , the actual clergy would wear masks or dress in women 's clothing , a reversal of roles in line with the traditional character of saturnalia . during the late middle ages and early renaissance , many towns in england elected a '' lord of misrule '' at christmas time to preside over the feast of fools . this custom was sometimes associated with the twelfth night or epiphany . a common tradition in western europe was to drop a bean-feast ; whoever found the object would become the '' king ( or queen ) of the bean '' . during the reformation , reformers sought to revise or even completely abolish such practices , which they regarded as '' popish '' ; these efforts were largely successful and , in many places , these customs died out completely . the puritans banned the '' lord of misrule '' in england and the custom was largely forgotten shortly thereafter , though the bean in the pudding survived as a tradition of a small gift to the one finding a single almond hidden in the traditional christmas porridge in scandinavia . nonetheless , in the middle of the nineteenth century , some of the old ceremonies , such as gift-giving , were revived in english-speaking countries as part of a widespread '' christmas revival '' . during this revival , authors such as charles dickens sought to reform the '' conscience of christmas '' and turn the formerly riotous holiday into a family-friendly occasion . vestiges of the saturnalia festivities may still be preserved in some of the traditions now associated with christmas . the custom of gift-giving at christmas time resembles the roman tradition of giving sigillaria and the lighting of advent candles resembles the roman tradition of lighting torches and wax tapers . likewise , saturnalia and christmas both share associations with eating , drinking , singing , and dancing .