Headphones

history . headphones grew out of the need to free up a person 's hands when operating a telephone . there were several iterative products that were predecessors to the '' hands-free '' headphones . by the 1890s the first device that is unmistakably a headphone was made by a british company called electrophone created a system allowing their customers to connect into live feeds of performances at theaters and opera houses across london . subscribers to the service could listen to the performance through a pair of massive earphones that connected below the chin , held by a long rod . french engineer ernest mercadier patented a set of in-ear headphones in 1891 , mercadier was awarded u.s . patent no . 454,138 for “ improvements in telephone-receivers…which shall be light enough to be carried while in use on the head of the operator . ” nathaniel baldwin of utah in 1910 invented a prototype telephone headset due to his inability to hear sermons during sunday service . he offered it to the us navy for testing , and they promptly ordered 100 from baldwin . wireless specialty apparatus co . in partnership with baldwin radio company set up a manufacturing facility in utah to fulfill orders . his innovations were the basis of “ sound-powered ” telephones or phones that required no electricity , which were used during world war ii . thumb headphones originated from the telephone receiver earpiece , and were the only way to listen to electrical audio signals before amplifiers were developed . these early headphones used moving iron speaker , with either single-ended or balanced armatures . the common single-ended type used voice coils wound around the poles of a permanent magnet , which were positioned close to a flexible steel diaphragm . the audio current through the coils varied the magnetic field of the magnet , exerting a varying force on the diaphragm , causing it to vibrate , creating sound waves . the requirement for high sensitivity meant that no damping was used , so the frequency response of the diaphragm had large peaks due to resonance , resulting in poor sound quality . these early models lacked padding , and were often uncomfortable to wear for long periods . their impedance varied ; headphones used in telegraph and telephone work had an impedance of 75 & nbsp ; ohms . those used with early wireless radio had more turns of finer wire to increase sensitivity . impedance of 1,000 to 2,000 & nbsp ; ohms was common , which suited both crystal sets and triode receivers . some very sensitive headphones , such as those manufactured by brandes around 1919 , were commonly used for early radio work . in early powered radios , the headphone was part of the vacuum tube 's plate circuit and carried dangerous voltages . it was normally connected directly to the positive high voltage battery terminal , and the other battery terminal was securely grounded . the use of bare electrical connections meant that users could be shocked if they touched the bare headphone connections while adjusting an uncomfortable headset . in 1958 , john c . koss , an audiophile and jazz musician from milwaukee , produced the first stereo headphones . previously , headphones were used only by the us navy , telephone and radio operators , and individuals in similar industries . smaller earbud type earpieces , which plugged into the user 's ear canal , were first developed for hearing aids . they became widely used with transistor radios , which commercially appeared in 1954 with the introduction of the regency tr-1 . the most popular audio device in history , the transistor radio changed listening habits , allowing people to listen to radio anywhere . the earbud uses either a moving iron driver or a crystal earpiece to produce sound . the 3.5 & nbsp ; mm radio and phone connector , which is the most commonly used in portable application today , has been used at least since the sony efm-117j transistor radio , which was released in 1964 . description of 3.5mm earphone jack in described model : its popularity was reinforced with its use on the walkman portable tape player in 1979 . applications . headphones may be used with stationary cd and dvd players , home cinema , personal computers , or portable devices ( e.g . , digital audio player/mp3 player , mobile phone ) . cordless headphones are not connected to their source by a cable . instead , they receive a radio or infrared signal encoded using a radio or infrared transmission link , such as fm , bluetooth or wi-fi . these are powered receiver systems , of which the headphone is only a component . cordless headphones are used with events such as a silent disco or silent gig . in the professional audio sector , headphones are used in live situations by disc jockeys with a dj mixer , and sound engineers for monitoring signal sources . in radio studios , djs use a pair of headphones when talking to the microphone while the speakers are turned off to eliminate acoustic feedback while monitoring their own voice . in studio recordings , musicians and singers use headphones to play or sing along to a backing track or band . in military applications , audio signals of many varieties are monitored using headphones . wired headphones are attached to an audio source by a cable . the most common connectors are 6.35 & nbsp ; mm ( ¼″ ) and 3.5 & nbsp ; mm phone connectors . the larger 6.35 & nbsp ; mm connector is more common on fixed location home or professional equipment . the 3.5 & nbsp ; mm connector remains the most widely used connector for portable application today . adapters are available for converting between 6.35 & nbsp ; mm and 3.5 & nbsp ; mm devices . applications for audiometric testing . various types of specially designed headphones or earphones are also used to evaluate the status of the auditory system in the field of audiology for establishing hearing thresholds , medically diagnosing hearing loss , identifying other hearing related disease , and monitoring hearing status in occupational hearing conservation programs . specific models of headphones have been adopted as the standard due to the ease of calibration and ability to compare results between testing facilities . supra-aural style headphones are historically the most commonly used in audiology as they are the easiest to calibrate and were considered the standard for many years . commonly used models are the telephonics dynamic headphone ( tdh ) 39 , tdh-49 , and tdh-50 . in-the-ear or insert style earphones are used more commonly today as they provide higher levels of interaural attenuation , introduce less variability when testing 6,000 and 8,000 & nbsp ; hz , and avoid testing issues resulting from collapsed ear canals . a commonly used model of insert earphone is the etymotic research er-3a . circum-aural earphones are also used to establish hearing thresholds in the extended high frequency range ( 8,000 & nbsp ; hz to 20,000 & nbsp ; khz ) . along with etymotic research er-2a insert earphones , the sennheiser hda300 and koss hv/1a circum-aural earphones are the only models that have reference equivalent threshold sound pressure level values for the extended high frequency range as described by ansi standards . audiometers and headphones must be calibrated together . during the calibration process , the output signal from the audiometer to the headphones is measured with a sound level meter to ensure that the signal is accurate to the reading on the audiometer for sound pressure level and frequency . calibration is done with the earphones in an acoustic coupler that is intended to mimic the transfer function of the outer ear . because specific headphones are used in the initial audiometer calibration process , they can not be replaced with any other set of headphones , even from the same make and model . . electrical characteristics . electrical characteristics of dynamic loudspeakers may be readily applied to headphones , because most headphones are small dynamic loudspeakers . impedance . headphones are available with high or low impedance ( typically measured at 1 & nbsp ; khz ) . low-impedance headphones are in the range 16 to 32 & nbsp ; ohms and high-impedance headphones are about 100-600 & nbsp ; ohms . as the impedance of a pair of headphones increases , more voltage ( at a given current ) is required to drive it , and the loudness of the headphones for a given voltage decreases . in recent years , impedance of newer headphones has generally decreased to accommodate lower voltages available on battery powered cmos-based portable electronics . this has resulted in headphones that can be more efficiently driven by battery-powered electronics . consequently , newer amplifiers are based on designs with relatively low output impedance . the impedance of headphones is of concern because of the output limitations of amplifiers . a modern pair of headphones is driven by an amplifier , with lower impedance headphones presenting a larger load . amplifiers are not ideal ; they also have some output impedance that limits the amount of power they can provide . to ensure an even frequency response , adequate damping factor , and undistorted sound , an amplifier should have an output impedance less than 1/8 that of the headphones it is driving ( and ideally , as low as possible ) . if output impedance is large compared to the impedance of the headphones , significantly higher distortion is present . therefore , lower impedance headphones tend to be louder and more efficient , but also demand a more capable amplifier . higher impedance headphones are more tolerant of amplifier limitations , but produce less volume for a given output level . historically , many headphones had relatively high impedance , often over 500 & nbsp ; ohms so they could operate well with high-impedance tube amplifiers . in contrast , modern transistor amplifiers can have very low output impedance , enabling lower-impedance headphones . unfortunately , this means that older audio amplifiers or stereos often produce poor-quality output on some modern , low-impedance headphones . in this case , an external headphone amplifier may be beneficial . sensitivity . sensitivity is a measure of how effectively an earpiece converts an incoming electrical signal into an audible sound . it thus indicates how loud the headphones are for a given electrical drive level . it can be measured in decibels of sound pressure level per milliwatt ( db ( spl ) /mw ) or decibels of sound pressure level per volt ( db ( spl ) / v ) . unfortunately , both definitions are widely used , often interchangeably . as the output voltage ( but not power ) of a headphone amplifier is essentially constant for most common headphones , db/mw is often more useful if converted into db/v using ohm 's law : : \mathrm alternatively , online calculators can be used . once the sensitivity per volt is known , the maximum volume for a pair of headphones can be easily calculated from the maximum amplifier output voltage . for example , for a headphone with a sensitivity of 100 & nbsp ; db ( spl ) /v , an amplifier with an output of 1 root mean square ( rms ) voltage produces a maximum volume of 100 & nbsp ; db . pairing high sensitivity headphones with power amplifiers can produce dangerously high volumes and damage headphones . the maximum sound pressure level is a matter of preference , with some sources recommending no higher than 110 to 120 & nbsp ; db . in contrast , the american occupational safety and health administration recommends an average spl of no more than 85 & nbsp ; db ( a ) to avoid long-term hearing loss , while the european union standard en 50332-1:2013 recommends that volumes above 85 & nbsp ; db ( a ) include a warning , with an absolute maximum volume ( defined using 40–4,000 & nbsp ; hz noise ) of no more than 100 & nbsp ; db to avoid accidental hearing damage . using this standard , headphones with sensitivities of 90 , 100 and 110 & nbsp ; db ( spl ) /v should be driven by an amplifier capable of no more than 3.162 , 1.0 and 0.3162 rms volts at maximum volume setting , respectively to reduce the risk of hearing damage . the sensitivity of headphones is usually between about 80 and 125 & nbsp ; db/mw and usually measured at 1 & nbsp ; khz . . types . headphone size can affect the balance between fidelity and portability . generally , headphone form factors can be divided into four separate categories : circumaural ( over-ear ) , supra-aural ( on-ear ) , earbud and in-ear . circumaural . thumb circumaural headphones ( sometimes called full size headphones or over-ear headphones ) have circular or ellipsoid earpads that encompass the ears . because these headphones completely surround the ear , circumaural headphones can be designed to fully seal against the head to attenuate external noise . because of their size , circumaural headphones can be heavy and there are some sets that weigh over . ergonomic headband and earpad design is required to reduce discomfort resulting from weight . these are commonly used by drummers in recording . supra-aural . thumb supra-aural headphones or on-ear headphones have pads that press against the ears , rather than around them . they were commonly bundled with personal stereos during the 1980s . this type of headphone generally tends to be smaller and lighter than circumaural headphones , resulting in less attenuation of outside noise . supra-aural headphones can also lead to discomfort due to the pressure on the ear as compared to circumaural headphones that sit around the ear . comfort may vary due to the earcup material . open- or closed-back . both circumaural and supra-aural headphones can be further differentiated by the type of earcups : open-back headphones have the back of the earcups open . this leaks more sound out of the headphone and also lets more ambient sounds into the headphone , but gives a more natural or speaker-like sound , due to including sounds from the environment . closed-back ( or sealed ) styles have the back of the earcups closed . they usually block some of the ambient noise . closed-back headphones usually can produce stronger low frequencies than open-back headphones . semi-open headphones , have a design that can be considered as a compromise between open-back headphones and closed-back headphones . some believe the term '' semi-open '' is purely there for marketing purposes . there is no exact definition for the term semi-open headphone . where the open-back approach has hardly any measure to block sound at the outer side of the diaphragm and the closed-back approach really has a closed chamber at the outer side of the diaphragm , a semi-open headphone can have a chamber to partially block sound while letting some sound through via openings or vents . ear-fitting headphones . . earphones . earphones are very small headphones that are fitted directly in the outer ear , facing but not inserted in the ear canal . earphones are portable and convenient , but many people consider them uncomfortable . they provide hardly any acoustic isolation and leave room for ambient noise to seep in ; users may turn up the volume dangerously high to compensate , at the risk of causing hearing loss . on the other hand , they let the user be better aware of their surroundings . since the early days of the transistor radio , earphones have commonly been bundled with personal music devices . they are sold at times with foam or rubber pads for comfort . ( the use of the term earbuds , which has been around since at least 1984 , did not hit its peak until after 2001 , with the success of apple 's mp3 player . ) . in-ear headphones . thumb in-ear headphones , also known as in-ear monitors ( iems ) or canalphones , are small headphones with similar portability to earbuds that are inserted in the ear canal itself . iems are higher-quality in-ear headphones and are used by audio engineers and musicians as well as audiophiles . the outer shells of in-ear headphones are made up of a variety of materials , such as plastic , aluminum , ceramic and other metal alloys . because in-ear headphones engage the ear canal , they can be prone to sliding out , and they block out much environmental noise . lack of sound from the environment can be a problem when sound is a necessary cue for safety or other reasons , as when walking , driving , or riding near or in vehicular traffic . generic or custom-fitting ear canal plugs are made from silicone rubber , elastomer , or foam . custom in-ear headphones use castings of the ear canal to create custom-molded plugs that provide added comfort and noise isolation . . mixed fitting pivoting earphones . this type combines advantages of earbuds and in-ear headphones – depending on the environment and requirements of the user , they provide passive noise reduction for quality mode ( conversation or active music listening ) or they give control over the sound environment around user in comfort mode ( stand by or background voice/music listening ) . headset . a headset is a headphone combined with a microphone . headsets provide the equivalent functionality of a telephone handset with hands-free operation . among applications for headsets , besides telephone use , are aviation , theatre or television studio intercom systems , and console or pc gaming . headsets are made with either a single-earpiece ( mono ) or a double-earpiece ( mono to both ears or stereo ) . the microphone arm of headsets is either an external microphone type where the microphone is held in front of the user 's mouth , or a voicetube type where the microphone is housed in the earpiece and speech reaches it by means of a hollow tube . telephone headsets . telephone headsets connect to a fixed-line telephone system . a telephone headset functions by replacing the handset of a telephone . headsets for standard corded telephones are fitted with a standard 4p4c commonly called an rj-9 connector . headsets are also available with 2.5 & nbsp ; mm jack sockets for many dect phones and other applications . cordless bluetooth headsets are available , and often used with mobile telephones . headsets are widely used for telephone-intensive jobs , in particular by call centre workers . they are also used by anyone wishing to hold telephone conversations with both hands free . for older models of telephones , the headset microphone impedance is different from that of the original handset , requiring a telephone amplifier for the telephone headset . a telephone amplifier provides basic pin-alignment similar to a telephone headset adaptor , but it also offers sound amplifier for the microphone as well as the loudspeakers . most models of telephone amplifiers offer volume control for loudspeaker as well as microphone , mute function and switching between headset and handset . telephone amplifiers are powered by batteries or ac adaptors . communication headsets . communication headsets are used for two-way communication and typically consist of a headphone and attached microphone . such headsets are used in a variety of professions as aviation , military , sports , music , and many service-oriented sectors . they come in all shapes and sizes , depending on use , required noise attenuation , and fidelity of communication needed . ambient noise reduction . unwanted sound from the environment can be reduced by excluding sound from the ear by passive noise isolation , or , often in conjunction with isolation , by active noise cancellation . passive noise isolation is essentially using the body of the earphone , either over or in the ear , as a passive earplug that simply blocks out sound . the headphone types that provide most attenuation are in-ear canal headphones and closed-back headphones , both circumaural and supra aural . open-back and earbud headphones provide some passive noise isolation , but much less than the others . typical closed-back headphones block 8 to 12 & nbsp ; db , and in-ears anywhere from 10 to 15 & nbsp ; db . some models have been specifically designed for drummers to facilitate the drummer monitoring the recorded sound while reducing sound directly from the drums as much as possible . such headphones claim to reduce ambient noise by around 25 & nbsp ; db . active noise-cancelling headphones use a microphone , amplifier , and speaker to pick up , amplify , and play ambient noise in phase-reversed form ; this to some extent cancels out unwanted noise from the environment without affecting the desired sound source , which is not picked up and reversed by the microphone . they require a power source , usually a battery , to drive their circuitry . active noise cancelling headphones can attenuate ambient noise by 20 & nbsp ; db or more , but the active circuitry is mainly effective on constant sounds and at lower frequencies , rather than sharp sounds and voices . some noise cancelling headphones are designed mainly to reduce low-frequency engine and travel noise in aircraft , trains , and automobiles , and are less effective in environments with other types of noise . transducer technology . headphones use various types of transducer to convert electrical signals to sound . moving-coil . thumb the loudspeaker , more commonly referred to as a '' dynamic '' driver is the most common type used in headphones . it consists of a stationary magnet element affixed to the frame of the headphone , which sets up a static magnetic field . the magnet in headphones is typically composed of ferrite or neodymium . a voice coil , a light coil of wire , is suspended in the magnetic field of the magnet , attached to a diaphragm , typically fabricated from lightweight , high-stiffness-to-mass-ratio cellulose , polymer , carbon material , paper or the like . when the varying current of an audio signal is passed through the coil , it creates a varying magnetic field that reacts against the static magnetic field , exerting a varying force on the coil causing it and the attached diaphragm to vibrate . the vibrating diaphragm pushes on the air to produce sound waves . electrostatic . thumb electrostatic drivers consist of a thin , electrically charged diaphragm , typically a coated pet film membrane , suspended between two perforated metal plates ( electrodes ) . the electrical sound signal is applied to the electrodes creating an electrical field ; depending on the polarity of this field , the diaphragm is drawn towards one of the plates . air is forced through the perforations ; combined with a continuously changing electrical signal driving the membrane , a sound wave is generated . electrostatic headphones are usually more expensive than moving-coil ones , and are comparatively uncommon . in addition , a special amplifier is required to amplify the signal to deflect the membrane , which often requires electrical potentials in the range of 100 to 1,000 & nbsp ; volts . due to the extremely thin and light diaphragm membrane , often only a few micrometers thick , and the complete absence of moving metalwork , the frequency response of electrostatic headphones usually extends well above the audible limit of approximately 20 & nbsp ; khz . the high-frequency response means that the low-midband distortion level is maintained to the top of the audible frequency band , which is generally not the case with moving coil drivers . also , the frequency response peakiness regularly seen in the high-frequency region with moving coil drivers is absent . well-designed electrostatic headphones can produce significantly better sound quality than other types . electrostatic headphones require a voltage source generating 100 & nbsp ; v to over 1 & nbsp ; kv , and are on the user 's head . since the invention of insulators , there is no actual danger . they do not need to deliver significant electric current , which further limits the electrical hazard to the wearer in case of fault . electret . an electret driver functions along the same electromechanical means as an electrostatic driver . however the electret driver has a permanent charge built into it , whereas electrostatics have the charge applied to the driver by an external generator . electret and electrostatic headphones are relatively uncommon . original electrets were also typically cheaper and lower in technical capability and fidelity than electrostatics . patent applications from 2009-2013 have been approved that show by using different materials , i.e . a '' fluorinated cyclic olefin electret film '' , frequency response chart readings can reach 50 & nbsp ; khz at 100db . when these new improved electrets are combined with a traditional dome headphone driver , headphones can be produced that are recognised by the japan audio society as worthy of joining the hi res audio program . us patents 8,559,660 b2 . 7,732,547 b2.7,879,446 b2.7,498,699 b2 . planar magnetic . planar magnetic ( also known as orthodynamic ) headphones use similar technology to electrostatic headphones , with some fundamental differences . they operate similarly to planar magnetic loudspeakers . a planar magnetic driver consists of a relatively large membrane that contains an embedded wire pattern . this membrane is suspended between two sets of permanent , oppositely aligned , magnets . a current passed through the wires embedded in the membrane produces a magnetic field that reacts with the field of the permanent magnets to induce movement in the membrane , which produces sound . balanced armature . left a balanced armature is a sound transducer design primarily intended to increase the electrical efficiency of the element by eliminating the stress on the diaphragm characteristic of many other magnetic transducer systems . as shown schematically in the first diagram , it consists of a moving magnetic armature that is pivoted so it can move in the field of the permanent magnet . when precisely centered in the magnetic field there is no net force on the armature , hence the term 'balanced ' . as illustrated in the second diagram , when there is electric current through the coil , it magnetizes the armature one way or the other , causing it to rotate slightly one way or the other about the pivot thus moving the diaphragm to make sound . thumb the design is not mechanically stable ; a slight imbalance makes the armature stick to one pole of the magnet . a fairly stiff restoring force is required to hold the armature in the 'balance ' position . although this reduces its efficiency , this design can still produce more sound from less power than any other . popularized in the 1920s as baldwin mica diaphragm radio headphones , balanced armature transducers were refined during world war ii for use in military sound powered telephones . some of these achieved astonishing electro-acoustic conversion efficiencies , in the range of 20 % to 40 % , for narrow bandwidth voice signals . today they are typically used only in in-ear headphones and hearing aids , where their high efficiency and diminutive size is a major advantage . they generally are limited at the extremes of the hearing spectrum ( e.g . below 20 & nbsp ; hz and above 16 & nbsp ; khz ) and require a better seal than other types of drivers to deliver their full potential . higher-end models may employ multiple armature drivers , dividing the frequency ranges between them using a passive crossover network . a few combine an armature driver with a small moving-coil driver for increased bass output . the earliest loudspeakers for radio receivers used balanced armature drivers for their cones . . thermoacoustic technology . the thermoacoustic effect generates sound from the audio frequency joule heating of the conductor , an effect that is not magnetic and does not vibrate the speaker . in 2013 a carbon nanotube thin-yarn earphone based on the thermoacoustic mechanism was demonstrated by a research group in tsinghua university . the as-produced cnt thin yarn earphone has a working element called cnt thin yarn thermoacoustic chip . such a chip is composed of a layer of cnt thin yarn array supported by the silicon wafer , and periodic grooves with certain depth are made on the wafer by micro-fabrication methods to suppress the heat leakage from the cnt yarn to the substrate . other transducer technologies . transducer technologies employed much less commonly for headphones include the heil air motion transformer ( amt ) ; piezoelectric film ; ribbon planar magnetic ; magnetostriction and plasma speaker . the first heil amt headphone was marketed by ess laboratories and was essentially an ess amt tweeter from one of the company 's speakers being driven at full range . since the turn of the century , only precide of switzerland have manufactured an amt headphone . piezoelectric film headphones were first developed by pioneer , their two models used a flat sheet of film that limited the maximum volume of air movement . currently , taket produces a piezoelectric film headphone shaped similarly to an amt transducer but , which like the precide driver , has a variation in the size of transducer folds over the diaphragm . it additionally incorporates a two way design by its inclusion of a dedicated tweeter/supertweeter panel . the folded shape of a diaphragm allows a transducer with a larger surface area to fit within smaller space constraints . this increases the total volume of air that can be moved on each excursion of the transducer given that radiating area . magnetostriction headphones , sometimes sold under the label bonephones , work by vibrating against the side of head , transmitting sound via bone conduction . this is particularly helpful in situations where the ears must be unobstructed , or for people who are deaf for reasons that do n't affect the nervous apparatus of hearing . magnetostriction headphones though , are limited in their fidelity compared to conventional headphones that rely on the normal workings of the ear . additionally , in the early 1990s , a french company called plasmasonics tried to market a plasma-ionisation headphone . there are no known functioning examples left . benefits and limitations . headphones can prevent other people from hearing the sound , either for privacy or to prevent disturbing others , as in listening in a public library . they can also provide a level of sound fidelity greater than loudspeakers of similar cost . part of their ability to do so comes from the lack of any need to perform room correction treatments with headphones . high-quality headphones can have an extremely flat low-frequency response down to 20 & nbsp ; hz within 3 & nbsp ; db . while a loudspeaker must use a relatively large ( often 15 '' or 18 '' ) speaker driver to reproduce low frequencies , headphones can accurately reproduce bass and sub-bass frequencies with speaker drivers only 40-50 millimeters wide ( or much smaller , as is the case with in-ear monitor headphones ) . headphones ' impressive low-frequency performance is possible because they are so much closer to the ear that they only need to move relatively small volumes of air . marketed claims such as 'frequency response 4 & nbsp ; hz to 20 & nbsp ; khz ' are usually overstatements ; the product 's response at frequencies lower than 20 & nbsp ; hz is typically very small . headphones are also useful for video games that use 3d positional audio processing algorithms , as they allow players to better judge the position of an off-screen sound source ( such as the footsteps of an opponent or their gunfire ) . although modern headphones have been particularly widely sold and used for listening to stereo recordings since the release of the walkman , there is subjective debate regarding the nature of their reproduction of stereo sound . stereo recordings represent the position of horizontal depth cues ( stereo separation ) via volume and phase differences of the sound in question between the two channels . when the sounds from two speakers mix , they create the phase difference the brain uses to locate direction . through most headphones , because the right and left channels do not combine in this manner , the illusion of the phantom center can be perceived as lost . hard panned sounds are also heard only in one ear rather than from one side . binaural recordings use a different microphone technique to encode direction directly as phase , with very little amplitude difference below 2 & nbsp ; khz , often using a dummy head . they can produce a surprisingly lifelike spatial impression through headphones . commercial recordings almost always use stereo recording , rather than binaural , because loudspeaker listening is more common than headphone listening . it is possible to change the spatial effects of stereo sound on headphones , to better approximate the presentation of speaker reproduction , by using frequency-dependent cross-feed between the channels . headsets can have ergonomic benefits over traditional telephone handsets . they allow call centre agents to maintain better posture without needing to hand-hold a handset or tilt their head sideways to cradle it . united states department of labor . occupational safety & health administration . computer workstation . checklist . accessed february 2 , 2009 . . health and safety . dangers and risks . using headphones at a sufficiently high volume level may cause temporary or permanent hearing impairment or deafness . the headphone volume often has to compete with the background noise , especially in loud places such as subway stations , aircraft , and large crowds . extended periods of exposure to high sound pressure levels created by headphones at high volume settings may be damaging to hearing ; nearly 50 % of teenagers and young adults ( 12 to 35 years old ) in middle and high income countries listen to unsafe levels of sound on their personal audio devices and smartphones . however , one hearing expert found in 2012 ( before the worldwide adoption of smartphones as the main personal listening devices ) that '' fewer than 5 % of users select volume levels and listen frequently enough to risk hearing loss . '' international telecommunication union recently published '' guidelines for safe listening devices/systems '' recommended that sound exposure not exceed 80 decibels , a-weighted db ( a ) for a maximum of 40 hours per week . the european union have also set a similar limit for users of personal listening devices ( 80 & nbsp ; db ( a ) for no more than 40 hours per week ) and for each additional increase of 3-db in sound exposure , the duration should be cut in half ( 83 & nbsp ; db ( a ) for no more than 20 hours , 86 & nbsp ; db ( a ) for 10 hours per week , 89 & nbsp ; db ( a ) for 5 hours per week and so on . most major manufactures of smartphones now include some safety or volume limiting features and warning messaging in their devices . though such practices have received mixed response from some segments of the buying who favor the personal choice of setting their own volume levels . the usual way of limiting sound volume on devices driving headphones is by limiting output power . this has the additional undesirable effect of being dependent of the efficiency of the headphones ; a device producing the maximum allowed power may not produce adequate volume when paired with low-efficiency , high-impedance equipment , while the same amount of power can reach dangerous levels with very efficient earphones . some studies have found that people are more likely to raise volumes to unsafe levels while performing strenuous exercise . a finnish study airo , erkko ; j . pekkarinen ; p . olkinuora . '' listening to music with earphones : an assessment of noise exposure , '' acustica–acta acustica , pp . & nbsp ; 82 , 885–894 . ( 1996 ) recommended that exercisers should set their headphone volumes to half of their normal loudness and only use them for half an hour . other than hearing risk , there is a general danger that listening to loud music in headphones can distract the listener and lead to injury and accidents . several countries and states have made it illegal to wear headphones while driving or cycling . . occupational health and safety . hearing risk from headphones ' use also applies to workers who must wear electronic or communication headsets as part of their daily job ( i.e . , pilots , call centre and dispatch operators , audio engineerfirefighter , etc . ) and hearing damage depends on the exposure time . the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) recommends sound exposure not exceed 85 & nbsp ; db ( a ) over 8 hour work day as a time-weighted average . niosh uses the 3-db exchange rate often referred to as '' time-intensity tradeoff '' which means if sound exposure level is increased by 3 decibels , the duration of exposure should be cut in half . niosh published several documents targeted at protecting the hearing of workers who must wear communication headsets such as call center operators , firefighters , and musicians and sound engineers .