Don Camillo and Peppone

characterisation . in the post-war years ( after 1945 ) , don camillo tarocci ( his full name , which he rarely uses ) is the hotheaded priest of a small town in the po valley in northern italy . don camillo is a big man , tall and strong with hard fists . for the films , the town chosen to represent that of the books was brescello ( which currently has a museum dedicated to don camillo and peppone ) after the production of movies based on guareschi 's tales , but in the first story don camillo is introduced as the parish priest of ponteratto . don camillo is constantly at odds with the communist mayor , giuseppe bottazzi , better known as peppone ( meaning , roughly , big joe ) and is also on very close terms with the crucifix in his town church . through the crucifix he hears the voice of christ . as the author notes in the preface of the first book , not the christ , but '' his '' christ , the voice of his conscience . the christ in the crucifix often has far greater understanding than don camillo of the troubles of the people , and has to constantly but gently reprimand the priest for his impatience . what peppone and camillo have in common is an interest in the well-being of the town . they also appear to have both been partisan fighters during world war ii ; one episode mentions camillo having braved german patrols in order to reach peppone and his fellow communists in the mountains and administer mass to them under field conditions . while peppone makes public speeches about how '' the reactionaries '' ought to be shot , and don camillo preaches fire and brimstone against '' godless communists '' , they actually grudgingly admire each other . therefore , they sometimes end up working together in peculiar circumstances , though keeping up their squabbling . thus , although he publicly opposes the church as a party duty , peppone takes his gang to the church and baptises his children there , which makes him part of don camillo 's flock ; also , peppone and other communists are seen as sharing in veneration of the virgin mary and local saints . don camillo also never condemns peppone himself , but the ideology of communism which is in direct opposition to the church . as depicted in the stories , the communists are the only political party with a mass grassroots organization in the town . the italian christian democratic party , the main force in italian politics at the time , does not have a local political organization ( at least , none is ever mentioned ) ; rather , it is the catholic church which unofficially but very obviously plays that role . don camillo thus plays an explicitly political as well as religious role . for example , when the communists organize a local campaign to sign the stockholm peace appeal , it is don camillo who organizes a counter-campaign , and the townspeople take for granted that such a political campaign is part of his work as priest . many stories are satirical and take on the real world political divide between the italian roman catholic church and the italian communist party , not to mention other worldly politics . others are tragedies about schism , politically motivated murder , and personal feuds in a small town where everyone knows everyone else , but not everyone necessarily likes everyone else very much . political forces other than the communists and the catholics have only a marginal presence . in one episode the local communists are incensed at the announcement that the small italian liberal party has scheduled an election rally in their town , and mobilize in force to break it up — only to discover virtually no local liberals have turned up ; the liberal speaker , a middle-aged professor , speaks to a predominantly communist audience and wins its grudging respect by his courage and determination . in one story , don camillo visits the soviet union , pretending to be a comrade . in another , the arrival of pop culture and motorcycles propels don camillo into fighting '' decadence '' , a struggle in which he finds he has his hands full , especially when the christ mainly smiles benevolently on the young rascals . in this later collection , peppone is the proprietor of several profitable dealerships , riding the '' boom '' years of the 1960s in italy . he is no longer quite the committed communist he once was , but he still does not get on with don camillo — at least not in public . don camillo has his own problems — the second vatican council has brought changes in the church , and a new assistant priest , who comes to be called don chichì , has been foisted upon him to see that don camillo moves with the times . don camillo , of course , has other ideas . despite their bickering , the goodness and generosity of each character can be seen during hard times . they always understand and respect each other when one is in danger , when a flood devastates the town , when death takes a loved one , and in many other situations in which the two '' political enemies '' show their mutual respect for one another and fight side by side for the same ideals ( even if they are each conditioned by their individual public roles in society ) . guareschi created a second series of novels about a similar character , don candido , archbishop of trebilie ( or trebiglie , literally '' three marble balls '' or '' three billiard balls '' ) . the name of this fictional town is a play on words of trepalle ( literally '' three balls '' ) , a real town ( near livigno ) whose priest was an acquaintance of guareschi 's . books in chronological order . the following italian language books have been published : mondo piccolo : don camillo . pub : rizzoli , 1948 literally : little world : don camillo mondo piccolo : don camillo e il suo gregge . pub : rizzoli , 1953 literally : little world : don camillo and his flock mondo piccolo : il compagno don camillo . pub : rizzoli , 1963 literally : little world : comrade don camillo the following italian language books have been published posthumously : mondo piccolo : don camillo e i giovani d'oggi . pub : rizzoli , 1969 literally : little world : don camillo and the youth of today gente così . 1980 . lo spumarino pallido . 1981 . noi del boscaccio . 1983 . l'anno di don camillo . 1986 . il decimo clandestino . 1987 . ciao don camillo . 1996 . don camillo e don chichì . 1996 . the complete version of don camillo e i giovani d'oggi don camillo e peppone . pub : rizzoli , 2007 the following us english translations have been published : the little world of don camillo . pub : pellegrini and cudahy , 1950 ( mondo piccolo : don camillo , translated by una vincenzo troubridge . ) don camillo and his flock . pub : pellegrini and cudahy , 1952 ( mondo piccolo : don camillo e il suo gregge , translated by frances frenaye . ) don camillo 's dilemma . pub : farrar , straus , and young , inc . , 1954 ( collection of stories for english publication , translated by frances frenaye . ) don camillo takes the devil by the tail . pub : farrar , straus , and young , inc . , 1957 ( collection of stories for english publication , translated by frances frenaye . ) comrade don camillo . pub : farrar , straus , and giroux , inc . , 1964 ( mondo piccolo : il compagno don camillo , translated by frances frenaye . ) don camillo meets the flower children . pub : farrar , straus , and giroux , inc . , 1970 ( mondo piccolo : don camillo e i giovani d'oggi , translated by l.k . conrad . ) the following uk english translations have been published : the little world of don camillo . pub : victor gollancz ltd , 1951 ( mondo piccolo : don camillo , translated by una vincenzo troubridge . ) don camillo and the prodigal son . pub : victor gollancz ltd , 1952 ( mondo piccolo : don camillo e il suo gregge , translated by frances frenaye . ) don camillo 's dilemma . pub : victor gollancz ltd , 1954 ( collection of stories for english publication , translated by frances frenaye . ) don camillo and the devil . pub : victor gollancz ltd , 1957 ( collection of stories for english publication , translated by frances frenaye . ) comrade don camillo . pub : victor gollancz ltd , 1964 ( mondo piccolo : il compagno don camillo , translated by frances frenaye . ) don camillo meets hell 's angels . pub : victor gollancz ltd , 1970 ( mondo piccolo : don camillo e i giovani d'oggi , translated by l.k . conrad . ) '' the complete little world of don camillo '' pub . pilot productions , 2013 ( 'mondo piccolo : don camillo , translated by adam elgar ) '' don camillo and his flock '' pub . pilot productions , 2015 ( 'don camillo e il suo gregge , translated by lucinda byatt , theresa federici , frances frenaye , wendell ricketts ) the following five were compiled into a larger book published in 1980 : the world of don camillo , the world of don camillo , giovanni guareschi , pub 1980 victor gollancz ltd ; to coincide with the television adaptation : the little world of don camillo . don camillo and the prodigal son . don camillo 's dilemma . don camillo and the devil . comrade don camillo . the world of don camillo does not contain all the stories contained in the individual books . the italian , us english and uk english publications often have a different number of stories within them . media . films . a series of black-and-white films were made between 1952 and 1965 . these were french-italian coproductions and were simultaneously released in both languages . don camillo was played by french actor fernandel , peppone by the italian actor gino cervi , quite a guareschi-lookalike , both tall and bulky with big mustaches . the author of the original stories was involved in the scripts and helped select the main actors . to this day , the films are screened in europe . the titles were : le petit monde de don camillo ( italian : don camillo ; french : le petit monde de don camillo ) the return of don camillo ( italian : il ritorno di don camillo ; french : le retour de don camillo ) don camillo 's last round ( italian : don camillo e l'onorevole peppone ; french : la grande bagarre ) don camillo : monsignor ( italian : don camillo monsignore ma non troppo ; french : don camillo monseigneur ) don camillo in moscow ( italian : il compagno don camillo ; french : don camillo en russie ) christian-jaque began filming the french-italian film don camillo e i giovani d'oggi in 1970 but had to stop filming due to fernandel 's falling ill , which resulted in his untimely death . the film was then realized in 1972 by mario camerini with gastone moschin playing the role of don camillo and lionel stander as peppone . a don camillo ( the world of don camillo ; italian : don camillo ) film was remade in 1983 , an italian production with terence hill directing and also starring as don camillo . colin blakely performed peppone in one of his last film roles . . radio . a bbc radio english-language radio dramatization of the little world of don camillo was broadcast in 2001 starring alun armstrong as don camillo , john moffatt as the bishop , shaun prendergast as peppone and joss ackland as god , and rebroadcast in july 2010 on bbc radio 7 . four further bbc radio series of the little world of don camillo were made , with the final series broadcast on bbc radio 4 in december 2006 . ian hogg replaced armstrong as don camillo , while prendergast , ackland and moffatt all continued to reprise their roles as peppone , god and the bishop respectively . bbc radio 7 broadcast the second and third series throughout august and september 2010 with the fourth series beginning on 6 october . . television . in 1980 , the bbc produced the television series the little world of don camillo , based on the stories , starring italian-german actor mario adorf as don camillo and englishman brian blessed as peppone . the narrator and voice of the christ was cyril cusack . in colombia the stories were adapted into a tv comedy called don camilo . the italian communist era was changed to a colombian period called '' la violencia '' when the liberal and conservative parties were fighting to maintain power in colombia . the comedy was produced from 1987 to 1988 by the now defunct coestrellas company and produced and directed by daniel samper pizano and bernando romero pereiro . the series starred carlos benjumea as don camillo ( don camilo in colombian spanish ) , hector rivas as peppone ( pepón in colombian spanish ) , luis fernando múnera as the christ voice , and the actors diego león hoyos and manuel pachón as peppone flunkies . the series was broadcast on mondays at 10:00 pm by canal a ( señal institucional now ) and rebroadcast by señal colombia in 2011 and canal uno in 2014 . thai novel . the little world of don camillo was adapted by the thai writer and politician kukrit pramoj into his own 1954 novel , phai daeng ( red bamboo ) . see also . marcelino pan y vino also features a talking crucifix monsignor quixote ( graham greene novel about friendship between priest and communist mayor ) clochemerle ( 1934 ) . references . sources . . external links . the little blog of don camillo . . don camillo on imdb