Ricardian equivalence

introduction . governments can finance their expenditures by creating new money , by levying taxes , or by issuing bonds . since bonds are loans , they must eventually be repaid—presumably by raising taxes in the future . the choice is therefore '' tax now or tax later . '' suppose that the government finances some extra spending through deficits ; i.e . it chooses to tax later . according to the hypothesis , taxpayers will anticipate that they will have to pay higher taxes in future . as a result , they will save , rather than spend , the extra disposable income from the initial tax cut , leaving demand and output unchanged . david ricardo was the first to propose this possibility in the early nineteenth century ; however , he was unconvinced of its empirical relevance . antonio de viti de marco elaborated on ricardian equivalence in the 1890s . handbook of public economics , martin feldstein , alan j . aurbach , eds . , north holland ( august 1 , 1985 ) robert j . barro took the question up independently in the 1970s , in an attempt to give the proposition a firm theoretical foundation . . ricardo and war bonds . in '' essay on the funding system '' ( 1820 ) , ricardo studied whether it makes a difference to finance a war with £20 million in current taxes or to issue government bonds with infinite maturity and annual interest payment of £1 million in all following years financed by future taxes . at the assumed interest rate of 5 % , ricardo concluded that in terms of spending the two alternatives amounted to the same value . however , ricardo himself doubted that this proposition had practical consequences . he followed up the initial exposition with a claim that individuals do not actually evaluate taxes in such a manner and , in particular , take myopic view of the tax path . david ricardo , '' essay on the funding system '' in the works of david ricardo . with a notice of the life and writings of the author , by j.r . mcculloch , london : john murray , 1888 . ricardo–de viti–barro equivalence . in 1974 , robert j . barro provided some theoretical foundation for ricardo 's hesitant speculation ( apparently in ignorance of ricardo 's earlier notion and de viti 's subsequent extensions ) . barro 's model assumed the following : families act as infinitely lived dynasties because of intergenerational altruism barro phrased this as '' any operative intergenerational transfer '' , however imperfect capital markets are perfect ( i.e . , all can borrow and lend at a single rate ) the path of government expenditures is fixed under these conditions , if governments finance deficits by issuing bonds , the bequests that families grant to their children will be just large enough to offset the higher taxes that will be needed to pay off those bonds . among his conclusions , barro wrote : . in the case where the marginal net-wealth effect of government bonds is close to zero . fiscal effects involving changes in the relative amounts of tax and debt finance for a given amount of public expenditure would have no effect on aggregate demand , interest rates , and capital formation . the model was an important contribution to the theory of new classical macroeconomics , built around the assumption of rational expectations . in 1979 , barro defined the ricardian equivalence theorem as follows : '' . shifts between debt and tax finance for a given amount of public expenditure would have no first-order effect on the real interest rate , volume of private investment , etc . '' barro noted that '' the ricardian equivalence proposition is presented in ricardo '' . however , ricardo himself was skeptical of this equivalence . . criticisms . ricardian equivalence requires assumptions that have been seriously challenged . the perfect capital market hypothesis is often held up for particular criticism because liquidity constraints invalidate the assumed lifetime income hypothesis . international capital markets also complicate the picture . however , even in a laboratory setting where all assumptions required are ensured to hold , behaviour of individuals is inconsistent with ricardian equivalence . meissner , thomas & rostam-afschar , davud ( 2014 ) '' do tax cuts increase consumption ? an experimental test of ricardian equivalence '' ( pdf ; 767 & nbsp ; kb ) martin feldstein argued in 1976 that barro ignored economic and population growth . he demonstrated that the creation of public debt depresses savings in a growing economy . in the same issue james m . buchanan also criticized barro 's model , noting that '' this is an age-old question in public finance theory '' , one already mooted by ricardo and elaborated upon by de viti . in a response to the comments of feldstein and buchanan , barro recognized that uncertainty may play a role in affecting individual behaviour with respect to government finance . nevertheless , he argued that '' it is much less clear that this complication would imply systematic errors in a direction such that public debt issue raises aggregate demand . '' in 1977 , gerald p . o'driscoll commented that ricardo , in expanding his treatment of this subject for an encyclopædia britannica article , changed so many features of it as to result in a ricardian nonequivalence theorem ; he elaborated all the reasons why the proposition would not hold . in 1989 , barro offered a number of defenses against various other critiques . . empirical results . ricardian equivalence has been the subject of extensive empirical inquiry . barro himself found some confirmation in post ww i years . however , research by chris carroll , james poterba and lawrence summers shows that the ricardian equivalence hypothesis is refuted by their results . in the ronald reagan era , the us government had a historically large budget deficit due to the reagan administration tax cuts and increases in military spending . during 1976–80 , government revenue was 10.01 percent of potential gnp , and it declined to 8.86 percent during 1981–1985 . the ratio of the us government 's budget deficit to its potential gnp did not exceed 4 percent from world war ii until 1981 , and exceeded 4 percent after 1981 . the ratio of an inflation- and cycle-adjusted deficit to the potential gnp was 2.56 percent during 1981–1986 , and this ratio was the largest between 1958 and 1986 . if the ricardian equivalence hypothesis is true , the rational consumers of the economy , who expect the government to raise taxes , try to reduce their consumption and increase their saving . the reality was that the net private saving as a percentage of gnp was 8.55 in the 1976–1980 period , and it decreased to 7.47 percent in the 1981–1986 period . the ratio of consumption to gnp was 62.96 percent in the 1976–1980 period , and slightly increased to 64.72 percent in the 1981–1986 period . the facts about private saving , government saving and consumption in the us are shown in table 1 . their finding is that increases in government deficits are followed by decreases in private saving . they see the increase in the consumption-to-gnp ratio during 1981–86 , when the governmental dissaving is accelerated by reaganomics . their results refute the ricardian equivalence hypothesis . an argument for countercyclical fiscal policies . ricardian equivalence has crucial importance in the fiscal policy considerations of new classical macroeconomics . when assessing ricardian equivalence or any of the new classical doctrines , one should bear in mind the conditional character of these theses . thus the equivalence theorem should not be separated from the assumptions on which it is based . in other words , ricardian equivalence does not mean that any countercyclical efforts will fail , but outlines the necessary conditions for that failure and , naturally , for success at the same time . governments do not have any potential to exert countercyclical efforts if the path of government expenditures is fixed and if agents form rational expectations . if these conditions hold , cuts in taxes imply a later pressure to raise taxes , since government has to fill the resource gap in the budget which is the result of the initial tax cut . so , rational agents will put the additional income from the tax cut into saving , and consumption does not rise . in this story , if these processes can be changed by the government , or , in any way , the additional income can be believed not to be withdrawn later , the initial tax cut will induce a rise in public consumption expenditures . so countercyclical fiscal policy can be effective if any one of the conditions necessary for the equivalence does not hold . controlling the real economy is possible perhaps even in a keynesian style if government regains its potential to exert this control . therefore , actually , new classical macroeconomics highlights the conditions under which fiscal policy can be effective and not the inefficiency of fiscal policy . countercyclical aspirations need not to be abandoned , only the playing-field of economic policy got narrowed by new classical macroeconomics . keynes urged active countercyclical efforts of fiscal policy and these efforts are not predestined to fail not even in the new classical theory , only the conditions necessary for the efficiency of countercyclical efforts were specified by new classical macroeconomics . ricardian equivalence underlines the importance of fiscal reforms , since such reforms are needed in order to change the path of government expenditures . when implementing comprehensive fiscal reforms which make public sector more efficient governments do not exert countercyclical efforts of course , but form the necessary conditions for regaining countercyclical potential . in this respect , ricardian equivalence clarifies the exact conditions necessary for countercyclical fiscal policies . . see also . public finance government debt policy ineffectiveness proposition say 's law fiscal policy . references . further reading .