Gender marking in job titles

examples . the suffix -man had the meaning '' person '' in old english ( see man ) , but in present-day english it is predominantly masculine . thus job titles that include this suffix , such as fireman , salesman and alderman , generally imply that the holder is male . while some of these job titles have feminine variants ( e.g . alderwoman ) , others do not , because traditionally the positions in question were not occupied by women . aarts , bas and april m . s . mcmahon . the handbook of english linguistics . malden , ma ; oxford : blackwell pub . , 2006 , , p . 737 . for most such titles , gender-neutral equivalents now also exist , such as police officer ( for policeman or policewoman ) , salesperson or sales representative ( for salesman or saleswoman ) , etc . however , some proposed gender-neutral terms have not attained such common usage ( as with fisher as an alternative to fisherman ) . military ranks with the suffix -man normally remain unchanged when applied to females : for example , a woman serving in the royal electrical and mechanical engineers might be known as craftsman atkins . examining the time magazine corpus ( texts from the 1920s to the 2000s ) , researcher maria bovin found : '' garner ’ s usage tip of the day '' states , in regards to '' layman ; layperson ; lay person '' , that '' “ layman ” is the most common among these terms and is commonly regarded as unexceptionable — in reference to members of both sexes , of course . '' . debate . a change to gender-neutral job titles can be controversial . this debate reflects the debate over gender-neutral language in general . the case for switching to gender-neutral job titles usually makes an ideology argument , that gender-specific job titles at some level promote sexism in the workplace . for example , fire chiefs have argued that when the public uses the term '' fireman '' instead of '' firefighter '' , it reinforces the popular image that firefighting is only a job for men , and thus makes it difficult for them to recruit women . the case for the more traditional , gender-specific terms is usually a practical argument , that replacing the historical terms everywhere they appear ( in documents , etc . ) would be difficult and expensive , or that it is unnecessary . however , there are many ( in particular feminism ) who would claim that this argument is really a backlash against the argument for gender-neutral language . there is much difficulty in resolving this debate , as in the case of gender-neutral language in general ; however there is at least one difference . whereas in the general case , there is often no appropriate singular gender-neutral replacement ( e.g . the third person singular pronoun he , although the use of singular they is increasingly common ) , there are gender-neutral versions of nearly all job titles . during the 19th century , attempts to overlay latin grammar rules onto english required the use of feminine endings in nouns ending with -or . this produced words like doctress and professoress and even lawyeress , all of which have fallen out of use ; though waitress , stewardess , and actress are in modern use . use of the term chairman remains widespread in predominantly male sectors of society , but chairperson or chair is now widespread in society in general , at least in the us , canada and increasingly in the uk american heritage dictionary for example , the boards of most fortune 500 companies in the united states are presided over by a '' chairman '' and also the overwhelming majority of the ( ftse 100 ) companies in the united kingdom have a '' chairman '' , while committees in the united states house of representatives are presided over by a '' chair '' , as of 2009 . house language becomes gender neutral since most of these are , however , men , a more correct description of the current language situation needs to consider use in organisations whose chairperson is a woman . less than half of the members of the american heritage dictionary 's usage panel accept the use of the word chairman in describing a woman . '' only 48 percent ( 43 percent of the women and 50 percent of the men ) accept the use of the word in emily owen , chairman of the mayor 's task force , issued a statement assuring residents that their views would be solicited . '' some usage guides , such as the cambridge guide to english usage , advocate gender-neutral language in circumstances where all sexes are meant to be included . for instance , a business might advertise that it is looking for a new chair or chairperson rather than chairman . gender-neutral language proscribes chairman , on the grounds that some readers would assume women and those of other genders are implicitly excluded from responding to an advertisement using this word . the cambridge guide to english usage pp 243,4 . generally accepted writing conventions . proponents of gender-neutral job titles believe that such titles should be used , especially when referring to hypothetical persons . for example , firefighter instead of fireman ; mail carrier , letter carrier , or post worker rather than mailman ; flight attendant instead of steward or stewardess ; bartender instead of barman or barmaid . in the rare case where no useful gender-neutral alternative is available , they believe both male and female terms should be used . proponents of gender-neutral language advocate the use of a neuter form when/where appropriate . for example , a company may seek to fill a vacancy and hire a new chairperson . since a gendered individual does n't currently hold the position , its title reverts to a neuter form . once that position is filled , many advocates believe gender can be attached to the title as appropriate ( chairman or chairwoman ) . sometimes this formulation can lead to inconsistent gender-specific usage , in which women become chairpersons but men remain chairmen . some women opt to use the word chairman in preference to chairwoman , subject to the style madam or mister prefixing the title , which they perceive to be gender-neutral by itself . particularly in academia , the word chair is often used to designate the person chosen to oversee the agenda at meetings of an organized group . the principle of gender-neutral language dictates that job titles that add suffixes to make them feminine should be avoided . for example , '' usher '' , not '' usherette '' ; '' comedian '' , not '' comedienne '' . some of these are almost entirely obsolete now , such as sculptress , poetess , and aviatrix . if gender is relevant , the words woman or female should be used instead of '' lady '' ( '' my grandmother was the first female doctor in the province '' ) , except if the masculine is '' lord '' ( as in '' landlady '' ) . in the case of landlord or landlady , it may be preferable to find an equivalent title with the same meaning , such as proprietor or lessor . however , when a female is in the office of '' black rod , '' it is changed to '' the lady usher of the black rod '' or simply '' usher of the blackrod '' , as in canada . advisors on non-sexist usage deprecate terms such as '' male nurse '' , '' female doctor '' , '' male model '' , or '' female judge '' because such terms are often used when the gender is irrelevant . these advisors say that the statement of exception reinforces harmful assumptions about the gender of people in those professions . gender-inclusive language - the writing center , unc chapel hill . languages other than english . when words have a grammatical gender associated with them , in many languages , they may impose morphological requirements to maintain sentence agreement . that is , there is a non-political content to the word changes , or inflection . nevertheless , gender-identification word endings are sometimes dropped , something that happened often in the former east germany , for example . review of : mary fulbrook . the people 's state : east german society from hitler to honecker . new haven : yale university press , 2005 . 352 pp . sometimes an entirely new or etymologically unrelated word is coined . for example , when men in france wanted to become midwife , up till then an exclusively female occupation , they chose not to adapt the existing term sage-femme ( '' wise woman '' ) , and instead coined maïeuticien . see also . epicene gender role gender-neutral language gender neutrality in english third-person pronoun . references . external links . gender-unmarked and gender-marked job title usage ( doc file )