Rukmini

etymology and epithets . the name rukmini comes from the word rukma which means 'what is bright or radiant ' . ruciranana – one who has a beautiful face , expanding like a lotus flower vaidarbhi – princess of vidarbha bhaishmi - daughter of bhishmaka . vidarbha raj nandini - daughter of vidarbha rajya . maanini mani- jewel among women or supreme reservoir of love . krishnatmika - the one who is soul of krishna . ramaa - splendour , goddess of fortune vithoba - mother rukmini . rakhma/lakhma - lakshmi dwarkeshwari- goddess of dwarka rukman - she is addressed by this name in haryana and rajasthan . laadobai- the people of kundinapur address her by this name , as it is her birthplace . chiryauvana - one who is forever young . rukmini was given the boon of staying young forever by rishi durvasa who was pleased by her hospitality during his visit to dwaraka . pradyumna jananī - mother of pradyumna shishupal yashohantri - as mentioned in skanda puran , shishupala had started saying wrong not only about shri krishna but also about rukmini , which further infuriated sri krishna , and he killed shishupala in anger . that is why rukmini is considered to be the cause of the shishupala slaughter . legends . birth . although born of an earthly king , her position as an incarnation of goddess lakshmi is described throughout puranic literature : goddess lakshmi is forever united with the lord . with rama , she becomes sita , when he is krishna , she is rukmini . in all the expansions of narayan , lakshmi is inseparable from narayana . ( vishnu purana 1.9.144 ) a hero among the kurus , the supreme lord himself , govinda , married king bhishmaka 's daughter , vaidarbhi rukmini , who was a direct expansion of the goddess of fortune sriyo maatraam . ( bhagavata purana 10.52.16 ) dwaraka 's citizens were overjoyed to see krishna , the lord of all opulence , united with rukmini , the goddess of fortune rama . ( sb 10.54.60 ) lakshmi by her portion took birth on earth as rukmini in the family of bhismaka . ( mahabharata adi 67.156 ) having krsna as her essence , rukmini is the basis of the material nature ( mula-prakrti ) and the creator of the universe . based on the revealed knowledge ( sruti ) arising from the questions of the women of vraja and also on account of her being associated with brahman , krsna 's potency ( rukmini ) is identified with pranava by the brahmavadins . ( gopala tapani upanishad ) the shrutis which are closely associated with the narrations of the pastimes of the vraja-gopis with svayam-rupa bhagavan shri krishna , the parabrahma , have declared this truth ( gopala-tapani upanisad 57 ) . they can not be separated . as lakshmi is vishnu 's shakti ( power or strength ) so even as rukmini is krishna 's strength . rukmini , the consort of krishna is the swarupa-shakti ( mulaprakriti ) , the essential potency of krishna ( krsnatmika ) and she is the shakti / mother of the divine world ( jagatkatri ) . she was born in kaundinyapur of vidarbha ( today 's maharashtra ) and a royal princess of vidarbha kingdom . the daughter of a powerful king bhishmaka who ruled from kundinapuri . she is the goddess of love , devotion , courage and mercy . she is called laadli or laadobai in kaundinyapur . the mishmi people of arunanchal pradesh believes that rukmini-chief consort of lord krishna belonged to their tribe . the plays and dances on ‘ rukmini haran ’ are common . there is a legend that lord krishna asked the mishmi people to cut their hair as a form of punishment for not allowing him to marry rukmini . due to this idu-mishmi people are also called '' chulikata '' ( chuli-hair , kata- cut ) . . marriage . rukmini was the daughter of bhishmaka , the king of vidarbha . rukmî was the firstborn son . rukmini was his chaste sister . bhismaka was the vassal of king jarasandha of magadha . she fell in love with and longed for krishna , whose virtue , character , charm and greatness she had heard much of . in the same way , shri krishna also started loving rukmini in his heart after hearing about her glories . krishna knowing her to be a repository of intelligence , auspicious marks , magnanimity , beauty , good behaviour and other qualities , likewise considered her a suitable wife and decided to marry her . he also went to attend her svayamvara but rukmini 's eldest brother rukmi though was a friend of evil king kamsa , who was killed by krishna and was set against the marriage . rukmini 's parents wanted to marry rukmini krishna but rukmi , her brother strongly opposed it . rukmi was an ambitious prince and he did not want to earn the wrath of emperor jarasandha , who was ruthless . instead , he proposed that she be married to his friend shishupala , the crown prince of chedi and a cousin of krishna . shishupala was also a vassal and close associate of jarasandha and hence an ally of rukmi . bhishmaka gave in but rukmini , who had overheard the conversation was horrified and immediately sent for a brahmana , sunanda , whom she trusted and asked him to deliver a letter to krishna . she asked krishna to come to vidarbha and kidnap her to avoid a battle where her relatives may be killed . she said that he may wonder how will he accomplish this without any bloodshed , considering that she is in the inner apartments of her palace , but the solution to this problem was that she would have to visit the temple of goddess girija , who is their family deity . rukmini asked that he use this occasion to claim her . krishna , having received the message in dwarka , said to brahmana , sunanda that '' just as rukmini 's mind is fixed on me , my mind is fixed on her . i ca n't even sleep at night . i know that rukmi , out of envy , has forbidden our marriage . she has dedicated herself exclusively to me and her beauty is flawless . i will bring her here after thrashing those worthless kings in battle , just as one brings a blazing flameout of firewood . he then immediately set out for vidarbha with balarama , his elder brother . '' meanwhile , shishupala was overjoyed at the news from rukmi that he could simply go to kundina ( present-day koundanyapur ) amravati district and claim rukmini . jarasandha , not so trusting , sent all his vassals and allies along because he felt that krishna would certainly come to snatch rukmini away . meanwhile , at the palace , rukmini got ready for her upcoming marriage . the brahmana messenger came and informed that krishna had accepted her request . she went to the temple to offer her obeisances to goddess ambika , consort of lord shiva . as she stepped out , she saw krishna and he soon swept her into his chariot with him . they both started to ride off when shishupala noticed them . all of jarasandha 's forces quickly started chasing them . while balarama occupied most of them and held them back rukmi had almost caught up with krishna and rukmini . he overtook krishna near bhadrod . krishna and rukmi duelled with the inevitable result of krishna 's victory . rukmi used abusive and offensive words for rukmini for which krishna was about to kill him , rukmini fell at the feet of krishna and begged that her brother 's life be spared . krishna , generous as always , agreed , but as punishment , shaved rukmi 's head and let him go free . there was no greater shame for a warrior than a visible sign of defeat . rukmi was worshipped as gaudera by villagers since he was defeated . he was known as the god of defeat and shame . according to folklore , krishna came to the village of madhavpur ghed after kidnapping and marrying rukmini at this very place . in memory of that event , there is a temple built for madhavrai . a celebration of this event is held at madhavpur in memory of this marriage every year at a cultural fair . at dwaraka , krishna and rukmini were welcomed with great pomp and ceremony . children . the first son of queen rukmini was pradyumna , and also born of her were charudeshna , sudesna and the powerful charudeha , along with sucharu , charugupta , bhadracharu , charuchandra , vicharu and charu , the tenth ( sb 10.61.8–9 ) . of them , pradyumna was the crown prince of dwaraka . tulabharam ( weighing by scale ) . this story is absent in the main scriptures pertaining to krishna 's life . the tulabhara is an incident in the life of rukmini , that reveals the extent to which humble devotion is worth more than material wealth . satyabhama , another queen of krishna , prides herself on the love krishna has for her and her grasp over his heart . rukmini , on the other hand , is a devoted wife , humble in her service of her lord . her devotion is her real inner beauty . on one occasion , sage narada arrived in dwaraka and in the course of conversation hinted to satyabhama that the love that krishna exhibits towards her is not all that real and in fact , it is rukmini who has real control over his heart . unable to bear this , satyabhama challenges narada to prove it . narada , with his way with words , tricked her into accepting a vrata ( ritual ) where she has to give krishna away in charity to narada and reclaim him by giving the weight of krishna in wealth . narada lures her into accepting this vrata by telling her that krishna 's love for her will increase many folds if she succeeds in performing this tulabharam . he also instigates her ego by hinting that her wealth may not be sufficient to equal the weight of krishna . with satyabhama 's ego duly raised , she tells narada that she can mobilize so much wealth that it is a child 's play for her to outweigh krishna . narada warns her that if she is not able to do this , krishna will become his slave to be done with as he pleases . the scene is soon set for the vrata . satyabhama gives krishna away in charity in spite of the other wives ' pleadings . krishna , always the mischievous cowherd , meekly submits to this drama . after donating krishna to narada , satyabhama arranges for a big scale to be put up and sends with all assurance for her huge treasure of gold and jewelry . all that she has is soon put on the scale , but it does n't budge . narada starts taunting her and threatening her that if she ca n't put enough gold or diamonds , he will be forced to auction krishna as a slave to someone else . satyabhama , in frantic panic , swallows her pride and begs all the other wives to give their jewels . they agree out of love for krishna but alas , it is of no use . krishna remains a mute witness to all this drama and rubs salt into the open wounds of satyabhama 's ego that the king of dwaraka will now become a slave to some rishi and will have to suffer the separation from his dear wife . narada suggests to satyabhama that rukmini may be able to get her out of the predicament . she finally swallows her pride and appeals to the devoted first wife of krishna . rukmini comes and with a prayer to her husband puts a single leaf of the sacred tulasi on the scale ( tula ) . the scales then become all at once so heavy that even after removing all the jewels , the scales are weighed down on the side of the tulasi leaf . while there are different versions in different texts as to why the weighing was arranged , the story of the tulsi leaf placed by rukmini being worth more in weight than that of satyabhama 's wealth is a common ending . this story is often repeated to enunciate the significance of tulsi and how a humble offering to god is greater than any material wealth . . sudama . another well-known incident in rukmini 's married life is when krishna 's childhood friend , sudama , visited dwarka . rukmini welcomed sudama and gave him food . she and krishna fanned him as he rested from his long journey . this type of devotion is a characteristic of rukmini , that was very prevalent . death . after the disappearance of krishna , after the yadu massacre , rukmini along with jambavati and few other ladies ascends herself on a pyre . dio mahabharate . „ rukmini , the princess of gandhara , saivya , haimavati , and queen jamvabati ascended the funeral pyre . ” . legacy . rukmini or rakhumai is worshipped as the consort of vithoba ( an avatar of krishna ) in pandharpur , maharashtra . in 1480 , rukmini devi 's servant messenger is believed to have appeared in this world as vadirajatirtha ( 1480–1600 ) , the greatest saint in the madhvacharya tradition . he composed a famous work rukminishavijaya glorifying rukmini and krishna in 1240 verses spread over 19 chapters . kantanagar temple , commonly known as kantaji temple or kantajew temple at kantanagar , is a late-medieval hindu temple in dinajpur , bangladesh . the kantajew temple is one of the most magnificent religious edifices belonging to the 18th century . this beautiful temple is dedicated to krishna and his wife rukmini built by maharaja pran nath , its construction started in 1704 ce and ended in the reign of his son raja ramnath in 1722 ce . it boasts one of the greatest examples of terracotta architecture in bangladesh and once had nine spires , but all were destroyed in an earthquake that took place in 1897 . rukmini is believed to have been born on eighth day of the month of pausha krishna paksha and this day is celebrated as rukmini janmashtami . in jagannath puri she is worshipped as suvarnlaxmi or shridevi , her marriage with lord jagannath ( krishna ) is celebrated . hera panchami festival is dedicated to her . references . bibliography . . external links . srimad-bhagavatam : krishna kidnaps rukmini