Essen

coat of arms . the coat of arms of the city of essen is a heraldic peculiarity . granted in 1886 , it is a so-called allianzwappen ( arms of alliance ) and consists of two separate shields under a single crown . most other coats of arms of cities use a mural crown instead of a heraldic crown . the crown , however , does not refer to the city of essen itself , but instead to the secularized principality of essen under the reign of the princess-abbesses . the dexter ( heraldically right ) escutcheon shows the double-headed imperial eagle of the holy roman empire , granted to the city in 1623 . the sinister ( heraldically left ) escutcheon is one of the oldest emblems of essen and shows a sword that people believed was used to behead the city 's patron saints cosmas and damian . people tend to connect the sword in the left shield with one found in the cathedral treasury . this sword , however , is much more recent . a slightly modified and more heraldically correct version of the coat of arms can be found on the roof of the handelshof hotel near the main station . international relations . the monessen , pennsylvania , situated along the monongahela river , was named after the river and essen . . twin towns – sister cities . essen is twinned with : changzhou , china ( 2015 ) grenoble , france ( 1974 ) nizhny novgorod , russia ( 1991 ) sunderland , england , united kingdom ( 1949 ) tampere , finland ( 1960 ) tel aviv , israel ( 1991 ) zabrze , poland ( 2015 ) . cooperation agreements . essen cooperates with : kōriyama , japan ( 2017 ) qingdao , china ( 2008 ) ulaanbaatar , mongolia ( 2012 ) . industry and infrastructure . economy . essen is home to several large companies , among them the thyssenkrupp industrial conglomerate which is also registered in duisburg and originates from a 1999 merger between duisburg-based thyssen ag and essen-based krupp . the largest company registered only in essen is germany 's second-largest electric utility rwe . essen hosts parts of the corporate headquarters of schenker ag , the logistics division of deutsche bahn . other major companies include germany 's largest construction company hochtief , as well as aldi , evonik industries , karstadt , medion and deichmann , europe 's largest shoe retailer . the coca-cola company had originally established their german headquarters in essen ( around 1930 ) , where it remained until 2003 , when it was moved to the capital berlin . in light of the energy transition in germany , germany 's largest electric utility e.on announced that , after restructuring and splitting off its conventional electricity generation division ( coal , gas , atomic energy ) , it will move its headquarters to essen in 2016 , becoming a sole provider of renewable energy . the chemical distribution company brenntag announced to move its headquarter to essen end of 2017 . thyssen-krupp-quartier-essen-2013.jpg thyssenkrupp headquarters in essen rwe tower essen 2014.jpg rwe headquarters in the business district eon-ruhrgas-zentrale essen.jpg e.on headquarters hochhaus kruppstraße 5 , essen ( 2 ) . jpg rwe headquarters hochtiefhaus essen.jpg hochtief headquarters rellinghaus ii , essen.jpg evonik industries headquarters schenker ag hauptsitz.jpeg schenker ag headquarters postbank-hochhaus essen.jpg postbank essen ehem . essener creditanstalt , heute deutsche bank.jpg deutsche bank branch in the financial district emschergenossenschaft essen.jpg emschergenossenschaft essen . fairs . the city 's exhibition centre , messe essen , hosts some 50 trade fairs each year . with around 530.000 visitors each year , essen motor show is by far the largest event held there . it has been described as '' the showcase event of the year for the tuning community '' nick hall , '' getting to grips with the essential essen '' , the irish times , 6 december 2006 and as the german version of the annual sema auto show in las vegas . jens meiners , '' the continental : essen motor show , european politics , and bmw remarks '' , car and driver , 3 december 2013 . as contrasted with the frankfurt auto show , the essen show is smaller and is focused on car tuning and racing interests . john rettie , '' germany 's essen motor show '' , road & track , 6 december 2011 . other important fairs open to consumers include spiel , the world 's biggest consumer fair for gaming , and one of the leading fairs for equestrianism , equitana , held every two years . important fairs restricted to professionals include '' security '' ( security and fire protection ) , ipm ( gardening ) and e-world ( energy and water ) . messe-essen-logo.svg messe-essen-logo essen-messesued3-asio.jpg messe essen south entrance messe essen , osteingang.jpg messe essen , east entrance essen-messesued1-asio.jpg messe essen south entrance . media . the westdeutscher rundfunk has a studio in essen , which is responsible for the central ruhr area . each day , it produces a 30-minute regional evening news magazine ( called lokalzeit ruhr ) , a 5-minute afternoon news programme , and several radio news programmes . a local broadcasting station went on air in the late 1990s . the waz media group is one of the most important ( print ) media companies in europe and publishes the ruhr area 's two most important daily newspapers , westdeutsche allgemeine zeitung ( waz ; 580,000 copies ) and neue ruhr/rhein zeitung ( nrz ; 180,000 copies ) . in essen , the waz group also publishes the local and , both of which had been independent weekly newspapers for parts of essen . additionally , axel springer run a printing facility for their boulevard-style daily paper bild in essen . education . one renowned educational institution in essen is the folkwang university , a university of the arts founded in 1927 , which is headquartered in essen and has additional facilities in duisburg , bochum and dortmund . since 1927 , its traditional main location has been in the former werden abbey in essen in the ruhr area , with additional facilities in duisburg , bochum , and dortmund , and , since 2010 , at the zeche zollverein , a world heritage site also in essen . deutschlandradio new name and building , 10 january 2010 ( in german ) the folkwang university is home to the international dance company folkwang tanz studio ( fts ) . in 1963 the folkwang school was renamed folkwang-hochschule ( folkwang academy ) . in 2010 the institution began offering graduate studies and was renamed folkwang university of the arts . this coincided with ruhr.2010 , the festival in which the ruhr district was designated the european capital of culture for the year 2010 . essen_kloster_werden_innenhof_2_2005.jpg folkwang university of the arts zollverein school of management and design 3116754.jpg zollverein school of management and design universität essen panorama.jpg universität essen essen werden - folkwang-hochschule 08 ies.jpg folkwang university the university of duisburg-essen , which resulted from a 2003 merger of the universities of essen and duisburg , is one of germany 's '' youngest '' universities with about 42,000 students . one of its primary research areas is urban systems ( i.e . , sustainable development , logistics and transportation ) , a theme largely inspired by the highly urbanised ruhr area . other fields include nanotechnology , discrete mathematics and '' education in the 21st century '' . another university in essen is the private fachhochschule für ökonomie und management , a university of applied sciences with over 6,000 students and branches in 15 other major cities throughout germany . medicine . essen offers a highly diversified health care system with more than 1,350 resident doctors and almost 6,000 beds in 13 hospitals , including a university hospital . the university hospital dates back to 1909 , when the city council established a municipal hospital ; although it was largely destroyed during world war ii , it was later rebuilt , and finally gained the title of a university hospital in 1963 . it focuses on diseases of the circulatory system ( west german heart centre essen ) , oncology and organ transplant , with the department of bone marrow transplantation being the second-largest of its kind in the world . elisabethkrankenhaus essen.jpg elisabethkrankenhaus essen uniklinik essen , 20071222.jpg university hospital essen . transport . . streets and motorways . the road network of essen consists of over 3,200 streets , which in total have a length of roughly . three autobahnen touch essen territory , most importantly the ruhrschnellweg ( ruhr expressway , a 40 ) , which runs directly through the city , dividing it roughly in half . in a west-eastern direction , the a 40 connects the dutch city of venlo with dortmund , running through the whole ruhr area . it is one of the arterial roads of the ruhr area ( > 140,000 vehicles/day ) and suffers from heavy congestion during rush hours , which is why many people in the area nicknamed it ruhrschleichweg ( ruhr crawling way ) . a tunnel was built in the 1970s , when the then-bundesstraße was upgraded to autobahn standards , so that the a 40 is hidden from public view in the inner-city district near the essen hauptbahnhof . in the north , the a 42 briefly touches essen territory , serving as an interconnection between the neighboring cities of oberhausen and gelsenkirchen and destinations beyond . a segment of the a 52 connects essen with the more southern region around düsseldorf . on essen territory , the a 52 runs from the southern boroughs near mülheim past the fairground and then merges with the ruhrschnellweg at the autobahndreieck essen-ost junction east of the city centre . with the a 40/a 52 in the southern parts of the city and the a 42 in the north , there is a gap in the motorway system often leading to congestion on streets leading from the central to the northern boroughs . an extension of the a 52 to connect the essen-ost junction with the a 42 to close this gap is considered urgent ; bundesverkehrswegeplan 2003 , p . 124 it has been planned for years but not yet been realized – most importantly due to the high-density areas this extension would lead through , resulting in high costs and concerns with the citizens . public transport . as with most communes in the ruhr area , local transport is carried out by a local , publicly owned company for transport within the city , the db regio subsidiary of deutsche bahn for regional transport and deutsche bahn itself for long-distance journeys . the local carrier , ruhrbahn , is a member of the verkehrsverbund rhein-ruhr ( vrr ) association of public transport companies in the ruhr area , which provides a uniform fare structure in the whole region . within the vrr region , tickets are valid on lines of all members as well as db 's railway lines ( except the high-speed intercity and intercity-express networks ) and can be bought at ticket machines and service centres of ruhrbahn , all other members of vrr , and db . , ruhrbahn operates 3 u-stadtbahn lines of the essen stadtbahn network , 7 trams in essen lines and 57 bus lines ( 16 of these serving as nacht express late-night lines only ) . the stadtbahn and straßenbahn operate on total route lengths of and , respectively . one tram line and a few bus lines coming from neighboring cities are operated by these cities ' respective carriers . the u-stadtbahn , which partly runs on used docklands light railway stock , is a mixture of tram and full underground systems with 20 underground stations for the u-stadtbahn and additional 4 underground stations used by the tram . two lines of the u-stadtbahn are completely intersection-free and hence independent from other traffic , and the u18 line leading from mülheim main station to the bismarckplatz station at the gates of the city centre partly runs above ground amidst the a 40 motorway . the essen stadtbahn is one of the stadtbahn systems integrated into the greater rhine-ruhr stadtbahn network . evag ( essen ) nf2-tw 1601.jpg essen stadtbahn nf2-tw 1601 essen hbf 02 empfangsgebäude.jpg essen hauptbahnhof essen hauptbahnhof freiheit.jpg essen hauptbahnhof in the city centre u-bahnhof-essenhbf.jpg essen hauptbahnhof subway station stadtbahn essen - kaiser-wilhelm-park.jpg platforms at kaiser-wilhelm-park on the same motorway , a long-term test of a guided bus system is being held since 1980 . many ruhrbahn rail lines meet at the main station but only a handful of bus lines . however , all but one of the nacht express bus lines originate from / lead to essen hauptbahnhof in a star-shaped manner . all ruhrbahn lines , including the nacht express lines , are closed on weekdays from 1:30 & nbsp ; a.m . to 4:30 & nbsp ; a.m . of the rhein-ruhr s-bahn net 's 13 lines , 5 lines lead through essen territory and meet at the essen hauptbahnhof main station , which also serves as the connection to the regional-express and intercity-express network of regional and nationwide high-speed trains , respectively . following essen 's appointment as european capital of culture 2010 , the main station , which is classified as a station of highest importance and which had not been substantially renovated over decades , will be redeveloped with a budget of €57 million until early 2010 . federal ministry of transport , building and urban affairs other important stations in essen , where regional and local traffic are connected , are the ( regional railway stations ) in the boroughs of altenessen , borbeck , kray and steele . further 20 s-bahn stations can be found in the whole urban area . in 2017 the public transport organization of mülheim , the mülheimer verkehrsgesellschaft ( mvg ) and the essener verkehrsgesellschaft ( evag ) merged and became the ruhrbahn . all vehicles and staff were merged and are now operated together . aviation . together with the neighbouring city of mülheim and the state of north rhine-westphalia , essen maintains essen/mülheim airport ( iata : ess , icao : edle ) . while the first flights had already arrived in 1919 , it was officially opened on 25 august 1925 . significantly expanded in 1935 , essen/mülheim became the central airport of the ruhr area until the end of the second world war , providing an asphalted runway of , another unsurfaced runway for gliding and destinations to most major european cities . it was heavily damaged during the war , yet partly reconstructed and used by the allies as a secondary airport since visibility is less often fog than at düsseldorf airport . the latter then developed into the large civil airport that it is now , while essen/mülheim now mainly serves occasional air traffic ( some 33,000 passengers each year ) , according to rvv-verkehrsstatistik 2007 ( rvv traffic statistics 2007 ) . the base of a fleet of airships and germany 's oldest public flight training company . residents of the region around essen typically use düsseldorf airport ( ~ 20 driving minutes ) and occasionally dortmund airport ( ~ 30 driving minutes ) for both domestic and international flights . landmarks . zollverein industrial complex . the zollverein coal mine industrial complex is the city 's most famous landmark . for decades , the coal mine ( current form mainly from 1932 , closed in 1986 ) and the coking plant ( closed in 1993 ) ranked among the largest of their kinds in europe . shaft xii , built in bauhaus style , with its characteristic winding tower , which over the years has become a symbol for the whole ruhr area , is considered an architectural and technical masterpiece , earning it a reputation as the '' most beautiful coal mine in the world '' . after unesco had declared it a world heritage site in 2001 , the complex , which had lain idle for a long time and was even threatened to be demolished , began to see a period of redevelopment . under the direction of an agency borne by the land of north rhine-westphalia and the city itself , several arts and design institutions settled mainly on the grounds of the former coal mine ; a redevelopment plan for the coking plant is to be realised . on the grounds of the coal mine and the coking plant , which are both accessible free of charge while paid guided tours ( some with former are available , several tourist attractions can be found , most importantly the design zentrum nrw/red dot . the ruhrmuseum , a museum dedicated to the history of the ruhr area , which had been existing since 1904 , opened its gates as one of the anchor attractions in the former coal-washing facility in 2010 . file : zeche zollverein essen okt10 011.jpg coal mine zollverein file : zeche zollverein abends.jpg shaft xii of zollverein file : essen - zeche-zollverein - eingangstor - 2013.jpg zollverein entrance file : rolltreppe ruhrmuseum.jpg ruhrmuseum file : ruhrmuseum staircase.jpg ruhrmuseum staircase . essen minster and treasury . the former collegiate church of essen abbey and nowadays cathedral of the bishop of essen is a gothic hall church made from light sandstone . the first church on the premises dates back to between 845 and 870 ; the current church was constructed after a former church had burnt down in 1275 . however , the important westwork and crypt have survived from ottonian times . the cathedral is located in the centre of the city which evolved around it . it is not spectacular in appearance and the adjacent church st . johann baptist , which is located directly within the pedestrian precinct , is often mistakenly referred to as the cathedral . the cathedral treasury , however , ranks amongst the most important in germany since only few art works have been lost over the centuries . the most precious exhibit , located within the cathedral , is the golden madonna of essen ( around 980 ) , the oldest known sculpture of the madonna and the oldest free-standing sculpture north of the alps . other exhibits include the alleged child crown of emperor otto iii , the eldest preserved seven-branched christian candelabrum and several other art works from ottonian times . essen muenster goldene madonna-4.jpg golden madonna of essen golden madonna.jpg golden madonna of essen otto mathilden kreuz.jpg cross of otto and mathilde , 10th century essen stludger von nw1.jpg st . ludger basilica muenster rathaus essen.jpg essen minster overshadowed by the town hall . old synagogue . opened in 1913 , the then-new synagogue served as the central meeting place of essen 's pre-war jewish community . the building ranks as one of the largest and most impressive testimonies of jewish culture in pre-war germany . in post-war germany , the former house of worship was bought by the city , used as an exhibition hall and later rededicated as a cultural meeting centre and house of jewish culture . synagoge 1917.jpg synagogue , 1917 synagoge 1922.jpg synagogue 1922 alte synagoge , essen.jpg old synagogue , 2010 alte synagoge essen 2014.jpg old synagogue , 2014 essen - alte synagoge in 04 ies.jpg old synagogue interior . villa hügel . built in 1873 by industrial magnate alfred krupp , villa hügel , the 269-room mansion and the surrounding park of served as the krupp family 's representative seat . the city 's land register solely lists the property , which at times had a staff of up to 640 people , as a single-family home . official villa hügel web page at the time of its construction , the villa featured some technical novelties and peculiarity , such as a central hot air heating system , own water- and gas works and electric internal and external telegraph- and telephone systems ( with a central induction alarm for the staff ) . the mansion 's central clock became the reference clock for the whole krupp enterprise ; every clock was to be set with a maximum difference of half a minute . it even acquired its own railway station , essen hügel , which is still a regular stop . the krupp family had to leave the gründerzeit mansion in 1945 , when it was annexed by the allies . given back in 1952 , villa hügel is now seat of the alfried krupp von bohlen und halbach foundation ( major shareholder of thyssen-krupp ) and was opened for concerts and sporadic yet high-profile exhibitions . villa huegel.jpg villa hügel villa hügel , essen , 20071222.jpg villa hügel villa hügel terrassenseite.jpg villa hügel villa hügel erster stock.jpg great hall . kettwig and werden . in the south of the city , the boroughs of kettwig and werden exceptionally stand for towns once of their own , which have been annexed in 1929 ( werden ) and 1975 ( kettwig ) , respectively , and which have largely preserved their pre-annexation character . while most of the northern boroughs were heavily damaged during the second world war and often lost their historic town centres ; the more southern parts got off more lightly . in werden , st . ludger founded werden abbey around 799 , 45 years before st . altfrid founded the later cornerstone of the modern city , essen abbey . the old church of werden abbey , st . ludgerus , was designated a pope basilica minor in 1993 , while the main building of the former abbey today is the headquarters of the folkwang university of music and performing arts . kettwig , which was annexed in 1975 , much to the dismay of the population that still struggles for independence , was mainly shaped by the textile industry . the most southern borough of essen is also the city 's largest ( with regard to area ) and presumably greenest . essen werden - werdener markt 06 ies.jpg essen werden werden , zicht op stadsdeel vanaf de brug over de ruhr foto62012-08-19 16.51.jpg essen werden essen werden - grafenstraße 01 ies.jpg essen werden historic town centre essen werden - heckstraße - evangelische kirche werden 11 ies.jpg protestant church essen werden essen werden - brandstorstraße 01 ies.jpg essen werden werdenerrathaus.jpg essen werden , old town hall essen kettwig 1.jpg historic town centre of kettwig blick auf kettwig mit uferpalais im herbst 2013.jpg essen kettwig . other important cultural sites . museum folkwang : one of the ruhr area 's major art collections , mainly from the 19th and 20th centuries . major parts of the museum have recently been rebuilt and expanded according to plans by david chipperfield & co . the alfried krupp von bohlen und halbach foundation is the sole funder of the €55 million project which was completed in early 2010 . after its re-opening , it also hosts the collection of the deutsches poster museum ( more than 340 000 exhibits ) . aalto theatre : opened in 1988 ( the plans dating back to 1959 ) , the asymmetry building with its deep indigo interior is home to the acclaimed essen opera and ballet . saalbau essen : home of the essen philharmonic orchestra , completely renovated in 2003/2004 . critics have repeatedly voted the essen philharmonic as germany 's orchestra of the year . colosseum theater : situated in a former krupp factory building at the fringe of the central pedestrian precinct , the has been home to several musical theatre productions since 1996 . zeche carl , a former coal mine , now a cultural centre and venue for rock concerts and home of offener kanal essen . grillo-theater , a theatre in the centre of the city . saalbau essen 01.jpg saalbau essen folkwang322.jpg museum folkwang aalto-theater-abends-02-2014.jpg aalto theatre colosseum theater essen 2011.jpg colosseum theater grillo-theater-2012.jpg grillo-theater grugahalle.jpg grugahalle concert hall schloss-borbeck-komplettansicht-sonnenuntergang-2012.jpg schloss borbeck hugenpoet-wassergraben-2012.jpg hugenpoet castle . other sites . gartenstadt margarethenhöhe : founded by margarethe krupp in 1906 , the garden city with its 3092 units in 935 buildings on an area of ( of which 50 ha are woodland ) is considered the first of its kind in germany . all buildings follow the same stylistic concept , with slight variations for each one . although originally designed as an area for the lower classes with quite small flats , the old part margarethenhöhe i has developed into a middle class residential area and housing space has become highly sought after . a new part , margarehenhöhe ii , was built in the 1960s and 1970s but is architecturally inferior and especially the multi-storey buildings are still considered social hot spots . moltkeviertel ( moltke quarter ) : from 1908 on , following reformative plans of the city deputy robert schmidt , this quarter was developed just south-east of the city centre . large green zones , forming broad urban ventilation lanes and incorporating sporting and playing areas and high quality architecture – invariably in the style of reform architecture , combine to create a unique example worldwide of modern town planning . it reflects reformative ideas and dates from the early part of the 20th century . the moltkeviertel continues to be a much sought-after area for residential , educational , health care and small-scale commercial purposes . on the moltkeplatz , the quarter 's largest square , an ensemble of high quality contemporary art is maintained and cared for by local residents . grugapark : with a total area of , the park near the exhibition halls is one of the largest urban parks in germany and , although entry is not free of charge , one of the most popular recreational sites of the city . it includes the city 's botanical garden , the botanischer garten grugapark . : the largest of the six reservoirs of the river ruhr , situated in the south of the city , is another popular recreational area . it is used for sailing , rowing and ship tours . the hilly and only lightly developed forest area around the lake , from which the kettwig area is easily reachable , is popular with hiking . file : orangerie mit orion.jpg grugapark , kranichwiese facing the orangerie and the sculpture orion file : skulptur joseph enseling trauer essen südwestfriedhof 2013.jpg grugapark , sculpture '' trauer '' by joseph enseling file : reichsgartenschau 1938 keramikhof essen.jpg grugapark , reichsgartenschau 1938 , keramikhof file : parkleuchten 2015 , essen , grugapark 46.jpg grugapark illuminated , 2015 file : wasserfall grugapark 2013 02.jpg grugapark , waterfall file : baldeneyseevonwerden.jpg baldeneysee file : baldeneysee abends essen.jpg baldeneysee file : baldeneysee segler 2 db.jpg baldeneysee file : essen-margarethenhöhe markt.jpg marketplace of margarethenhöhe i file : marga haeuser1.jpg margarethenhöhe houses file : moltkeviertel 0741 2.jpg sculptures by friedrich gräsel and gloria friedmann at the moltkeplatz . notable people . : for a comprehensive list of people who were born or acted/lived in essen , see this article in the german wikipedia . honorary citizens . the city of essen has been awarding honorary citizenships since 1879 but has ( coincidentally ) discontinued this tradition after the foundation of the federal republic of germany in 1949 . a notable exception was made in 2007 , when berthold beitz , the president of the alfried krupp von bohlen und halbach foundation received honorary citizenship for his long lasting commitment to the city . the following list contains all honorary citizens of the city of essen : 1879 otto von bismarckchancellor of germany 1888 politician , lawyer and economist 1895 roman catholic theology 1896 friedrich alfred kruppindustrialist ( spouse of margarethe krupp , see below ) 1901 heinrich carl söllingtradesman and benefactor 1906 lord mayor ( 1886–1906 ) 1912 benefactress ( spouse of friedrich alfred krupp , see above ) 1917 paul von hindenburggeneralfeldmarschall and army leader , later president of germany 1949 viktor niemeyercouncilman ( posthumous recognition ) 2007 berthold beitzpresident of the alfried krupp von bohlen und halbach foundation today , the highest award of the city is the ring of honour , which berthold beitz , for example , had already received in 1983 . other bearers of the ring of honour include essen 's former lord mayor and later president of germany , gustav heinemann , as well as franz hengsbach , the first bishop of essen . sport . the biggest association football clubs in essen are rot-weiss essen ( red-white essen ) and schwarz-weiß essen ( black-white essen ) . stadion essen , its home stadium , is located in the north of essen . rot-weiss essen is playing in the fourth tier of the german football league system , regionalliga west , and schwarz-weiß essen in the fifth tier , oberliga nordrhein-westfalen . other football clubs are bv altenessen are tus helene altenessen . in women 's football , sgs essen are members of top division frauen-bundesliga . the city 's main basketball team is etb essen , currently called the etb wohnbau baskets for sponsorship reasons . the team is one of the main teams in germany 's second division proa and has attempted to move up to germany 's elite league basketball bundesliga . the baskets play their home games at the sportpark am hallo . essen hosted the 1955 nine-pin bowling world championships and the final round of the fiba eurobasket 1971 . the city is also home to the vv humann essen volleyball team . references . bibliography . external links . essen city panoramas , panoramic views and virtual tours pictures from kettwig memorials in essen , sites-of-memory.de