Hobgoblin (comics)

publication history . the hobgoblin was created by writer roger stern and artist john romita jr . for the amazing spider-man 238 ( march 1983 ) . like other writers , stern found himself under pressure to have spider-man fight the green goblin again , but did not wish to bring norman osborn or bart hamilton back from the dead , have harry osborn be the green goblin again , or create yet another green goblin . stern instead created a new concept as heir to the goblin legacy and developed the hobgoblin . stern recounts that he directed romita to base the costume on the green goblin 's but to make it '' a little more medieval-looking '' , while romita asserts that he was given no direction beyond using the green goblin as a basis . both agree , however , that the costume was chiefly romita 's design . the hobgoblin 's identity was not initially revealed , generating one of the longest-running mysteries in the spider-man comics . according to stern , '' i plotted that first story with no strong idea of who the hobgoblin was . as i was scripting those gorgeous pages from jr john romita , jr . , particularly the last third of the book , and developing the hobgoblin ’ s speech pattern , i realized who he was . it was roderick kingsley , that sunuvabitch corporate leader i had introduced in my first issue of the spectacular spider-man the spectacular spider-man . '' a handful of readers deduced that kingsley was the hobgoblin almost immediately . in order to throw off the scent and in the same stroke provide a retroactive continuity for his inconsistent characterization of kingsley in his early appearances , stern came up with the idea of kingsley having his brother daniel kingsley sometimes impersonate him , sealing the deception by having the hobgoblin conspicuously appear in the same room as kingsley in amazing spider-man 249 . stern 's original plan was to have the hobgoblin 's mystery identity run exactly one issue longer than that of the green goblin 's identity , meaning the truth would be revealed in the amazing spider-man 264 . however , stern left after the amazing spider-man 251 , and editor tom defalco took his place . wanting to resolve the mystery in a manner that would do justice to stern 's stories , defalco asked stern who the hobgoblin was , but objected when stern said it was kingsley . defalco argued that the '' twin brother '' scheme was cheating the readers since there had been no hint that roderick even had a brother ( aside from a single thought bubble ) , much less one who could serve as a body double . stern disagreed but said that defalco should feel free to choose whoever defalco wanted for the hobgoblin 's secret identity , reasoning that '' i knew that whomever tom chose , he would make it work . '' upon reviewing the clues , defalco decided that the hobgoblin was richard fisk . moreover , he decided that the hobgoblin 's mystery should be prolonged as long as possible , since it was the chief element that made the hobgoblin interesting . through both stern and defalco 's runs , mystery answer was continuously teased on the cover art , with the covers of amazing spider-man 245 , 251 , and 276 all showing spider-man unmasking the hobgoblin . the mystery was further complicated after james owsley came on as editor of the spider-man titles . owsley 's relationship with defalco and artist ron frenz was strained from the beginning . when owsley asked who the hobgoblin was at a creators conference , defalco lied and said the man in question was ned leeds . owsley then wrote the one-shot spider-man vs wolverine in which leeds is killed off ( though the actual death is not shown ) , and instructed the spectacular spider-man writer peter david to reveal the hobgoblin 's identity as the foreigner . david objected and argued that the only person who fit the clues was leeds ; having been present at the spider-man creator 's conference , david also thought that leeds was who defalco intended it to be . because spider-man vs . wolverine had already been drawn , however , it was too late to undo leeds 's death . thus , the hobgoblin 's identity was revealed posthumously in the amazing spider-man 289 ( a double-sized issue ) . with spider-man 's archenemy now dead , a new storyline was created from jason macendale 's hatred of the hobgoblin . though the hobgoblin 's posthumous unmasking as leeds was unpopular with fans , david said in a 2009 interview of still being proud of the story , arguing that the hobgoblin being unmasked in a climactic battle with spider-man was the sort of tale readers had already seen countless times before , whereas having an archvillain unmasked in a flashback after having been brutally killed by nameless assassins was unprecedented and shocking . from 1987 to 1997 , macendale initially wielded only the hobgoblin 's weaponry but the 1988-1989 inferno crossover writer gerry conway had macendale imbued with demonic powers by n'astirh . in addition to power over hellfire and increased strength and speed to far greater than that of the original hobgoblin , these powers also disfigure macendale so that his head is even more grotesque than the hobgoblin mask , and ultimately alters his mind so that he was deluded into thinking that his appearance is normal . several years later , macendale succeeds in purging himself of his demonic powers and was later revamped again with cybernetic implants . stern was unhappy with the hobgoblin 's civilian identity revelation was leeds and wrote the three-issue miniseries spider-man : hobgoblin lives in 1997 , with the retcon that kingsley was the original hobgoblin while leeds was brainwashed into serving as a fall guy , macendale is killed off , and kingsley returned . according to stern , initially he had not known how to resolve the situation of having two hobgoblins , and it was at the suggestion of the editorial staff that kingsley kill macendale and return to operating as the hobgoblin . . fictional character biography . roderick kingsley . roderick kingsley is an egotistical socialite and billionaire fashion designer . he decided to create a name criminal for himself by altering norman osborn 's goblin formula and improve the goblin costume/equipment in order to be the original hobgoblin . kingsley then frames ned leeds as a decoy for his crimes , and later murders his successor jason macendale . spider-man : hobgoblin lives 1 ( january 1997 ) when his villainous identity is finally exposed by spider-man and betty brant , he flees to the caribbean to hide from both the law and his enemies . amazing spider-man 259-261 after his twin brother amazing spider-man 691 is murdered by phil urich , the amazing spider-man 649 roderick returns to new york and dons his old hobgoblin costume . the amazing spider-man 697 ( november 2012 ) . lefty donovan . arnold samuel '' lefty '' donovan was a petty thug . similar to osborn , donovan was a test subject mix the two vital chemicals that were mixed into the goblin formula , disfiguring donovan 's face and granting superhuman abilities . donovan is taken to a hospital . brainwashed by gerhard winkler 's device , donovan eventually escapes the hospital and follows preprogrammed instructions to go to a hidden cache of goblin weapons and dress up as the hobgoblin . donovan ( impersonating the hobgoblin ) attacks new york city but spider-man eventually confronts and unmasks him . spider-man sees his ( scarred ) face and recognizes lefty . as donovan is able to shake off some of his programing and starts talking , his '' boss '' programmed the goblin glider to crash into the side of a building , killing lefty with the falling rubble . . ned leeds . ned leeds was a reporter working for the daily bugle . he was brainwashed to act as a stand-in on many occasions and fool the underworld into thinking that he was the hobgoblin , and was later murdered by the foreigner after the actual supervillain was decided that he was no longer needed . spider-man versus wolverine ( february 1987 ) . jason macendale . jason macendale was a mercenary who had been trained by the cia ( and various para-military organizations ) . he first appeared as the supervillain jack o'lantern before eventually adopting the hobgoblin identity . the amazing spider-man 289 . daniel kingsley . daniel kingsley is roderick kingsley 's twin brother . he would act as a body double until being exposed by betty brant while the true hobgoblin gets unmasked by spider-man . now in protective custody , daniel was unknowingly used by roderick to blackmail norman osborn , resulting in the hobgoblin to swoop in to collect daniel . spider-man defends daniel but is drugged while daniel passes out and both are taken to osborn . spectacular spider-man 260 ( august 1998 ) as kingsley and osborn furiously fight each other , daniel gets rescued by spider-man . spectacular spider-man 261 ( september 1998 ) kingsley later returned to new york , posing as his twin brother as the hobgoblin . kingsley investigated an old lair at oscorp which had a flaming energy sword , but discovers phil urich trying to retrieve the same gear . kingsley gets stunned by urich 's '' lunatic laugh '' long enough for urich to kill him using his own sword , allowing his killer to claim the hobgoblin mantle . . phil urich . phil urich ( who once used the green goblin identity to operate as a superhero ) took on the hobgoblin identity himself as a supervillain with some new gear ( new body armor , a winged jetpack , and a flaming energy sword ) . . norman osborn . norman osborn briefly impersonated the original hobgoblin . superior spider-man 18 . claude . claude was roderick 's butler who was sent in place and to talk like his master to distract the goblin nation . he fought against the goblin king and was killed in battle . the goblin knight discovered who the hobgoblin that killed was and destroyed claude 's body to keep the goblin king from finding out who was impersonating hobgoblin . the superior spider-man 26 . powers , abilities , and equipment . as the hobgoblin , roderick kingsley wears bulletproof mail with an overlapping tunic , cape , and cowl . a computerized system cybernetically causes the finger-blasters to randomly vary their attack vectors when trained on a particular target . he uses a goblin glider , a one-man miniature turbo-fan-powered vertical thrust , cybernetically-controlled vehicle . it can reach high velocities and is extremely maneuverable . he uses concussion and incendiary jack o'lanterns , wraith-shaped smoke and gas-emitting bombs , bat shaped razor-edged throwing blades , and gloves woven with micro-circuited power conducting filaments which channel pulsed discharges of electricity . he wore a shoulder bag to carry his small , portable weaponry . while brainwashed , ned leeds wore the hobgoblin 's uniform and used the glider and equipment which included jack o'lantern bombs , razor bats and electrical shock gloves . however , he had no healing factor or superhuman strength . as the hobgoblin , phil urich wears an orange hobgoblin costume with wings on the back that allow him to fly without the use of a goblin glider and he took roderick kingsley 's mask as his own . he uses the traditional pumpkin bombs all green goblins and hobgoblins before him have used , but he also has a new flaming sword . he still retains his '' lunatic laugh '' from when he was the goblin and he also has superhuman strength , speed , durability , stamina , reflexes and senses , and enhanced intellect . for unknown reasons , he no longer needs his mask to activate this power . with the help of reverbium , his '' lunatic laugh '' was able to cause a building to collapse . the amazing spider-man 651 ( january 2011 ) . marvel comics . . other versions . hobgoblin 2211 . hobgoblin 2211 first appears in spider-man 2099 meets spider-man . while her costume sports the twentieth-century green goblins ' green-and-purple color scheme , she boasted that she was the hobgoblin of 2211 . her identity was not revealed to readers ( or to the visiting spider-men of previous eras ) at the time , but her later reappearance in friendly neighborhood spider-man ( also written by david ) revealed her true identity and origin . hobgoblin 2211 is robin '' hobby '' / '' hob '' bourne , spider-man 's daughter . her father always seemed to put his superhero career before raising his own daughter . she wanted to save the universes from 'intersecting ' ; in other words , having other parallel universes merge with the existing one , causing it to override . she was later arrested by her father for something that she would have done in future : unauthorized time travel , chronal displacement , jumping the tracks to other realities . she was held in a virtual reality prison where she lives a benign and trouble-free existence in what appears to be kansas . her boyfriend attempts to free her by uploading a virus into the prison , but inadvertently causes her to be driven insane . she attacked her father with a 'retcon bomb ' ( a variation on the original goblins ' pumpkin bombs ) but it hit her boyfriend instead , erasing ( or 'retconning ' ) him from existence . now suited up as the hobgoblin , robin managed to time-travel to the current year , attacking the current spider-man in his reality and derailing an uncle ben from another reality into the present one causing a time paradox . later , in a confrontation with her father , she threw a 'retcon bomb ' at him . spider-man , believing it to be no more harmful than a regular pumpkin bomb , caught it with his web and threw it back to robin , unwittingly erasing her from existence . jla/avengers . in the last issue of jla/avengers , the hobgoblin is among the enthralled villains defending krona 's stronghold , and is defeated by hawkgirl . avengers/jla 4 ( may 2004 ) . marvel adventures . in this continuity , hobgoblin is an unidentified criminal who found a stash of green goblin 's weaponry because he had forgotten to leave the entrance locked . delighted at his new technological power he challenges green goblin to a confrontation . spider-man defeats them both . marvel adventures spider-man 22 ( 2005 ) . mc2 . the original hobgoblin made his mc2 debut as a hired assassin to kill many of the spider-girl characters , including normie osborn , spider-girl , and peter parker . spider-girl 97 ( june 2006 ) after a fight against both spider-girl and her father , he came close to victory , but at the end his only success lay in killing the venom symbiote , and also in escaping without a trace . spider-girl 100 ( september 2006 ) he attempted a complex plot to become the new kingpin of crime , but was undone due to an act of treachery by his partner , the mindworm . killing the mindworm , and deciding the new york underworld had become too '' hot '' for him at the moment , he chose to return to the caribbean , but vowed someday to come back and finish off spider-girl . the amazing spider-girl 18 ( may 2008 ) he is later revealed to be the instigator of a mob war against the black tarantula , returning to new york to finish the job . the spectacular spider-girl 3 ( july 2010 ) he defeated american dream and the new warriors . he then dropped them from a great height , planning to kill spider-girl as she tried to save them . however , he himself was then killed by mayhem , spider-girl 's half-symbiote clone . the spectacular spider-girl 4 ( august 2010 ) . ultimate marvel . the ultimate marvel equivalent of hobgoblin is harry osborn when his second personality shaw takes control . he tries to stop himself during a battle with spider-man but shaw takes over and is wounded by s.h.i.e.l.d . , ultimate spider-man 74 and later once again used by s.h.i.e.l.d . to attract his father but the two osborns end up doing battle which leaves the younger osborn dead . ultimate spider-man 115-117 . sword-and-sorcery . in the 2007 spider-man/red sonja mini-series , the hobgoblin was one of several supervillains who was transformed into a sword-and-sorcery version of themselves due to the spell cast by kulan gath . it was never specified which hobgoblin it was . spider-verse . the earth-21205 version of hobgoblin is peter parker . overwhelmed with rage over the death of gwen stacy , spider-man murdered the green goblin and later retired his spider-man identity . he soon after became the hobgoblin and was later targeted by verna of the inheritors ( alongside the hounds scorpion and rhino ) as a spider-totem . the spider-woman of earth-65 attempted to recruit him into a growing army of spiders to protect him from the inheritors , but he initially turned the offer down . when spider-woman revealed herself to be an alternate version of gwen , he sacrificed himself to save her as atonement for failing to do so in his own dimension . spider-verse team-up 2 the earth-001 version of hobgoblin appeared as a member of verna 's hounds alongside the multiple green goblins . hobgoblin and the other goblin-themed hounds attacked silk , spider-woman of earth-65 , and black widow of earth-1610 . amazing spider-man vol . 3 13 he is killed by superior spider-man , assassin spider-man , and spider-punk . . spider-gwen . in the alternate continuity of spider-gwen , the green goblin uses an army of hobgoblin-based androids to assist him during his assault against spider-woman . spider-gwen vol . 2 4 ( january 2016 ) . spider-geddon . in the spider-geddon event on earth-11580 , a version of hobgoblin is seen alongside green goblin , jack o'lantern and demogoblin during the goblin night . under the orders of the goblin queen , they try to kill gwen stacy , but spiders-man arrives and defeats the goblins . vault of spiders 2 . marvel comics . . newspaper strip . in '' the amazing spider-man '' newspaper strip by stan lee and larry leiber , harry osborn as the hobgoblin has repeatedly attacked spider-man , seeking vengeance for his father 's death . after trying to kill both spider-man and black widow after , under hypnotic influence of psychiatrist '' dr . stone '' ( actually spy-assassin dimitri gregorin who has killed friends of the black widow in the past ) , harry , seeing spider-man 's heroism , realizes that spider-man is a hero , his father was a murderer , and vows to never assume the hobgoblin identity again . in other media . television . an amalgamated incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared in spider-man ( 1994 tv series ) , voiced by mark hamill . under the alias of '' jason philips '' , this depiction is a composite character of roderick kingsley 's criminal ambitions and likeness , jason macendale 's mercenary status , and lefty donovan 's criminal background as a former petty crook . additionally , his identity and weapons were developed by norman osborn . in his two-part , self-titled episode , the hobgoblin tries to kill the kingpin . after the assassination is foiled by '' both '' peter parker and spider-man , the hobgoblin demands osborn pay for another chance , but the latter fires him . in response , the hobgoblin seeks out a partnership with the kingpin and kidnaps harry osborn . however , the kingpin refuses to pay immediately , so the mercenary returns to osborn . receiving an improved glider and weapons , the hobgoblin battles spider-man across new york before the web-slinger is forced to work with osborn and the kingpin to stop the mercenary from taking over kingpin 's criminal empire . in the end , the hobgoblin crashes into a nearby river while trying to kill the osborns . in the episodes '' the mutant agenda '' and '' mutant 's revenge '' , the hobgoblin resurfaced after learning dr . herbert landon was planning to exterminate mutants and blackmailed the scientist . the mercenary comes into conflict with spider-man and the x-men , but he escapes with discs outlining landon 's master plan and mutates the scientist into a monster to keep the heroes busy . in the episodes '' rocket racer '' and '' the spot '' , his identity is revealed to be jason philips , felicia hardy 's fiancé . in the episode '' goblin war ! '' , the hobgoblin obtains the portal-creating time dilation accelerator , confronting spider-man and clashing with the green goblin as well . once his identity is revealed , jason and felicia were kidnapped by the green goblin , who stole the machine and arranged for the engaged couple to be killed in an acid pool . while spider-man saves jason and felicia , they ended their relationship and he was taken into custody afterward . in the episode '' i really , really hate clones '' , an alternate-reality hobgoblin appeared as an enemy of the ben reilly . the hobgoblin was set to appear in the spectacular spider-man animated series before the show was cancelled , though roderick kingsley appeared in the episode '' accomplices '' . the hobgoblin alias and equipment appear in the 2010s spider-man animated series . created by oscorp , the hobgoblin technology is donned primarily by harry osborn as a crime-fighting hero , though norman osborn also briefly donned replica hobgoblin technology while trying to kill spider-man . the roderick kingsley incarnation of the hobgoblin appears in the marvel super hero adventures animated series , voiced by andrew francis . . video games . the roderick kingsley incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared in spider-man and captain america in doctor doom 's revenge . the roderick kingsley incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared as a boss in the amazing spider-man for the game boy . the roderick kingsley incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared in spider-man : the video game , voiced by david hadinger . the roderick kingsley incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared as a boss in the amazing spider-man 2 . the jason macendale incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared as a boss in spider-man : return of the sinister six . the jason macendale incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared in the amazing spider-man vs . the kingpin . the roderick kingsley incarnation of the hobgoblin appeared as an assist character in the psp and ps2 versions of spider-man : web of shadows . the roderick kingsley incarnation of hobgoblin appears as an alternate costume for the green goblin in marvel : ultimate alliance 2 . an exclusive marvel 2099 incarnation of the hobgoblin appears in spider-man : shattered dimensions , voiced by steven blum . implied to be a hybrid clone of previous goblin-themed villains created by his time 's lady octopus , this version is a mercenary hired by alchemax with hybrid nanofiber bio-organic circuitry wings bonded to his back and '' psy-powers '' . after obtaining a fragment of the tablet of order and chaos , the hobgoblin ambushes spider-man 2099 and has the web-slinger pursue him as he wreaks havoc . after spider-man corners him , the hobgoblin uses the fragment to increase his psy-powers and torment the web-slinger with a hellish hallucination of gargoyle-like monsters . ultimately , spider-man defeats the hobgoblin and retrieves his tablet fragment before examining his wings and deducing alchemax 's involvement . the roderick kingsley incarnation of hobgoblin appears as a playable character in lego marvel super heroes 2 . . toys and collectibles . the hobgoblin first received a toy in the secret wars toy line produced by mattel . the hobgoblin was prominently featured in the 1990s spider-man : the animated series toyline . a total of five figures were produced , including the standard 5 '' figure with '' missile firing '' goblin glider , a 10 '' version of the series 1 figure , a talking hobgoblin with sound effects from the show , a 7 '' figure featuring an illuminated projector embedded into the chest , and an action pose figure including a motorized battle glider . two incarnations of hobgoblin received figures in the spider-man classics . the first ( series 2 ) was similar to that of the demonic jason macendale incarnation while the more recent one ( series 17 ) is similar to that of the original roderick kingsley incarnation . the jason macendale incarnation was reused twice . the first time , it was repainted and given a newly sculpted green goblin head for the spider-man vs . the sinister six box set in the marvel legends toy line . the second time , it was repainted and renamed demogoblin in the spider-man : origins toy line produced by hasbro . a hobgoblin minimate was released in late 2007 exclusively at select f.y.e . , suncoast , and sam goody stores in a 2-pack including a scarlet spider figure . bowen designs released a hobgoblin bust in 2005 of the roderick kingsley version . in 2009 , hasbro released a 3 & nbsp ; inch hobgoblin bust for their marvel universe toyline , with the packaging information signifying the character as the roderick kingsley incarnation . in 2015 , hasbro made hobgoblin the build-a-figure for the marvel legends infinite series spider-man line-up . in 2016 , the first officially licensed hobgoblin lego minifigure was included with set 76058 ( spider-man : ghost rider team-up ) . attractions . the ned leeds incarnation of the hobgoblin appears in the islands of adventure ride the amazing adventures of spider-man , voiced by pat fraley . references . external links . hobgoblin i at marvel.com spideykicksbutt.com : '' squandered legacy : the rise and fall of the hobgoblin '' peter david site : '' foolish consistencies and . ''