2000 in music

specific locations . 2000 in british music 2000 in norwegian music 2000 in south korean music . specific genres . classical music 2000 in country music 2000 in heavy metal music 2000 in hip hop music 2000 in latin music 2000 in jazz . events . january . january 1 in new york city , united states , at precisely midnight , prince celebrates the start of the final year before the new millennium by playing his anthem '' 1999 '' , in what he vows is the song 's finale . british composer john tavener is knighted in the new year 's honours list . january 11 gary glitter is released from jail , two months before his sentence for sexual offences ends . sharon osbourne quits as manager of smashing pumpkins after only three months . in a brash press release she announces she had to resign '' for medical reasons : billy corgan was making me sick . '' singer whitney houston is caught with 15.2 grams of marijuana in her bag at a hawaii airport . she boards her flight to san francisco before police can arrive to arrest her . january 14 – rolling stone reveals that the two children of melissa etheridge and her partner , julie cypher , were fathered by david crosby . january 18 – spencer goodman is executed by lethal injection in huntsville , texas , for the 1991 kidnap and murder of the wife of zz top manager bill ham in 1991 . ham is present at the execution . january 21–february 6 – the big day out festival takes place in australia and new zealand , headlined by red hot chili peppers and nine inch nails . mr . bungle are originally named in the lineup , but are '' kicked off '' due to an ongoing dispute with the red hot chili peppers . february . february 9 – the million dollar hotel , a film co-written by u2 lead singer bono , premieres at the 50th berlinale ( berlin international film festival ) . february 11 – diana ross divorces arne næss , jr . her husband of 14 years . february 16 – the silver tassie , an opera by mark-anthony turnage , receives its première at the london coliseum , performed by the english national opera . february 23 – at the 42nd annual grammy awards , santana win a record 8 grammys in one night , tying michael jackson who won 8 in 1984 . among the awards won are album of the year for supernatural and record of the year and song of the year , both for '' smooth '' featuring matchbox twenty frontman rob thomas . christina aguilera won best new artist . february 24 – italian motorcycle manufacturing company aprilia wins a lawsuit filed against the spice girls over a sponsorship deal that fell apart when geri halliwell left the group . march . march 6 – foxy brown is injured in a car accident in brooklyn , new york , in which her car hit a fence . police discover that brown was driving with a suspended driver license and order her to appear in court in april . brown 's license was suspended for failing to appear in court for a parking violation . march 7 – heavy metal band disturbed release their debut studio album the sickness . march 11 – 311 holds their first 3–11 day concert at tower records in the french quarter of new orleans . march 13 – blink-182 end their european tour early after guitarist/vocalist tom delonge and drummer travis barker succumb to strep throat . march 21 – nsync rises to superstardom after the fast-paced sales of their second studio album no strings attached march 24 – after violating a prior probation agreement by getting drunk , ol ' dirty bastard is ordered to undergo a 90-day diagnostic evaluation at the california institute for men in chino , california . april . april 1 – ted nugent angers hispanic groups in texas after onstage remarks he makes during a concert at the cynthia woods mitchell pavilion , in which he says that those who did not speak english should get out of america . he is banned from the venue as a result . april 4 – mick jagger attends the opening of an arts center named after him at dartford grammar school in southeast england . april 6 – shawn colvin , james taylor , cyndi lauper , richard thompson , sweet honey , elton john , cassandra wilson , wynonna judd , k.d . lang , bryan adams , and mary chapin carpenter perform in new york as part of a tribute to joni mitchell . april 12 – metallica files a lawsuit against the peer-to-peer service napster , as well as yale university , university of southern california and indiana university for copyright infringement . yale and indiana are later dropped from the suit when they block access to napster on campus computers . april 25 – nu metal band papa roach releases their second studio album , infest . may . may 1 – a 1.8 million civil fraud lawsuit is filed against neil young in los angeles superior court by a former village voice writer . the lawsuit charges that young broke an agreement to have a biography written about him when he blocked the book 's publication . may 3 – 75-year-old tenor carlo bergonzi makes his final professional appearance at carnegie hall , in a concert performance of otello . '' music review ; bergonzi sings just 2 acts of 'otello ' '' , new york times , may 5 , 2000 . accessed 31 july 2014 after two acts , he is replaced by an understudy . may 4 – letters to cleo play their last concert in boston ; they disband the following month . may 5 – rod stewart undergoes an hour-long throat operation at cedars-sinai medical center in los angeles to remove a growth on his thyroid , which turns out to be benign . may 6 – john mellencamp receives an honorary doctor of music degree as the commencement speaker for indiana university 's class of 2000 . may 7 – westlife releases their 2000 debut album with the release of their billboard 1 hit single '' swear it again '' , as the group 's first and only single to have charted in the us may 13 the 45th eurovision song contest final , held in stockholm 's globe arena , is won by denmark 's olsen brothers and the song '' fly on the wings of love '' . dickey betts is kicked out of the allman brothers band and replaced with warren haynes . may 16 – prince announces that he has changed his name back to prince now that his publishing contract with warner/chappell has expired . he had been known as an unpronounceable symbol , since 1993 . may 24 – 50 cent is shot nine times in queens . after spending time in hospital he returns to recording and performing . may 25 – eddie van halen begins treatment for prevention of tongue cancer at the m.d . anderson cancer center in houston , texas . may 29 – michael jackson and mariah carey are named the best selling male and female artist of the millennium at the world music awards in monaco . june . june 8 – sinéad o'connor comes out as a lesbian in an interview with curve magazine . june 20 – britney spears begins her oops ! . i did it again world tour , her first world tour , visiting north america , europe and brazil in support her sophomore album , oops ! . i did it again . the tour was a commercial success and became the second highest-grossing tour by a solo artist in 2000 , only behind tina turner 's twenty four seven tour . june 23–25 – the experience music project , now the emp museum , opens in seattle . june 30 – nine people are crushed to death during pearl jam 's set at the roskilde festival , in roskilde , denmark . july–august . july 21–22 – oasis plays at wembley stadium . the first of this night is featured on the double cd and the dvd familiar to millions . july 26 – a u.s . district judge orders the napster to halt the trading of copyrighted music among its users , essentially ordering it shut down . a stay on the injunction is granted two days later , allowing the site to continue operating for the time being . august 1 – experimental pop band animal collective release their debut album spirit they 're gone , spirit they 've vanished under the name avey tare & panda bear . august 8 – a coalition of 28 u.s . states file a lawsuit against the major record labels , accusing them of keeping the prices of cds fixed at artificially high prices since 1995 . august 11 – madonna gives birth to her second child , son rocco . film director guy ritchie is the father . august 14 – outside the democratic national convention in los angeles , rage against the machine performs a free concert protesting the two-party system . in a chaotic scene after the performance , police forcibly disperse the crowd and several arrests are made . august 16 – rapper eminem files for divorce from wife kim mathers . august 20 – skinny puppy reunite for a concert at the doomsday festival in dresden , germany . august 22 – nu metal band mudvayne released their debut studio album l.d . 50 ( album ) . september . september 7 – rage against the machine 's tim commerford is arrested for climbing on the set at mtv 's video music awards after his band lost the award for '' best rock video '' to limp bizkit . the director of rage 's '' sleep now in the fire '' video , michael moore , suggests commerford was probably '' just bored '' by the show . nsync performed their hit single '' bye bye bye '' . september 11- successful british girl group sugababes release their debut single 'overload ' . september 13 – the first latin grammy awards are held . september 23 – isaac stern celebrates his 80th birthday together with his 40th anniversary as president of carnegie hall . september 26 – pearl jam releases twenty-five live albums , each taken from a different show on their european tour , as the initial part of the pearl jam official bootlegs series . october . october 1 – midnight oil perform their single beds are burning at the closing of the 2000 summer olympics dressed in outfits clearly displaying the word '' sorry '' in reference to australian prime minister john howard 's refusal to apologise to the stolen generation . october 2 – radiohead release their fourth studio album , kid a . while highly anticipated in the leadup to its release , the album is met with polarized responses from fans and critics as a result of its shift from the densely-layered alternative rock of ok computer in favor of electronica-tinged post-rock . however , its reputation would grow more unanimously positive over the years , eventually being regarded by music analysts as one of the greatest albums of all time . october 3 – green day release their sixth album warning . despite positive reviews from critics , it would end up a commercial disappointment compared to their previous efforts . october 5 the beatles release a hardcover book version of the beatles anthology , containing newly published photos and interviews with band members . the book went straight to the top of the new york times bestseller list . emi and warner music group withdraw their application to the european commission for a proposed 20 billion merger due to regulators ' concerns . the merger would have concentrated 80 % of the european music business into the hands of just four major labels . october 18 – zack de la rocha leaves rage against the machine saying that the band 's decision making process has completely failed . october 24 – linkin park release their debut album hybrid theory . it has reached riaa certification by the riaa , with 11 million units as of 2017 , making it the best-selling rock album of the 21st century . october 31 – napster and bmg music announce a partnership that would change the website into a subscription-based service offering legal downloads . . november–december . november 5 – the fourth terrastock festival is held in seattle . november 18 – a new musical adaptation of georg büchner 's woyzeck by robert wilson and tom waits opens in copenhagen . december 2 tripp eisen formerly of dope replaces koichi fukuda in static-x . the smashing pumpkins played what was to be their final concert at the metro club in chicago . the band would reunite in 2005 . december 22 madonna marries film director guy ritchie , at skibo castle in dornoch , sutherland , scotland with gwyneth paltrow , stella mccartney , sting , george clooney , jon bon jovi , celine dion , bryan adams , rupert everett and others in attendance . the coen brothers film , o brother , where art thou ? is released , scored by a t-bone burnett-produced soundtrack that revives the popularity of traditional american folk music and bluegrass . december 31 – chris robinson of the black crowes marries actress kate hudson . . bands formed . see musical groups established in 2000 . bands disbanded . all saints ( reformed in 2006 ) art of noise auto boys 400 atari teenage riot ( reformed in 2010 ) b witched ( reformed 2013 ) ben folds five ( reformed in 2011 ) color me badd pezz ( legal issue with band name , changed name to billy talent ) candlebox ( reformed in 2006 ) demonoid drain sth genesis ( would sporadically reunite for reunion tours in 2006 and 2020 ) the golden palominos hi-standard hum jack off jill june of 44 kid dynamite knapsack lifter puller luna sea luscious jackson make-up the paradise motel ( reform in 2007 ) phish ( hiatus until 2002 , disband in 2004 ) the posies ( reformed in 2004 ) primus ( hiatus until 2004 ) pure rage against the machine ( reformed in 2007 ) sacred reich ( reformed in 2007 ) screaming trees seaweed ( reformed in 2007 ) skunk anansie ( reformed 2009 ) the smashing pumpkins ( reformed in 2006 ) son of the castellan soul coughing symposium urban dance squad . bands reformed . the presidents of the united states of america ( after 1998 break ) . albums released . january–march . . classical music . thomas adès – piano quintet , op . 20 john coolidge adams – el niño ( opera-oratorio ) john luther adams – the light that fills the world , for orchestra julian anderson – alhambra suite , for chamber orchestra milton babbitt little goes a long way , for violin and piano pantuns , for soprano and piano leonardo balada – music for flute and orchestra chen yi – kc capriccio , for wind ensemble and mixed choir edward cowie bad lands gold , for tuba and piano concerto for oboe and orchestra dark matter , for brass ensemble elysium iv , for orchestra four frames in a row , for high voice and baroque ensemble the healing of saul , for violin and harp ( or piano ) several charms , for violin and piano peter maxwell davies – symphony no . 7 peter eötvös – paris–dakar , for ensemble lorenzo ferrero glamorama spies , for flute , clarinet , violin , violoncello , and piano rastrelli in saint petersburg , for oboe and string orchestra tempi di quartetto , for string quartet stefano gervasoni – rigirio frans geysen alles heeft zijn tijd 1 , for orchestra alles heeft zijn tijd 2 , for string quartet alles heeft zijn tijd 3 , for string quartet alles heeft zijn tijd 4 , for keyboard instrument alles heeft zijn tijd 5 , for keyboard instrument alles heeft zijn tijd 6 , for string quartet alles heeft zijn tijd 7 , for four-part mixed choir ( or string quartet , or trumpet , oboe , clarinet , and bassoon ) alles heeft zijn tijd 8 , for keyboard instrument alles heeft zijn tijd 9 , for 4 trumpets alles komt terug 2 , for three-part choir alles komt terug 3 , for ssatb choir alles komt terug 4 , for carillon alles komt terug 5 , for keyboard instrument benadering van de kern , for keyboard instrument muziek voor toetsenbord 2 , for piano toetsing , for keyboard instrument philip glass tirol concerto , for piano and orchestra concerto fantasy , for two timpanists and orchestra alexander goehr piano quintet , op . 69 suite , for two pianos , op . 70 friedrich goldmann – augenblick für stimme , for mezzo-soprano , flute , oboe , clarinet , trombone , percussion , electric guitar , keyboard , viola and cello etudes ( 3 ) for piano quartet , for oboe , violin , viola , and cello 7 x 10 takte für dieter schnebel , for flute and clarinet ilja hurník con brio , for orchestra symphony in c karl jenkins – adiemus iv : the eternal knot nigel keay – viola concerto ( wojciech kilar – introitus for organ missa pro pace , for solo voices , choir and orchestra or instrumental ensemble the oscar fanfare meyer kupferman – icon symphony mario lavista estudio , for four marimbas mater dolorosa , for organ tres miniaturas , for guitar , györgy ligeti – síppal , dobbal , nádihegedüvel magnus lindberg corrente – china version jubilees , for piano james macmillan – mass , for choir and organ mesías maiguashca – el tiempo , for 2 flutes , 2 clarinets , 2 cellos , 2 percussionists , and electronics tomás marco – américa ( cantata ) donald martino – romanza , for violin solo robert morris in concert , for ten instruments still , for piano bayan northcott – alma redemptoris mater , for three tenors , op . 7 , no . 2 gérard pape – tantric transformations , eight-channel electronic music and digital video henri pousseur anneaux du soleil , for piano navigations , for harp seize paysages planétaires , ethno-electroacoustical music wolfgang rihm auf einem anderen blatt , for piano concerto ( dithyrambe ) , for string quartet and orchestra deus passus ( passions-stücke nach lukas ) , for soprano , mezzo-soprano , alto , tenor , baritone , mixed chorus , and orchestra . fleuve v ( omnia tempus habent ) , for mezzo-soprano , baritone , distant ensemble ( 2 trumpets , 3 percussion ) , and large orchestra frage , for coloratura soprano , english horn , a-clarinet ( + bass clarinet ) , harp , viola , cello , double bass , piano , and percussion im anfang , for large orchestra in frage , for english horn , bass clarinet , harp , viola , cello , double bass , piano , and percussion rilke : vier gedichte , for tenor and piano stilles stück ( text by hermann lenz ) , for baritone and 2 string quartets vers une symphonie fleuve iv , for large orchestra vier male ( stücke ) , for a-clarinet peter ruzicka – traces , for clarinet and orchestra peter sculthorpe djilile , for string quartet from the river , for violin , viola , cello , double bass , and piano harbour dreaming , for piano ( originally titled between five bells ) new norcia , for brass and percussion parting , for viola and piano quamby , for chamber orchestra reef singing , for clarinet and piano saibai , for unison voices and drums song for a penny , for solo piano ( shorter and longer versions ) tailitnama song , for viola and piano , or viola solo three shakespeare songs , for voice and piano ( text : william shakespeare ) roger smalley – string quartet no . 2 juan maria solare blockartig , for three recorders ( ttb ) constelación ( nueva suite modal ) constellation ( new modal suite ) , five pieces for flute and clarinet de capa caída , tango for two pianos utopía caminante walking utopia , for trombone and cello viejo fueye deconstruido old , deconstructed bag ( bellows ) , postmodern tango for tenor saxophone , bandoneon , double bass , and piano karlheinz stockhausen engel-prozessionen ( from licht sunday ) refrain 2000 john tavener – song of the cosmos eric whitacre – october charles wuorinen fourth string quartet cyclops 2000 , for twenty players . opera . michael abels – homies and popz john coolidge adams – el niño ( opera-oratorio ) harrison birtwistle – the last supper peter maxwell davies – mr emmet takes a walk carlisle floyd – cold sassy tree cristóbal halffter – don quijote jake heggie – dead man walking michael nyman – facing goya poul ruders – the handmaid 's tale kaija saariaho – l'amour de loin sheila silver – the thief of love richard thomas – tourette 's diva . jazz . musical theater . aida – broadway production opened at the palace theatre and ran for 1852 performances the dead – broadway production opened at the belasco theatre and ran for 120 performances the full monty – broadway production opened at the eugene o'neill theatre and ran for 770 performances jane eyre – broadway production opened at the brooks atkinson theatre and ran for 209 performances the music man ( meredith willson ) – broadway revival seussical – broadway production opened at the richard rodgers theatre and ran for 198 performances the sapphire necklace – midway village premiere . musical film . almost famous dancer in the dark ( danser i mørket ) , starring björk darling darling escaflowne , with music by yoko kanno , hajime mizoguchi and inon zur the filth and the fury help ! i 'm a fish , with music by søren hyldgaard kandukondain kandukondain nuvvu vastavani songcatcher the road to el dorado ( animation ) the tigger movie released february 10 the fantasticks released september 22 , starring joel grey '' the fantasticks : sprinkling stardust and a dollop of magic over a pair of lovebirds '' , the new york times , september 22 , 2000 , accessed march 23 , 2015 thenkasipattanam turn it up . births . january 5 – big baby tape , russian rapper , songwriter and producer january 8 – noah cyrus , american singer , actress ( sister of miley cyrus , trace cyrus , daughter of billy ray cyrus ) january 30 : benee , new zealand singer-songwriter and musician february 16 – koffee ( singer ) , jamaican reggae singer , songwriter , rapper , deejay and guitarist march 5 – gabby barrett , american singer march 10 – roko blažević , croatian singer march 20 – hyunjin , korean singer , member of stray kids march 27 – halle bailey , american singer-songwriter and member of duo chloe x halle april 9 – jackie evancho , american classical crossover singer april 12 – manuel turizo , colombian singer april 20 – klara hammarström – swedish singer may 1 – 9lokknine , american rapper from orlando , florida may 10 - bae jinyoung , korean singer , member of cix may 18 – carlie hanson , american musician and youtuber may 26 – itzy , korean singer , member of itzy may 28 – maisie peters , english '' emo girl pop '' singer-songwriter , musician , and youtuber june 3 – beabadoobee , filipino-british indie singer-songwriter june 8 – charlotte lawrence , american singer-songwriter , model june 16 – tay-k , american rapper and songwriter july 7 - haon , korean rapper july 9 – mxmtoon , chinese american singer songwriter , musician and youtuber august 13 – jaemin , korean singer , and member of nct august 17 – lil pump , american rapper , record producer , and songwriter september 15 – fêlix , australian-korean , rapper and singer , member of stray kids october 4 – lunay , puerto rican singer-songwriter october 13 – lydia night , american singer and rhythm guitarist , member of pop rock band the regrettes october 19 – loona , korean singer and dancer , member of loona october 28 – aydan calafiore , australian singer october 31 – willow smith , american singer , songwriter , activist , actress and dancer ( daughter of will smith and jada pinkett smith ) november 13 – 24kgoldn , american rapper and songwriter december 28 – larissa manoela , brazilian actress , singer and songwriter . deaths . january 2 – nat adderley ( 68 ) , jazz cornet and trumpet player january 16 – gene harris ( 67 ) , jazz pianist january 19 irra petina ( 91 ) , operatic contralto josh clayton-felt ( 32 ) , singer-songwriter ( choriocarcinoma ) january 22 – carlo cossutta ( 67 ) , operatic tenor february 3 – alla rakha ( 80 ) , tabla player february 4 – doris coley ( 58 ) , vocalist ( the shirelles ) february 7 big punisher ( 28 ) , rapper ( heart attack ) dave peverett ( 56 ) ( foghat ) february 11 – lord kitchener ( 77 ) , calypsonian february 12 screamin ' jay hawkins ( 70 ) , u.s . vocal artist andy lewis ( 33 ) , australian bass player ( the whitlams ) ( b . 1967 ) oliver ( 54 ) , u.s . singer ( b . 1945 ) february 19 – marin goleminov ( 91 ) , violinist and composer february 23 – ofra haza ( 42 ) , singer february 29 – dennis danell ( 38 ) , guitarist ( social distortion ) ( brain aneurysm ) march 4 – walter dana ( 97 ) , polka-music promoter march 5 – alexander young ( 79 ) , operatic tenor march 7 – pee wee king ( 86 ) , country musician and songwriter ( heart attack ) march 20 – gene eugene ( 38 ) , actor and singer ( brain aneurysm ) march 27 – ian dury ( 57 ) , english rock musician ( liver cancer ) april 25 – niels viggo bentzon ( 80 ) , danish composer april 27 – vicki sue robinson ( 45 ) , us disco singer ( cancer ) may 2 – sundar popo ( 56 ) , indo-trinidadian chutney musician ( heart and kidney ailment relating to diabetes ) may 13 – cesare valletti ( 77 ) , operatic tenor may 20 – jean-pierre rampal ( 78 ) , flautist may 31 – johnnie taylor ( 66 ) , singer june 1 – tito puente ( 77 ) , afro-cuban jazz and salsa musician june 7 – james moore ( 44 ) , gospel singer june 14 – paul griffin ( 62 ) , pianist july 5 – lord woodbine ( harold adolphus phillips ) ( 71 ) , calypsonian july 6 ľudovít rajter ( 93 ) , slovak composer and conductor władysław szpilman ( 88 ) , jewish-polish pianist who survived the holocaust july 11 – jaroslav filip ( 51 ) , slovak musician , actor july 15 – paul young ( 53 ) , english singer and percussionist of sad café and mike + the mechanics ( heart attack ) july 24 – oscar shumsky ( 83 ) , violinist july 28 – jerome smith ( kc and the sunshine band ) august 10 – suzanne danco ( 89 ) , operatic soprano august 13 – nazia hassan ( 34 ) , iconic pakistani singer ( lung cancer ) august 25 jack nitzsche ( 63 ) , arranger , producer , songwriter and composer allen woody ( 44 ) , bass guitarist september 12 – stanley turrentine ( 66 ) , jazz saxophonist september 21 – bengt hambraeus ( 72 ) , composer for organ september 25 – tommy reilly ( 81 ) , harmonica virtuoso september 26 – carl sigman ( 91 ) , songwriter october 1 robert allen ( 73 ) , american pianist and composer ( b . 1928 ) cub koda ( 51 ) , singer , guitarist and songwriter ( brownsville station ) october 3 – benjamin orr ( 53 ) , bassist , vocalist of the cars october 17 – joachim nielsen ( 36 ) , norwegian rock singer in jokke & valentinerne october 18 – julie london ( 74 ) , us singer and actress october 21 – frankie crocker , radio dj october 27 – winston grennan ( 56 ) , jamaican drummer october 28 – carlos guastavino ( 78 ) , composer october 30 – steve allen ( 78 ) , comedian , composer , talk show host , author november 8 brian boydell ( 83 ) , irish composer dick morrissey ( 60 ) , uk tenor saxophonist ( cancer ) november 12 – stanley turrentine ( 64 ) , us tenor saxophonist ( stroke ) november 16 dj screw ( 29 ) , hip-hop dj ( codeine overdose ) joe c . ( 26 ) , rapper november 30 – scott smith ( 45 ) , bassist ( loverboy ) ( lost at sea ) december 17 – harold rhodes ( 89 ) , inventor of rhodes piano december 18 – kirsty mccoll ( 41 ) , english singer songwriter ( speedboat accident ) december 19 rob buck ( 42 ) , guitarist ( 10,000 maniacs ) ( liver disease ) milt hinton ( 90 ) , jazz double bassist pops staples ( 85 ) , gospel and r & b musician december 24 – nick massi ( 65 ) , bass singer in the four seasons . awards . the following artists are inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame : eric clapton , earth , wind & fire , the lovin ' spoonful , the moonglows , bonnie raitt and james taylor inductees of the gma gospel music hall of fame include shirley caesar , and the oak ridge boys . grammy awards . grammy awards of 2000 . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 2000 . mercury music prize . the hour of bewilderbeast – badly drawn boy wins . mtv video music awards . 2000 mtv video music awards . charts . triple j hottest 100 . triple j hottest 100 , 2000 . see also . 2000 in music ( uk ) record labels established in 2000 . references .