Mordred

name . the name mordred , found as the latinised modredus in geoffrey of monmouth 's historia regum britanniae , comes from old welsh medraut ( comparable to old cornish modred and old breton modrot ) . it is ultimately derived from latin moderātus , meaning '' within bounds , observing moderation , moderate '' . . early welsh sources . the earliest surviving mention of mordred ( referred to as medraut ) is found in an entry for the year 537 in the chronicle annales cambriae ( the annals of wales ) , which references his name in an association with the battle of camlann . this brief entry gives no information as to whether mordred killed or was killed by arthur , or even if he was fighting against him . as noted by leslie alcock , the reader assumes this in the light of later tradition . the annales themselves were completed between 960 and 970 , meaning that ( although their authors likely drew from older material ) they can not be considered as a contemporary source having been compiled 400 years after the events they describe . meilyr brydydd , writing at the same time as geoffrey of monmouth , mentions mordred in his lament for the death of gruffudd ap cynan ( d . 1137 ) . he describes gruffudd as having eissor medrawd ( '' the nature of medrawd '' ) as to have valour in battle . similarly , gwalchmai ap meilyr praised madog ap maredudd , king of powys ( d . 1160 ) as having arthur gerdernyd , menwyd medrawd ( '' arthur 's strength , the good nature of medrawd '' ) . this would support the idea that early perceptions of mordred were largely positive . however , mordred 's later characterisation as the king 's villainous son has a precedent in the figure of amhar , a son of arthur 's known from only two references . the more important of these , found in an appendix to the 9th-century chronicle historia brittonum ( the history of the britons ) , describes his marvelous grave beside the herefordshire spring where he had been slain by his own father in some unchronicled tragedy . the arthurian handbook , p . 15 ; p . 277 . what connection exists between the stories of amr and mordred , if there is one , has never been satisfactorily explained . depictions in the legend . in geoffrey 's influential historia regum britanniae ( the history of the kings of britain ) , written around 1136 , modredus ( mordred ) is portrayed as the nephew of and traitor to king arthur . the unhistorical account presented by geoffrey describes arthur leaving modredus in charge of his throne as he crossed the english channel to wage war on lucius tiberius of rome . during arthur 's absence , modredus crowns himself king and lives in an adulterous union with arthur 's wife , ganhumara ( guinevere ) . geoffrey does not make it clear how complicit ganhumara is with his actions , simply stating that the queen had '' broken her vows '' and '' about this matter . he prefers to say nothing . '' geoffrey of monmouth , the history of the kings of britain , xi.i . this forces arthur to return to britain to fight at the battle of camlann , where modredus is ultimately slain . arthur , having been gravely wounded in battle , is sent to be healed by morgen ( morgan ) in avalon . a number of welsh sources also refer to medraut , usually in relation to camlann . one welsh triad , based on geoffrey 's historia , provides an account of his betrayal of arthur ; triad 51 . in bromwich , rachel ( 2006 ) . trioedd ynys prydein . in another , he is described as the author of one of the '' three unrestrained ravagings of the isle of britain '' – he came to arthur 's court at kelliwic in cornwall , devoured all of the food and drink , and even dragged gwenhwyfar ( guinevere ) from her throne and beat her . triad 54 . in bromwich , rachel ( 2006 ) . trioedd ynys prydein . in another triad , however , he is described as one of '' men of such gentle , kindly , and fair words that anyone would be sorry to refuse them anything . '' the mabinogion also describes him in the terms of courtliness , calmness and purity . . life in romances . in the early 13th century , the old french literature of the chivalric romance genre expanded on the history of mordred prior to the civil war with arthur . in the prose merlin part of vulgate cycle , mordred 's elder half-brother gawain saves the infant mordred and their mother morgause from the saxon king taurus . in the revision known as the post-vulgate cycle , and consequently in thomas malory 's english compilation le morte d'arthur ( the death of arthur ) , arthur is told prophecy by merlin about a just-born child that is to be his undoing , and so he tries to avert the fate by ordering the killing of all the may day newborns . this episode ( reminiscent of the biblical massacre of the innocents and sometimes dubbed the '' may day massacre '' ) leads to a war between arthur and the furious king lot , believing he was mordred 's father , in which the latter king dies at the hands of arthur 's vassal king pellinore . yet , unknown to both kings , the baby mordred actually miraculously survived . as told by malory , mordred is accidentally found and rescued by a man who then raises him until he is 14 . in this branch of the legend , the young mordred later joins arthur 's fellowship of the round table after merlin 's downfall . he is involved in the adventures of his brothers , having grown to become the tallest among them , and some of their fellow knights such as brunor . however , he is known for his lustful habits , including even attempted rapes , as in the post-vulgate queste ( in which he is stopped by king bagdemagus who wounds him ) and in the french romance claris et laris . he also becomes the killer of pellinore 's son lamorak , as well as a friend and companion of the great knight lancelot . the latter comes to rescue to the young mordred on multiple occasions in the prose lancelot , such as helping save his life at the castle of the white thorn ( castel de la blanche espine ) , and mordred in turn treats lancelot as his personal hero . his turning point toward villainy is hearing an old priest 's prophecy for him and lancelot , the two '' most unfortunate knights '' , revealing his true parentage and predicting their roles in the ruin of the kingdom . however , the angry mordred kills the priest before he could warn arthur , and while lancelot does tell guinevere , she refuses to believe in it and does not banish mordred . the prose lancelot indicates mordred was about 22 years old at the time ( two years into his knighthood ) . mordred eventually overthrows arthur 's rule when the latter is engaged in the war against lancelot ( or during the second roman war that followed it , depending on the version ) . in the vulgate mort artu , mordred achieves his coup with the help of a forged letter supposedly sent by arthur . the text adds that '' there was much good in mordred , and as soon as he made himself elevated go the throne , he made himself well beloved by all , '' and so they were '' ready to die to defend his honor '' once arthur returned with his army . mordred 's few opponents during his brief rule included kay , who was gravely wounded by mordred 's supporters and died after fleeing to brittany . in the french-influenced english poem stanzaic morte arthur , a council of britain 's knights first elects mordred for the position of regent in arthur 's absence as the most worthy candidate . family relations . traditions vary on mordred 's relationship to arthur . medraut is never considered arthur 's son in welsh texts , only his nephew , though the dream of rhonabwy mentions that the king had been his foster father . in early literature derived from geoffrey 's historia , mordred was considered the legitimate son of arthur 's sister or half-sister queen variably known as morgause with her husband , king lot , the king of either lothian or orkney . today , however , he is best known as arthur 's own illegitimate son by morgause in the motif introduced in the vulgate cycle , in which their union happens at the time when neither of them have yet known of their blood relation . gawain is mordred 's brother already in the historia as well as in layamon 's brut . besides him , mordred 's other brothers or half-brothers are agravain , gaheris , and gareth in the later tradition derived from the french romance cycles , beginning with the prose versions of robert de boron 's poems merlin and perceval . in the vulgate lancelot , mordred is the youngest of the siblings who begins his knightly career as agravain 's squire and the two later conspire together to reveal lancelot 's affair with guinevere . in stark contrast to many modern works , mordred 's only interaction with morgan le fay in any medieval text occurs when he and his brothers visit morgan 's castle in the vulgate queste , in which she is mordred 's aunt . the 14th-century scottish chronicler john of fordun claimed that mordred was the rightful heir to the throne of britain , as arthur was an illegitimate child ( in his account , mordred was the legitimate son of lot and anna , who here is uther 's sister ) . this sentiment was elaborated upon by walter bower and by hector boece , who in his historia gentis scotorum goes so far as to say arthur and mordred 's brother gawain were traitors and villains and arthur usurped the throne from mordred . according to boece , arthur agreed to make mordred his heir but then , on the advice of the britons who did not want mordred to rule , he made constantine his heir ; this led to the war in which arthur and mordred die . in the historia and certain other texts , such as the alliterative morte arthure reimagination of the historia where mordred is portrayed sympathetically , mordred marries guinevere consensually after he takes the throne . however , in later writings like the lancelot-grail cycle and le morte d'arthur , guinevere is not treated as a traitor and instead she flees mordred 's proposal and hides in the tower of london . adultery is still tied to her role in these later romances , but mordred has been replaced in this role by lancelot . the 18th-century welsh antiquarian lewis morris , based on statements made by the scottish chronicler boece , suggested that medrawd had wife named cwyllog , daughter of caw . another late welsh tradition was that medrawd 's wife was gwenhwyfach , sister of gwenhwyfar . . death . in henry of huntingdon 's retelling of geoffrey 's historia , mordred is beheaded at camlann in a lone charge against him and his entire host by arthur himself , who suffers many injuries in the process . in the alliterative morte arthure , mordred first kills gawain by his own hand in an early battle against arthur 's landing forces and then deeply grieves after him . in the vulgate mort artu ( and consequently in malory 's le morte d'arthur ) , the terrible final battle begins by an accident during a last-effort peace meeting between him and arthur . in the ensuing fighting , mordred personally slays his cousin yvain after the latter 's rescue of the unhorsed arthur and then he decapitates the already badly wounded sagramore . he also kills sagramore as well as six other round table knights loyal to arthur in the post-vulgate version , which presents this as an incredible and unprecedented feat . these and many other versions of the legend feature the motif of arthur and mordred striking down each other in a duel after most of the others on both sides have died . the version in le morte d'arthur features the now-iconic scene where they meet on foot as arthur charges mordred and runs a spear through him . with the last of his strength , mordred impales himself even further to be within striking distance , and lands a mortal blow with his sword to king arthur 's head . malory 's telling is a variant of the original account from the vulgate mort artu , in which arthur and mordred both charge at each other on horses three times until arthur drives his lance through mordred 's body , but then fully withdraws it ( a ray of sunlight even shines through the hole ) before mordred 's sword powerfully strikes his head and they both fall from their saddles . the alliterative morte arthure has mordred grievously wound arthur with the sword clarent , stolen for him from arthur by his co-conspirator guinevere , but then arthur slashes off mordred 's sword arm and brutally skewers him up on the sword caliburn ( excalibur ) . the post-vulgate retelling of mort artu deals with the aftermath of mordred 's death in more detail than the earlier works . in it , arthur says before being taken away : '' mordred , in an evil hour did i beget you . you have ruined me and the kingdom of logres , and you have died for it . cursed be the hour in which you were born . '' one of the few survivors of arthur 's army , bleoberis , then drags mordred 's corpse behind a horse around the battlefield of salisbury plain until it is torn to pieces . later , as it had been commanded by the dying arthur , the archbishop of canterbury constructs the tower of the dead tomb memorial , from which bleoberis hangs mordred 's head as a warning against treason and there it then remains for centuries until it is removed by the visiting ganelon . conversely , margam abbey 's chronicle annales de margan claims arthur had been buried alongside mordred , here described as his nephew , in another tomb purportedly exhumed in the '' real avalon '' at glastonbury abbey . there have been also alternative stories of mordred 's demise . in the italian la tavola ritonda ( the round table ) , it is lancelot who kills mordred at castle urbano where mordred has besieged guinevere after arthur 's death . in ly myreur des histors ( the mirror of history ) by belgian writer jean d'outremeuse , mordred survives the great battle and rules with the traitorous guinevere until they are defeated and captured by lancelot and caradoc in london . guinevere is then executed by lancelot and mordred is entombed alive with her body , which he consumes before dying of starvation . offspring . since geoffrey , mordred is often said to be succeeded by his sons . stories always number them as two , though they are usually not named , nor is their mother . in geoffrey 's version , after the battle of camlann , constantine is appointed arthur 's successor . however , mordred 's two sons and their saxon allies later rise against him . s : history of the kings of britain/book 11 . after defeating them , one of them flees to sanctuary in the church of amphibalus in winchester while the other hides in a london friary . s : history of the kings of britain/book 11 . constantine tracks them down , and kills them before the altars in their respective hiding places . this act invokes the vengeance of god , and three years later constantine is killed by his nephew aurelius conanus . geoffrey 's account of the episode may be based on constantine 's murder of two '' royal youths '' as mentioned by the 6th-century writer gildas . s : the ruin of britain 28 . in the alliterative morte arthure , the dying arthur personally orders constantine to kill mordred 's infant children as guinevere had been asked by mordred to flee with them to ireland . guinevere instead returns to caerleon without a concern for the children . the elder of mordred 's sons is named melehan ( evolved from melou in layamon 's brut ) in the lancelot-grail and the post-vulgate . in a battle near winchester , melehan slays lionel , brother to bors the younger ; bors kills melehan , avenging his brother 's death , while lancelot kills the unnamed younger brother who tried to escape deep into a forest . in the 15th-century spanish chivalric romance florambel de lucea , the surviving arthur is rescued by his sister morgan in a battle against the sons of mordred ( morderec ) . . in later works . virtually everywhere mordred appears , his name is synonymous with treason . he appears in inferno ( dante ) in the lowest circle of hell , set apart for traitors : '' him who , at one blow , had chest and shadow / shattered by arthur 's hand '' ( canto xxxii ) . inferno , canto xxxii , lines 61–62 ( mandelbaum translation ) . mordred is especially prominent in popular modern era arthurian literature , as well as in film , television , and comics . torregrossa , michael a . , '' will the 'reel ' mordred please stand up ? strategies for representing mordred in american and british arthurian film '' in cinema arthuriana : twenty essays ( rev . edn . ) , ed . kevin j . harty . jefferson , nc : mcfarland , 2002 ( pb . 2009 ) , pp . 199–210 . he has been portrayed by leonard penn ( the adventures of sir galahad 1949 ) , brian worth ( the adventures of sir lancelot 1956–1957 ) , david hemmings ( camelot 1967 ) , robert addie ( excalibur 1981 ) , nickolas grace ( morte d'arthur 1984 ) , simon templeman ( the legend of prince valiant 1991–1994 ) , craig sheffer ( merlin : the return 2000 ) , hans matheson ( the mists of avalon 2001 ) , alexander vlahos and asa butterfield ( merlin 2008–2012 ) , and miyuki sawashiro ( fate/apocrypha 2017 , fate/grand order ) , among others . in such modern adaptations , morgause is often conflated with ( and into ) the character of morgan le fay , who may be mordred 's mother or alternatively his lover or wife . a few works of the middle ages and today , however , portray mordred as less a traitor and more a conflicted opportunist , or even a victim of fate . the new arthurian encyclopedia , p . 394 . even malory , who depicts mordred as a villain , notes that the people rallied to him because , '' with arthur was none other life but war and strife , and with sir mordred was great joy and bliss . '' . see also . illegitimacy in fiction king arthur 's family . references . citations . . bibliography . rachel bromwich ( 2006 ) . trioedd ynys prydein : the triads of the island of britain . university of wales press . norris j . lacy ( ed . ) , the new arthurian encyclopedia , pp . & nbsp ; 8–9 . new york : garland . lacy , norris j . ; geoffrey ashe ; and mancroff , debra n . ( 1997 ) . the arthurian handbook . new york : garland . external links . mordred at the camelot project the different accounts of mordred 's death at camlann ( salisbury plain )