Shamrock

botanical species . there is still not a consensus over the precise botany species of clover that is the '' true '' shamrock . john gerard in his herbal of 1597 defined the shamrock as trifolium pratense or trifolium pratense flore albo , meaning red or white clover . he described the plant in english as '' three leaved grasse '' or '' medow trefoile '' , '' which are called in irish shamrockes '' . the irish botanist caleb threlkeld , writing in 1726 in his work entitled synopsis stirpium hibernicarum or a treatise on native irish plants followed gerard in identifying the shamrock as trifolium pratense , calling it white field clover . the botanist carl von linné in his 1737 work flora lapponica identifies the shamrock as trifolium pratense , mentioning it by name as chambroch , with the following curious remark : '' hiberni suo chambroch , quod est trifolium pratense purpureum , aluntur , celeres & promtissimi roburis '' ( the irish call it shamrock , which is purple field clover , and which they eat to make them speedy and of nimble strength ) . linnaeus based his information that the irish ate shamrock on the comments of english elizabethan authors such as edmund spenser who remarked that the shamrock used to be eaten by the irish , especially in times of hardship and famine . it has since been argued however , that the elizabethans were confused by the similarity between the irish ( gaelic ) name for young clover seamróg , and the name for wood sorrel seamsóg . kelly , fergus , early irish farming , ( 2000 ) , dublin , p 311 the situation regarding the identity of the shamrock was further confused by a london botanist james ebenezer bicheno , who proclaimed in a dissertation in 1830 that the real shamrock was oxalis acetosella , a species of wood sorrel . bichino falsely claimed that clover was not a native irish plant and had only been introduced into ireland in the middle of the 17th century , and based his argument on the same comments by elizabethan authors that shamrock had been eaten . bicheno argued that this fitted the wood sorrel better than clover , as wood sorrel was often eaten as a green and used to flavour food . bicheno 's argument has not been generally accepted however , as the weight of evidence favours a species of clover . a more scientific approach was taken by english botanists james britten and robert holland , who stated in their dictionary of english plant names published in 1878 , that their investigations had revealed that trifolium dubium was the species sold most frequently in covent garden as shamrock on st . patrick 's day , and that it was worn in at least 13 counties in ireland . finally , detailed investigations to settle the matter were carried out in two separate botanical surveys in ireland , one in 1893 and the other in 1988 . the 1893 survey was carried out by nathaniel colgan , an amateur naturalist working as a clerk in dublin ; while the 1988 survey was carried out by e . charles nelson , director of the irish national botanic gardens . both surveys involved asking people from all across ireland to send in examples of shamrock , which were then planted and allowed to flower , so that their botanical species could be identified . the results of both surveys were very similar , showing that the conception of the shamrock in ireland had changed little in almost a hundred years . the results of the surveys are shown in the table below . since the acts of union 1800 between britain and ireland the shamrock was incorporated into the royal coat of arms of the united kingdom , depicted growing from a single stem alongside the rose of england , and the thistle of scotland to symbolise the unity of the three kingdoms . since then , the shamrock has regularly appeared alongside the rose , thistle and ( sometimes ) leek for wales in british coins such as the two shilling and crown , and in stamps . the rose , thistle and shamrock motif also appears regularly on british public buildings such as buckingham palace . throughout the nineteenth century the popularity of the shamrock as a symbol of ireland grew , and it was depicted in many illustrations on items such as book covers and st . patrick 's day postcards . it was also mentioned in many songs and ballads of the time . for example , a popular ballad called the shamrock shore lamented the state of ireland in the nineteenth century . another typical example of such a ballad appears in the works of thomas moore whose oh the shamrock embodies the victorian spirit of sentimentality . it was immensely popular and contributed to raising the profile of the shamrock as an image of ireland : oh the shamrock - through erin 's isle , to sport awhile , as love and valor wander'd with wit , the sprite , whose quiver bright a thousand arrows squander 'd . where'er they pass , a triple grass shoots up , with dew-drops streaming , as softly green as emeralds seen through purest crystal gleaming . oh the shamrock , the green immortal shamrock ! chosen leaf of bard and chief , old erin 's native shamrock ! throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries , the shamrock continued to appear in a variety of settings . for example , the shamrock appeared on many buildings in ireland as a decorative motif , such as on the facade of the kildare street club building in dublin , st . patrick 's cathedral , armagh , and the harp and lion bar in listowel , co . kerry . it also appears on street furniture , such as old lamp standards like those in mountjoy square in dublin , and on monuments like the parnell monument , and the o'connell monument , both in o'connell street , dublin . shamrocks also appeared on decorative items such as glass , china , jewellery , poplin and irish lace . belleek pottery in co . fermanagh , for example , regularly features shamrock motifs . file : mountjoy square lamppost1.jpg lamppost in mountjoy square , dublin , early 20th century file : listowel-eringobrath.jpg design on harp and lion bar listowel , co . kerry file : herself - himself - geograph.org.uk - 885732.jpg work by belleek pottery , which often features shamrock motifs file:2d map of ireland- first irish postage stamp.jpg 2d map of ireland : the first irish postage stamp featured the shamrock . file : aer lingus regional atr 72 arrives birmingham airport , england 27june2019 arp.jpg shamrock on the tail fin of an atr 72 of aer lingus regional the shamrock is used in the emblems of many state organisations , both in the republic of ireland and northern ireland . some of these are all-ireland bodies , ( such as tourism ireland ) as well as organisations specific to the republic of ireland ( such as ida ireland ) and northern ireland ( such as police service of northern ireland ) . the irish postal service an post , regularly features the shamrock on its series of stamps . the airline aer lingus uses the emblem in its logos , and its air traffic control call sign is '' shamrock '' . the shamrock has been registered as a trademark by the government of ireland . use of the harp and the shamrock were registered by the irish government as international trademarks . see . retrieved 20 july 2008 . in the early 1980s , ireland defended its right to use the shamrock as its national symbol in a german trademark case , which included high-level representation from taoiseach charles haughey . having originally lost , ireland won on appeal to the german supreme court in 1985 . it has become a tradition for the irish taoiseach to present a bowl of shamrocks in a special waterford crystal bowl featuring a shamrock design to the president of the united states in the white house every st . patrick 's day . shamrock is also used in emblems of uk organisations with an association with ireland , such as the irish guards . soldiers of the royal irish regiment of the british army use the shamrock as their emblem , and wear a sprig of shamrock on saint patrick 's day . shamrock are exported to wherever the regiment is stationed throughout the world . queen victoria decreed over a hundred years ago that soldiers from ireland should wear a sprig of shamrock in recognition of fellow irish soldiers who had fought bravely in the boer war , a tradition continued by british army soldiers from both the north and the south of ireland following partition in 1921 . the coat of arms on the flag of the royal ulster constabulary george cross foundation was cradled in a wreath of shamrock . the shamrock also appears in the emblems of a wide range of voluntary and non-state organisations in ireland , such as the irish farmers association , the boy scouts of ireland association , scouting ireland irish girl guides , and the irish kidney donors association . in addition many sporting organisations representing ireland use the shamrock in their logos and emblems . examples include the irish football association ( northern ireland ) , irish rugby football union , swim ireland , cricket ireland , and the olympic council of ireland . a sprig of shamrock represents the lough derg yacht club tipperary , ( est . 1836 ) . the shamrock is the official emblem of irish football club shamrock rovers . use overseas . shamrock commonly appears as part of the emblem of many organisations in countries overseas with communities of irish descent . outside ireland , various organisations , businesses and places also use the symbol to advertise a connection with the island . these uses include : the shamrock features in the emblem of the ancient order of hibernians , the largest and oldest irish catholic organisation . founded in new york city in 1836 by irish immigrants , it claims a membership of 80,000 in the united states , canada and ireland . the emerald society , an organisation of american police officers or fire fighters of irish heritage , includes a shamrock on its badge . emerald societies are found in most major us cities such as new york city , milwaukee , jersey city , washington , boston , chicago , san francisco , los angeles and saint paul , minnesota . the shamrock is featured in the '' compartment '' of the royal arms of canada , as part of a wreath of shamrocks , roses , thistles , and lilies ( representing the irish , english , scottish , and french settlers of canada ) . the flag of the city of montreal , quebec , canada has a shamrock in the lower right quadrant . the shamrock represents the irish population , one of the four major ethnic groups that made up the population of the city in the 19th century when the arms were designed , the other three being the french ( represented by a fleur-de-lis in the upper-left ) , the english ( represented by a rose in the upper-right ) , and the scots ( represented by a thistle in the lower-left ) . the shamrock is featured on the passport stamp of montserrat , many of whose citizens are of irish descent . the shamrock signified the second corps of the army of the potomac in the american civil war , which contained the irish brigade . it can still be seen on the regimental coat of arms of '' the fighting sixty-ninth '' the erin go bragh flag , used originally by the saint patrick 's battalion of the mexican army , uses an angelic clàrsach , a medieval irish harp , cradled in a wreath of clover . the crest of celtic f.c . originally included a shamrock which was changed in 1938 to a four-leaf clover for reasons that remain unclear . the club was founded in 1887 in glasgow among the poor irish immigrants of the city . the crest of the irish football club shamrock rovers obviously . london irish rugby football club has a shamrock on its crest . the club was founded in 1898 for the young irishmen of london . the shamrocks motorcycle club is a usa-based traditional motorcycle club ( composed of law enforcement personnel ) which uses the shamrock as its name and symbol . the basketball team , boston celtics , in the usa incorporate the shamrock in their logo . former nba player shaquille o'neal nicknamed himself the '' big shamrock '' after joining the team . in australia , the melbourne celtic club features a shamrock on its emblem . the club was founded in 1887 for the irish and other celtic groups in the city . during the russian civil war a british officer col . p.j . woods , of belfast , established a karelian regiment which had a shamrock on an orange field as its regimental badge . a shamrock ( trifylli ) is the official emblem of greek multi-sport club panathinaikos a.o . , greek football club acharnaikos f.c . and cypriot sports club ac omonia . a red shamrock is also the emblem of platanias f.c . , a cretan football team of chania . the danish football club viborg ff uses a shamrock in its badge and it has become a symbol of the town of viborg . the german football club spvgg greuther fürth also has a shamrock in its badge as it is a symbol of the city of fürth . according to the anti-defamation league , the aryan brotherhood symbol combines a shamrock with a swastika . file : erin go bragh banner.svg flag of st . patrick 's battalion of the mexican army reconstructed from description of jon riley file : flag of montreal.svg the flag of montreal . the shamrock is located in the lower right corner file : aoh logo 2001.svg aoh logo file : roman catholic archdiocese of newark.svg emblem of the roman catholic archdiocese of newark , new jersey file : panathinaikos fc shirt 2010-2011.jpg panathinaikos f.c . shirt