Maurice de Saxe

childhood . maurice was born at goslar , an illegitimacy son of augustus ii the strong , king of poland and elector of saxony , and the countess maria aurora of königsmarck . he was the first of eight extramarital children whom august acknowledged , although as many as 354 are claimed by sources , including wilhelmine of bayreuth , to have existed . in 1698 , the countess sent him to his father in warsaw . august had been elected king of poland in the previous year , but the unsettled condition of the country obliged maurice to spend the greater part of his youth outside its borders . this separation from his father made him independent and had an important effect on his future career . military career . at the age of twelve , maurice served in the imperial army under prince eugene of savoy , at the sieges of tournai and mons and at the battle of malplaquet . a proposal at the end of the campaign to send him to a jesuit college in brussels was dropped due to the protests of his mother . upon his return to the camp of the allies at the beginning of 1710 , maurice displayed a courage so impetuous that prince eugene admonished him to not confuse rashness with valour . he next served under peter the great against the sweden . in 1711 , august formally recognized him and maurice was granted the rank of count ( graf ) . he then accompanied his father to pomerania , and in 1712 he took part in the battle of gadebusch . at the age of 17 in 1713 he commanded his own regiment of the royal saxon army . as an adult , maurice bore a strong resemblance to his father , both physically and in character . his grasp was so powerful that he could bend a horseshoe with his hand , and even at the end of his life , his energy and endurance were scarcely affected by the illnesses his many excesses had caused . on 12 march 1714 , a marriage was arranged between him and one of the richest of his father 's subjects , countess johanna viktoria tugendreich von loeben , but he dissipated her fortune so rapidly that he was soon heavily in debt . the next year ( 21 january 1715 ) , johanna gave birth to a son , called august adolf after his grandfather ; the child only lived a few hours . since maurice had also given her more serious grounds of complaint against him , he consented to an annulment of the marriage on 21 march 1721 . after serving the german emperor charles vi in a campaign against the ottoman empire in 1717 , he went to paris to study mathematics , and in 1720 obtained a commission as maréchal de camp . in 1725 , he entered negotiations for election as duke of courland , at the insistence of the duchess anna ivanovna , who offered him her hand . he was chosen duke in 1726 , but declined marriage with the duchess . he soon found it impossible to resist her opposition to his claims , but with the assistance of £30,000 lent him by the french actress adrienne lecouvreur , he raised a force by which he maintained his authority till 1727 , when he withdrew and took up residence in paris . lecouvreur was to die mysteriously shortly afterwards : there is controversy as to whether or not she was poisoned by her rival , maria karolina sobieska , duchess of bouillon . at the outbreak of the war of the polish succession , saxe served under marshal the duke of berwick , and for a brilliant exploit at the siege of philippsburg he was named lieutenant-general . in the war of the austrian succession he took command of an army division sent to invade austria in 1741 , and on 19 november 1741 , surprised prague during the night , and seized it before the garrison was aware of the presence of an enemy , a coup de main which made him famous throughout europe ; he thus repeated the exploit of 1648 of his maternal great-grandfather , hans christoff von königsmarck . after capturing the fortress of cheb on 19 april 1742 , he received a leave of absence , and went to russia to push his claims for the duchy of courland , but returned to his command after getting nowhere . saxe 's exploits were the sole redeeming feature in an unsuccessful campaign , and on 26 march 1743 , his merits were rewarded by promotion to marshal of france . he had been given only 50-60,000 men to defend against an enemy army twice as large . white , p . 138 from this time on , he became one of the great generals of the age . in 1744 , he was chosen to command the 10,000 men of the french invasion of britain on behalf of james francis edward stuart , which assembled at dunkirk but did not proceed more than a few miles out of harbour before being wrecked by disastrous storms . white , p . 132 after its termination , he received an independent command in the netherlands , and by skilful manoeuvering succeeded in continually harassing the superior forces of the enemy without risking a decisive battle . in the following year , saxe with 65,000 men besieged tournai and inflicted a severe defeat on the army of the duke of cumberland at the battle of fontenoy , an encounter determined entirely by his constancy and cool leadership . white , p . 147 during the battle , he was unable to sit on horseback due to edema , and was carried about in a wicker chariot . in recognition of his brilliant achievement , louis xv conferred on him the château de chambord for life , and in april 1746 , he was naturalised as a french subject . until the end of the war , he continued to command in the netherlands , always with success . white , p . 181 besides fontenoy he added rocoux ( 1746 ) and lawfeldt or val ( 1747 ) to the list of french victories . he led the french force which siege of brussels and it was under his orders that marshal löwendahl captured bergen op zoom . he himself won the last success of the war in capturing maastricht in 1748 . in 1747 the title once held by turenne and villars , '' marshal general of the king 's camps and armies '' , was revived for him . but on 20 november 1750 he died at the château de chambord '' of a putrid fever '' . during the last years of his life , maurice had an affair with a french lady , marie rinteau , who at that time was only eighteen years old . in 1748 she gave birth to a daughter , the last of maurice 's several illegitimate children . she was called maria aurora ( in french : marie aurore ) after her grandmother . she bore the surname de la rivière until 1766 when the parlement of paris formally recognized her parentage and she could assume the surname of von sachsen or de saxe . marie aurore married firstly in 1766 with antoine , comte d'horne ( 1722–1767 ) , an alleged illegitimate son of louis xv of france . by her second marriage with louis claude dupin de francueil ( in 1777 ) , she was the grandmother of amandine lucile aurore dupin , who later became famous as the writer george sand . maria aurore died on 25 december 1821 when her granddaughter george sand was seventeen . sand included details of her grandmother 's parentage in her memoires . writings . image : mausolee-maurice-de-saxe-img 4156.jpg thumb left 200px tomb of maurice of saxe in saint thomas church ( strasbourg ) , by jean-baptiste pigalle . saxe 's work on the art of war , mes rêveries was published after his death in 1757 . described by carlyle as '' a strange military farrago , dictated , as i should think , under opium '' , it was praised by frederick the great and described by lord montgomery , more than two centuries later , as '' a remarkable work on the art of war . '' a common theme of the 18th century age of enlightenment was to emphasise scientific method and the idea every activity could be expressed in terms of a universal system . in one sense , mes rêveries followed this by subjecting '' military affairs to reasoned criticism and intellectual treatment , and the ensuing military doctrines were perceived as forming a definitive system . '' written following prussian expansion during the war of the austrian succession , saxe rejected their rigid discipline ; arguing the french character was fundamentally different and their tactics should reflect that , he advocated the use of a deep order or ordre profond , rather than relying on firearms . however , mes rêveries also challenged french military orthodoxy in arguing for a greater focus on mobile warfare , rather than fortifications ; this was partly a legacy of vauban ( 1633-1707 ) , who had revolutionised this field but adherence to his principles meant french engineers became ultra-conservative . as early as 1701 , john churchill , 1st duke of marlborough argued winning one battle was more beneficial than taking 12 fortresses ; saxe followed this line but his argument was given increased weight by french losses in the 1756-1763 seven years ' war . saxe 's lettres et mémoires choisis appeared in 1794 . his letters to his sister anna karolina orzelska , the duchess of schleswig-holstein-sonderburg-beck , preserved at strasbourg , were destroyed by the bombardment of that place in 1870 . thirty copies had , however , been printed from the original . many previous errors in former biographies were corrected and additional information supplied in karl von weber 's moritz graf von sachsen , marschall von frankreich , nach archivalischen quellen moritz count of saxony , marshal of france , after archival sources ( leipzig : tauchnitz , 1863 ) , in saint-rené taillandier 's maurice de saxe , étude historique d'après les documents des archives de dresde maurice of saxe , historical study according to the documents in the archives of dresden ( 1865 ) and in comte carl friedrich vitzthum von eckstädt 's maurice de saxe ( leipzig , 1861 ) . a biography in english is jon manchip white 's marshal of france : the life and times of maurice , comte de saxe 1696–1750 ( rand mcnally & company , chicago , 1962 ) . see also the military histories of the period , especially carlyle 's frederick the great . ancestry . in popular culture . in the 1962 film lawrence of arabia , general allenby ( jack hawkins ) contends to t . e . lawrence ( peter o'toole ) that '' i fight like clausewitz , you fight like saxe '' , to which lawrence replies , '' we should do very well indeed , should n't we ? '' . references . . external links . child of chequer 'd fortune : the life , loves and battles of maurice de saxe , maréchal de france by marjorie bowen at project gutenberg australia