Oleg of Novgorod

oleg of the rus ' chronicles . thumb according to the primary chronicle , oleg was a relative ( likely brother-in-law ) of the first ruler , rurik , and was entrusted by rurik to take care of both his kingdom and his young son igor . oleg gradually took control of the dnieper cities , seizing the power in kiev by tricking and slaying askold and dir , and naming kiev the capital of his newly created state kievan rus ' . the new capital was a convenient place to launch a raid against constantinople in 907 . in 883 , prince oleg of novgorod made the drevlians pay tribute to kiev . in 907 , the drevlians took part in the kievan military campaign against the eastern roman empire . according to the chronicle , the byzantines attempted to poison oleg , but the rus ' leader demonstrated his oracular powers by refusing to drink the cup of poisoned wine . having fixed his shield to the gate of the imperial capital , oleg won a favourable trade treaty , which eventually was of great benefit to both nations . although byzantine sources did not record these hostilities , the text of the treaty survives in the chronicle . image : trizna 1899.jpg 250px thumb viktor vasnetsov . oleg being mourned by his warriors ( 1899 ) . the primary chronicles brief account of oleg 's life contrasts with other early sources , specifically the novgorod first chronicle , which states that oleg was not related to rurik , and was rather a scandinavian client-prince who served as igor 's army commander . the novgorod first chronicle does not give the date of the commencement of oleg 's reign , but dates his death to 922 rather than 912 . a . n . nasonov , novgorodskaia pervaia letopis starshego i mladshego izvodov , ( moscow and leningrad : anssr , 1950 ) ,109 . cf . kloss 337-343 . scholars have contrasted this dating scheme with the '' epic '' reigns of roughly thirty-three years for both oleg and igor in the primary chronicle . shahmatov xxxii-xxxiii . the primary chronicle and other kievan sources place oleg 's grave in kiev , while novgorodian sources identify a funerary barrow in ladoga as oleg 's final resting place . the earliest and most believable version seems to have been preserved in the novgorod first chronicle , which says that oleg departed '' overseas '' ( i.e . , to scandinavia ) and was buried there . . legend of the death of oleg the prophet . image : olegsmound.jpg thumb 250px the reputed burial mound for oleg of novgorod ; volkhov river near staraya ladoga . in the primary chronicle , oleg is known as the prophet ( вещий ) , an epithet alluding to the sacred meaning of his norse name ( '' priest '' ) . according to the legend , romanticised by alexander pushkin in his ballad '' the song of the wise oleg , '' leningrad , aurora art publishers , 1991 . it was prophesied by the pagan priests ( volkhvs ) that oleg would take death from his stallion . to defy the prophecies , oleg sent the horse away . many years later he asked where his horse was , and was told it had died . he asked to see the remains and was taken to the place where the bones lay . when he touched the horse 's skull with his boot a snake slithered from the skull and bit him . oleg died , thus fulfilling the prophecy . oleg 's death has been interpreted as a distorted variant of the threefold death theme in indo-european myth and legend , with prophecy , the snake and the horse representing the three functions : the prophecy is associated with sovereignty , the horse with warriors , and the serpent with reproduction . in scandinavian traditions , this legend lived on in the saga of orvar-odd . oleg of the schechter letter . according to the primary chronicle , oleg died in 912 and his successor , igor of kiev , ruled from then until his assassination in 945 . the schechter letter , the text of the schechter letter is given at golb 106-121 . it is cited herein by folio and line ( e.g . sl fol . x : x ) a document written by a jewish khazar , a contemporary of romanus i lecapenus , describes the activities of a rus ' warlord named hlgw ( hebrew : , usually transcribed as '' helgu '' . sl fol . 2r , 15-16 ; 17 . the author of the letter describes khazaria as '' our land '' . sl fol . 1r:19 , 2v:15,20 . for years many scholars disregarded or discounted the schechter letter account , which referred to helgu ( often interpreted as oleg ) as late as the 940s . no less a personage than mikhail artamonov declared the manuscripts ' authenticity beyond question . artamonov 12 . nonetheless , other scholars expressed scepticism about its account , due in large part to its contradiction of the primary chronicle . e.g . , gregoire 242-248 , 255-266 ; dunlop 161 . anatoli novoseltsev , noting the discrepancy , admits the document 's authenticity but declares that the author '' displaces the real historical facts rather freely . '' novoseltsev 216-218 . brutskus asserted that hlgw was in fact another name for igor . brutskus 30-31 . mosin proposed that hlgw was a different person from oleg and was an independent prince in tmutarakan ; the existence of an independent rus ' state in tmutarakan in the first half of the tenth century is rejected by virtually all modern scholars . mosin 309-325 ; cf . zuckerman 258 . recently , however , scholars such as david christian and constantine zuckerman have suggested that the schechter letter 's account is corroborated by various other russian chronicles , and suggests a struggle within the early rus ' polity between factions loyal to oleg and to the rurikid igor , a struggle that oleg ultimately lost . zuckerman 257-268 . zuckerman cites , inter alia , to the novgorod first chronicle . cf . , e.g . , christian 341-345 . zuckerman posited that the early chronology of the rus ' had to be re-determined in light of these sources . among zuckerman 's beliefs and those of others who have analyzed these sources are that the khazars did not lose kiev until the early 10th century ( rather than 882 , the traditional date pritsak 60-71 ; shahmatov xxxii-xxxiii ; ) , that igor was not rurik 's son but rather a more distant descendant , and that oleg did not immediately follow rurik , but rather that there is a lost generation between the legendary varangian lord and his documented successors . pritsak 60-71 . pritsak placed the '' lost generation '' between oleg and igor . zuckerman dismisses this as '' outright speculation '' ; and places both as contemporaries in the early to mid tenth century . of particular interest is the fact that the schechter letter account of oleg 's death ( namely , that he fled to and raided frs , tentatively identified with persia , pavel kokovtsov , when publishing a russian translation of the letter in 1932 , argued that frs may refer to thrace , where the rus ' forces were defeated by the armies of lecapenus ( online ) . and was slain there ) bears remarkable parallels to the account of arab historians such as ibn miskawayh , who described a similar rus ' attack on the muslim state of arran in the year 944/5 . miskawaihi 67-74 ; cf . sl fol . 2v:3 et seq . . attempts to reconcile the accounts . in contrast to zuckerman 's version , the primary chronicle and the later kiev chronicle place oleg 's grave in kiev , where it could be seen at the time of the compilation of these documents . furthermore , scholars have pointed out that if oleg succeeded rurik in 879 ( as the east slavic chronicles assert ) , he could hardly have been active almost 70 years later , unless he had a life-span otherwise unheard of in medieval annals . to solve these difficulties , it has been proposed that the pagan monarch-priests of rus ' used the hereditary title of helgu , standing for '' holy '' in the norse language , and that igor and others held this title . parkhomenko 24 et seq . it has also been suggested that helgu-oleg who waged war in the 940s was distinct from both of rurik 's successors . he could have been one of the '' fair and great princes '' recorded in the russo-byzantine treaties of 911 and 944 or one of the '' archons of rus '' mentioned in de administrando imperio . brook 154 . regrettably , the primary chronicle does not specify the relations between minor rurikid princes active during the period , although the names rurik , oleg and igor were recorded among the late-10th-century and 11th-century rurikids . georgy vernadsky even identified the oleg of the schechter letter with igor 's otherwise anonymous eldest son , whose widow predslava is mentioned in the russo-byzantine treaty of 944 . vernadsky 41 et seq . alternatively , v . ya . petrukhin speculated that helgu-oleg of the 940s was one of the vernacular princes of chernigov , whose ruling dynasty maintained especially close contacts with khazaria , as the findings at the black grave , a large royal kurgan excavated near chernigov , seem to testify . petrukhin 226-228 . . in popular culture . oleg appears briefly in the soviet film the legend of princess olga ( 1983 ) , played by russian-ukrainian actor nikolay olyalin . hungarian actor lászló helyey portrayed oleg in the hungarian production honfoglalás ( 1996 ) , a biopic on árpád ( played by franco nero ) . the danish film a viking saga tells of the early life and career of oleg . oleg is played by ken vedsegaard , with erik holmey in the role of rurik , kim sønderholm as dir and peter gantzler as askold , the primary antagonist . prince oleg appears as the primary villain in season 6 of vikings ( 2019–2020 ) . in this production , askold and dir are portrayed as his brothers and rurik as oleg 's brother-in-law . he is played by russian actor danila kozlovsky . prince oleg appears in russian docudrama '' the rurikids . the story of the first dynasty '' ( 2019 ) , which tells the story of rurik dynasty ( from ix till xvi c . ) he is portrayed by russian actor dmitry moguchev .