Opiliones

description . the opiliones are known for having exceptionally long legs relative to their body size ; however , some species are short-legged . as in all arachnida , the body in the opiliones has two tagmata , the anterior cephalothorax or prosoma , and the posterior 10-segmented abdomen or opisthosoma . the most easily discernible difference between harvestmen and spiders is that in harvestmen , the connection between the cephalothorax and abdomen is broad , so that the body appears to be a single oval structure . other differences include the fact that opiliones have no venom glands in their chelicerae , so pose no danger to humans . they also have no silk glands and therefore do not build webs . in some highly derived species , the first five abdominal segments are fused into a dorsal shield called the scute , which in most such species is fused with the carapace . some such opiliones only have this shield in the males . in some species , the two posterior abdominal segments are reduced . some of them are divided medially on the surface to form two plates beside each other . the second pair of legs is longer than the others and function as antennae or feelers . in short-legged species , this may not be obvious . the feeding apparatus ( stomotheca ) differs from most arachnids in that opiliones can swallow chunks of solid food , not only liquids . the stomotheca is formed by extensions of the coxae of the pedipalps and the first pair of legs . most opiliones , except for cyphophthalmi , have a single pair of eyes in the middle of the head , oriented sideways . eyes in cyphophthalmi , when present , are located laterally , near the ozopores . a 305-million-year-old fossilized harvestman with two pairs of eyes was reported in 2014 . this find indicates that the eyes in cyphophthalmi are not homologous to the eyes of other harvestmen . 4-eyed daddy longlegs helps explain arachnid evolution however , some species are eyeless , such as the brazilian caecobunus termitarum ( grassatores ) from termite nests , giupponia chagasi ( gonyleptidae ) from caves , most species of cyphophthalmi , and all species of the guasiniidae . harvestmen have a pair of prosomatic defensive scent glands ( ozopores ) that secrete a peculiar-smelling fluid when disturbed . in some species , the fluid contains noxious quinones . they do not have book lungs , and breathe through tracheae . a pair of spiracles is located between the base of the fourth pair of legs and the abdomen , with one opening on each side . in more active species , spiracles are also found upon the tibia of the legs . they have a gonopore on the ventral cephalothorax , and the copulation is direct as opiliones penis , unlike other arachnids . all species lay eggs . the legs continue to twitch after they are detached because 'pacemakers ' are located in the ends of the first long segment ( femur ) of their legs . these pacemakers send signals via the nerves to the muscles to extend the leg and then the leg relaxes between signals . while some harvestman 's legs twitch for a minute , others have been recorded to twitch up to an hour . the twitching has been hypothesized to function as an evolutionary advantage by keeping the attention of a predator while the harvestman escapes . typical body length does not exceed , and some species are smaller than 1 & nbsp ; mm , although the largest known species , trogulus torosus ( trogulidae ) , grows as long as . the leg span of many species is much greater than the body length and sometimes exceeds and to in southeast asia . most species live for a year . behavior . many species are omnivorous , eating primarily small insects and all kinds of plant material and fungi . some are scavengers , feeding upon dead organisms , bird dung , and other feces material . such a broad range is unusual in other arachnids , which are typically pure predators . most hunting harvestmen ambush their prey , although active hunting is also found . because their eyes can not form images , they use their second pair of legs as antennae to explore their environment . unlike most other arachnids , harvestmen do not have a sucking stomach or a filtering mechanism . rather , they ingest small particles of their food , thus making them vulnerable to internal parasites such as gregarines . although parthenogenesis species do occur , most harvestmen reproduce sexually . mating involves direct copulation , rather than the deposition of a spermatophore . the males of some species offer a secretion ( nuptial gift ) from their chelicerae to the female before copulation . sometimes , the male guards the female after copulation , and in many species , the males defend territories . in some species , males also exhibit post-copulatory behavior in which the male specifically seeks out and shakes the female 's sensory leg . this is believed to entice the female into mating a second time . the females lay eggs from an ovipositor shortly after mating to several months later . some species build nests for this purpose . a unique feature of harvestmen is that some species practice parental care , in which the male is solely responsible for guarding the eggs resulting from multiple partners , often against egg-eating females , and cleaning the eggs regularly . depending on circumstances such as temperature , the eggs may hatch at any time after the first 20 days , up to about half a year after being laid . harvestmen variously pass through four to eight nymphal instars to reach maturity , with most known species having six instars . most species are nocturnal and colored in hues of brown , although a number of diurnal species are known , some of which have vivid patterns in yellow , green , and black with varied reddish and blackish mottling and reticulation . many species of harvestmen easily tolerate members of their own species , with aggregations of many individuals often found at protected sites near water . these aggregations may number 200 individuals in the laniatores , and more than 70,000 in certain eupnoi . gregarious behavior is likely a strategy against climatic odds , but also against predators , combining the effect of scent secretions , and reducing the probability of any particular individual being eaten . harvestmen clean their legs after eating by drawing each leg in turn through their jaws . antipredator defenses . predators of harvestmen include a variety of animals , including some mammals , amphibians , and other arachnids like spiders and scorpions . opiliones display a variety of primary and secondary defenses against predation , ranging from morphological traits such as body armor to behavioral responses to chemical secretions . some of these defenses have been attributed and restricted to specific groups of harvestmen . . primary defenses . primary defenses help the harvestmen avoid encountering a potential predator , and include crypsis , aposematism , and mimicry . crypsis . particular patterns or color markings on harvestmen 's bodies can reduce detection by disrupting the animals ' outlines or providing camouflage . markings on legs can cause an interruption of the leg outline and loss of leg proportion recognition . cokendolpher pers . comm . darker colorations and patterns function as camouflage when they remain motionless . gnaspini , p . , cavalheiro , a.j . , 1998 . chemical and behavioral defenses of a neotropical cavernicolous harvestman : goniosoma spelaeum ( opiliones , laniatores , gonyleptidae ) . j . arachnol . 26 , 81–90 . within the genus leiobunum are multiple species with cryptic coloration that changes over ontogeny to match the habitat used at each life stage . edgar , a.l . , 1971 . studies on the biology and ecology of michigan phalangida ( opiliones ) . many species have also been able to camouflage their bodies by covering with secretions and debris from the leaf litter found in their environments . firmo , c . , pinto-da-rocha , r . , 2002 . a new species of pseudotrogulus roewer and assignment of the genus to the hernandariinae ( opiliones , gonyleptidae ) . j . arachnol . 30 , 173–176 . some hard-bodied harvestmen have epizoic cyanobacteria and liverworts growing on their bodies that suggest potential benefits for camouflage against large backgrounds to avoid detection by diurnal predators . machado , g . , vital , d.m . , 2001 . on the occurrence of epizoic cyanobacteria and liverworts on a neotropical harvestman ( arachnida : opiliones ) biotropica proud , d.n . , wade , r.r . , rock , p . , townsend , v.r . , chavez , d.j . , 2012 . epizoic cyanobacteria associated with a neotropical harvestman ( opiliones : sclerosomatidae ) from costa rica . j . arachnol . 40 , 259–261 . . aposematism and mimicry . some harvestmen have elaborate and brightly colored patterns or appendages which contrast with the body coloration , potentially serving as an aposematic warning to potential predators . gonzález , a . , rossini , c . , eisner , t . , 2004 . mimicry : imitative depiction of discharged defensive secretion on carapace of an opilionid . chemoecology 14 , 5–7 . pomini , a.m . , machado , g . , pinto-da-rocha , r . , macías-ordóñez , r . , marsaioli , a.j . , 2010 . lines of defense in the harvestman hoplobunus mexicanus ( arachnida : opiliones ) : aposematism , stridulation , thanatosis , and irritant chemicals . biochem . syst . ecol . 38 , 300–308 . this mechanism is thought to be commonly used during daylight , when they could be easily seen by any predators . other harvestmen may exhibit mimicry to resemble other species ’ appearances . some gonyleptidae individuals that produce translucid secretions have orange markings on their carapaces . this may have an aposematic role by mimicking the coloration of glandular emissions of two other quinone-producing species . mimicry ( müllerian mimicry ) occurring between brazilian harvestmen that resemble others could be explained by convergent evolution . . secondary defenses . secondary defenses allow for harvestmen to escape and survive from a predator after direct or indirect contact , including thanatosis , freezing , bobbing , autotomy , fleeing , stridulation , retaliation , and chemical secretions . thanatosis . some animals respond to attacks by simulating an apparent death to avoid either detection or further attacks . humphreys , r.k . , ruxton , g.d . , 2018 . a review of thanatosis ( death feigning ) as an anti-predator behaviour . behav . ecol . sociobiol . 72 , 22 . arachnids such as spiders practice this mechanism when threatened or even to avoid being eaten by female spiders after mating . hansen , l.s . , gonzales , s.f . , toft , s . , bilde , t . , 2008 . thanatosis as an adaptive male mating strategy in the nuptial gift–giving spider pisaura mirabilis . behav . ecol . 19 , 546–551 . jones , t.c . , akoury , t.s . , hauser , c.k . , moore , d . , 2011 . evidence of circadian rhythm in antipredator behaviour in the orb-weaving spider larinioides cornutus . anim . behav . 82 , 549–555 . thanatosis is used as a second line of defense when detected by a potential predator and is commonly observed within the dyspnoi and laniatores suborders , with individuals becoming rigid with legs either retracted or stretched . cokendolpher , j.c . , 1987 . observations on the defensive behaviors of a neotropical gonyleptidae ( arachnida , opiliones ) . revue arachnologique , 7 , pp.59-63 . eisner , t . , alsop , d . , meinwald , j . , 1978 . secretions of opilionids , whip scorpions and pseudoscorpions , in : arthropod venoms , handbook of experimental pharmacology / handbuch der experimentellen pharmakologie . springer , berlin , heidelberg , pp . 87–99 . machado , g . , pomini , a.m . , 2008 . chemical and behavioral defenses of the neotropical harvestman camarana flavipalpi ( arachnida : opiliones ) . biochem . syst . ecol . 36 , 369–376 . pereira , w . , elpino-campos , a . , del-claro , k . , machado , g . , 2004 . behavioral repertory of the neotropical harvestman ilhaia cuspidata ( opiliones , gonyleptidae ) . j . arachnol . 32 , 22–30 . . freezing . freezing – or the complete halt of movement – has been documented in the family sclerosomatidae . misslin , r . , 2003 . the defense system of fear : behavior and neurocircuitry . neurophysiol . clin . neurophysiol . 33 , 55–66 . while this can mean an increased likelihood of immediate survival , it also leads to reduced food and water intake . chelini , m.-c . , willemart , r.h . , hebets , e.a . , 2009 . costs and benefits of freezing behaviour in the harvestman eumesosoma roeweri ( arachnida , opiliones ) . behav . processes 82 , 153–159 . . bobbing . to deflect attacks and enhance escape , long-legged species – commonly known as daddy long-legs – from the eupnoi suborder , use two mechanisms . one is bobbing , for which these particular individuals bounce their bodies . it potentially serves to confuse and deflect any identification of the exact location of their bodies . field , l.h . , glasgow , s . , 2001 . the biology of wetas , king crickets and their allies . cabi holmberg , r.g . , angerilli , n.p.d . , lacasse , l.j . , 1984 . overwintering aggregations of leiobunum paessleri in caves and mines ( arachnida , opiliones ) . j . arachnol . 12 , 195–204 . this can be a deceiving mechanism to avoid predation when they are in a large aggregation of individuals , which are all trembling at the same time . escalante , i . , albín , a . , aisenberg , a . , 2013 . lacking sensory ( rather than locomotive ) legs affects locomotion but not food detection in the harvestman holmbergiana weyenberghi . can . j . zool . 91 , 726–731 . cellar spiders ( pholcidae ) that are commonly mistaken for daddy long-legs ( opiliones ) also exhibit this behavior when their webs are disturbed or even during courtship . huber , b.a . , eberhard , w.g . , 1997 . courtship , copulation , and genital mechanics in physocyclus globosus ( araneae , pholcidae ) . can . j . zool . 75 , 905–918 . . autotomy . autotomy is the voluntary amputation of an appendage , and is employed to escape when restrained by a predator . domínguez , m . , escalante , i . , carrasco-rueda , f . , figuerola-hernández , c.e . , marta ayup , m . , umaña , m.n . , ramos , d . , gonzález-zamora , a . , brizuela , c . , delgado , w . , pacheco-esquivel , j . , 2016 . losing legs and walking hard : effects of autotomy and different substrates in the locomotion of harvestmen in the genus prionostemma . j . arachnol . 44 , 76–82 . fleming , p.a . , muller , d . , bateman , p.w . , 2007 . leave it all behind : a taxonomic perspective of autotomy in invertebrates . biological reviews . roth , v.d . , roth , b.m . , 1984 . review of appendotomy in spiders and other arachnids . bull.-br . arachnol . soc . mattoni , c.i . , garcía hernández , s . , botero-trujillo , r . , ochoa , j.a . , ojanguren-affilastro , a.a . , outeda-jorge , s . , pinto-da-rocha , r . and yamaguti , h.y . , 2001 . perder la cola o la vida . in primer caso de autotomía en escorpiones ( scorpiones : buthidae ) . iii congreso latinoamericano de aracnología , memorias y resúmenes ( pp . 83-84 ) . eupnoi individuals , more specifically sclerosomatid harvestmen , commonly use this strategy in response to being captured . houghton , j.e . , townsend , v.r . , proud , d.n . , 2011 . the ecological significance of leg autotomy for climbing temperate species of harvestmen ( arachnida , opiliones , sclerosomatidae ) . southeast . nat . 10 , 579–590 . guffey , c . , 1998 . leg autotomy and its potential fitness costs for two species of harvestmen ( arachnida , opiliones ) . j . arachnol . 26 , 296–302 . this strategy can be costly because harvestmen do not regenerate their legs , and leg loss reduces locomotion , speed , climbing ability , sensory perception , food detection , and territoriality . macias-ordonez , r . , 1998 . the mating system of leiobunum vittatum say 1821 ( arachnida : opiliones : palpatores ) : resource defense polygyny in the striped harvestman . autotomized legs provide a further defense from predators because they can twitch for 60 seconds to an hour after detachment . this can also potentially serve as deflection from an attack and deceive a predator from attacking the animal . it has been shown to be successful against ants and spiders . . fleeing . individuals that are able to detect potential threats can flee rapidly from attack . this is seen with multiple long-legged species in the leiobunum clade that either drop and run , or drop and remain motionless . machado , g . , raimundo , r.l.g . , oliveira , p.s . , 2000 . daily activity schedule , gregariousness , and defensive behaviour in the neotropical harvestman goniosoma longipes ( opiliones : gonyleptidae ) : journal of natural history : vol 34 , no 4 . this is also seen when disturbing an aggregation of multiple individuals , where they all scatter . . stridulation . multiple species within the laniatores and dyspnoi possess stridulation organs , which are used as animal communication and have also been shown to be used as a second line of defense when restrained by a predator . . retaliation . armored harvestmen in laniatores can often use their modified morphology as weapons . dias , b.c . , willemart , r.h . , 2013 . the effectiveness of post-contact defenses in a prey with no pre-contact detection . zoology 116 , 168–174 . segovia , j.m.g . , del-claro , k . , willemart , r.h . , 2015 . defences of a neotropical harvestman against different levels of threat by the recluse spider . behaviour 152 , 757–773 . many have spines on their pedipalps , back legs , or bodies . eisner , t . , eisner , m . , siegler , m . , 2005 . secret weapons : defenses of insects , spiders , scorpions , and other many-legged creatures . harvard university press . by pinching with their chelicerae and pedipalps , they can cause harm to a potential predator . also this has been proven to increase survival against recluse spiders by causing injury , allowing the harvestman to escape from predation . . chemical . harvestmen are well known for being chemically protected . they exude strongly odored secretions from their scent glands , called ozopores , shultz , j.w . , pinto-da-rocha , r . , 2007 . morphology and functional anatomy . harvest . biol . opiliones harv . univ . press camb . mass . lond . engl . 14–61 . that act as a shield against predators ; this is the most effective defense they use which creates a strong and unpleasant taste . these secretions have successfully protected the harvestmen against wandering spiders ( ctenidae ) , wolf spiders ( lycosidae ) and formica exsectoides ants . however , these chemical irritants are not able to prevent four species of harvestmen being preyed upon by the black scorpion bothriurus bonariensis ( bothriuridae ) . these secretions contain multiple volatile compounds that vary among individuals and clades . gnaspini , p . , rodrigues , g.s . , 2011 . comparative study of the morphology of the gland opening area among grassatores harvestmen ( arachnida , opiliones , laniatores ) of zoological systematics and evolutionary research . hara , m.r . , gnaspini , p . , 2003 . comparative study of the defensive behavior and morphology of the gland opening area among harvestmen ( arachnida , opiliones , gonyleptidae ) under a phylogenetic perspective . shear , w.a . , jones , t.h . , guidry , h.m . , derkarabetian , s . , richart , c.h . , minor , m . , lewis , j.j . , 2014 . chemical defenses in the opilionid infraorder insidiatores : divergence in chemical defenses between triaenonychidae and travunioidea and within travunioid harvestmen ( opiliones ) from eastern and western north america journal of arachnology . . endangered status . all troglobitic species ( of all animal taxa ) are considered to be at least threatened in brazil . four species of opiliones are on the brazilian national list of endangered species , all of them cave-dwelling : giupponia chagasi , iandumoema uai , pachylospeleus strinatii and spaeleoleptes spaeleus . several opiliones in argentina appear to be vulnerable , if not endangered . these include pachyloidellus fulvigranulatus , which is found only on top of cerro uritorco , the highest peak in the sierras chicas chain ( provincia de cordoba ) and pachyloides borellii is in rainforest patches in northwest argentina which are in an area being dramatically destroyed by humans . the cave-living picunchenops spelaeus is apparently endangered through human action . so far , no harvestman has been included in any kind of a red list in argentina , so they receive no protection . maiorerus randoi has only been found in one cave in the canary islands . it is included in the catálogo nacional de especies amenazadas ( national catalog of threatened species ) from the spain government . texella reddelli and texella reyesi are listed as endangered species in the united states . both are from caves in central texas . texella cokendolpheri from a cave in central texas and calicina minor , microcina edgewoodensis , microcina homi , microcina jungi , microcina leei , microcina lumi , and microcina tiburona from around springs and other restricted habitats of central california are being considered for listing as endangered species , but as yet receive no protection . misconception . an urban legend claims that the harvestman is the most venomous animal in the world , but possesses fangs too short or a mouth too round and small to bite a human , rendering it harmless ( the same myth applies to pholcus phalangioides and the cranefly , which are both also called a '' daddy longlegs '' ) . the spider myths site : '' daddy-longlegs '' this is untrue on several counts . none of the known species of harvestmen has venom glands ; their chelicerae are not hollowed fangs but grasping claws that are typically very small and not strong enough to break human skin . research . harvestmen are a scientifically neglected group . description of new taxa has always been dependent on the activity of a few dedicated taxonomists . carl friedrich roewer described about a third ( 2,260 ) of today 's known species from the 1910s to the 1950s , and published the landmark systematic work die weberknechte der erde ( harvestmen of the world ) in 1923 , with descriptions of all species known to that time . other important taxonomists in this field include : pierre latreille ( 18th century ) carl ludwig koch , maximilian perty ( 1830s-1850s ) l . koch , tord tamerlan teodor thorell ( 1860s-1870s ) eugène simon , william sørensen ( 1880s-1890s ) james c . cokendolpher , raymond forster , jürgen gruber , reginald frederick lawrence , jochen martens , cândido firmino de mello-leitão ( 20th century ) gonzalo giribet , adriano brilhante kury , tone novak ( 21st century ) . since the 1990s , study of the biology and ecology of harvestmen has intensified , especially in south america . . phylogeny . harvestmen are ancient arachnids . fossils from the devonian rhynie chert , 410 million years ago , already show characteristics like tracheae and sexual organs , indicating that the group has lived on land since that time . despite being similar in appearance to , and often confused with , spiders , they are probably closely related to the scorpions , pseudoscorpions , and solifuges ; these four orders form the clade dromopoda . the opiliones have remained almost unchanged morphologically over a long period . indeed , one species discovered in china , mesobunus martensi , fossilized by fine-grained volcanic ash around 165 million years ago , is hardly discernible from modern-day harvestmen and has been placed in the extant family sclerosomatidae . . etymology . the swedish naturalist and arachnologist carl jakob sundevall ( 1801–1875 ) honored the naturalist martin lister ( 1638–1712 ) by adopting lister 's term opiliones for this order , known in lister 's days as '' harvest spiders '' or '' shepherd spiders '' , from latin opilio , '' shepherd '' ; lister characterized three species from england ( although not formally describing them , being a pre-linnean work ) . martin lister 's english spiders , 1678 . ed . john parker and basil hartley ( 1992 ) . colchester , essex : harley books . pp . 26 & 30 . ( translation of the latin original , tractatus de araneis . ) . systematics . the interfamilial relationships within opiliones are not yet fully resolved , although significant strides have been made in recent years to determine these relationships . the following list is a compilation of interfamilial relationships recovered from several recent phylogenetic studies , although the placement and even monophyly of several taxa are still in question . fernández r , sharma pp , tourinho al , giribet g . 2017 the opiliones tree of life : shedding light on harvestmen relationships through transcriptomics . proc . r . soc . b 284 : 20162340 . suborder cyphophthalmi simon 1879 ( about 200 species ) infraorder boreophthalmi giribet 2012 : : family sironidae simon 1879 : : family stylocellidae hansen & sørensen 1904 infraorder scopulophthalmi giribet 2012 : : family pettalidae shear 1980 infraorder sternophthalmi giribet 2012 : : familytroglosironidae shear 1993 : superfamily ogoveoidea shear 1980 : : family neogoveidae shear 1980 : : family ogoveidae shear 1980 suborder eupnoi hansen & sørensen 1904 ( about 1,800 species ) : superfamily caddoidea banks 1892 : : family caddidae banks 1892 : superfamily phalangioidea latreille 1802 : : family neopilionidae lawrence 1931 : : family phalangiidae latreille 1802 : : family protolophidae banks 1893 : : family sclerosomatidae simon 1879 suborder dyspnoi hansen & sørensen 1904 ( about 400 species ) : superfamily acropsopilionoidea roewer 1923 : : family acropsopilionidae roewer 1923 : superfamily ischyropsalidoidea simon 1879 : : family ischyropsalididae simon 1879 : : family sabaconidae dresco 1970 : : family taracidae schönhofer 2013 : superfamily troguloidea sundevall 1833 : : family dicranolasmatidae simon 1879 : : family nemastomatidae simon 1872 : : family nipponopsalididae martens 1976 : : family trogulidae sundevall 1833 suborder laniatores thorell , 1876 ( about 4,200 species ) infraorder insidiatores loman , 1900 : superfamily travunioidea absolon & kratochvil 1932 : : family cladonychiidae hadži 1935 : : family cryptomastridae derkarabetian & hedin 2018 : : family paranonychidae briggs 1971 : : family travuniidae absolon & kratochvil 1932 : superfamily triaenonychoidea sørensen , 1886 : : family synthetonychiidae forster 1954 : : family triaenonychidae sørensen , 1886 infraorder grassatores kury , 2002 : superfamily assamioidea sørensen , 1884 : : family assamiidae sørensen , 1884 : : family pyramidopidae sharma and giribet , 2011 : superfamily epedanoidea sørensen , 1886 : : family epedanidae sørensen , 1886 : : family petrobunidae sharma and giribet , 2011 : : family podoctidae roewer , 1912 : : family tithaeidae sharma and giribet , 2011 : superfamily gonyleptoidea sundevall , 1833 : : family agoristenidae šilhavý , 1973 : : family otilioleptidae acosta , 2019 : : family cosmetidae koch , 1839 : : family cranaidae roewer , 1913 : : family cryptogeobiidae kury , 2014 : : family gerdesiidae bragagnolo , 2015 : : family gonyleptidae sundevall , 1833 : : family manaosbiidae roewer , 1943 : : family metasarcidae kury , 1994 : : family nomoclastidae roewer , 1943 : : family stygnidae simon , 1879 : : family stygnopsidae sørensen , 1932 : superfamily phalangodoidea simon , 1879 : : family phalangodidae simon , 1879 : superfamily samooidea sørensen , 1886 : : family biantidae thorell , 1889 : : family samoidae sørensen , 1886 : : family stygnommatidae roewer , 1923 : superfamily sandokanoidea özdikmen & kury , 2007 : : family sandokanidae özdikmen & kury , 2007 : superfamily zalmoxoidea sørensen , 1886 : : family escadabiidae kury & pérez , 2003 : : family fissiphalliidae martens , 1988 : : family guasiniidae gonzalez-sponga , 1997 : : family icaleptidae kury & pérez , 2002 : : family kimulidae pérez gonzález , kury & alonso-zarazaga , 2007 : : family zalmoxidae sørensen , 1886 the family stygophalangiidae ( one species , stygophalangium karamani ) from underground waters in north macedonia is sometimes misplaced in the phalangioidea . it is not a harvestman . fossil record . despite their long history , few harvestman fossils are known . this is mainly due to their delicate body structure and terrestrial habitat , making them unlikely to be found in sediments . as a consequence , most known fossils have been preserved within amber . the oldest known harvestman , from the 410-million-year-old devonian rhynie chert , displayed almost all the characteristics of modern species , placing the origin of harvestmen in the silurian , or even earlier . a recent molecular study of opiliones , however , dated the origin of the order at about 473 million years ago ( mya ) , during the ordovician . no fossils of the cyphophthalmi or laniatores much older than 50 million years are known , despite the former presenting a basal clade , and the latter having probably diverged from the dyspnoi more than 300 mya . naturally , most finds are from comparatively recent times . more than 20 fossil species are known from the cenozoic , three from the mesozoic , and at least seven from the paleozoic . . paleozoic . the 410-million-year-old eophalangium sheari is known from two specimens , one a female , the other a male . the female bears an ovipositor and is about long , whilst the male had a discernable penis . whether both specimens belong to the same species is not definitely known . they have long legs , tracheae , and no median eyes . together with the 305-million-year-old hastocularis argus , it forms the suborder tetrophthalmi . brigantibunum listoni from east kirkton near edinburgh in scotland is almost 340 million years old . its placement is rather uncertain , apart from it being a harvestman . from about 300 mya , several finds are from the coal measures of north america and europe . while the two described nemastomoides species are currently grouped as dyspnoi , they look more like eupnoi . kustarachne tenuipes was shown in 2004 to be a harvestman , after residing for almost one hundred years in its own arachnid order , the '' kustarachnida '' . some fossils from the permian are possibly harvestmen , but these are not well preserved . described species . eophalangium sheari dunlop , 2004 ( tetrophthalmi ) — early devonian ( rhynie , scotland ) brigantibunum listoni dunlop , 2005 ( eupnoi ? ) — early carboniferous ( east kirkton , scotland ) echinopustulus samuelnelsoni dunlop , 2004 ( dyspnoi ? ) — upper carboniferous ( western missouri , u.s . ) eotrogulus fayoli thevenin , 1901 ( dyspnoi : † eotrogulidae ) — upper carboniferous ( commentry , france ) hastocularis argus garwood , 2014 ( tetrophthalmi ) — upper carboniferous ( montceau-les-mines , france ) kustarachne tenuipes scudder , 1890 ( eupnoi ? ) — upper carboniferous ( mazon creek , u.s . ) nemastomoides elaveris thevenin , 1901 ( dyspnoi : † nemastomoididae ) — upper carboniferous ( commentary , france ) nemastomoides longipes petrunkevitch , 1913 ( dyspnoi : † nemastomoididae ) — upper carboniferous ( mazon creek , u.s . ) . mesozoic . currently , no fossil harvestmen are known from the triassic . so far , they are also absent from the lower cretaceous crato formation of brazil , a lagerstätte that has yielded many other terrestrial arachnids . an unnamed long-legged harvestman was reported from the early cretaceous of koonwarra , victoria , australia , which may be a eupnoi . a fossil of halitherses grimaldii , a long-legged dyspnoi with large eyes , was found in burmese amber dating from approximately 100 mya . it has been suggested that this may be related to the ortholasmatinae ( nemastomatidae ) . . cenozoic . unless otherwise noted , all species are from the eocene . trogulus longipes haupt , 1956 ( dyspnoi : trogulidae ) — geiseltal , germany philacarus hispaniolensis ( laniatores : samoidae ? ) — dominican amber kimula species ( laniatores : kimulidae ) — dominican amber hummelinckiolus silhavyi cokendolpher & poinar , 1998 ( laniatores : samoidae ) — dominican amber caddo dentipalpis ( eupnoi : caddidae ) — baltic amber dicranopalpus ramiger ( koch & berendt , 1854 ) ( eupnoi : phalangiidae ) — baltic amber opilio ovalis ( eupnoi : phalangiidae ? ) — baltic amber cheiromachus coriaceus menge , 1854 ( eupnoi : phalangiidae ? ) — baltic amber leiobunum longipes ( eupnoi : sclerosomatidae ) — baltic amber histricostoma tuberculatum ( dyspnoi : nemastomatidae ) — baltic amber mitostoma denticulatum ( dyspnoi : nemastomatidae ) — baltic amber nemastoma incertum ( dyspnoi : nemastomatidae ) — baltic amber sabacon claviger ( dyspnoi : sabaconidae ) — baltic amber petrunkevitchiana oculata ( petrunkevitch , 1922 ) ( eupnoi : phalangioidea ) — florissant fossil beds national monument , usa ( oligocene ) proholoscotolemon nemastomoides ( laniatores : cladonychiidae ) — baltic amber siro platypedibus ( cyphophthalmi : sironidae ) — bitterfeld amber amauropilio atavus ( cockerell , 1907 ) ( eupnoi : sclerosomatidae ) — florissant , usa ( oligocene ) amauropilio lacoei ( a . lawei ? ) ( petrunkevitch , 1922 ) — florissant , usa ( oligocene ) pellobunus proavus cokendolpher , 1987 ( laniatores : samoidae ) — dominican amber phalangium species ( eupnoi : phalangiidae ) — near rome , italy ( quaternary )