Noto

history . the old town , noto antica , lies directly north on mount alveria . a city of sicel origin , it was known as netum in ancient times . in 263 bce the city was granted to hiero ii by the romans . according to legend , daedalus stayed in the city after his flight over the ionian sea , as did hercules after his seventh task . during the roman era , it opposed the magistrate verres . in 866 it was conquered by the muslims , who elevated the city to become a capital of one of the three valli of sicily ( the val di noto ) . in 1091 , it became the last islamic stronghold in sicily to fall to the christians . later it became a rich norman city . in the 16th and 17th centuries , the city was home to several notable intellectual figures , including giovanni aurispa , jurists andrea barbazio and antonio corsetto , as well as architect matteo carnelivari and composer mario capuana . in 1503 king ferdinand iii granted it the title of civitas ingeniosa ( '' ingenious city '' ) . in the following centuries , the city expanded , growing beyond its medieval limits , and new buildings , churches and convents were built . the medieval town of noto was virtually razed by the 1693 sicily earthquake . distinta relatione dello spauentoso eccidio cagionato da'terremoti ultimamente con replicate scosse , accaduto a 9 & 11 di gennaro di 1693 regno di sicilia by alessandro burgos , palermo and naples , 1893 . over half the population is said to have died from the earthquake . storia della città di noto , by salvatore russo ferruggia , pappalardo publisher , 1838 ) : page 66 . it was decided to re-build the town at the present site , on the left bank of the river asinaro , closer to the ionian shore . these circumstances have led this town to have a unique architectural homogeneity , since the core of the town was all built over the next decades after the calamity in what is a typical and highly preserved example of sicilian baroque . the layout followed a grid system by giovanni battista landolina and utilized the sloping hillside for scenographic effects . the architects rosario gagliardi , francesco sortino and others each participated in designing multiple structures . the town was dubbed the '' stone garden '' by cesare brandi and is currently listed among unesco 's world heritage sites . many of the newer structures are built of a soft tufa stone , which assume a honey tonality under sunlight . parts of the cathedral , however , unexpectedly collapsed in 1996 . the city , which had lost its provincial capital status in 1817 , rebelled against the house of bourbon on 16 may 1860 , leaving its gates open to giuseppe garibaldi and i mille . five months later , on 21 october , a plebiscite sealed the annexation of noto to piedmont . in 1844 , noto was named a diocese , but in 1866 suffered the abolition of the religious guilds , which had been deeply linked to the city 's structures and buildings . noto was freed from the fascist dictatorship of benito mussolini in july 1943 . the notinesi people voted in favour of the monarchy in the referendum of 1946 . main sights . noto is famous for its buildings from the early 18th century , many of which are considered to be among the finest examples of sicilian baroque style . it is a place of many religious buildings and several palaces . palazzi and other buildings . palazzo ducezio , the current town hall . designed by vincenzo sinatra , it houses neo-classical style frescos by antonio mazza . palazzo astuto . palazzo di villadorata on via nicolaci which was built by p . labisi in 1733 . palazzo di lorenzo del castelluccio town library . religious buildings . noto cathedral ( cattedrale di san nicolò di mira , finished in 1776 ) . church of santa caterina . church of san corrado . church of the collegio di san carlo . church of the sacro nome di gesu . monastery of santa chiara ( 1735 ) , designed by gagliardi . it has an oval plant , the interior divided by twelve columns housing a madonna with child from the 16th century . church of san michele arcangelo . church of santa maria della scala . santissimo salvatore : church and benedictine convent church of san nicola di mira . church of santa chiara , with a precious madonna ( by antonello gagini ) . church of san francesco d'assisi ( immacolata ) . church of the spirito santo . church of ecce homo . church of santa maria dell'arco . church of the anime sante del purgatorio ( '' holy souls of the purgatory '' ) . church of santa maria della rotonda . church of the santissima trinità . san carlo al corso : church by rosario gagliardi ) church of santa maria del carmelo . church of san pietro martire . church of san michele arcangelo . san domenico : church by rosario gagliardi church of sant'antonio abate . church of santa caterina . church of the crociferio di san camillo . san girolamo or church of montevergine church of santissimo salvatore . church of san andrea apostolo . church of san pietro delle rose ( saints peter and paul ) . church of the ss . crocifisso . church of sant'egidio vescovo . church of santa maria del gesù . church of annunziata . church of santa agata . archaeological sites . the remains of noto 's ancient structures are almost entirely hidden beneath the ruins of the mediaeval town , except for three chambers cut into the rock . one is noted by an inscription in the library at noto to have belonged to a gymnasium , while the other two were heroa ( shrines of heroes ) . explorations have discovered four cemeteries dating to the third sicel period and one from the greek period . among other finds are catacombs of the christian period and several byzantine tombs . about south of noto , on the left bank of the tellaro ( helorus ) river , stands a stone column about high , which is believed to be a memorial to the surrender of nicias . in the 3rd century bc , a tomb was excavated in the rectangular area which surrounds it , destroying an apparently pre-existing tomb . remnants of a later burial site belonging to the necropolis of the small town of helorus , to the southeast , have been discovered . the villa romana del tellaro is a roman villa located south of noto . culture . in the noto neighbourhood , a noto vlbi station was installed by the istituto di radioastronomia di bologna as part of the consiglio nazionale delle ricerche . it works in collaboration with a similar instrument in medicina , bologna . noto vlbi home page . noto.ira.inaf.it . retrieved on 18 december 2012 . the city has held an annual flower festival , the infiorata , every may since the 1980s , lining the corrado nicolaci with floral mosaics . l'infiorata di noto ( noto 's flower festival ) noto on-line : city of noto , unesco world heritage site one episode of the movie l'avventura ( 1960 ) directed by michelangelo antonioni was shot in noto and features views of its cathedral and square . . frazioni . baulì , buonivini ( meaning '' good wines '' ) , calabernardo , castelluccio , cipolla , coda di lupo , falconara , fondo morte , lenzavacche , lido di noto , madonna marina , pantano longarini , pietà san giovannello , reitani , rigolizia , san corrado di fuori , san lorenzo , san marco , san paolo , santa lucia , serra di vento , testa dell'acqua , vendicari and villa vela . economy . the local area is home to several quality wine producers . photogallery . image : noto 2008 img 1442.jpg theatre file : noto , duomo 03.1.jpg noto cathedral image : san domenico church01.jpg church of san domenico file : noto 2008 img 1392.jpg church of st . charles borromeo image : noto 2008 img 1384.jpg church of san francesco all'immacolata image : chiesa del carmine a noto.jpg church of the carmine image : noto flickr01.jpg arch image : noto 2008 img 1372.jpg church of the santissimo crocifisso image : noto , chiesa di santa chiara.jpg church of santa chiara image : via nicolaci noto-pjt.jpg via nicolaci . see also . sicilian baroque val di noto roman catholic diocese of noto . references . sicily and its islands , 2004 - ugo la rosa editore . further reading . adler , nancy lockwood . '' noto : a city rebuilt '' history today ( sept 1983 ) , vol . 33 issue 9 , pp 39–42 . external links . noto in sicily webcam on cathedral of san nicolò il portale su noto accommodation center of noto