The Master (Doctor Who)

audio plays . the master has made regular appearances in various radio drama produced by big finish . geoffrey beevers , derek jacobi , michelle gomez , eric roberts and john simm have all reprised the role from the television series . while mark gatiss , alex macqueen , gina mckee and milo parker portray versions of the master original to big finish . jon culshaw has performed as the roger delgado and anthony ainley incarnations of the master . the master appears in the big finish productions dust breeding , where geoffrey beevers reprised the role . the story reveals that , at some point after survival , the master 's trakenite body is damaged when he attempts to take control of a psychic weapon trapped in the painting the scream , which returns him to his walking corpse state once again . he is presented using the alias mr seta , another anagram of master . in master , the origin of the master and the doctor 's enmity is explored . as children , a school bully attempted to drown the master but was killed by the doctor in defense . unable to cope with the guilt and grief , the young doctor made a deal with death to take away his pain , inadvertently transferring the memories and guilt of the murder to the master . in the main plot , the seventh doctor ( sylvester mccoy ) has made another deal with death to remove the master 's memory and let him live in peace for ten years , in exchange for the master then becoming death 's champion . upon learning this , the master absolves the doctor of his actions as a child , before having his memories restored and becoming death 's servant once again . an alternate-universe master appears in the big finish audio play sympathy for the devil , voiced by mark gatiss , as part of the doctor who unbound series . in this version of events , an alternate third doctor — now voiced by david warner — does not arrive for his exile on earth until 1997 . without the doctor 's help , unit was unable to cope with a series of extraterrestrial disasters and the political landscape of the planet changed drastically . stranded on earth , the master worked as an advisor to the united nations . this version of the master later appears in big finish 's the new adventures of bernice summerfield range , opposite warner 's doctor , when bernice summerfield is temporarily pulled into the unbound universe . he later escapes to benny 's universe and is recruited by the daleks to stop a plan by the war master that threatens to completely destroy the universe . the master was set to appear in the television story the hollows of time , proposed for the show 's 23rd season , but ultimately never produced . when the story was adapted by big finish for their lost stories range , while colin baker and nicola bryant voiced their original roles as the sixth doctor and peri , rights to the master could not be obtained ( and anthony ainley had died ) , so the role of professor stream ( originally meant as the master 's alias—another anagram ) was played by david garfield and left ambiguous as to his true identity , the story presented as a semi-flashback with the doctor and peri 's memories distorted so that they can not clearly recall certain key details . the master , played by geoffrey beevers , returns in the fourth doctor audio plays trail of the white worm , the oseidon adventure , the evil one , requiem for the rocket men and death match . beevers also appears in the fiftieth anniversary story the light at the end , where he attempts to erase the doctor 's travels by using an advanced weapon to erase the tardis from existence , and in the companion chronicle mastermind , which looks at how he stole a new body in the early twentieth century after his essence escaped from the eighth doctor 's tardis , and survived by possessing a series of human hosts until he tricked unit into helping him regain access to his tardis . alex macqueen plays a new incarnation of the master - existing after eric roberts ' incarnation ( and the subsequent corpse form played by beevers ) - in the seventh doctor release unit : dominion pretending to be a future version of the doctor before his true identity is revealed . he goes on to become a recurring antagonist in the eighth doctor 's dark eyes series where it is explained that the time lords resurrected the master to fight in an approaching conflict , implied to be the time war . the events surrounding the master 's resurrection were depicted in the ravenous series five years later . chris finney plays a character named 'keith potter ' in the story the end of the line from the audio anthology the sixth doctor : the last adventure , who is later revealed to be an avatar under the control of the master . the master , played by geoffrey beevers , makes a cameo appearance in series 10 of the doctor who spin-off jago & litefoot , and later featured as the main villain for the 11th series . to mark forty-five years since the master 's first appearance , big finish released a trilogy of stories featuring the geoffrey beevers and alex macqueen incarnations of the master in 2016 . and you will obey me features the beevers master encountering the fifth doctor , while vampire of the mind pits the sixth doctor against macqueen 's master . in both stories , the two masters are characterised very differently from their previous appearances . in the final story of the trilogy - the two masters - it is explained that the two masters swapped bodies after the macqueen master went back in time and caused the event that gave the beevers master his emaciated corpse form . this results in a universe-destroying paradox which is fixed by the seventh doctor , returning the two masters to their rightful bodies and erasing their memories of the events . in december 2017 , derek jacobi reprised his role as the master for the war master , an ongoing series of audios set during the time war , having originally appeared in the 2007 episode '' utopia '' . the first series ends with the master using a chameleon arch to turn himself into an infant human , setting up the events of utopia . subsequent series take place earlier in the war master 's life and depict him getting involved with various battles in the time war , sometimes at the behest of the time lords and sometimes for his own ends . mark gatiss made a guest appearance as the alternate-universe master in series four . paul mcgann briefly plays the master in series five . jacobi has also appeared as the war master in several other big finish ranges , including unit : cyber-reality and the first volume of gallifrey : time war . james dreyfus portrays an early incarnation of the master opposite david bradley as the first doctor in doctor who : the first doctor adventures . dreyfus also appears in the second doctor audio the home guard and the seventh doctor audio the psychic circus . in may 2018 , it was announced that the fifth series of the diary of river song would feature the title character , river song , encountering four incarnations of the master . as well as beevers and jacobi returning , this release saw eric roberts and michelle gomez make their big finish debuts as their incarnations of the master . like jacobi , michelle gomez also performs her incarnation of the master ( renamed missy ) for an ongoing audio series . missy premiered in february 2019 and featured the monk played by rufus hound . the second series introduced a character known as the lumiat - revealed to be the next incarnation of the master , the immediate successor to missy - played by gina mckee . it is explained that , after her '' poetic '' death at the hands of her predecessor , missy used an elysian field to transfer her consciousness into a duplicate body created from her own dying cells and trigger regeneration . motivated by her recent attempt at redemption , she edited the duplicate to remove all the negative aspects of her personality and became a benevolent force in the universe , adopting the title lumiat . missy encounters the lumiat trying to undo some of her earlier incarnation 's evil deeds . sickened by her future self , missy kills the lumiat with a tce and abandons her to regenerate , implying the process might cause them to return to evil . beevers , jacobi , roberts and gomez appeared in the fourth volume of the eighth doctor series ravenous in october 2019 . in planet of dust , the doctor and his companions encounter the burnt master ( beevers ) on the planet parrak , where it is explained that he has once again returned to his emaciated corpse form following his time in the body of bruce ( roberts ) before being killed by the ravenous . in day of the master , the eighth doctor encounters the bruce master while his companions liv chenka and helen sinclair are confronted by the war master ( jacobi ) and missy ( gomez ) respectively . by the end of the story , the war master , missy and the bruce master are sent by the time lords to the tomb where the burnt master is buried , using technology acquired earlier in the story to grant him a new regeneration cycle and , it is implied , turning him into the alex macqueen incarnation of the master . the story also suggests the bruce master has his memory wiped and is flung into the time vortex by his future selves , ultimately leading him back to parrax in his burnt master form , to preserve the timeline . as part of the time lord victorious multi-platform storyline , a pair of short trips stories introduced the roger delgado and anthony ainley incarnations of the master to big finish - master thief by sophie iles and lesser evils by simon guerrier were released in october 2020 with jon culshaw serving as narrator and voicing both incarnations of the master . in january 2021 , to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the master 's first television appearance , big finish released masterful , a three-part special written by james goss uniting every living television and audio incarnation of the master ( other than sacha dhawan due to licensing ) . it saw john simm reprise his role as the harold saxon version of the master and introduced milo parker as a young incarnation of the master . beevers , gatiss , jacobi , macqueen , roberts and gomez all reprised their roles . gina mckee makes a cameo appearance as the lumiat and jon culshaw voices kamelion impersonating the ainley master . in the story , the saxon master has killed the doctor and taken control of the universe using an entropy wave that has destabilized his body and threatens to destroy the universe . he summons his previous selves in an attempt to steal their lives and heal himself . the intervention of missy , the alternate-universe master and jo grant thwarts saxon 's plans and , after discovering that the entropy wave is a sentient manifestation of the master from the future - their final incarnation , a being of pure rage and insanity - the war master kills his other incarnations ( including himself ) to cause a paradox and return the universe to normal . the special edition release included an original audiobook terror of the master written by trevor baxendale , narrated by jon culshaw , featuring the delgado master . eric roberts will return as the master for a three-part special release entitled master ! in march 2021 , alongside chase masterson as vienna salvatore . roberts reprised the role of the master onscreen for the first time since 1996 for a series of video teasers posted to social media by big finish ; starting with a halloween-themed video in november 2020 and subsequent christmas and valentine 's day messages . . short stories . eric saward included anthony ainley 's incarnation of the master in his short story , '' birth of a renegade '' , in the doctor who 20th anniversary special one-off magazine , published by radio times ( and in the united states by starlog ) in 1983 . in a short story by cavan scott and mark wright , '' the feast of the stone '' , an android version of the master is created by the doctor as an ally—albeit a slightly sinister one . exactly why the doctor created an android duplicate of the master is not revealed , but it is suggested that the doctor somehow extended the master 's life by doing so . the android is able to pilot the doctor 's tardis , but is physically unable to leave the ship . the master is seen to escape the eye of harmony in the short story '' forgotten '' by joseph lidster , published in short trips : the centenarian . the story ends with him left in 1906 in possession of a human male 's body . martha jones ' year long journey across a master-controlled planet earth is detailed in the short story collection the story of martha , which was released on 26 december 2008 . in the doctor who short ebook the spear of destiny by marcus sedgwick , featuring the third doctor , the master disguises himself as a viking called frey ( old norse for master ) and tries to take the holy lance . . webcasts . in 2003 , an android version of the character ( resembling the delgado version of the master , and voiced by derek jacobi ) appeared in the animated webcast scream of the shalka . this version 's master has some psychic abilities and attempts to hypnotise another character but is unable due to his powers being far weaker . at one point he mentions that the time lord council gave him a choice , permanent death or one last chance at life as the doctor 's assistant to make amends for all the harm he had caused the doctor over the years . . audio book . the killing stone ( bbv audio , read by richard franklin ) . computer game . doctor who : destiny of the doctors , played by ainley . this was his last performance as the master before his death . lego dimensions , featuring a lego version of missy voiced by gomez . . role playing game . the doctor who rpg published by fasa in 1985 has two modules outlining the master 's personal history , a timeline of his activities and an inventory of much of the equipment he has obtained during his travels . most notably , the modules identify the meddling monk as an alias the master has used in his early attempts to alter the history of earth . . board game . the 1980 board game doctor who : the game of time & space features information on the characters within the game . of note , it states that '' the monk '' , the war chief and the master are all the same person . parody . in the comic relief sketch doctor who : the curse of fatal death , the master was played by jonathan pryce . . notes .