Salford

landmarks . although salford lacks the number of grade ii ( and above ) listed buildings accorded to its neighbour ( manchester ) , it does possess a wide range of both classical and modern architecture , as well as some unique structures , including the 19th-century barton swing aqueduct . one of salford 's oldest buildings is the grade i listed ordsall hall , a tudor mansion and former stately home in nearby ordsall . it dates back over 750 years , although the oldest surviving parts of the present hall were built in the 15th century . kersal cell is a grade ii listed 16th-century timber-framed manor house , currently in use as a private residence . closer to the centre of the settlement , the tower of the church of the sacred trinity dates from 1635 , the main building from 1752 . it was restored between 1871 and 1874 . another grade ii listed building , salford cathedral , is a decorated neo-gothic roman catholic church built between 1844 and 1848 . salford is linked to manchester by a series of bridges , including the grade ii listed blackfriars bridge , completed in 1820 . the settlement is dominated by the several railway viaducts built in the 19th century . salford ( old ) town hall , situated in bexley square off chapel street , is a neo-classical brick building dressed in stone , designed by richard lane . public swimming baths were provided , on blackfriars road . now in commercial use , the two-storey building was constructed in about 1890 from brick , with terracotta dressings and a part-glazed roof . the university of salford campus , visible partly from the crescent , contains a number of interesting buildings including the royal art gallery and the peel building . salford lads ' club is a recreational club established in 1903 and located in ordsall . it is a listed building and gained international fame in 1986 when the pop band the smiths posed in front of it for the inside cover of their album the queen is dead . a report by english heritage said '' the building is thought to be the most complete example of this rare form of social provision to survive in england . '' in 2007 , the manchester evening news reported that the club was third in a nationwide hunt to find the most iconic buildings in the country . . transport . one of the earliest transport schemes in salford was constructed by the turnpike trust , by an act of parliament of 1753 . turnpike roads had a huge impact on the nature of business transport around the region . packhorses were superseded by wagons , and merchants would no longer accompany their caravans to markets and fairs , instead sending agents with samples , and dispatching the goods at a later date . however , road transport was not without its problems , and in 1808 the manchester bolton & bury canal was connected to the river irwell . in the main a coal-carrying canal , it provided a valuable boost to the economies of salford and manchester , with a large number of wharves at its terminus in salford . sixteen years later john greenwood started the first bus operation from pendleton to market street , manchester . the liverpool and manchester railway & nbsp ; – the world 's first steam driven inter-city passenger railway & nbsp ; – opened through salford on 15 september 1830 . the railway was primarily built to provide faster transport of materials and goods between the port of liverpool and mills in manchester and surrounding towns , and stopped along the route at ordsall lane railway station . almost eight years later the manchester and bolton railway was opened , terminating at salford central railway station . by 1801 the population of both manchester and salford was about 94,000 . by 1861 this had risen to about 460,000 , and so in the same year john greenwood jr . made an application to salford borough council and to the pendleton turnpike trust , to build a tramway from pendleton to albert bridge in salford . the system was innovative in that the rails were designed to be 'flush ' with the road surface , with a third central rail to accommodate a perambulator wheel attached to the front axle of the omnibus . approval was granted and work commenced immediately , with the horse-pulled tramway finished in september 1861 . it remained in use for a further eleven years when the condition of the track had deteriorated such that the council ordered it removed . the tramways act 1870 allowed councils to construct their own tramways , and on 17 may 1877 the 'manchester and salford tramways ' opened for business . the network of lines was largely complete by september 1880 , the company changed its name to the manchester carriage and tramways company , and the system reached its peak in the 1890s . a steam tramway was opened on 12 april 1883 from bury to higher broughton . the vehicles provoked letters of complaints from residents about the associated noise , dirt , and grease , and by 1888 the route was eventually curtailed to besses o ' th ' barn . electric trams were a common sight in early 20th century salford , and had from 1901 replaced the earlier horse-drawn vehicles . a network of lines crossed the region , with coordinated services running through salford , manchester and the surrounding areas . many served the new suburban housing and industrial developments built at the time , but in 1947 they were withdrawn in favour of more practical services & nbsp ; – buses . the city is served by a complex road infrastructure , with connections from the m602 motorway to several major motorways , and a-roads including the a57 regent road and the a6042 trinity way . salford city council has also created both advisory and mandatory cycle lanes across the city . public transport in salford is now co-ordinated by transport for greater manchester ( tfgm ) , a county-wide public body with direct operational responsibilities such as supporting ( and in some cases running ) local bus services , and managing integrated ticketing in greater manchester . salford city council is responsible for the administration and maintenance of public roads and footpaths throughout the city . the city is served by two railway stations , salford central and salford crescent . most train services are provided by northern , although salford crescent is also served by transpennine express as part of its transpennine north west network . buses run to destinations throughout salford , the city of salford , across greater manchester and further afield : pendleton is served by a route to preston and blackpool . the eccles line of the manchester metrolink runs through salford , with stations at exchange quay , salford quays , anchorage , harbour city , broadway , langworthy , weaste and more recently mediacityuk . the line was opened in two stages , in 1999 and 2000 , as phase 2 of the system 's development . . education . despite the rapid progress made during the industrial revolution , by 1851 education in salford was judged '' inadequate to the wants of the population '' , and for those children who did get schooling '' order and cleanliness were little regarded & nbsp ; . they were for the most part crowded in close and dirty rooms '' . salford has thirty-two primary schools , and five secondary schools . until recently there were three main 6th form and fe colleges : pendleton college , eccles college and salford college . they merged to create salford city college in january 2009 . the university of salford , a plate glass university , is one of four in greater manchester . it has its origins in the former royal technical college , which was granted the status of a college of advanced technology ( cat ) , on 2 november 1956 . in november 1963 the robbins report recommended that the cats should become technological universities ; and on 4 april 1967 a charter was established creating the university of salford . the university is undergoing £150m of redevelopment through investment in new facilities , including a £10m law school and a £22m building for health and social care , which were opened in 2006 . the university of salford has over 19,000 students , and was ranked 81st in the uk by the times newspaper . in 2007 , the university received nearly 17,000 & nbsp ; applications for 3,660 & nbsp ; places , and the drop-out rate from the university was 25 % . of the students graduating , 50 % gained first class or 2:1 degrees , below the national average of about 55 % . the level of student satisfaction in the 2009 survey ranged from 62 % to 94 % , depending on subject . . religion . from the formation of the hundred of salford , the entire area was within the diocese of lichfield . this diocese was divided in 1541 , upon the creation of the see of chester . early worship took place at the parish church of manchester , however a small chantry chapel existed in 1368 on the only bridge linking the two settlements . in the 16th century , it was converted into a dungeon , and was later demolished in 1779 . in 1634–35 , humphrey booth , a wealthy local merchant , opened a chapel of ease , which a year later was consecrated as the chapel of sacred trinity ( the parish of sacred trinity was created in 1650 ) . hartwell , c . , et al . ( 2004 ) lancashire : manchester and the south-east . new haven : yale university press ; p . 619 john wesley preached in the building , before his break with the anglican church . however , upon his return in 1747 , he preached in the open , at salford cross . the chapel was rebuilt in about 1752–53 , although the tower probably belonged to the original building . . it was restored in 1871–74 by the architect j . p . holden and a chapel was added to the south-east in 1934 . there are three galleries , supported by tuscan ( doric according to hartwell ( 2004 ) ) columns . the wooden roof is victorian . pevsner , n . ( 1969 ) lancashire ; 1 : the industrial and commercial south . harmondsworth : penguin ; p . 391 chapel 1934 : hartwell ( 2004 ) it is now a grade ii listed building . salford cathedral is one of the largest catholic cathedrals in northern england . it was built between 1844 and 1848 , and was listed as a grade ii building in 1980 . it is at the centre of the roman catholic diocese of salford , which was founded in 1850 as one of the first post-reformation catholic dioceses in britain . its current boundaries encompass manchester and a large part of north west england . the bishop of salford 's official residence is at wardley hall . salford deanery is in the salford archdeaconry of the church of england . the sixteen churches in the deanery include the parish church of saint paul the apostle in paddington , st . thomas ' in pendleton , st philip with st stephen in salford and st clement 's in ordsall . the greek orthodox church of the annunciation , manchester was founded in 1861 , in broughton . it was established by the local greek immigrant community , who had arrived in the area soon after the greek war of independence in the early 19th century . it replaced an earlier place of worship on cheetham hill , and an earlier chapel on wellington street . it is the oldest purpose-built orthodox church in the country . . sports . salford has a notable history in sports , which includes hosting some of the events in the 2002 commonwealth games : rugby league , speedway , and horse racing . salford had a venue for horse racing since the 17th century ; the earliest record of racing at kersal moor dates from 1687 . '' salford red devils is the city 's rugby league club and has been based in salford since 1873 . they participate in the super league . salford now play all home games at the aj bell stadium . junior rugby league is also played within salford 's boundaries , with langworthy reds , folly lane and salford city roosters amongst other clubs providing playing personnel to the senior club . the premiership side sale sharks play their home games at the aj bell stadium since the start of the 2012–13 season salford quays has been used as a major international triathlon site , but a 2009 aquathlon was cancelled because of a lack of competitors . during the early part of the 20th century speedway was staged at albion stadium . prior to salford city 's promotion to the football league in 2019 , salford was one of the largest settlements in the uk without a league football team ; . in the formative years of the sport the region 's football heartland was in east manchester , with few teams to the west . salford city are salford 's only representatives in the football league , playing in league two , the fourth tier of english football , as of the 2019–20 season . culture . salford museum and art gallery opened in november 1850 as the royal museum and public library . it was built on the site of lark hill estate and mansion , which was purchased by public subscription . the park was named peel park after robert peel who contributed to the subscription fund . the library was the first unconditionally free public library in the country . harold brighouse 's play hobson 's choice takes place in the salford of 1880 , and the 1954 film version was shot in the town . walter greenwood 's 1933 novel love on the dole was set in a fictional area known as hanky park , said in the novel to be near salford , but in reality based on salford itself . . a more modern fictional setting influenced by the area is coronation streets weatherfield . . the salford of the 1970s was the setting for the bafta award winning east is east . salford was featured in the second series of the channel 4 programme the secret millionaire , screened in 2007 . salford is also home to the theatre venue studio salford . the folk song '' dirty old town '' , written by native ewan maccoll , is the origin of salford 's nickname . . local band doves released a song on their 2005 album some cities called '' shadows of salford '' . one of the most famous photographs of band the smiths shows them standing outside the salford lads club , and was featured in the artwork for their album the queen is dead . the videos for the timbaland song '' the way i are '' , and the justin timberlake song '' lovestoned '' were filmed in salford . . public services . under the requirements of the municipal corporations act 1835 , the county borough of salford was obliged to appoint a watch committee to establish a police force and appoint a chief constable . jenifer hart , reform of the borough police , 1835–1856 in the english historical review , vol . 70 , no . 276 , ( july 1955 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 411–427 on 1 june 1968 the manchester and salford city constabularies formed the manchester and salford police . since 1974 , home office policing in salford has been provided by the greater manchester police . the force 's '' ( f ) division '' has its headquarters for policing the city of salford at swinton , with further police stations in little hulton , higher broughton and salford . the fire service in the united kingdom is provided by the greater manchester fire and rescue service , whose headquarters are on a666 in nearby pendlebury . salford royal hospital dated back to 1830 and was extended in 1911 . it was closed and converted into flats . the modern salford royal , at hope , near the boundary with eccles , was opened in 1882 as the salford union infirmary . . later renamed hope hospital and then again as salford royal , . it is a large nhs hospital administrated by salford royal nhs foundation trust . in a 2006–07 review of all 394 nhs trusts in england by the healthcare commission , salford royal was one of 19 to be rated excellent in its quality of services and its use of resources . the north west ambulance service provides emergency patient transport . other forms of health care are provided for locally by several small clinics and surgeries . waste management is co-ordinated by the local authority via the greater manchester waste disposal authority . salford 's distribution network operator for electricity is united utilities ; there are no power stations in the city . united utilities also manages salford 's drinking and waste water . . notable people . people from salford are called salfordians , and the city has been the birthplace and home to notable people of national and international acclaim . amongst the most notable persons of historic significance with a connection to salford are emmeline pankhurst , one of the founders of the british suffragette movement , who lived in salford , and the scientist james prescott joule , who was born and raised in salford . . the novelist walter greenwood ( love on the dole ) and the dramatist shelagh delaney ( a taste of honey ) were both born in , and wrote about , salford . musicians bernard sumner and peter hook , who were members of joy division & nbsp ; – which later reformed as new order & nbsp ; – are both from salford . . notable salfordian sportspeople include former england football international and manchester united f.c . midfielder paul scholes , olympic javelin thrower shelley holroyd , english former snooker player mick price was born in the area and great britain and england rugby league international and current warrington wolves front-rower adrian morley . salford is also the hometown of the band happy mondays and punk poet john cooper clarke . composer sir peter maxwell davies , who was appointed master of the queen 's music in 2004 , was born in salford . actors albert finney and robert powell were both born and raised in salford . another notable resident of salford is eddie colman , the youngest of the manchester united players to die in the munich air disaster of 6 february 1958 , when only 21 . born at archie street in november 1936 , he lived in the area all his life and is buried at weaste cemetery . his former home was demolished in the early 1970s . geoff bent , another manchester united player who died at munich , was born in salford . journalist alistair cooke who wrote and broadcast '' letter from america '' for decades on the bbc was born in salford . see also . listed buildings in salford , greater manchester . references . bibliography . . external links . www.salford.gov.uk , salford city council