John Hume

early life and education . john hume was born in 1937 in derry , the son of anne ( née doherty ) and samuel hume . he had a mostly irish catholic background ; though his great-grandfather was a presbyterian immigrant into county donegal from scotland . hume was a student at st columb 's college and at st patrick 's college , maynooth , the leading catholic seminary in ireland and a recognised college of the national university of ireland , where he intended to study for the priesthood . among his teachers was the future tomás cardinal ó fiaich , a future primate of all ireland . hume did not complete his clerical studies but did obtain an m.a . degree in french and history from the college in 1958 , and then returned home to his native derry , where he became a teacher . he was a founding member of the credit union movement in the city and was chair of the university for derry committee in 1965 . gerald mcsheffrey , planning derry : planning and politics in northern ireland , p . 110 . hume became a leading figure in the civil rights movement in the late 1960s along with people such as hugh logue . hume was prominent in the unsuccessful fight to have northern ireland 's second university established in derry in the mid-sixties . after this campaign , john hume went on to be a prominent figure in the derry citizens ' action committee . the dcac was set up in the wake of 5 october march through derry which had caused much attention to be drawn towards the situation in northern ireland . the purpose of the dcac was to make use of the publicity surrounding recent events to bring to light grievances in derry that had been suppressed by the unionist government for years . the dcac , unlike northern ireland civil rights association ( nicra ) , was aimed specifically at a local campaign , improving the situation in derry for everyone , and maintaining a peaceful stance . the committee also had a stewards association that was there to prevent any violence at marches or sit-downs . . involvement in the credit union movement . hume , a founder member of derry credit union , became the youngest ever president of the irish league of credit unions at age 27 . he served in the role from 1964 to 1968 . he once said that '' all the things i 've been doing , it 's the thing i 'm proudest of because no movement has done more good for the people of ireland , north and south , than the credit union movement . '' . political career . hume became an independent nationalist member of the parliament of northern ireland in 1969 at the height of the civil rights campaign . he was elected to the northern ireland assembly in 1973 , and served as minister of commerce in the short-lived power-sharing executive in 1974 . he stood unsuccessfully for the westminster parliament for the londonderry constituency in october 1974 , and was elected for foyle in 1983 . in october 1971 he joined four westminster mps in a 48-hour hunger strike to protest at the internment without trial of hundreds of suspected irish republicans . state papers that have been released under the 30 year rule that an irish diplomat eight years later in 1979 believed hume supported the return of internment , however the sdlp have strenuously denied this . in 1977 , hume challenged a regulation under the civil authorities ( special powers ) act ( northern ireland ) 1922 which allowed any soldier to disperse an assembly of three or more people . the lord chief justice of northern ireland , lord lowry , held that the regulation was ultra vires under section 4 of the government of ireland act 1920 which forbade the parliament of northern ireland to make laws in respect of the army . robert lynd erskine lowry ; odnb . a founding member of the social democratic and labour party ( sdlp ) , he succeeded gerry fitt as its leader in 1979 . he also served as one of northern ireland 's three members of the european parliament and served on the faculty of boston college , from which he received an honorary degree in 1995 . hume was directly involved in 'secret talks ' with the british government and sinn féin , in an effort to bring sinn féin to the discussion table openly . the talks are speculated to have led directly to the anglo-irish agreement in 1985 . the vast majority of unionists rejected the agreement and staged a massive and peaceful public rally in belfast city centre to demonstrate their distaste . many republicans and nationalists also rejected it , as they had seen it as not going far enough . jonathan tonge ( 2002 ) . northern ireland : conflict and change . hume , however , continued dialogue with both governments and sinn féin . the '' hume–adams process '' eventually delivered the 1994 ira ceasefire which ultimately provided the relatively peaceful backdrop against which the good friday agreement was brokered . . reputation . hume is credited as being the thinker behind many political developments in northern ireland , from the power-sharing sunningdale agreement to the anglo-irish agreement and the belfast agreement . he won the nobel peace prize in 1998 alongside the then-leader of the ulster unionist party , david trimble . when david trimble became first minister , it was expected that hume would take the role of deputy first minister , being the leader of the second largest party , the sdlp . instead , this role was handed to seamus mallon , also of the sdlp . some political journalists cited a bad working relationship between hume and trimble , despite the two men collecting the nobel prize together . on his retirement from the sdlp leadership in 2001 , hume was praised across the political divide , even by his long-time opponent , fellow mp and mep , the rev . ian paisley . hume held the tip o'neill chair in peace studies at the university of ulster , currently funded by the ireland funds . . retirement . on 4 february 2004 , hume announced his complete retirement from politics and was succeeded by mark durkan as sdlp leader . he did not contest the 2004 european election ( when his seat was won by bairbre de brún of sinn féin ) , nor did he run in the 2005 general election , in which mark durkan retained the foyle constituency for the sdlp . hume and his wife , pat , continued to be active in promoting european integration , issues around global poverty and the credit union movement . he was also a supporter of the campaign for the establishment of a united nations parliamentary assembly , an organisation which campaigns for democratic reformation of the united nations . in retirement , he continued to speak publicly , including a visit to seton hall university in new jersey in 2005 , the first summer university of democracy of the council of europe ( strasbourg , 10–14 july 2006 ) , and at st thomas university , fredericton , new brunswick , canada , on 18 july 2007 . a building added to the national university of ireland , maynooth , was named after him . hume held the position of club president of his local football team , derry city f.c . , which he supported all his life . he was a patron of the children 's charity plan international ireland . during his final years hume suffered from dementia , which first started displaying symptoms in the late 1990s . . death . john hume died in the early hours of 3 august 2020 at a nursing home in derry , at the age of 83 . on his death , former labour leader and prime minister tony blair said : '' john hume was a political titan ; a visionary who refused to believe the future had to be the same as the past . '' the dalai lama said on twitter : '' john hume 's deep conviction in the power of dialogue and negotiations to resolve conflict was unwavering . it was his leadership and his faith in the power of negotiations that enabled the 1998 good friday agreement to be reached . his steady persistence set an example for us all to follow . '' . see also . list of peace activists . awards and honours . ll.d . ( honoris causa ) , boston college , 1995 . ( one of 44 honorary doctorates hume was awarded ) ll.d . ( honoris causa ) , nui galway , 1996 four freedoms , freedom of speech medal recipient , 1996 golden doves for peace journalistic prize , 1997 nobel prize for peace ( co-recipient ) , 1998 . officier de legion of honour , france , 1999 . martin luther king award , 1999 irish news , 6 january 1999 international gandhi peace prize , 2001 . golden plate award of the american academy of achievement , 2002 . freedom of two cities ; derry in 2000 & cork in 2004 . honorary d.litt . , st . thomas university , fredericton , n.b . , 2007 st . thomas university – fredericton , new brunswick , canada honorary patron , university philosophical society , trinity college dublin , 2007 . ireland 's greatest ( public poll conducted by rté ) , 2010 knight of saint gregory , 2012 . further reading . denis haughey and sean farren , 'john hume : irish peacemaker , ' four courts press , dublin , 2015 john hume , 'personal views , politics , peace and reconciliation in ireland , ' town house , dublin , 1996 . john hume , ‘ derry beyond the walls : social and economic aspects of the growth of derry , ' ulster historical foundation , belfast , 2002 . barry white , 'john hume : a statesman of the troubles , ' blackstaff , belfast , 1984 george drower , 'john hume : peacemaker , ' gollancz , 1995 george drower , 'john hume : man of peace , ' vista , london , 1996 paul routledge , 'john hume : a biography , ' harper-collins , london , 1997 gerard murray , 'john hume and the sdlp : impact and survival in northern ireland , ' irish academic press , dublin , 1998 . quotes . '' over the years , the barriers of the past—the distrust and prejudices of the past—will be eroded , and a new society will evolve , a new ireland based on agreement and respect for difference . '' '' i thought that i had a duty to help those that were n't as lucky as me . '' . references . external links . including the nobelprize lecture on december 10 , 1998 hume 's address to the college historical society of trinity college dublin , on northern ireland tip o'neill chair in peace studies at the university of ulster