Ottoman military reforms

reforms of selim iii . when selim iii came to the throne in 1789 , an ambitious effort of military reform was launched , geared towards securing the ottoman empire . the sultan and those who surrounded him were conservative and desired to preserve the status quo . no one in power in the empire had any interest in social transformation . selim iii in 1789 to 1807 set up the '' nizam-i cedid '' new order army to replace the inefficient and outmoded imperial army . the old system depended on janissaries , who had largely lost their military effectiveness . selim closely followed western military forms . it would be expensive for a new new treasury 'irad-i cedid ' to be established . the result was the porte now had an efficient , european-trained army equipped with modern weapons . however it had fewer than 10,000 soldiers in an era when western armies were ten to fifty times larger . furthermore , the sultan was upsetting the well-established traditional political powers . as a result it was rarely used , apart from its use against napoleon expeditionary force at gaza and rosetta . the new army was dissolved by reactionary elements with the overthrow of selim in 1807 , but it became the model of the new ottoman army created later in the 19th century . stanford j . shaw , '' the nizam-1 cedid army under sultan selim iii 1789-1807 . '' oriens 18.1 ( 1966 ) : 168-184 online . david nicolle , armies of the ottoman empire 1775-1820 ( osprey , 1998 ) . . introduction of advisors . western military advisors were imported as advisors but their abilities to enact change were limited . a parade of france officers were brought in , and none of them could do a great deal . one example of an advisor who achieved limited success was the françois baron de tott , a french officer . he did succeed in having a new foundry built to make artillery . as well he directed the construction of a new naval base . unfortunately it was almost impossible for him to divert soldiers from the regular army into the new units . the new ships and guns that made it into service were too few to have much of an influence on the ottoman army and de tott returned home . when they had requested french help , general napoleon bonaparte was to be sent to constantinople in 1795 to help organize ottoman artillery . he did not go , for just days before he was to embark for the near east he proved himself useful to the directory by putting down a parisian mob in the whiff of grapeshot and was kept in france . memoirs of napoleon bonaparte p.29 history of napoleon , emperor of the french , king of italy , etc . by john jacob lehmanowsky p.4 . new army system . the most important change was the creation of an elite new infantry unit ; the nizam-i djedid was set up with western uniforms , weapons , and training . this group would offend the janissary . once elite forces , the janissaries had become a conservative elite using their military power to advance themselves commercially and politically . in 1806 the janissaries , with support of the ulema and the provincial governors , revolted against the sultan and his new force and replaced him with mustafa iv . reforms of mahmud ii . in 1808 mustafa iv was replaced by mahmud ii with martial law of alemdar mustafa pasha who restarted the reform efforts . his first task was to ally with the janissaries in order to break the power of the provincial governors . he then turned on the janissaries , massacring them in their barracks in istanbul and the provincial capitals in 1826 , which is known as the auspicious incident . the sultan now set himself to replace the janissaries by other regular troops . the russo-turkish war ( 1828–1829 ) did not give him time to organize a new army , and the sultan was forced to fight with these young and undisciplined recruits against the veterans of the tsar . the war was brought to a close by the disastrous treaty of adrianople . while the reforms in question were mainly implemented to improve the military , the most notable development that arose out of these efforts was a series of schools teaching everything from math to medicine to train new officers . reforms of abdulmejid i . sultan abdulmejid i enjoyed several years of peace , which enabled him to form a powerful and well disciplined army that was established at the beginning of the year 1842 . the chain-of-command in the general staff of each army was composed of a commander-in-chief , two lieutenant-generals , three brigadiers of infantry , one of whom commands the reserve , two brigadiers of cavalry , and one brigadier of artillery . in each corps there were three regiments of infantry , two of cavalry , and one of artillery , with thirty-three guns . the total strength of these twelve regiments of active forces was 30,000 men , but it was diminished in time of peace by furlough to an effective strength of about 25,000 men in three of the six armies , as well as 15,000 troops in the other three , a consequence of the recruiting system being as yet incomplete in its application all over the ottoman empire . the whole establishment of this branch amounts , therefore , to 180,000 men , belonging to the active service , but its effective strength is at present 123,000 . the reserve of four of the six armies consisted of eleven regiments , six of which were infantry , four of cavalry , and one of artillery . the total combined force equalled 12,000 troops , while the other two armies have not met their reserve of soldiers who have served five years . in time of war , however , the reserve would form two corps of 25,000 men in each army ; giving a total of 300,000 . the two services , therefore , as they stood , formed an effective force of 135,000 men ; and when their full strength shall have been filled up it will amount to 480,000 . besides these six armies there were four detached corps . these corps raise the effective strength of the standing army to 365,000 men . deployment at the time consisted of the following : the island of crete was assigned three regiments of infantry and one of cavalry , in all 11,000 men ; the pashalik of tripoli in africa was assigned one regiment of infantry and one of cavalry , about 5,000 strong ; the pashalik of tunis was assigned one regiment of infantry and one of cavalry , about 5,000 strong . aside from deployed troops , the ottoman military also had the following units : the central artillery corps , a standing brigade of sappers and miners with engineer officers , the veteran artillery brigade , permanent artillery garrisons of the fortresses on the hellespont , the bosphorus , the danube , in serbia , on the adriatic , the coast of asia minor , in the islands of the archipelago , the southern shores of the black sea , constituting a combined force of approximately 9,000 troops . besides augmentation of 32,000 men by the submission of bosnia and northern albania to the new system ; and a further increase of 40,000 men , which serbia had arranged to furnish , 18,000 men served in egypt , which would act to reinforce the reserve of the fifth army . the marines , sailors , and workmen , enrolled in brigades that amounted to 34,000 total men . the grand total of armed men at the disposal of ottoman empire at the time could be calculated at no less than 664,000 men . in addition , the ottomans could call-up occasional levies , which were more easily and efficiently utilized in the ottoman empire than in any other country at the time . after years of peace and stability the modernized army was put to test in the crimean war . reforms of abdul hamid ii . abdul hamid ii attached utmost importance to the reorganization of the military . as early as 1880 he sought , and two years later secured , german assistance , which culminated in the appointment of lt . col . kohlcr and , finally , colmar von der goltz as military advisors . the curriculum of harbiye ( war college ) was specialized further to train staff officers in the european style . the school ’ s name was changed to mekteb-i fununu harb ( school of war science ) . it was during his reign that the officers ’ training was upgraded and regularized , starting with the mid-level military rt2diye and idadi schools and culminating in the mekteb-i harbiye ( war college ) or , for the most capable , in the erkan-i harbiye ( chiefs of staff ) . the last , as a concept and an organization , was largely the work of von der goltz . however , although the consensus that abdulhamid favoured the modernization of the ottoman army and the professionalization of the officer was fairly general , it seems that he neglected the military during the last fifteen years of his reign , and he also cut down the military budget . the problem with the army ( numbering ca . 700,000 at the end of the century ) , besides the officers ’ constant opposition to field exercises , was the growing number of underpaid officers , and the lack of a proper retirement system . the annual army expenditures were some 7,756,000 liras out of a total national budget of 18,927,000 liras for 1897 ; when the debt administration claimed 6,483.000 liras , little was left for investment in economic development . notes . see also . military of the ottoman empire ottoman empire auspicious incident