Cesare Lombroso

early life and education . lombroso was born in verona , kingdom of lombardy–venetia , on 6 november 1835 to a wealthy jewish family . '' cesare lombroso , a brief biography '' , brain and mind ( 1997 ) . his father was aronne lombroso , a tradesman from verona , and his mother was zippora ( or zefira ) levi from chieri near turin . cesare lombroso descended from a line of rabbis , which led him to study a wide range of topics in university . he studied literature , linguistics , and archæology at the universities of padua , vienna , and paris . despite pursuing these studies in university , lombroso eventually settled on pursuing a degree in medicine , which he graduated with from the university of pavia . . career . lombroso was initially an army surgeon , beginning in 1859 . in 1866 he was appointed visiting lecturer at pavia , and later took charge of the insane asylum at pesaro in 1871 . he became professor of forensic medicine and hygiene at turin in 1878 . that year he wrote his most important and influential work , l'uomo delinquente , which went through five editions in italian and was published in various european languages . three of his works had been translated into english by 1900 , including a partial translation of the female offender published in 1895 and read in august of that year by the late nineteenth century english novelist , george gissing . lombroso later became professor of psychiatry ( 1896 ) and criminal anthropology ( 1906 ) at the same university . . personal life and final years . lombroso married nina de benedetti on 10 april 1870 . they had five children together , one of whom—gina—would go on to publish a summary of lombroso 's work after his death . later in life lombroso came to be influenced by gina 's husband , guglielmo ferrero , who led him to believe that not all criminality comes from one 's inborn factors and that social factors also played a significant role in the process of shaping a criminal . he died in turin in 1909 . . concept of criminal atavism . s , and early humans and to some extent preserved , he said , in modern '' savages '' . the behavior of these biological '' throwbacks '' will inevitably be contrary to the rules and expectations of modern civilized society . through years of postmortem examinations and anthropometric studies of criminals , the insane , and normal individuals , lombroso became convinced that the '' born criminal '' ( reo nato , a term given by ferri ) could be anatomically identified by such items as a sloping forehead , ears of unusual size , asymmetry of the face , prognathism , excessive length of arms , asymmetry of the cranium , and other '' physical stigmata '' . specific criminals , such as thieves , rapists , and murderers , could be distinguished by specific characteristics , he believed . lombroso also maintained that criminals had less sensitivity to pain and touch ; more acute sight ; a lack of moral sense , including an absence of remorse ; more vanity , impulsiveness , vindictiveness , and cruelty ; and other manifestations , such as a special criminal argot and the excessive use of tattooing . besides the '' born criminal '' , lombroso also described '' criminaloids '' , or occasional criminals , criminals by passion , moral imbeciles , and criminal epileptics . he recognized the diminished role of organic factors in many habitual offenders and referred to the delicate balance between predisposing factors ( organic , genetic ) and precipitating factors such as one 's environment , opportunity , or poverty . in criminal woman , as introduced in an english translation by nicole hahn rafter and mary gibson , lombroso used his theory of atavism to explain women 's criminal offending . in the text , lombroso outlines a comparative analysis of '' normal women '' opposed to '' criminal women '' such as '' the prostitute . '' however , lombroso 's '' obdurate beliefs '' about women presented an '' intractable problem '' for this theory : '' because he was convinced that women are inferior to men lombroso was unable to argue , based on his theory of the born criminal , that women 's lesser involvement in crime reflected their comparatively lower levels of atavism . '' lombroso 's research methods were clinical and descriptive , with precise details of skull dimension and other measurements . he did not engage in rigorous statistical comparisons of criminals and non-criminals . although he gave some recognition in his later years to psychological and sociological factors in the etiology of crime , he remained convinced of , and identified with , criminal anthropometry . after he died , his skull and brain were measured according to his own theories by a colleague as he requested in his will ; his head was preserved in a jar and is still displayed with his collection at the museum of psychiatry and criminology in turin . lombroso 's theories were disapproved throughout europe , especially in schools of medicine : notably by alexandre lacassagne in france . his notions of physical differentiation between criminals and non-criminals were seriously challenged by charles goring ( the english convict , 1913 ) , who made elaborate comparisons and found insignificant statistical differences . legacy . self-proclaimed the founder of modern scientific psychiatry , lombroso is purported to have coined the term criminology . he institutionalized the science of psychiatry in universities . his graduating thesis from the university of pavia dealt with '' endemic cretinism '' . in the next several years , lombroso 's fascination with criminal behavior and society began , and he gained experience managing a mental institution . after a brief stint in the italian army , lombroso returned to the university of pavia and became the first professor specializing in mental health . by the 1880s , his theories had reached the pinnacle of their fame , and his accolades championed them throughout the fields dedicated to examining mental illness . lombroso differentiated himself from his predecessor and rival , cesare beccaria , through depicting his positivist school in opposition to beccaria 's classist one ( which centered around the idea that criminal behavior is born out of free will rather than inherited physical traits ) . lombroso 's psychiatric theories were conglomerated and collectively called the positivist school by his followers . his school of thought was only truly abandoned in italian universities ' curriculum after world war ii . through his various publications , lombroso established a school of psychiatry based on biological determinism and the idea that mental illness was via genetic factors . a person 's predisposition to mental illness was determinable through his appearance , as explained in the aforementioned criminal atavism segment . lombroso 's theory has been cited as possibly '' the most influential doctrine '' in all areas studying human behavior , and indeed , its impact extended far and wide . according to lombroso , criminal appearance was not just based on inherited physiognomy such as nose or skull shape , but also could be judged through superficial features like tattoos on the body . in particular , lombroso began searching for a relationship between tattoos and an agglomeration of symptoms eut ( which are currently diagnosed as borderline personality disorder ) . he also believed that tattoos indicated a certain type of criminal . through his observations of sex workers and criminals , lombroso hypothesized a correlation between left-handedness , criminality , and degenerate behavior . he also propagated the idea that left-handedness lead to other disabilities , by linking left-handedness with neurodegeneration and alcoholism . lombroso 's theories were likely accepted due to the pre-existing regional stigma against left-handedness , and greatly influenced the reception of left-handedness in the 20th century . his hypothesis even manifested in a new way during the 1980s and 1990s with a series of research studies grouping left-handedness with psychiatric disorders and autoimmune diseases . despite his stance on inherited immorality and biologically-destined criminal behavior , lombroso believed in socialism and supposedly sympathized with stigmatization of lower socioeconomic statuses , placing him at odds with the biological determinism he espoused . his work stereotyping degenerates can even be seen as an influence behind benito mussolini 's movement to clean the streets of italy . many adherents to lombroso 's positivist school stayed powerful during mussolini 's rule , because of the seamless way criminal atavism and biological determinism justified fascism . however , certain legal institutions did press back against the idea that criminal behavior is biologically determined . within the penal system , lombroso 's work led to new forms of punishment , where occasionally punishment varied based on the defendant 's biological background . there are a few instances in which case the physiognomy of the defendant actually mattered more than witness testimony and the defendant was subjected to harsher sentences . during the period in italy between the 1850s and 1880s , the italian government debated legislation for the insanity plea . judges and lawyers backed beccaria 's classist school , tending to favor the idea that wrongdoers are breaking a societal contract with the option to exercise free will , tying into beccaria 's classist school of social misbehavior . lombroso and his followers argued for a criminal code , in which the criminal understood as unable to act with free will due to their biological predisposition to crime . since his research tied criminal behavior together with the insane , lombroso is closely credited with the genesis of the criminal insane asylum and forensic psychiatry . his work sponsored the creation of institutions where the criminally insane would be treated for mental illness , rather than placed in jails with their saner counterparts . one example of an asylum for the criminally insane is bridgewater state hospital , which is located in the united states . other examples of these institutions are matteawan state hospital and danvers state hospital . most have closed down , but the concept is kept alive with modern correctional facilities like cook county jail . this facility houses the largest population of prisoners with mental illness in the united states . however , criminal insane asylums did exist outside of italy while lombroso was establishing them within the country . his influence on the asylum was at first regional , but eventually percolated to other countries who adopted some of lombroso 's measures for treating the criminally insane . in addition to influencing criminal atavisim , lombroso wrote a book called genio e follia , in which he discussed the link between genius and insanity . he believed that genius was an evolutionarily beneficial form of insanity , stemming from the same root as other mental illnesses . this hypothesis led to his request to examine leo tolstoy for degenerate qualities during his attendance at the 12th international medical congress in moscow in 1897 . the meeting went poorly , and tolstoy 's novel resurrection shows great disdain for lombroso 's methodology . towards the end of his life , lombroso began to study pellagra , a disease which joseph goldberger simultaneously was researching , in rural italy . he postulated that pellagra came from a nutrition deficit , officially proven by goldberger . this disease also found its roots in the same poverty that caused cretinism , which lombroso studied at the start of his medical career . furthermore , before lombroso 's death the italian government passed a law in 1904 standardizing treatment in mental asylums and codifying procedural admittance for mentally ill criminals . this law gave psychiatrists rein within the criminal insane asylum , validating the field of psychiatry through giving the psychiatrists the sole authority to define and treat the causes of criminal behavior ( a position which lombroso argued for from his early teaching days to his death ) . . the man of genius . lombroso believed that genius was closely related to madness . in his attempts to develop these notions , lombroso traveled to moscow and met with lev tolstoy in hopes of elucidating and providing evidence for his theory of genius reverting or degenerating into insanity . lombroso published the man of genius in 1889 , a book which argued that artistic genius was a form of hereditary insanity . in order to support this assertion , he began assembling a large collection of '' psychiatric art '' . he published an article on the subject in 1880 in which he isolated thirteen typical features of the '' art of the insane . '' although his criteria are generally regarded as outdated today , his work inspired later writers on the subject , particularly hans prinzhorn . lombroso 's the man of genius provided inspiration for max nordau 's work , as evidenced by his dedication of degeneration to lombroso , whom he considered to be his '' dear and honored master '' . in his exploration of geniuses descending into madness , lombroso stated that he could only find six men who did not exhibit symptoms of '' degeneration '' or madness ; galileo , da vinci , voltaire , machiavelli , michelangelo , and darwin . on the other hand , lombroso cited that men such as shakespeare , plato , aristotle , mozart and dante all displayed '' degenerate symptoms '' . in order to justify which geniuses were 'degenerate ' or insane , lombroso judged each genius by whether or not they displayed '' degenerate symptoms '' , which included precocity , longevity , versatility , and inspiration . lombroso supplemented these personal observations with measurements including facial angles , '' abnormalities '' in bone structure , and volumes of brain fluid . measurements of skulls taken included those from immanuel kant , alessandro volta , ugo foscolo , and ambrogio fusinieri . lombroso 's approach in using skull measurements was inspired by the work and research in the field of phrenology by german doctor franz joseph gall . in commenting on skull measurements , lombroso would make observations such as '' i have noted several characters which anthropologists consider to belong to the lower races , such as prominence of the styloid apophyses '' . this observation was recorded in response to his analysis of alessandro volta 's skull . lombroso connected geniuses to various health disorders as well , by listing signs of degeneration in chapter two of his work—some of which include abnormalities and discrepancies in height and pallor . lombroso listed the following geniuses , among others , as '' sickly and weak during childhood '' ; demosthenes , francis bacon , descartes , isaac newton , john locke , adam smith , robert boyle , alexander pope , john flaxman , nelson , albrecht von haller , korner , and blaise pascal . other physical afflictions that lombroso connected with degeneracy included rickets , emaciation , sterility , lefthandedness , unconsciousness , stupidity , somnambulism , smallness or disproportionality of the body , and amnesia . in his explanation of the connection between genius and the '' degenerative marker '' of height , lombroso cites the following people : robert and elizabeth browning , henrik ibsen , george eliot , thiers , robert browning , louis blanc , and algernon charles swinburne among others . he continues by listing the only '' great men of tall stature '' that he knows of , including petrarch , friedrich schiller , foscolo , bismarck , charlemagne , dumas , george washington , peter the great , and voltaire . lombroso further cited certain personality traits as markers of degeneracy , such as '' a fondness for special words '' and '' the inspiration of genius '' . lombroso 's methods and explanations in the man of genius were rebutted and questioned by the american journal of psychiatry . in a review of the man of genius they stated , '' here we have hypothesis claiming to be the result of strict scientific investigation and reluctant conviction , bolstered up by half-told truths , misrepresentations and assumptions . lombroso 's work was also criticized by italian anthropologist giuseppe sergi who , in his review of lombroso 's the man of genius -- and specifically his classifications and definitions of '' the genius '' —stated '' by creating a genius according to his own fancy , an ideal and abstract being , and not by examining the personality of a real living genius , he naturally arrives at the conclusion that all theories by which the origin of genius is sought to be explained on a basis of observation , and especially that particular one which finds in degeneration the cause or one of the causes of genius , are erroneous . '' sergi continued by stating that such theorists are '' like the worshippers of the saints or of fetishes , who do not recognize the material from which the fetish is made , or the human origin from which the saint has sprung '' . . spiritualism . later in his life lombroso began investigating mediumship . although originally skeptical , he later became a believer in spiritualism . as an atheist lombroso discusses his views on the paranormal and spiritualism in his book after death – what ? ( 1909 ) which he believed the existence of spirits and claimed the medium eusapia palladino was genuine . the article '' exit eusapia ! '' was published in the british medical journal on november 9 , 1895 . the article questioned the scientific legitimacy of the society for psychical research for investigating palladino a medium who had a reputation of being a fraud and imposter and was surprised that lombroso had been deceived by palladino . the anthropologist edward clodd wrote '' lombroso swallowed the lot at a gulp , from table raps to materialisation of the departed , spirit photographs and spirit voices ; every story , old or new , alike from savage and civilised sources , confirming his will to believe . '' edward clodd . ( 1917 ) . the question : a brief history and examination of modern spiritualism . grant richards , london . p . 236 lombroso 's daughter gina ferrero wrote that during the later years of his life lombroso suffered from arteriosclerosis and his mental and physical health was wrecked . the skeptic joseph mccabe wrote that because of this it was not surprising that palladino managed to fool lombroso into believing spiritualism by her tricks . joseph mccabe . ( 1920 ) . scientific men and spiritualism : a skeptic 's analysis . the living age . june 12 . pp . 652-657 . . literary impact . historian daniel pick argues that lombroso serves '' as a curious footnote to late-nineteenth-century literary studies , '' due to his referencing in famous books of the time . jacques in émile zola 's the beast within is described as having a jaw that juts forward on the bottom . it is emphasized especially at the end of the book when he is overwhelmed by the desire to kill . the anarchist karl yundt in joseph conrad 's the secret agent , delivers a speech denouncing lombroso . the assistant prosecutor in leo tolstoy 's resurrection uses lombroso 's theories to accuse maslova of being a congenital criminal . in bram stoker 's dracula , count dracula is described as having a physical appearance lombroso would describe as criminal . stevenson 's jekyll and hyde was influenced by lombroso 's theory , with the criminal , evil hyde being described as '' ape-like '' . works . original italian . 1859 & nbsp ; ricerche sul cretinismo in lombardia 1864 & nbsp ; genio e follia 1865 & nbsp ; studi clinici sulle mallatie mentali 1871 & nbsp ; l'uomo bianco e l'uomo di colore 1873 & nbsp ; sulla microcefala e sul cretinismo con applicazione alla medicina legale 1876 & nbsp ; l'uomo delinquente 1879 & nbsp ; considerazioni al processo passannante 1881 & nbsp ; l'amore nel suicidio e nel delitto 1888 & nbsp ; l'uomo di genio in rapporto alla psichiatria 1890 & nbsp ; sulla medicina legale del cadavere ( second edition ) 1891 & nbsp ; palimsesti del carcere 1892 & nbsp ; trattato della pellagra 1893 la donna delinquente : la prostituta e la donna normale ( co-authored with lombroso 's son-in-law guglielmo ferrero ) . 1894 & nbsp ; le più recenti scoperte ed applicazioni della psichiatria ed antropologia criminale 1894 & nbsp ; gli anarchici 1894 & nbsp ; l'antisemitismo e le scienze moderne 1897 & nbsp ; genio e degenerazione 1898 & nbsp ; les conquêtes récentes de la psychiatrie 1899 & nbsp ; le crime ; causes et remédes 1900 & nbsp ; lezioni de medicina legale 1902 & nbsp ; delitti vecchi e delitti nuovi 1909 & nbsp ; ricerche sui fenomeni ipnotici e spiritici in 1906 , a collection of papers on lombroso was published in turin as l'opera di cesare lombroso nella scienza e nelle sue applicazioni . english translations . 1891 & nbsp ; the man of genius , walter scott . 1895 & nbsp ; the female offender . the 1895 english translation was a partial translation which left out the entire section on the normal woman and which , in true victorian fashion , sanitised lombroso 's language . 1899 & nbsp ; crime : its causes and remedies 1909 & nbsp ; after death - what ? 1911 & nbsp ; criminal man , according to the classification of cesare lombroso 2004 & nbsp ; the criminal anthropological writings of cesare lombroso 2004 & nbsp ; criminal woman , the prostitute , and the normal woman . translated by nicole hahn rafter and mary gibson . 2006 & nbsp ; criminal man . translated by nicole hahn rafter and mary gibson . selected articles . '' illustrative studies in criminal anthropology '' , the monist , vol . i , no . 2 , 1890 . '' the physiognomy of the anarchists '' , the monist , vol . i , no . 3 , 1890 . '' innovation and inertia in the world of psychology '' , the monist , vol . i , no . 3 , 1890 . '' the modern literature of italy since the year 1870 '' , the monist , vol . i , no . 3 , 1890 . '' criminal anthropology applied to pedagogy '' , the monist , vol . vi , no . 1 , october 1895 . '' the heredity of acquired characteristics , '' the forum , vol . xxiv , 1898 . '' was columbus morally irresponsible ? , '' the forum , vol . xxvii , 1899 . '' why criminals of genius have no type , '' the international quarterly , vol . vi , 1902 . other . macdonald , arthur . criminology , introduction by cesare lombroso , funk & wagnalls company , 1893 . drahms , august . the criminal , introduction by cesare lombroso , the macmillan company , 1900 . '' cesare lombroso '' , biblioteca federata di medicina f . rossi , università degli studi di torino . works in italian , french and german .