Trent Lott

early life . lott was born in grenada , mississippi , and lived his early years in nearby duck hill , where his father , chester paul lott , sharecropped a stretch of cotton field . lott 's mother , the former iona watson , was a schoolteacher . lott 's father was a philanderer with a drinking problem , and lott frequently acted as a mediator when his mother threatened his father with divorce . when lott was in the sixth grade , the family moved to pascagoula , where lott 's father worked at a shipyard . lott attended college at the university of mississippi in oxford , where he obtained an undergraduate degree in public administration in 1963 and a juris doctor degree in 1967 . he served as a field representative for ole miss and was president of his fraternity , sigma nu . lott was also an ole miss cheerleader , on the same team with future u.s . senator thad cochran . regarding his education , the congressional record from 1999 quotes senator lott declaring : '' i am a product of public education from the first grade through the second , third , and fourth grades where i went to school at duck hill , mississippi , and i had better teachers in the second , third , and fourth grades in duck hill , mississippi , than i had the rest of my life . '' lott married patricia thompson on december 27 , 1964 . the couple has two children : chester trent '' chet '' lott jr . , and tyler lott . while an undergraduate at the university of mississippi , lott participated in the effort at the 1964 national convention of the sigma nu fraternity to oppose a civil rights amendment proposed by the dartmouth college and duke university chapters to end mandatory racial exclusion by the fraternity . lott sided with the segregationists who defeated the amendment . the dartmouth chapter subsequently seceded from the fraternity , and sigma nu remained whites-only until later in the decade . . political career . house of representatives . he served as administrative assistant to house rules committee chairman william m . colmer , also of pascagoula , from 1968 to 1972 . in 1972 , colmer , one of the most conservative democrats in the house , announced his retirement after 40 years in congress . he endorsed lott as his successor in mississippi 's 5th district , located in the state 's southern tip , even though lott ran as a republican . lott won handily , in large part due to richard nixon 's landslide victory in that year 's presidential election . nixon won the 5th district with an astonishing 87 percent of the vote ; it was his strongest congressional district in the entire nation . barone , michael ; et al . the almanac of american politics ( 1976 ) , p . 465 . lott and his future senate colleague , thad cochran ( also elected to congress that year ) , were only the second and third republicans elected to congress from mississippi since reconstruction ( prentiss walker was the first in 1964 ) . lott 's strong showing in the polls landed him on the powerful house judiciary committee as a freshman , where he voted against all three articles of impeachment drawn up against nixon during the committee 's debate . after nixon released the infamous '' smoking gun '' transcripts ( which proved nixon 's involvement in the watergate cover-up ) , however , lott announced that he would vote to impeach nixon when the articles came up for debate before the full house ( as did the other republicans who voted against impeachment in committee ) . lott became very popular in his district , even though almost none of its living residents had been represented by a republican before . as evidence , in november 1974 , lott won a second term in a blowout . cochran was also reelected in a rout ; he and lott were the first republicans to win a second term in congress from the state since reconstruction . they were among the few bright spots in a year that saw many republicans turned out of office due to anger over watergate . lott was re-elected six more times without much difficulty , and even ran unopposed in 1978 . in 1980 , he served as ronald reagan 's mississippi state chairman . kornacki , steve ( february 3 , 2011 ) the '' southern strategy '' , fulfilled , salon.com he served as house minority whip ( the second-ranking republican in the house ) from 1981 to 1989 ; he was the first southern republican to hold such a high leadership position . united states senate . lott ran for the senate in 1988 , after 42-year incumbent john stennis announced he would not run for another term . he defeated democratic 4th district congressman wayne dowdy by almost eight points . lott won by running up a 70 percent margin in his congressional district , and was also helped by george h . w . bush easily carrying the state in the presidential election . he never faced another contest nearly that close . he was re-elected in 1994 , 2000 , and 2006 with no substantive democratic opposition . he gave some thought to retirement for much of 2005 , however , after hurricane katrina , he announced on january 17 , 2006 that he would run for a fourth term . in 1989 , on the 25th anniversary of the murders of chaney , goodman , and schwerner , lott and the rest of the mississippi congressional delegation refused to vote for the non-binding resolution honoring the three men which nevertheless passed the congress . he became senate majority whip when the republicans took control of the senate in 1995 . in june 1996 , he ran for the post of senate majority leader to succeed republican bob dole , who had resigned from the senate to concentrate on his presidential campaign . lott faced his mississippi colleague thad cochran , the then-chairman of the senate republican conference . cochran cast himself as an '' institutionalist '' and who would help to rebuild public trust in congress through compromise over conflict . lott promised a '' more aggressive '' style of leadership and courted the younger senate conservatives . lott won by 44 votes to 8 . as majority leader , lott had a major role in the senate trial following the impeachment of president bill clinton . after the house narrowly voted to impeach clinton , lott proceeded with the senate trial in early 1999 , despite criticisms that republicans were far short of the two-thirds majority required under the constitution to convict clinton and remove him from office . lott generally pursued a conservative position in politics and was a noted social conservative . for instance , in 1998 , lott caused some controversy in congress when as a guest on the armstrong williams television show , he equated homosexuality with alcoholism , kleptomania and sex addiction . when williams , a conservative talk show host , asked lott whether homosexuality is a sin , lott simply replied , '' yes , it is . '' lott 's stance against homosexuality was disconcerting to liberal democratic party elected officials and the human rights campaign fund , an advocacy group for gay rights . according to the anti-defamation league , lott was a frequent speaker at the white supremacist group council of conservative citizens . although he denied knowing of the group 's intentions , it was later revealed members of his family had ccc membership . after the 2000 elections produced a 50–50 partisan split in the senate , vice president al gore 's tie-breaking vote gave the democrats the majority from january 3 to 20 , 2001 , when george w . bush took office and vice president dick cheney 's tie-breaking vote gave the republicans the majority once again . later in 2001 , he became senate minority leader again after vermont senator jim jeffords became an independent and caucused with the democrats , allowing them to regain the majority . he was due to become majority leader again in early 2003 after republican united states senate election , 2002 . resignation from senate leadership . lott spoke on december 5 , 2002 , at the 100th birthday party of senator strom thurmond of south carolina , a retiring republican senator who , like lott , had switched parties from the democrats decades earlier . thurmond had run for president of the united states in 1948 on the dixiecrat ( or states ' rights democratic ) ticket . lott said : '' when strom thurmond ran for president , we voted for him . we 're proud of it . and if the rest of the country had followed our lead , we would n't have had all these problems over the years , either . '' thurmond had based his presidential campaign largely on an explicit states ' rights platform that challenged the civil rights movement and later , the civil rights act as illegally overturning the separation of powers under the united states constitution and called for the preservation of racial segregation . the washington post reported that lott had made similar comments about thurmond 's candidacy in a 1980 rally . lott gave an interview with black entertainment television explaining himself and repudiating thurmond 's former views . transcript of lott interview on bet , december 13 , 2002 in the wake of controversy , lott resigned as senate republican leader on december 20 , 2002 , effective at the start of the next session , january 3 , 2003 . bill frist of tennessee was later elected to the leadership position . in the book free culture , lawrence lessig argues that lott 's resignation would not have occurred had it not been for the effect of internet blogs . he says that though the story '' disappeared from the mainstream press within forty-eight hours '' , '' bloggers kept researching the story '' until , '' finally , the story broke back into the mainstream press . '' after losing the majority leader post , lott was less visible on the national scene , although he did break with some standard conservative positions . he battled with bush over military base closures in his home state . he showed support for passenger rail initiatives , notably his 2006 bipartisan introduction , with sen . frank lautenberg of new jersey , of legislation to provide 80 percent federal matching grants to intercity rail and guarantee adequate funding for amtrak . on july 18 , 2006 , lott voted with 19 republican senators for the stem cell research enhancement act to lift restrictions on federal funding for the research . on november 15 , 2006 lott regained a leadership position in the senate , when he was named minority whip after defeating lamar alexander of tennessee 25–24 . senator john e . sununu ( r ) of new hampshire said , after lott 's election as senate minority whip , '' he understands the rules . he 's a strong negotiator . '' former house speaker newt gingrich ( r ) said he 's '' the smartest legislative politician i 've ever met . '' . 2006 re-election campaign . lott faced no republican opposition in the race . state representative erik r . fleming placed first of four candidates in the june democratic primary , but did not receive the 50 percent of the vote required to earn the party 's nomination . fleming and second-place finisher bill bowlin faced off in a runoff on june 27 , and fleming won with 65 % of the vote . fleming , however , was not regarded as a serious opponent , and lott handily defeated him with 64 % of the vote . resignation . on november 26 , 2007 , lott announced that he would resign his senate seat by the end of 2007 . trent lott announces his resignation nbc news according to cnn , his resignation was at least partly due to the honest leadership and open government act , which forbade lawmakers from lobbying for two years after leaving office . those who left by the end of 2007 were covered by the previous law , which he cosponsored and which required a wait of only one year . in an interview regarding his resignation , lott said that the new law '' did n't have a big role '' in his decision to resign . lott 's resignation became effective at 11:30 & nbsp ; p.m . on december 18 , 2007 . on january 7 , 2008 , it was announced that lott and former senator john breaux of louisiana , a democrat , opened their lobbying firm about a block from the white house . . post-senate career . in december 2007 , he co-founded the breaux-lott leadership group , a '' strategic advice , consulting , and lobbying '' firm together with former louisiana senator john breaux . breaux lott leadership group the firm was later acquired by law and lobbying firm patton boggs , now squire patton boggs following the june 2014 merger with squire sanders . in september 2014 , lobbyist filings revealed that lott was contracted to advocate on behalf of gazprombank , a russian majority state-owned bank targeted with sanctions over the 2014 pro-russian unrest in ukraine . lott was fired by squire patton boggs in june 2020 ; no explanation was provided for his departure . lott serves on the board of directors of airbus north america . on october 10 , 2008 , lott was named honorary patron of the university philosophical society , trinity college , dublin . on february 14 , 2009 , the new york times reported the indictment of judge bobby delaughter for taking bribes from richard scruggs , lott 's brother-in-law . scruggs represented lott in litigation against state farm insurance company after the insurer refused to pay claims for the loss of his mississippi home in hurricane katrina . according to the new york times , federal prosecutors have said that lott was induced by scruggs to offer delaughter a federal judgeship in order to gain the judge 's favor . in 2012 , lott testified in federal court that he never told delaughter that he would be recommended for a federal judgeship . lott is a freemason , and holds the grand cross in the scottish rite southern jurisdiction in the ancient and accepted scottish rite . lott is on the board of selectors of jefferson awards for public service . in 2018 sacha baron cohen 's television program who is america ? premiered showing lott supporting the '' kinderguardians program '' which supported training toddlers with firearms . lott appeared not to know it was a hoax . author . lott 's memoir , entitled herding cats : a life in politics , was published in 2005 . in the book , lott spoke about the remark he made at the strom thurmond birthday party , former senate majority leader bill frist , and his feelings of betrayal toward the tennessee senator , claiming '' if frist had not announced exactly when he did , as the fire was about to burn out , i would still be majority leader of the senate today . '' lott , herding cats : a life in politics ( 2005 ) , p . 273 . he also described former democratic leader tom daschle of south dakota as '' trustworthy '' . lott , herding cats : a life in politics ( 2005 ) , p . 211 . he also revealed that president george w . bush , then–secretary of state colin powell , and other gop leaders played a major role in ending his career as senate republican leader . lott , herding cats : a life in politics ( 2005 ) , pp . 271–272 . . legacy . trent lott academy in the pascagoula school district is named after him . lott has been quoted as being opposed to homosexuality , comparing it to other issues such as alcoholism . lott is also the namesake of trent lott international airport in moss point , mississippi . . further reading . lott , trent . herding cats : a life in politics ( regan books : 2005 ) . orey , byron d'andra . '' racial threat , republicanism , and the rebel flag : trent lott and the 2006 mississippi senate race '' , national political science review july 2009 , vol . 12 , pp . & nbsp ; 83–96 .