Heterodoxy

christianity . eastern orthodoxy . in the orthodox church , the term is used primarily in reference to christian churches and denominations not belonging to the communion of eastern orthodox churches and espousing doctrines contrary to the received holy tradition . michael pomazansky . 1994 . orthodox dogmatic theology , translated by s . rose . platina , ca : st . herman of alaska brotherhood . pp . 243–46 . it also describes any theological position , moral principle , spiritual practice , or lifestyle thought to be inconsistent with the catholic rule of faith . in general , this term is used in two distinct senses : to label a theological system or viewpoint which , although erroneous and unacceptable to hold or promote within orthodoxy , has not been formally defined as heresy . to label a theological system or viewpoint which is both contrary to orthodoxy and whose adherents have not been baptized into the church , so that the attribution of heresy would be improper . roman catholicism . heterodoxy in the roman catholic church refers to views that differ from strictly orthodox views , but retain sufficient faithfulness to the original doctrine to avoid heresy . many roman catholics profess some heterodox views , either on doctrinal or social issues . hornsby-smith , michael p . , raymond m . lee , and peter a . reilly . 1985 . '' common religion and customary religion : a critique and a proposal . '' review of religious research 26 ( 3 ) :244–52 . for example , the orthodox catholic position on unbaptized infants is that their fate is uncertain , and '' the church can only entrust them to the mercy of god . '' congregation for the doctrine of the faith . catechism of the catholic church . p . 1261 . . protestantism . many protestants , such as lutherans , use the term '' heterodox '' to describe christian teachings which are not in agreement with their understanding of scripture . as charles spurgeon says : you shall find spiritual life in every church . i know it is the notion of the bigot , that all the truly godly people belong to the denomination which he adorns . orthodoxy is my doxy ; heterodoxy is anybody else 's doxy who does not agree with me . charles spurgeon 1871 . the metropolitan tabernacle pulpit sermons 17 . london : passmore & alabaster . p . 449 . . islam . the arabic word is used by shia muslims for beliefs perceived as being extremely heterodox ( more in line with the christian use of the word '' heresy '' ) . in particular , the term is used to describe the beliefs of minority muslim groups who ascribe divine characteristics to a member of muhammad 's family ( especially ali ) or the early sahabah such as salman the persian . the assumption is that the groups thus described have gone too far and have come to associate them with god . sunni and shia muslims see each other as heterodox , differing in practice mainly on matters of jurisprudence or , splitting historically on the matter of the succession of ali to the caliphate by muawiyah . a third and much smaller movement is ibadi , which differ from both of these groups on a few key points . several ultra-orthodox groups such as the wahhabis , in turn , see themselves as the only truly orthodox groups within islam . the shia ismailis , who in turn split from the shia mainstream of twelvers over another succession dispute , have subsumed several groups which the majority of muslims view as heterodox , such as the seveners , and gnostic-influenced alawites , and many other sects and subsects . the gnostic-influenced druze sect has also been affiliated with the ismailis , but some of its followers go so far as to see it as a distinct religion altogether . the sufis , divided into many sects and orders , incorporate many mystical doctrines and rituals into islam , but many also consider themselves shi ' i or sunnis . another shia group , influenced heavily by the sufis , turkic religion and other mystical movements , is that of the alevi . historical groups viewed as highly heterodox by most muslims include the kharijites , who took a third view on ali 's succession ( and are today succeeded by the ibadi ) , the mu'tazilites , who most famously asserted that the qur'an was created , a view which enjoyed caliphal approval before the time of mutawakkil , the qarmatians , a branch of the seveners within ismaili islam who took control of much of the arabian peninsula in the 9th and 10th century , practiced vegetarianism , attacked hajj pilgrims and took control of the well of zamzam and the black stone before their decline , and the hashashin or assassins , another ismaili group , famous for their reclusive lifestyle , manners of indoctrination and assassinations in the years after the first crusade . according to philip hitti , during the umayyad and abbasid caliphates there was a marked tendency among several quite unrelated heterodox groups to affiliate themselves with the shiites , particularly the ismailis , in a general feeling of heterodox solidarity in a sunni-controlled empire . philip k . hitti . 1937 1970 . history of the arabs . the cause of the alids thus became a rallying point for a diverse range of heterodox islamic movements . the view that ali was divine , though never mainstream within shiism , is attested in the early centuries of islam . two more recent movements seen as particularly at odds with the majority muslim view are the ahmadiyya and nation of islam movements . many followers of the former consider its 19th century founder , mirza ghulam ahmad , to have been a prophet , as well as such other religious figures as krishna and buddha , despite the mainstream muslim view that muhammad was the last . both ahmadi denominations consider ahmad to have been the mahdi and second coming of jesus . the nation of islam is a movement which acknowledges its 20th century founder , wallace fard muhammad , as an incarnation of allah , a view most muslims consider ( polytheism ) . bábism ( most followers of which came to follow baha ' u'llah and became the baháʼí faith and were further divided into many sects ) is viewed by many non-followers as originally having been a highly divergent movement within the twelver ismailism practiced in 19th century persia . beyond heterodoxy , many elements of islam have been incorporated into distinct belief systems several times , most specifically into sikhism and the baháʼí faith , whose predecessor movement was bábism . hinduism . in china . in late 1999 , legislation was created in china to outlaw '' heterodox religions '' . leung , beatrice . 2002 . '' china and falun gong : party and society relations in the modern era . '' journal of contemporary china 11 ( 33 ) :761–84 . this was applied retroactively to falun gong , a spiritual practice introduced to the public in china by li hongzhi in 1992 . statement of professor david ownby . unofficial religions in china : beyond the party 's rules . 2005 . . economics . heterodox economics refers to schools of economic thought considered outside of mainstream economics , referred to as orthodox economics , often represented by expositors as contrasting with or going beyond neoclassical economics . heterodox economics refers to the consideration of a variety of economic schools and methodologies , which can include neoclassical or other orthodox economics in part . heterodox economics refers to a variety of separate unorthodox approaches or schools such as institutional , post-keynesian , socialist , marxian , feminist , georgism , austrian , ecological , and social economics , among others . jel classification codes history of economic thought , methodology , and heterodox approaches jel : b subcategories . lee , frederic s . 2008 . '' heterodox economics . '' in the new palgrave dictionary of economics ( 2nd ed . ) . abstract . . see also . adiaphora āstika and nāstika catholicism christian apologetics christian countercult movement christian heresy orthodoxy schism . references . sources . . external links . heterodox - the word of the day heterodox economics orthodox vs heterodox churches ( lutheran confessionalism )