Torii

etymology . the torii , a gateway erected on the approach to every shinto shrine , may be derived from the indian word torana . while the indian term denotes a gateway , the japanese characters can be translated as '' bird perch '' . shôzô yamaguchi , frederic de garis and atsuharu sakai , 1964 , we japanese : miyanushita , hakone , fujiya hotel , page 200 . ancient indian torana sacred gateway architecture has influenced gateway architecture across asia , specially where silk road transmission of buddhism ; chinese paifang gateways , joseph needham , science and civilization in china , vol 4 part 3 , p137-138 japanese torii gateways , korean hongsalmun gateways , and giant swing in thailand have been derived from the indian torana . the functions of all are similar , but they generally differ based on their respective architectural styles . according to several scholars , the vast evidence shows how the torii , both etymologically and architecturally , were originally derived from the torana , a free-standing sacred ceremonial gateway which marks the entrance of a sacred enclosure , such as hindu-buddhist temple or shrine , or city . 1987 , tenri journal of religion , issue 21 , page 89 . louis fredric , 2002 , japan encyclopedia , page 986 . atsuharu sakai , 1949 , japan in a nutshell : religion , culture , popular practices . page 6 . parul pandya dhar , 2010 , the toraṇa in the indian and southeast asian architecture , page 295 . fosco maraini , 1960 , ore giapponesi , interpretive description of modern japan by an italian linguist and photographer who spent many years there , page 132 . parul pandya dhar , 2010 , the toraṇa in the indian and southeast asian architecture , page 295 . torii-a doorway into the japanese soul bernhard scheid wonders whether torii existed in japan before buddhism or arrived with it from india . . uses . the function of a torii is to mark the entrance to a sacred space . for this reason , the road leading to a shinto shrine ( sandō ) is almost always straddled by one or more torii , which are therefore the easiest way to distinguish a shrine from a buddhist temple . if the sandō passes under multiple torii , the outer of them is called . the following ones , closer to the shrine , are usually called , in order , and . other torii can be found farther into the shrine to represent increasing levels of holiness as one nears the inner sanctuary ( honden ) , core of the shrine . also , because of the strong relationship between shinto shrines and the japanese imperial family , a torii stands also in front of the tomb of each emperor . in the past torii must have been used also at the entrance of buddhist temples . even today , as prominent a temple as osaka 's shitennō-ji , founded in 593 by shōtoku taishi and the oldest state-built buddhist temple in the world ( and country ) , has a torii straddling one of its entrances . ( the original wooden torii burned in 1294 and was then replaced by one in stone . ) many buddhist temples include one or more shinto shrines dedicated to their tutelary kami ( '' chinjusha '' ) , and in that case a torii marks the shrine 's entrance . benzaiten is a syncretic goddess derived from the indian divinity sarasvati , who unites elements of both shinto and buddhism . for this reason halls dedicated to her can be found at both temples and shrines , and in either case in front of the hall stands a torii . the goddess herself is sometimes portrayed with a torii on her head . finally , until the meiji period ( 1868–1912 ) torii were routinely adorned with plaques carrying buddhist sūtras . yamabushi , japanese mountain ascetic hermits with a long tradition as mighty warriors endowed with supernatural powers , sometimes use as their symbol a torii . the torii is also sometimes used as a symbol of japan in non-religious contexts . for example , it is the symbol of the marine corps security force regiment and the 187th infantry regiment , 101st airborne division and of other us forces in japan . defenselink news : revised helmet patch immortalizes world war ii troops . origins . the origins of the torii are unknown and there are several different theories on the subject , none of which has gained universal acceptance . because the use of symbolic gates is widespread in asia—such structures can be found for example in india , china , thailand , korea , and within nicobarese and shompen villages—historians believe they may be an imported tradition . they may , for example , have originated in india from the torana gates in the monastery of sanchi in central india . according to this theory , the torana was adopted by shingon buddhism founder kūkai , who used it to demarcate the sacred space used for the homa ceremony . james edward ketelaar.of heretics and martyrs in meiji japan . princeton : princeton university press , 1990 . p.59 . the hypothesis arose in the 19th and 20th centuries due to similarities in structure and name between the two gates . linguistic and historical objections have now emerged , but no conclusion has yet been reached . in bangkok , thailand , a brahmin structure called giant swing strongly resembles a torii . functionally , however , it is very different as it is used as a swing . during ceremonies brahmins swing , trying to grab a bag of coins placed on one of the pillars . other theories claim torii may be related to the pailou of china . these structures however can assume a great variety of forms , only some of which actually somewhat resemble a torii . the same goes for korea 's '' hongsal-mun '' . unlike its chinese counterpart , the hongsal-mun does not vary greatly in design and is always painted red , with '' arrowsticks '' located on the top of the structure ( hence the name ) . various tentative etymology of the word torii exist . according to one of them , the name derives from the term . another hypothesis takes the name literally : the gate would originally have been some kind of bird perch . this is based on the religious use of bird perches in asia , such as the korean sotdae ( 솟대 ) , which are poles with one or more wooden birds resting on their top . commonly found in groups at the entrance of villages together with totem poles called jangseung , they are amulets which ward off evil spirits and bring the villagers good luck . '' bird perches '' similar in form and function to the sotdae exist also in other shamanism cultures in china , mongolia and siberia . although they do not look like torii and serve a different function , these '' bird perches '' show how birds in several asian cultures are believed to have magic or spiritual properties , and may therefore help explain the enigmatic literal meaning of the torii 's name ( '' bird perch '' ) . torii used to be also called . the presence of the honorific mi- or go- makes it likely that by then their use was already associated with shrines . poles believed to have supported wooden bird figures very similar to the sotdae have been found together with wooden birds , and are believed by some historians to have somehow evolved into today 's torii . intriguingly , in both korea and japan single poles represent deities ( kami in the case of japan ) and is the counter for kami . in japan birds have also long had a connection with the dead , this may mean it was born in connection with some prehistorical funerary rite . ancient japanese texts like the kojiki and the nihon shoki for example mention how yamato takeru after his death became a white bird and in that form chose a place for his own burial . for this reason , his mausoleum was then called . many later texts also show some relationship between dead souls and white birds , a link common also in other cultures , shamanic like the japanese . bird motifs from the yayoi and kofun periods associating birds with the dead have also been found in several archeological sites . this relationship between birds and death would also explain why , in spite of their name , no visible trace of birds remains in today 's torii : birds were symbols of death , which in shinto brings defilement ( kegare ) . finally , the possibility that torii are a japanese invention can not be discounted . the first torii could have evolved already with their present function through the following sequence of events : four posts were placed at the corners of a sacred area and connected with a rope , thus dividing sacred and mundane . two taller posts were then placed at the center of the most auspicious direction , to let the priest in . a rope was tied from one post to the other to mark the border between the outside and the inside , the sacred and the mundane . this hypothetical stage corresponds to a type of torii in actual use , the so-called , an example of which can be seen in front of ōmiwa shrine 's haiden in nara ( see also the photo in the gallery ) . the rope was replaced by a lintel . because the gate was structurally weak , it was reinforced with a tie-beam , and what is today called or ( see illustration at right ) was born . this theory however does nothing to explain how the gates got their name . the shinmei torii , whose structure agrees with the historians ' reconstruction , consists of just four unbarked and unpainted logs : two vertical pillars topped by a horizontal lintel and kept together by a tie-beam . the pillars may have a slight inward inclination called or just . its parts are always straight . parts and ornamentations . torii may be unpainted or painted vermilion and black . the color black is limited to the kasagi and the . very rarely torii can be found also in other colors . kamakura 's kamakura-gū for example has a white and red one . the kasagi may be reinforced underneath by a second horizontal lintel called . iwanami japanese dictionary , 6th edition ( 2008 ) , dvd version kasagi and the shimaki may have an upward curve called . the nuki is often held in place by wedges . the kusabi in many cases are purely ornamental . at the center of the nuki there may be a supporting strut called , sometimes covered by a tablet carrying the name of the shrine ( see photo in the gallery ) . the pillars often rest on a white stone ring called or . the stone is sometimes replaced by a decorative black sleeve called . at the top of the pillars there may be a decorative ring called . the gate has a purely symbolic function and therefore there usually are no doors or board fences , but exceptions exist , as for example in the case of ōmiwa shrine 's triple-arched torii ( miwa torii , see below ) . . styles . structurally , the simplest is the ( see illustration below ) . the two names are simply different readings of the same characters . probably one of the oldest types of torii , it consists of two posts with a sacred rope called shimenawa tied between them . all other torii can be divided in two families , the and the . other ways of classifying torii exist , based for example on the presence or absence of the shimaki . see for example the site jinja chishiki . torii of the first have only straight parts , the second have both straight and curved parts . . shinmei family . the shinmei torii and its variants are characterized by straight upper lintels . file : shime torii.svg shime torii – just two posts and a shimenawa file : shinmei torii 2.svg shinmei torii file : geku - ise torii.svg ise torii – a shinmei torii with a kasagi pentagonal in section , a shimaki and kusabi . file : kashima torii.svg kashima torii – a shinmei torii with kusabi and a nuki protruding from the sides . file : kasuga torii.svg kasuga torii – a myōjin torii with straight top lintels cut at a square angle . file : hachiman torii.svg hachiman torii – a kasuga torii , but the two lintels have a downwards slant . file : mihashira torii.svg mihashira torii – a triple shinmei torii . . photo gallery . file : beachside torii , naoshima.jpg beachside torii on the island of naoshima file : tsukiyomi-no-miya ( naiku ) 03.jpg ise torii , first type . note the presence of kasagi file : naiku 03.jpg ise torii , second type . note the shimaki file : kiyamaji 11.jpg hachiman torii file : yamato mihasira006.jpg mihashira torii file : yokoteyama torii.jpg a shiroki torii file : hidatorii.jpg torii in the hida minzoku mura folk village . shinmei torii . the , which gives the name to the family , is constituted solely by a lintel ( kasagi ) and two pillars ( hashira ) united by a tie beam ( nuki ) . in its simplest form , all four elements are rounded and the pillars have no inclination . when the nuki is rectangular in section , it is called yasukuni torii , from tokyo 's yasukuni jinja . it is believed to be the oldest torii style . . ise torii . ( see illustration above ) are gates found only at the inner shrine and outer shrine at ise shrine in mie prefecture . for this reason , they are also called jingū torii , from jingū , ise grand shrine 's official japanese name . there are two variants . the most common is extremely similar to a shinmei torii , its pillars however have a slight inward inclination and its nuki is kept in place by wedges ( kusabi ) . the kasagi is pentagonal in section ( see illustration in the gallery below ) . the ends of the kasagi are slightly thicker , giving the impression of an upward slant . all these torii were built after the 14th century . the second type is similar to the first , but has also a secondary , rectangular lintel ( shimaki ) under the pentagonal kasagi . this and the shinmei torii style started becoming more popular during the early 20th century at the time of state shinto because they were considered the oldest and most prestigious . . kasuga torii . the is a myōjin torii ( see illustration above ) with straight top lintels . the style takes its name from kasuga-taisha 's , or main torii . the pillars have an inclination and are slightly tapered . the nuki protrudes and is held in place by kusabi driven in on both sides . this torii was the first to be painted vermilion and to adopt a shimaki at kasuga taisha , the shrine from which it takes its name . . hachiman torii . almost identical to a kasuga torii ( see illustration above ) , but with the two upper lintels at a slant , the first appeared during the heian period . the name comes from the fact that this type of torii is often used at hachiman shrines . kashima torii . the ( see illustration above ) is a shinmei torii without korobi , with kusabi and a protruding nuki . it takes its name from kashima shrine in ibaraki prefecture . kuroki torii . the is a shinmei torii built with unbarked wood . because this type of torii requires replacement at three years intervals , it is becoming rare . the most notorious example is nonomiya shrine in kyoto . the shrine now however uses a torii made of synthetic material which simulates the look of wood . shiromaruta torii . the or is a shinmei torii made with logs from which bark has been removed . this type of torii is present at the tombs of all emperors of japan . mihashira torii . the ( see illustration above ) is a type of torii which appears to be formed from three individual torii ( see gallery ) . it is thought by some to have been built by early japanese christians to represent the holy trinity . '' mihashira torii 三柱鳥居 . '' jaanus . retrieved on september 4 , 2018 . . myōjin family . the myōjin torii and its variants are characterized by curved lintels . file : myoujin torii.svg myōjin torii – kasagi and shimaki are curved upwards . file : nakayama torii.svg nakayama torii – a myōjin torii , but the nuki does not protrude from the pillars . file : inari - daiwa torii.svg daiwa or inari torii – a myōjin torii with rings at the top of the pillars . file : ryoubu torii.svg ryōbu torii – a daiwa torii with pillars supported on both sides . file : miwa torii.svg miwa torii – a triple myōjin torii . file : usa torii.svg usa torii – a myōjin torii with no gakuzuka . file : nune torii.svg nune torii – a daiwa torii with a small gable above the gakuzuka . file : sannou torii.svg sannō torii – a myōjin torii with a gable above the kasagi . file : hizen torii.svg hizen torii – an unusual style with a rounded kasagi and thick , flared pillars . this example is the main torii of kashii shrine , saga prefecture . photo gallery . file : entrance to tsurugaoka hachiman shrine.jpg myōjin torii file : hiyoshi-taisha03s4592.jpg sannō torii file : hushimi-inari-taisha omotesando.jpg daiwa torii . note the nemaki . file : sumiyoshi taisha3.jpg the sumiyoshi torii has pillars with a square cross-section . file : nakayama jinja 01.jpg nakayama torii file : itsukushima torii angle.jpg ryōbu torii file : shiraminegu 01.jpg miwa torii file : 肥前鳥居 059.jpg the has a rounded kasagi and thick flared pillars . file : fujisan hongū sengen taisha daitorii.jpg fujisan hongū sengen taisha file : fushimi inari1.jpg senbon torii at fushimi inari-taisha . myōjin torii . the , by far the most common torii style , are characterized by curved upper lintels ( kasagi and shimaki ) . both curve slightly upwards . kusabi are present . a myōjin torii can be made of wood , stone , concrete or other materials and be vermilion or unpainted . nakayama torii . the style , which takes its name from nakayama jinja in okayama prefecture , is basically a myōjin torii , but the nuki does not protrude from the pillars and the curve made by the two top lintels is more accentuated than usual . the torii at nakayama shrine that gives the style its name is 9 m tall and was erected in 1791 . . daiwa / inari torii . the ( see illustration above ) is a myōjin torii with two rings called daiwa at the top of the two pillars . the name '' inari torii '' comes from the fact that vermilion daiwa torii tend to be common at inari shrines , but even at the famous fushimi inari shrine not all torii are in this style . this style first appeared during the late heian period . sannō torii . the ( see photo below ) is myōjin torii with a gable over the two top lintels . the best example of this style is found at hiyoshi shrine near lake biwa . . miwa torii . also called , or ( see illustration above ) , the is composed of three myōjin torii without inclination of the pillars . it can be found with or without doors . the most famous one is at ōmiwa shrine , in nara , from which it takes its name . an entrance to a temple . ryōbu torii . also called , or , the is a daiwa torii whose pillars are reinforced on both sides by square posts ( see illustration above ) . the name derives from its long association with ryōbu shintō , a current of thought within shingon buddhism . the famous torii rising from the water at itsukushima is a ryōbu torii , and the shrine used to be also a shingon buddhist temple , so much so that it still has a tō . . hizen torii . the is an unusual type of torii with a rounded kasagi and pillars that flare downwards . the example in the gallery below is the main torii at : ja : 千栗八幡宮 in saga prefecture , and a city-designated important cultural property . gallery . file : nikkotoriitablet5127.jpg a tablet on a torii at nikkō tōshō-gū covers the gakuzuka file : pentagonal kasagi.jpg the typical pentagonal profile of a torii 's kasagi . note the black nemaki . file : yamasa kamaboko hq 04.jpg a row of torii file : nagasaki one legged torii c1946.jpg one-legged torii , sannō shrine , nagasaki , japan . the other half was toppled in the explosion of the nuclear bomb . file : kamakura-gu-torii.jpg an unusual white and red nakayama torii file : nunakumajinja05s1980.jpg a shime torii file : zeniarai benten shrine inside.jpg rows of tiny votive torii donated by the faithful at kamakura 's zeniarai benten shrine file : sumiyoshi-taisha , wakamiya-hachimangu.jpg an unusual at sumiyoshi taisha : the nuki does not protrude and all members are square in section file : christmas lights and torii , sendai 2012.jpg a temporary torii for new year celebration in a shopping street decorated with christmas lights file : heianjingu tori.jpg an example of a hizen style gate . . see also . mon ( architecture ) torana , in hindu-buddhist indian-origin also found in southeast asia and east asia toran , ceremonial indian door decoration paifang , in chinese temple architecture hongsalmun , in korean architecture with both religious and other usage iljumun , portal in korean temple architecture . notes . . references . external links .