Wikipedia:Article size

readability issues . each wikipedia article is in a process of evolution and is likely to continue growing . other editors will add to articles when you are done with them . wikipedia has practically unlimited storage space ; however , long articles may be more difficult to read , navigate , and comprehend . an article longer than one or two pages when printed should be divided into sections to ease navigation ( see wikipedia : manual of style and wikipedia : layout for guidance ) . for most long articles , division into sections is natural anyway . readers of the mobile version of wikipedia can be helped by ensuring that sections are not so long or so numerous as to impede navigation . a page of about 10,000 words takes between 30 and 40 minutes to read at average speed , which is close to the attention span of most readers . understanding of standard texts at average reading speed is around 65 % . at 10,000 words ( 50 & nbsp ; kb and above ) it may be beneficial to move some sections to other articles and replace them with summaries per wikipedia : summary style – see a rule of thumb below . articles that cover particularly technical subjects should , in general , be shorter than articles on less technical subjects . while expert readers of such articles may accept complexity and length provided the article is well written , the general reader requires clarity and conciseness . there are times when a long or very long article is unavoidable , though its complexity should be minimized . readability is a key criterion . readable prose . readable prose is the main body of the text , excluding material such as footnotes and reference sections ( '' see also '' , '' external links '' , bibliography , etc . ) , diagrams and images , tables and lists , wikilinks and external urls , and formatting and mark-up . xtools shows prose information , including number of characters ( under '' prose '' in the '' general statistics '' section ) . it may be used for an article currently being looked at by selecting the view history tab for the page , then page statistics from the line near the top headed external tools . the prosesize gadget is also helpful for estimating readable prose size . lists , tables and summaries . lists , tables , and other material that is already in summary form may not be appropriate for reducing or summarizing further by the summary style method . if there is no '' natural '' way to split or reduce a long list or table , it may be best to leave it intact , and a decision made to either keep it embedded in the main article or split it off into a stand-alone page . regardless , a list or table should be kept as short as is feasible for its purpose and scope . too much statistical data is against policy . technical issues . total article size should be kept reasonably low , particularly for readers using slow internet connections or mobile devices or who have slow computer loading . the text on a 32 & nbsp ; kb page takes about five seconds to load for editing on a dial-up connection , with accompanying images taking additional time , so pages significantly larger than this are difficult for older browsers to display . some large articles exist for topics that require depth and detail , but typically articles of such size are split into two or more smaller articles . mobile browsers can be a problem if these devices have little memory and/or a slow cpu ; long pages can take too much time to process , if they can be fully loaded at all . when using slow connections , e.g . , a desktop computer with an analog modem dial-up or the wireless connection of some mobile devices , long articles can take too much time to load . for notes on unrelated problems that various web browsers have with mediawiki sites , and for a list of alternative browsers you can download , see wikipedia : browser notes . the maximum limit for wikipedia is set by the mediawiki software default article size limit , 2048 kibibytes ( specifically , 2,097,152 bytes ) . exceeding the wikipedia : peis will result in templates in the article appearing incorrectly . splitting an article . very large articles should be split into logically separate articles . long stand-alone list articles are split into subsequent pages alphabetically , numerically , or subtopically . also consider splitting and transcluding the split parts ( for example with template : excerpt ) . when you split a section from a long article into an independent article , you should leave a short summary of the material that is removed along with a pointer to the independent article . in the independent article , put the or tag on the talk page to create a banner that refers back to the main article . to conform with wp : c , which permit modification and reuse but require attribution of the content contributors , the new page should be created with an edit summary attesting proper copy attribution , such as '' split content from article name '' . ( do not omit this step or omit the page name . ) a note should also be made in the edit summary of the source article , '' split content to article name '' , to protect against the article subsequently being deleted and the history of the new page eradicated . the template can also be placed on the talk page of both articles . no need for haste . as browsers have improved , there is no need for haste in splitting an article when it starts getting large . sometimes an article simply needs to be big to give the subject adequate coverage . if uncertain , or with high profile articles , start a discussion on the talkpage regarding the overall topic structure . determine whether the topic should be treated as several shorter articles and , if so , how best to organize them . if the discussion makes no progress consider adding one of the wp : split in order to get feedback from other editors . breaking out trivial or controversial sections . a relatively trivial topic may be appropriate in the context of the larger article , but inappropriate as the topic of an entire article in itself . in most cases , it is a violation of the neutral point of view to specifically break out a controversial section without leaving an adequate summary . it also violates the neutral point of view policy to create a new article specifically to contain information that consensus has rejected from the main article . consider other organizational principles for splitting the article , and be sure that both the title and content of the broken-out article reflect a neutral point of view . breaking out an unwanted section . if a section of an article is a magnet for unhelpful contributions ( such as the '' external links '' section or trivia sections ) , be aware that while moving it to another article may help to clean up the main article , it creates a new article that consists entirely of a section for unwanted contributions . if an article includes large amounts of material not suitable for inclusion in the encyclopedia , it is better to remove that content than to create a new article for it . size guideline . some useful rules of thumb for splitting articles , and combining small pages : ; please note : these rules of thumb apply only to readable prose and not to wiki markup size ( as found on history lists or other means ) , and each kb can be equated to 1,000 characters . number of characters in an article can be found with the help of xtools ( also accessible via page history from page statistics link at the top ) under '' prose '' in the '' general statistics '' section ; shubinator 's dyk tool ; or prosesize . the rules of thumb apply somewhat less to disambiguation pages and naturally do not apply to redirects . they also apply less strongly to list articles , especially if splitting them would require breaking up a sortable table . content removal . content , especially summary , well sourced and non-tangential information , should not be removed from articles simply to reduce length ; see wikipedia : content removal reasons for acceptable reasons . markup size . markup or markup language is the code used to organise a document and make it readable . wiki markup is the codes used on wikipedia . markup size includes readable prose , the wiki codes , and any media used in the article , such as images or audio clips . markup size will always be greater than or equal to the readable prose size on which the above size guideline is based . you can find the size of the markup of a page in bytes from its page history ( near the bottom ) . also the search box entry : intitle : article title will show both number of words in the article and the size of the article in kilobytes . in most cases these are not reliable indications on their own of whether an article should be split . the largest articles by markup size are listed at special : longpages . note that the ability to wikipedia : section decreases wait time , removing some of the many , oversized-page problems for editors ; however , readers with slow modems will still have to wait for the entire page to load . you can set your preferences ( by changing the '' threshold for stub link formatting '' under the '' appearance '' menu ) to make links to pages smaller than a certain size appear in a different colour . '' size '' in this context means the size of the source text seen in the edit box . if you have problems editing a long article . if you have encountered an article that is so long you ca n't edit it , or if your browser chops off the end of the article when you try to edit it , there are a few ways you can solve the problem . the best improvement is to simply upgrade to a more modern web browser , if possible . there are also many other benefits to upgrading to their latest version , such as better security , better displaying of content written to more modern html , and bug fixes . many articles on wikipedia may be longer than 32 & nbsp ; kb on a permanent basis , so older browsers will continue to have occasional problems with long articles . often you can edit the article one section at a time by using the '' edit '' links you see next to each header in the article . this should work as long as none of the sections are longer than 32 & nbsp ; kb , which they really should n't be . you can edit text before the first section by editing the first section , then changing the & section 1 part of the url to & section 0 . ( see t2156 and two javascript workarounds : 1 , 2 . ) you can insert a new section either by using the '' '' link ( if there is one ) in the '' views '' section , or by editing an existing section and explicitly adding a second header line within it . see also section editing and editing before the first section . if you find a section too long to edit correctly and safely , or have a problem otherwise relevant , you can post a request for assistance on the help desk . follow the '' new section '' link , which will allow you to post a new comment without editing any existing text . see also . special : longpages wikipedia : abundance and redundancy wikipedia : article series wikipedia : content removal wikipedia : database reports/long pages wikipedia : database reports/long stubs wikipedia : database reports/talk pages by size wikipedia : featured articles/by length wikipedia : out of scope wikipedia : template limits wikipedia : too much detail wikipedia : writing better articles stay on topic . references .