Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester

early life . alice christabel was born in montagu house , whitehall , london , on christmas day 1901 as the third daughter and fifth child of john montagu douglas scott , 7th duke of buccleuch , and his wife , the former lady margaret alice '' molly '' bridgeman , daughter of the 4th earl of bradford . her brothers walter and william and her nephew john were all conservative mps . her first cousin , marian montagu douglas scott , was the paternal grandmother of sarah , duchess of york , former wife of alice 's great-nephew , prince andrew , duke of york . she was a descendant , in an unbroken male line , of charles ii through his eldest but illegitimate son , james scott , 1st duke of monmouth , himself a major political figure during the years leading up to the glorious revolution . as she was born on christmas day , she was given the middle name of christabel . alice spent much of her childhood travelling '' between splendid houses '' : boughton house in northamptonshire , drumlanrig castle in dumfries and galloway , and bowhill , scottish borders . eildon hall , in melrose , scottish borders , was more or less home base . an experience of nearly drowning at the age of 14 awoke her to a keen sense of making the most of every day . caught in a current in the solway firth , she was convinced that she was going to die and she prayed to god , begging for a miracle to save her life in exchange for her devoting herself to public service : she attended the independent malvern st james , in west malvern , worcestershire , and later travelled to france , kenya and india . after school in west malvern , she spent a year in paris '' before returning home to be presented at court in 1920 '' . alice enjoyed skiing , horse-riding and hunting and was also an accomplished watercolourist . a painting by her , done near archers post in kenya , is today part of the royal collection . in kenya , where she stayed for over a year , from about 1929–1931 , she stayed in the area typical of the so-called happy valley set and encountered many of the personalities of said clique , including evelyn waugh . . marriage . in 1935 , alice returned to the united kingdom when she learned that her father 's health had been deteriorating . in august 1935 , lady alice became engaged to prince henry , duke of gloucester . henry proposed to alice with a square sapphire ring . they were married in a private ceremony , in the private chapel , buckingham palace , on 6 november of that year . hrh princess alice , duchess of gloucester , memories of ninety years , london : collins & brown ltd . , 1991 , p . 138 . a much more elaborate wedding was originally planned for westminster abbey ; but after the duke of buccleuch died of cancer on 19 october 1935 , and in consideration of the king 's own failing health , it was decided that the wedding should be scaled down to a more private setting . the duchess 's bridesmaids were her sister , the lady angela montagu-douglas-scott ; her nieces clare phipps , lady elizabeth montagu-douglas-scott , and anne hawkins ; her husband 's nieces elizabeth ii and princess margaret of york ; her cousin moyra montagu-douglas-scott ; and her husband 's cousin lady mary whitley . alice wore a blush-hued wedding gown , the only british royal bride to do so . her gown was designed by norman hartnell , who later designed the wedding dress of princess elizabeth , the future queen . the dress was '' of modest simplicity , with long , narrow sleeves and a high neckline draped into a nosegay of artificial orange-blossom '' . the veil was made from '' a drifting cloud of crisp modern tulle '' . on her way to the private chapel at buckingham palace , alice wore '' an ermine blanket stole '' due to the cold weather . although the day was cold and wet , a crowd estimated to be over one million people lined the streets from the palace to the railway station to see the couple off on their honeymoon . she was often referred to as the '' winter princess '' from then on . . life in the royal family . initially the duke and duchess of gloucester lived at the royal pavilion in aldershot , where the duke was taking the army staff course . the duke of gloucester left the army to take on more public duties following the abdication of edward viii in december 1936 . the couple received a grace and favour residence at york house , st james 's palace , london and , in 1938 , they purchased barnwell manor in northamptonshire . the duchess suffered two miscarriages , before giving birth to two sons : : prince william of gloucester ( 18 december 1941 – 28 august 1972 ) : prince richard , duke of gloucester ( born 26 august 1944 ) the duke and duchess of gloucester travelled extensively , undertaking various engagements . the public appearances of the duchess included launching on 19 october 1937 . during world war ii , the duchess worked with the red cross and the order of st john . she became head of the women 's auxiliary air force ( waaf ) in 1939 as senior controller , changed to air commandant on 12 march 1940 , and appointed air chief commandant on 4 march 1943 , when she took over as director until august 1944 . when the waaf became the women 's royal air force ( wraf ) in 1949 , she was appointed an air chief commandant ( equivalent to air vice-marshal ) in the new service on 1 february 1949 . she was promoted to air marshal on 1 september 1968 , and to air chief marshal in the royal air force on 23 february 1990 . she also served as deputy to queen elizabeth , the consort of george vi , as commandant-in-chief of the nursing corps . from 1945 to 1947 , the duke and duchess of gloucester lived in canberra , where the duke was serving as governor-general of australia . the duchess of gloucester served as colonel-in-chief or deputy colonel-in-chief of a dozen regiments in the british army , including the king 's own scottish borderers , the northamptonshire regiment , the 2nd east anglian regiment ( duchess of gloucester 's own royal lincolnshire and northamptonshire ) , the royal anglian regiment , the royal hussars , and the royal irish rangers ( 27th inniskilling ) ; also , the royal corps of transport . she was patron of the girls ' day school trust and queen margaret college . in 1965 , while returning from winston churchill 's funeral in their vehicle , the duke suffered a stroke which resulted in a car crash , with the duke being thrown out of the car and the duchess '' suffering facial injuries '' . on the occasion she wrote '' i was sitting beside him to grab the wheel or put my foot on the brake if he fell asleep and lost control , but on that occasion i must have dozed off myself . apparently the rolls swerved off the road ( and ) ended upside down in a field of cabbages . prince henry had luckily been thrown through the open door.into ( stinging ) nettles and brambles '' . . later life . in 1975 , princess alice was the first woman to be appointed a dame grand cross of the order of the bath . in 1981 , she first published her memoirs under the title the memoirs of princess alice , duchess of gloucester . in 1991 , she released a revised edition as memories of ninety years . in 1994 , after the gloucesters had to give up barnwell manor for financial reasons , alice moved from barnwell to kensington palace , where she lived with the current duke and duchess of gloucester . she officially retired from public duties at the age of 98 . in 1999 , the duke issued a press release announcing that due to physical frailty , his mother would no longer carry out public engagements outside the environs of kensington palace . in july 2000 , the duke said in another statement that his mother had become '' increasingly forgetful . '' in december 2001 , the royal family held a ceremony to acknowledge princess alice 's 100th birthday . this was princess alice 's last public appearance ( as well as the last public appearance of princess margaret , the queen 's younger sister , who died on 9 & nbsp ; february 2002 ) . on the death of queen elizabeth the queen mother at age 101 in march 2002 , princess alice became the oldest living member of the british royal family . on 21 august 2003 , princess alice surpassed the queen mother 's record as the oldest person in the history of the british royal family by reaching the age of 101 years and 238 days . on 20 september 2003 , at the age of 101 years and 269 days , she was certified by guinness world records as the world 's longest ever lived royal , surpassing leonilla bariatinskaya . . death . princess alice died on 29 october 2004 in her sleep at kensington palace at age 102 , 57 days before her 103rd birthday and several years after suffering a stroke . following her death , the union jack flew at half mast at buckingham palace . her funeral was held on 5 november 2004 , at st george 's chapel , windsor , and she was interred next to her husband , prince henry , and her elder son , prince william , in the royal burial ground at frogmore . the funeral was attended by elizabeth ii and other members of the british royal family . a memorial service was held at st clement danes on 2 february 2005 , which was attended by her son and his family and representatives of organisations princess alice was involved in ; the service was co-ordinated by the royal air force in respect of princess alice 's role as commandant-in-chief wraf . she was the eldest member of any royal family in history . legacy . hugo vickers called princess alice '' a very private person who was not widely known to the general public '' despite being the third highest ranking lady in the royal family at the time of her marriage . it was well known she disliked large parties . peter townsend said of her : '' she possessed classic , serene good looks and sincerity shone from her mild face . but she was painfully shy , so that conversation with her was sometimes halting and unrewarding , for you felt that she had so much more to say , but could not bring herself to say it . '' alice herself wrote in her autobiography : '' i was very shy and rather plump , . i made a miserable debut at a dance at windsor for princess mary 's birthday , uncomfortably squeezed into a white satin frock . '' although generally a woman of few and soft-spoken words , princess alice was known for her dry humour . soon after her marriage , when the couple moved to york house , they were warned that the drawing-room floor would not stand the weight of more than twenty people '' so we made a party list '' recalled the duchess many years later '' of the twenty-one people whom we disliked most '' . the queen mother said of princess alice after her son 's death in an aircrash in 1972 : '' the tragic accident was a great shock to all the family , but i feel desperately for his dear little mother . she has the courage of a lion , and has suffered so many cruel blows in the past few years . '' . vickers , p . 406 alice herself later admitted that following her son 's death '' i was completely stunned and have never quite been the same since . '' . titles , styles , honours and arms . titles and styles . 25 december 1901 – 5 november 1935 : lady alice montagu douglas scott 6 november 1935 – 10 june 1974 : her royal highness the duchess of gloucester 10 june 1974 – 29 october 2004 : her royal highness princess alice , duchess of gloucester on 10 june 1974 , prince henry died , and was succeeded as duke of gloucester by their second son , prince richard ( the couple 's elder son , prince william , had been killed in an aeroplane crash in 1972 ) . as a widow she requested permission from her niece , the queen , to use the title and style hrh princess alice , duchess of gloucester instead of adopting hrh the dowager duchess of gloucester . the queen allowed her aunt to adopt this title , in part to avoid confusion with her daughter-in-law , the new duchess of gloucester ( formerly birgitte eva van deurs ) . . honours . british honours gcstj : venerable order of saint john , 1936 ci : order of the crown of india , 9 june 1937 gbe : order of the british empire , 11 may 1937 gcvo : royal victorian order , 1 january 1948 gcb : order of the bath , 2 april 1975 royal family order of king george v , 1935 royal family order of king george vi , 1937 royal family order of queen elizabeth ii , 1952 foreign honours order of the crown ( romania ) , 1938 grand cordon of the order of the virtues ( nishan al-kamal ) , 1950 grand cross of the order of the queen of sheba , 1958 . ancestry . publications . princess alice , duchess of gloucester , the memoirs of princess alice , duchess of gloucester ( london : collins , 1983 ) , . princess alice , duchess of gloucester , memories of ninety years ( london : collins & brown ltd , 1991 ) , . references . bibliography . ronald allison and sarah riddell , eds . , the royal encyclopedia ( london : macmillan , 1991 ) , . marlene a . eilers , queen victoria 's descendants ( new york : atlantic international publishing , 1987 ) , . external links . princess alice , duchess of gloucester official website of the british monarchy ( archived ) regiments.org listing