Vow

marriage vows . marriage vows are binding promises each partner in a couple makes to the other during a wedding ceremony . marriage customs have developed over history and keep changing as human society develops . in earlier times and in most cultures the consent of the partners has not had the importance now attached to it , at least in western societies and in those they have influenced . protestants , for instance , consider marriage vow as an unchangeable divine law since it needs not only '' conciliar assertion '' but also the support of the scripture , making marriage a form of divine ordinance . . divine vows . within the world of monks and nuns , a vow is sometimes a transaction between a person and a deity , where the former promises to render some service or gift , or devotes something valuable to the deity 's use . the vow is a kind of oath , with the deity being both the witness and recipient of the promise . for example , see the book of judges or the bodhisattva vows . in the roman catholic code of canon law , the vow and the oath are not considered acts of worship ( cultus ) like the liturgical celebration . however , they are considered acts of religion due to their sacred character , including the religious obligations they entail . here , an important characteristic of the vow involves the manner by which non-catholics are recognized to be capable of making a vow , which must also be fulfilled by reason of the virtue of religion . the god is usually expected to grant , on entering into contracts or covenants with man , the claims his vow establishes on their benevolence , and valuing of his gratitude . conversely , in taking a vow , the petitioner 's piety and spiritual attitude have begun to outweigh those merely ritual details of the ceremony that are all-important in magical rites . sometimes the old magical usage survives side by side with the more developed idea of a personal power to be approached in prayer . for example , in the maghreb ( in north africa ) , in time of drought the maidens of ma.zouna carry every evening in procession through the streets a doll called ghonja , really a dressed-up wooden spoon , symbolizing a pre-islamic rain-spirit . often one of the girls carries on her shoulders a sheep , and her companions sing the following words : here we have a sympathetic rain charm , combined with a prayer to the rain viewed as a personal goddess and with a promise or vow to give her the animal . the point of the promise lies of course in the fact that water is in that country stored and carried in sheep-skins . professor a . bel in paper quelque rites pour obtenir la pluie , in xiv me congres des orientalistes ( alger , 1905 ) . secondly , the vow is quite apart from established cults , and is not provided for in the religious calendar . the roman vow ( votum ) , as w . w . fowler observes in his work the roman festivals ( london , 1899 ) , p . & nbsp ; 346 , '' was the exception , not the rule ; it was a promise made by an individual at some critical moment , not the ordered and recurring ritual of the family or the state . ' the vow , however , contained so large an element of ordinary prayer that in the greek language one and the same word ( ) expressed both . the characteristic mark of the vow , as the suda and the greek church fathers remark , was that it was a promise either of things to be offered to god in the future and at once consecrated to him in view of their being so offered , or of austerities to be undergone . for offering and austerity , sacrifice and suffering , are equally calculated to appease an offended deity 's wrath or win his goodwill . the bible affords many examples of vows . thus in judges xi . jephthah 'vowed a vow unto the lord , and said , if thou wilt indeed deliver the children of ammon into my hand , then it shall be that whosoever cometh forth out of the doors of my house ' to meet me , when i return in peace from the children . of ammon , it shall be the lord 's , and i will offer it up for a burnt-offering . ' in the sequel it is his own daughter who so meets him , and he sacrifices her after a respite of two months , granted so she could 'bewail her virginity upon the mountains . ' a thing or person thus vowed to the deity became holy and sanctified to god . ( jephthah could not have lawfully burned his daughter in sacrifice as it would constitute human sacrifice - something that god explicitly forbade . some have suggested that his daughter remained unmarried and was given to serve the lord in the temple . ) it belonged to once to the sanctuary or to the priests who represented the god . in the judaism , the latter , under certain conditions , defined in leviticus 27 , could permit it to be redeemed . but to substitute an unclean for a clean beast that had been vowed , or an imperfect victim for a flawless one , was to court with certainty the divine displeasure . it is often difficult to distinguish a vow from an oath . a vow is an oath , but an oath is only a vow if the divine being is the recipient of the promise and is not merely a witness . therefore , in acts 23:21 , over forty men , enemies of paul , bound themselves , under a curse , neither to eat nor to drink till they had slain him . in the christian fathers we hear of vows to abstain from meat diet and wine . but of the abstentions observed by votaries , those with no relation to the barber 's art were the commonest . wherever individuals were concerned to create or confirm a tie connecting them with a god , a shrine or a particular religious circle , a hair-offering was in some form or other imperative . they began by polling their locks at the shrine and left them as a soul-token in charge of the god , and never polled them afresh until the vow was fulfilled . so achilles consecrated his hair to the river spercheus and vowed not to cut it until he should return safe from troy ; and the hebrew nazarite , whose strength resided in his flowing locks , only cut them off and burned them on the altar when the days of his vow were ended , and he could return to ordinary life , having achieved his mission . so in acts 18:18 paul had shorn his head in cenchreae , for he had a vow . in acts 21:23 we hear of four men who , having a vow on them , had their heads shaved at paul 's expense . among the ancient chatti , as tacitus relates ( germania , 31 ) , young men allowed their hair and beards to grow , and vowed to court danger in that guise until they each had slain an enemy . '' in christianity , the vow has more weight than an oath when approached from the view that it binds one to god whereas the oath binds one to man . this was explained further by st . thomas aquinas , who said : the obligation both of a vow and of an oath arises from something divine ; but in different ways . for the obligation of a vow arises from the fidelity we owe god , which binds us to fulfil our promises to him . on the other hand , the obligation of an oath arises from the reverence we owe him which binds us to fulfil our promises to him . . see also . albanian sworn virgins marriage vows religious vows ( or monastic vows ) heitstrenging . references . external links .