Washing machine

history . washing by hand . laundering by hand involves soaking , beating , scrubbing , and rinsing dirty textiles . before indoor plumbing , the maids , washerwoman ( laundress ) , or housewife also had to carry all the water used for washing , boiling , and rinsing the laundry ; according to an 1886 calculation , some women in the united states fetched water eight to ten times every day from a pump , well , or spring for these purposes . water for the laundry would be hand carried , heated on a fire for washing , then poured into the tub . that made the warm soapy water precious ; it would be reused , first to wash the least soiled clothing , then to wash progressively dirtier laundry . removal of soap and water from the clothing after washing was a separate process . first , soap would be rinsed out with clear water . after rinsing , the soaking wet clothing would be formed into a roll and twisted by hand to extract water . the entire process often occupied an entire day of hard work , plus drying and ironing . nearly 5 billion of the world 's population of 7 billion as of 2010 still hand-wash their clothes . . early machines . the first english patent under the category of washing machines was issued in 1691 . mothers and daughters of invention : notes for a revised history of technology , autumn stanley , rutgers university press , 1995 , p . 301 a drawing of an early washing machine appeared in the january 1752 issue of the gentleman 's magazine , a british publication . jacob christian schäffer 's washing machine design was published 1767 in germany . in 1782 , henry sidgier issued a british patent for a rotating drum washer , and in the 1790s edward beetham sold numerous '' patent washing mills '' in england . one of the first innovations in washing machine technology was the use of enclosed containers or basins that had grooves , fingers , or paddles to help with the scrubbing and rubbing of the clothes . the person using the washer would use a stick to press and rotate the clothes along the textured sides of the basin or container , agitating the clothes to remove dirt and mud . this crude agitator technology was hand-powered , but still more effective than actually hand-washing the clothes . more advancements were made to washing machine technology in the form of the rotative drum design . basically , these early design patents consisted of a drum washer that was hand-cranked to make the wooden drums rotate . while the technology was simple enough , it was a milestone in the history of washing machines , as it introduced the idea of '' powered '' washing drums . as metal drums started to replace the traditional wooden drums , it allowed for the drum to turn above an open fire or an enclosed fire chamber , raising the water temperature for more effective washes . it would not be until the 19th century when steam power would be used in washing machine designs . in 1862 , a patented '' compound rotary washing machine , with rollers for wringing or mangling '' by richard lansdale of pendleton , manchester , was shown at the 1862 london exhibition . the first united states patent titled '' clothes washing '' was granted to nathaniel briggs of new hampshire in 1797 . because of the patent office fire in 1836 , no description of the device survives . invention of a washing machine is also attributed to watervliet shaker village , as a patent was issued to an amos larcom of watervliet , new york , in 1829 , but it is not certain that larcom was a shaker . a device that combined a washing machine with a wringer mechanism did not appear until 1843 , when canadian john e . turnbull of saint john , new brunswick patented a '' clothes washer with wringer rolls . '' mario theriault , great maritime inventions 1833–1950 , goose lane , 2001 , p . 28 during the 1850s , nicholas bennett from the mount lebanon shaker society at new lebanon , new york , invented a '' wash mill '' , but in 1858 he assigned the patent to david parker of the canterbury shaker village , where it was registered as the '' improved washing machine '' . passively collecting lint from water forced through the agitator . front-loaders tend to require separate pumps and plumbing to provide lint filters which are often mounted behind covers on the bottom of the machine . another advantage to the top loading design is the reliance on gravity to contain the water , rather than potentially trouble-prone or short-lived front door seals . top loaders may require less periodic maintenance , since there is no need to clean a door seal or bellows , although a plastic tub may still require a periodic '' maintenance wash '' cycle ( described below ) . as with front-loading washers , clothing should not be packed tightly into a top-loading washer . although wet fabric usually fits into a smaller space than dry fabric , a dense wad of fabric can restrict water circulation , resulting in poor soap distribution and incomplete rinsing . extremely overloaded top-loading washers can either jam the motion of the agitator , overloading or damaging the motor or gearbox , burning drive belts , or tearing fabrics - many whirlpool/kenmore machines even have a mechanical '' fuse '' designed to break before the expensive motor is damaged . extreme overloading can also push fabrics into the small gap between the underside of the agitator and the bottom of the wash basket , resulting in fabrics wrapped around the agitator shaft , possibly requiring agitator removal to unjam . some top-loading machines use mechanisms very similar to front-loading drum machines , and are described below . front-loading . the front-loading or horizontal-axis clothes washer is the dominant design in europe . in other regions of the world , most '' high-end '' washing machines are of this type . in addition , most commercial and industrial clothes washers around the world are of the horizontal-axis design . this layout mounts the inner basket and outer tub horizontally , and loading is through a door at the front of the machine . the door often but not always contains a transparent window . agitation is supplied by the back-and-forth rotation of the cylinder and by gravity . the clothes are lifted up by paddles on the inside wall of the drum and then dropped . this motion flexes the weave of the fabric and forces water and detergent solution through the clothes load . because the wash action does not require the clothing be freely suspended in water , only enough water is needed to moisten the fabric . because less water is required , front-loaders typically use less soap , and the repeated dropping and folding action of the tumbling can easily produce large amounts of foam or suds . front-loaders control water usage through the surface tension of water , and the capillary action this creates in the fabric weave . a front-loader washer always fills to the same low water level , but a large pile of dry clothing standing in water will soak up the moisture , causing the water level to drop . the washer then refills to maintain the original water level . because it takes time for this water absorption to occur with a motionless pile of fabric , nearly all front-loaders begin the washing process by slowly tumbling the clothing under the stream of water entering and filling the drum , to rapidly saturate the clothes with water . front-loading washers are mechanically simple compared to top-loaders , with the main motor ( a universal motor or variable-frequency drive motor ) normally being connected to the drum via a grooved pulley belt and large pulley wheel , without the need for a gearbox , clutch or crank . some models , such as those by lg , utilitize a motor directly connected to the drum , eliminating the need for a belt and pulley . but front-load washers suffer from their own technical problems , due to the drum lying sideways . for example , a top loading washer keeps water inside the tub merely through the force of gravity pulling down on the water , while a front-loader must tightly seal the door shut with a gasket to prevent water dripping onto the floor during the wash cycle . this access door is locked shut with an interlock during the entire wash cycle , since opening the door with the machine in use could result in water gushing out onto the floor . in most machines , the interlock is usually doubly redundant to prevent either opening with the drum full of water or being opened during the spin cycle . for front-loaders without viewing windows on the door , it is possible to accidentally pinch fabric between the door and the drum , resulting in tearing and damage to the pinched clothing during tumbling and spinning . nearly all front-loader washers for the consumer market also use a folded flexible bellows assembly around the door opening , to keep clothing contained inside the basket during the tumbling wash cycle . if this bellows assembly were not used , small articles of clothing such as socks could slip out of the wash basket near the door , and fall down the narrow slot between the outer tub and basket , plugging the drain and possibly jamming rotation of the inner basket . retrieving lost items from between the outer tub and inner basket can require complete disassembly of the front of the washer and pulling out the entire inner wash basket . commercial and industrial front-loaders used by businesses ( described below ) usually do not use the bellows , and instead require all small objects to be placed in a mesh bag to prevent loss near the basket opening . the bellows assembly around the door is a potential source of problems for the consumer front-loader . the bellows has a large number of flexible folds to permit the tub to move separately from the door during the high speed extraction cycle . on many machines , these folds can collect lint , dirt , and moisture , resulting in mold and mildew growth , and a foul odor . some front-loading washer operating instructions say the bellows should be wiped down monthly with a strong bleach solution , while others offer a special '' freshening '' cycle where the machine is run empty with a strong dosing of bleach . the inherent mechanical weak spot of the front loader design is the cantilevered mounting of the inner drum within the outer tub . the drum bearing has to support the entire weight of the drum , the laundry , and the dynamic loads created by the sloshing of the water and of the imbalance of the load during the spin cycle . the drum bearing eventually wears out , and usually requires extensive dismantling of the machine to replace , which often results in the machine being write-off due to the failure of a relatively inexpensive component that is labor-intensive to renew . some manufacturers have compounded this problem by '' overmolding '' the drum bearing into the outer tub to reduce manufacturing costs , but this makes the bearing impossible to renew without replacing the entire outer tub - which usually forces owners to scrap the entire machine - this may be viewed as an implementation of planned obsolescence . compared to top-loading washers , clothing can be packed more tightly in a front loader , up to the full drum volume if using a cottons wash cycle . this is because wet cloth usually fits into a smaller space than dry cloth , and front loaders are able to self-regulate the water needed to achieve correct washing and rinsing . extreme overloading of front-loading washers pushes fabrics towards the small gap between the loading door and the front of the wash basket , potentially resulting in fabrics lost between the basket and outer tub , and in severe cases , tearing of clothing and jamming the motion of the basket . variant and hybrid designs . there are many variations of the two general designs . top-loading machines in asia use impellers instead of agitators . impellers are similar to agitators except that they do not have the center post extending up in the middle of the wash tub basket . some machines which actually load from the top are otherwise much more similar to front-loading horizontal-axis drum machines . they have a drum rotating around a horizontal axis , as a front-loader , but there is no front door ; instead there is a liftable lid which provides access to the drum , which has a hatch which can be latched shut . clothes are loaded , the hatch and lid are closed , and the machine operates and spins just like a front-loader . these machines are narrower but usually taller than front-loaders , usually have a lower capacity , and are intended for use where only a narrow space is available , as is sometimes the case in europe . they have incidental advantages : they can be loaded without bending down ; they do not require a perishable rubber bellows seal ; and instead of the drum having a single bearing on one side , it has a pair of symmetrical bearings , one on each side , avoiding asymmetrical bearing loading and potentially increasing life . this type of washing machine is popular in europe , where space is limited , as a washer can be as little as 40 & nbsp ; cm wide , and a full washer and dryer installation can be as little as 80 & nbsp ; cm wide . there are also combo washer dryer machines that combine washing cycles and a full drying cycle in the same drum , eliminating the need to transfer wet clothes from a washer to a dryer machine . in principle , these machines are convenient for overnight cleaning ( the combined cycle is considerably longer ) , but the effective capacity for cleaning larger batches of laundry is drastically reduced . the drying process tends to use much more energy than using two separate devices , because a combo washer dryer not only must dry the clothing , but also needs to dry out the wash chamber itself . new machines recently on the market have produced new spin technology allowing these combo machines to be quicker than normal machines . this patented technology comes from the brand lightning clean . these machines are used more where space is at a premium , such as areas of europe and japan , because they can be fit into small spaces , perform both washing and drying , and many can be operated without dedicated utility connections . in these machines , the washer and dryer functions often have different capacities , with the dryer usually having the lowest capacity . these machines should not be confused with a dryer on top of a washer installation , or with a laundry center , which is a one piece appliance offering a compromise between a washer-dryer combo and a full washer to the side of the dryer installation or a dryer on top of a washer installation . laundry centers usually have the dryer on top of the washer , with the controls for both machines being on a single control panel . often , the controls are simpler than the controls on a washer-dryer combo or a dedicated washer and dryer . some implementations are patented under us patent us6343492b1 and us patent us 6363756b1 . comparison . true front-loaders , and top-loading machines with horizontal-axis drum as described above , can be compared with top-loaders on a number of aspects : efficient cleaning : front-loaders usually use less energy , water , and detergent compared to the best top-loaders . high efficiency washers use 20 % to 60 % of the detergent , water and energy of standard '' washers . they usually take somewhat longer ( 20–110 minutes ) to wash a load , but are often computer controlled with additional sensors , to adapt the wash cycle to the needs of each load . as this technology improves , the human interface will also improve , to make it easier to understand and control the many different cleaning options . water usage : front-loaders usually use less water than top-loading residential clothes washers . estimates are that front-loaders use from one third to one half as much water as top-loaders . spin-dry effectiveness : front-loaders ( and european horizontal axis top loaders and some front loaders ) offer much higher maximum spin speeds of up to 2000 & nbsp ; rpm , although home machines tend to be in the 1000 to 1400 & nbsp ; rpm range , while top-loaders ( with agitators ) do not exceed 1140 & nbsp ; rpm . high-efficiency top-loaders with a wash plate ( instead of an agitator ) can spin up to 1100 rpm , as their center of gravity is lower . higher spin speeds , along with the diameter of the drum , determine the g-force , and a higher g-force removes more residual water , making clothes dry faster . this also reduces energy consumption if clothes are dried in a clothes dryer . cycle length : top-loaders have tended to have shorter cycle times , in part because their design has traditionally emphasized simplicity and speed of operation more than resource conservation . wear and abrasion : top-loaders require an agitator or impeller mechanism to force enough water through clothes to clean them effectively , which greatly increases mechanical wear and tear on fabrics . front-loaders use paddles in the drum to repeatedly pick up and drop clothes into water for cleaning ; this gentler action causes less wear . the amount of clothes wear can be roughly gauged by the amount of accumulation in a clothes dryer lint filter , since the lint largely consists of stray fibers detached from textiles during washing and drying . difficult items : top-loaders may have trouble cleaning large items , such as sleeping bags or pillows , which tend to float on top of the wash water rather than circulate within it . in addition , vigorous top-loader agitator motions may damage delicate fabrics . noise : front-loaders tend to operate more quietly than top-loaders because the door seal helps contain noise , and because there is less of a tendency to imbalance . top-loaders usually need a mechanical transmission ( due to agitators , see above ) , which can generate more noise than the rubber belt or direct drive found in most front loaders . compactness : true front-loading machines may be installed underneath counter-height work surfaces . a front-loading washing machine , in a fully fitted kitchen , may even be disguised as a kitchen cabinet . these models can also be convenient in homes with limited floor area , since the clothes dryer may be installed directly above the washer ( '' stacked '' configuration ) . water leakage : top-loading machines are less prone to leakage , because simple gravity can reliably keep water from spilling out the loading door on top . true front-loading machines require a flexible seal or gasket on the front door , and the front door must be locked during operation to prevent opening , lest large amounts of water spill out . this seal may leak and require replacement . however , many current front-loaders use so little water that they can be stopped mid-cycle for addition or removal of laundry , while keeping the water level in the horizontal tub below the door level . best practice installations of either type of machine will include a floor drain or an overflow catch tray with a drain connection , since neither design is immune to leakage or a solenoid valve getting stuck in the open position . maintenance and reliability : top-loading washers are more tolerant of maintenance neglect , and may not need a regular '' freshening '' cycle to clean door seals and bellows . during the spin cycle , a top-loading tub is free to move about inside the cabinet of the machine , using only a lip around the top of the inner basket and outer tub to keep the spinning water and clothing from spraying out over the edge . therefore , the potentially problematic door-sealing and door-locking mechanisms used by true front-loaders are not needed . on the other hand , top-loaders use mechanical gearboxes that are more vulnerable to wear than simpler front-load motor drives . accessibility and ergonomics : front-loaders are more convenient for dwarfism and those with paraplegia , as the controls are front-mounted and the horizontal drum eliminates the need for standing or climbing . risers , also referred to as pedestals , often with storage drawers underneath , can be used to raise the door of a true front-loader closer to the user 's level . initial cost : in countries where top-loaders are popular , front-loaders tend to be more expensive to buy than top-loaders , though their lower operating costs can ultimately lead to lower total cost of ownership , especially if energy , detergent , or water are expensive . on the other hand , in countries with a large front-loader user base , top-loaders are usually seen as alternatives and more expensive than basic off-brand front loaders , although without many differences in total cost of ownership apart from design-originated ones . in addition , manufacturers have tended to include more advanced features such as internal water heating , automatic dirt sensors , and high-speed emptying on front-loaders , although some of these features could be implemented on top-loaders . wash cycles . the earliest washing machines simply carried out a washing action when loaded with clothes and soap , filled with hot water , and started . over time machines became more and more automated , first with very complex electromechanical controllers , then fully electronic controllers ; users put clothes into the machine , select a suitable program via a switch , start the machine , and come back to remove clean and slightly damp clothes at the end of the cycle . the controller starts and stops many different processes including pumps and valves to fill and empty the drum with water , heating , and rotating at different speeds , with different combinations of settings for different fabrics . washing . many front loading machines have internal electrical heating elements to heat the wash water , to near boiling if desired . the rate of chemical cleaning action of the detergent and other laundry chemicals increases greatly with temperature , in accordance with the arrhenius equation . washing machines with internal heaters can use special detergents formulated to release different chemical ingredients at different temperatures , allowing different type of stains and soils to be cleaned from the clothes as the wash water is heated up by the electrical heater . however , higher-temperature washing uses more energy , and many fabrics and elastics are damaged at higher temperatures . temperatures exceeding have the undesirable effect of inactivating the enzymes when using biological detergent . many machines are cold-fill , connected to cold water only , which they heat to operating temperature . where water can be heated more cheaply or with less carbon dioxide emission than by electricity , cold-fill operation is inefficient . front loaders need to use low-sudsing detergents because the tumbling action of the drum folds air into the clothes load that can cause over-sudsing and overflows . however , due to efficient use of water and detergent , the sudsing issue with front-loaders can be controlled by simply using less detergent , without lessening cleaning action . rinsing . washing machines perform several rinses after the main wash to remove most of the detergent . modern washing machines use less water due to environmental concerns ; however , this has led to the problem of poor rinsing on many washing machines on the market , which can be a problem to people who are allergy to detergents . the allergy uk website suggests re-running the rinse cycle , or rerunning the entire wash cycle without detergent . in response to complaints , many washing machines allow the user to select additional rinse cycles , at the expense of higher water usage and longer cycle time . bosch for example , in its allergy wash program , incorporates an additional 3-minute rinse cycle with water of at least 60 degree celsius to rinse off detergent residues and any allergen . . spinning . higher spin speeds , along with larger tub diameters , remove more water , leading to faster drying . on the other hand , avoid ironing can be obtained not using spin cycle in the washing machine . if a heated clothes dryer is used after the wash and spin , energy use is reduced if more water has been removed from clothes . however , faster spinning can crease clothes more . also , mechanical wear on bearings increases rapidly with rotational speed , reducing life . early machines would spin at 300 rpm and , because of lack of any mechanical suspension , would often shake and vibrate . in 1976 , most front loading washing machines spun at around 700 rpm , or less . separate spin-driers , without washing functionality , are available for specialized applications . for example , a small high-speed centrifuge machine may be provided in locker rooms of communal swimming pools to allow wet swimsuits to be substantially dried to a slightly damp condition after daily use . maintenance wash . many home washing machines use a plastic , rather than metal , outer shell to contain the wash water ; residue can build up on the plastic tub over time . some manufacturers advise users to perform a regular maintenance or '' freshening '' wash to clean the inside of the washing machine of any mold , bacteria , encrusted detergent , and unspecified dirt more effectively than with a normal wash . a maintenance wash is performed without any laundry , on the hottest wash program if there is a heater , adding substances such as white vinegar , 100 grams of citric acid , a detergent with bleaching properties , or a proprietary washing machine cleaner . the first injection of water goes into the sump so the machine can be allowed to fill for about 30 seconds before adding cleaning substances . efficiency and standards . capacity and cost are both considerations when purchasing a washing machine . all else being equal , a machine of higher capacity will cost more to buy , but will be more convenient if large amounts of laundry must be cleaned . fewer runs of a machine of larger capacity may have lower running costs and better energy and water efficiency than frequent use of a smaller machine , particularly for large families . running a large machine with small loads is wasteful . for many years energy and water efficiency were not regulated , and little attention was paid to them . from the last part of the twentieth century increasing attention was paid to efficiency , with regulations enforcing some standards , and efficiency being a selling point , both to save on running costs and to reduce carbon dioxide emissions associated with energy generation , and waste of water . as energy and water efficiency became regulated , they became a selling point , however , the effectiveness of rinsing was not regulated , and it did n't directly become a selling point . therefore , manufacturers tended to reduce the degree of rinsing after washing , saving water and motor energy . this had the side-effect of leaving more detergent residue in clothes . insufficient rinsing can leave enough detergent in clothes to affect people with allergies or sensitivity . . europe . washing machines display an eu energy label with grades for energy efficiency , washing performance and spin efficiency . grades for energy efficiency run from a+++ to d ( best to worst ) , providing a simple method for judging running costs . washing performance and spin efficiency are graded in the range a to g . however , all machines for sale must have washing performance a , such that manufacturers can not compromise washing performance in order to improve the energy efficiency . this labeling has had the desired effect of driving customers toward more efficient washing machines and away from less efficient ones . according to newer regulations , each washing machine is equipped with a waste water filter . there are two reasons for that . on one hand it has to be ensured that no hazardous chemical substances are disposed of improperly through the waste water channel ; on the other hand it must also be ensured that in case of a backwards shear in the waste water channel that is possible in case of technical problems , the feces and other waste could not enter the washing machine . . united states . top-loading and front-loading clothes washers are covered by a single federal standard regulating energy consumption . the old federal standard applicable until january 1 , 2011 included no restriction on water consumption ; washer manufacturers faced no legal restriction on how much unheated rinse water could be used . energy consumption for clothes washers is quantified using the energy factor . but after new mandatory federal standards were introduced , many us washers were manufactured to be more energy- and water-efficient than required by the federal standard , or even certified by the more stringent energy star standard . manufacturers were found to be motivated to exceed mandatory standards by a program of direct-to-manufacturer tax credits . in north america , the energy star program compares and lists energy efficient clothes washers . certified energy star units can be compared by their modified energy factor ( mef ) and water factor ( wf ) coefficients . the mef tells us how many cubic feet ( about 28.3 liters ) of clothes are washed per kwh ( kilowatt hour ) and is closely related to the configuration of the washer ( top-loading , front-loading ) , its spin speed and the temperatures and the amount of water used in the rinse and wash cycles . energy star residential clothes washers have a mef of at least 2.0 ( the higher the better ) , but the best machines may reach 3.5 . energy star washers have also a wf of less than 6.0 ( the lower the better ) . . commercial use . a commercial washing machine is intended for more frequent use than a consumer washing machine . durability and functionality is more important than style ; most commercial washers are bulky and heavy , often with more expensive stainless steel construction to minimize corrosion in a constantly moist environment . they are built with large easy-to-open service covers , and washers are designed not to require access to the underside for service . often commercial washers are installed in long rows with a wide access passageway behind all the machines to allow maintenance without moving the heavy machines . laundromat machines . many commercial washers are built for use by the general public , and are installed in publicly accessible laundromats or laundrettes , operated by currency acceptor or card readers . the features of a commercial laundromat washer are more limited than those of a consumer washer , usually offering just two or three basic wash programs and an option to choose wash cycle temperatures . the common front-loading commercial washing machine also differs from consumer models in its expulsion of wash and rinse water . while the consumer models pump used washer water out , allowing the waste line to be located above the washer , front-loading commercial machines generally use only gravity to expel used water . a drain in the rear , at the bottom of the machine opens at the appointed time during the cycle and water flows out . this creates the need for a drainage trough behind machines , which leads to a filter and drain . the trough is usually part of a cement platform built for the purpose of raising the machines to a convenient height , and can be seen behind washers at most laundromats . most laundromat machines are horizontal-axis front-loading models , because of their lower operating costs ( notably lower consumption of expensive hot water ) . industrial washers . by contrast , commercial washers for internal business operations ( still often referred to as '' washer/extractor '' machines ) may include features absent from domestic machines . many commercial washers offer an option for automatic injection of five or more different chemical types , so that the operator does not have to deal with constantly measuring out soap products and fabric softeners for each load by hand . instead , a precise metering system draws the detergents and wash additives directly from large liquid-chemical storage barrels and injects them as needed into the various wash and rinse cycles . some computer-controlled commercial washers offer the operator control over the various wash and rinse cycles , allowing the operator to program custom washing cycles . most large-scale industrial washers are horizontal-axis machines , but may have front- , side- , or top-load doors . some industrial clothes washers can batch-process up to of textiles at once , and can be used for extremely machine-abusive washing tasks such as stone washing or fabric bleaching and dyeing . an industrial washer can be mounted on heavy-duty shock absorbers and attached to a concrete floor , so that it can extract water from even the most severely out-of-balance and heavy wash loads . noise and vibration is not as unacceptable as in a domestic machine . it may be mounted on hydraulic cylinders , permitting the entire washer to be lifted and tilted so that fabrics can be automatically dumped from the wash drum onto a conveyor belt once the cycle is complete . one special type of continuous-processing washer is known as the tunnel washer . this specialized high-capacity machine does not have a drum where everything being washed undergoes distinct wash and rinse cycles , but moves the laundry slowly and continuously through a long , large-diameter horizontal-axis rotating tube in the manner of an assembly line , with different processes at different positions . . social impact . the historically laborious process of washing clothes ( wikt : laundry day ) has at times been labelled 'woman 's work ' . the spread of the washing machine has been seen to be a force behind the improvement of women 's status . in 2009 the italian newspaper l'osservatore romano published a playboy article on international women 's day arguing that the washing machine had done more for the liberation of women than the contraceptive pill and abortion rights . a study from université de montréal , canada presented a similar point of view , adding fridges as well . the following year , swedish statistician hans rosling suggested that the positive effect the washing machine had on the liberation of women , makes it '' the greatest invention of the industrial revolution '' . it has been argued that washing machines are an example of labour saving technology , which does not decrease employment because households can internalize the gains of the innovation . e mcgaughey , 'will robots automate your job away ? full employment , basic income , and economic democracy ' ( 2018 ) ssrn , part 3 ( 4 ) historian frances finnegan credits the rise of this technology in helping undercut the economic viability of the magdalene asylums in ireland , later revealed to be inhumanly abusive prisons for women , by supplanting their laundry businesses and prompting the eventual closure of the institutions as a whole . before the advent of the washing machine , laundry was done first at watercourses and then in public washhouses known as lavoirs . camille paglia and others argue that the washing machine led to a type of social isolation of women , '' as mulheres sufocam os homens '' . revista veja , issue 2,363 , 5 march 2014 ( in portuguese ) . as a communal activity became a solitary one . in india , dhobis , a caste group specialized in washing clothes , are slowly adapting to modern technology , but even with access to washing machines , many still handwash garments as well . since most modern homes are equipped with a washing machine , many indians have dispensed with the services of the dhobiwallahs . . environmental impact . due to the increasing cost of repairs relative to the price of a washing machine , there has been a major increase in the number of defective washing machines being discarded , to the detriment of the environment . the cost of repair and the expected life of the machine may make the purchase of a new machine seem like the better option . different washing machine models vary widely in their use of water , detergent , and energy . the energy required for heating is large compared to that used by lighting , electric motors , and electronic devices . because of their use of hot water , washing machines are among the largest consumers of energy in a typical modern home . . see also . centrifugation laundry clothes dryer combo washer dryer detergent drying cabinet energetic efficiency home appliance ironing laundry detergent laundry symbols list of home appliances major appliance silver nano standpipe l'increvable . references . e mcgaughey , 'will robots automate your job away ? full employment , basic income , and economic democracy ' ( 2018 ) ssrn , part 3 ( 4 ) on washing machines . external links . preservation and also exhibition of vintage washing machines washing machines at the canada science and technology museum washing machine museum