Extended play

background . history . eps were released in various sizes in different eras . the earliest multi-track records , issued around 1919 by grey gull records , were vertically cut 78 rpm discs known as '' 2-in-1 '' records . these had finer than usual grooves , like edison disc records . by 1949 , when the 45 & nbsp ; rpm single and 33 & nbsp ; rpm lp were competing formats , seven-inch 45 & nbsp ; rpm singles had a maximum playing time of only about four minutes per side . partly as an attempt to compete with the lp introduced in 1948 by rival columbia , rca victor introduced '' extended play '' 45s during 1952 . their narrower grooves , achieved by lowering the cutting levels and sound compression optionally , enabled them to hold up to 7.5 minutes per side—but still be played by a standard 45 & nbsp ; rpm phonograph . in the early era record companies released the entire content of lps as 45 & nbsp ; rpm eps . richard osborne vinyl : a history of the analogue record , routledge 2016 , p.106 these were usually 10-inch lps ( released until the mid-1950s ) split onto two seven-inch eps or 12-inch lps split onto three seven-inch eps , either sold separately or together in gatefold covers . this practice became much less common with the advent of triple-speed-available phonographs . introduced by rca in the us in 1952 , emi issued the first eps in britain in april 1954 . eps were usually compilations of singles or album samplers and were typically played at 45 & nbsp ; rpm on seven-inch ( 18 & nbsp ; cm ) discs , with two songs on each side . rca had success in the format with their top money earner , elvis presley , issuing 28 elvis eps between 1956 and 1967 , many of which topped the separate billboard ep chart during its brief existence . other than those published by rca , eps were relatively uncommon in the united states and canada , but they were widely sold in the united kingdom , and in some other european countries , during the 1950s and 1960s . in sweden ep was for long the most popular record format , with as much as 85 % of the market in the late 1950s being eps . leif aulin & pontus von tell british beat in sweden . the original vinyls 1957-1969 premium publishing billboard introduced a weekly ep chart in october 1957 , noting that '' the teen-age market apparently dominates the ep business , with seven out of the top 10 best-selling ep 's featuring artists with powerful teen-age appeal — four sets by elvis presley , two by pat boone and one by little richard '' . june bundy billboard adds to pop chart score : new service cover weekly listing of ep best-sellers ; album box score billboard 7 october 1957 record retailer printed an ep chart in 1960 . the nme , melody maker , disc and music echo and the record mirror continued to list eps on their respective singles charts . when the bbc and record retailer commissioned the british market research bureau ( bmrb ) to compile a chart it was restricted to singles and eps disappeared from the listings . the popularity of eps in the us had declined in the early 1960s in favour of lps . in the uk cliff richard and the shadows , both individually and collectively , and the beatles were the most prolific artists issuing eps in the 1960s , many of them highly successful releases . the beatles ' twist and shout outsold most singles for some weeks in 1963 . the success of the ep in britain lasted until around 1967 , but it later had a strong revival with punk rock in the late 1970s and the adaptation of the format for 12 '' and cd singles . dave thompson '' eps – albums on installment plans '' the music lover 's guide to record collecting , hal leonard corporation 2002 . notable ep releases . some classical music albums released at the beginning of the lp era were also distributed as ep albums—notably , the seven operas that arturo toscanini conducted on radio between 1944 and 1954 . these opera eps , originally broadcast on the nbc radio network and manufactured by rca , which owned the nbc network then , were made available both in 45 rpm and 33 & nbsp ; rpm . in the 1990s , they began appearing on compact discs . during the 1950s , rca published several ep albums of walt disney movies , containing both the story and the songs . these usually featured the original casts of actors and actresses . each album contained two seven-inch records , plus a fully illustrated booklet containing the text of the recording so that children could follow along by reading . some of the titles included snow white and the seven dwarfs ( 1937 ) , pinocchio ( 1940 ) , and what was then a recent release , the movie version of 20,000 leagues under the sea that was 1954 in film . the recording and publishing of 20,000 was unusual : it did not employ the movie 's cast , and years later , a 12 in & nbsp ; rpm album , with a nearly identical script , but another different cast , was sold by disneyland records in conjunction with the re-release of the movie in 1963 . because of the popularity of 7 '' and other formats , sp ( 78 & nbsp ; rpm , 10 '' ) records became less popular and the production of sps in japan was suspended in 1963 . in the philippines , seven-inch eps marketed as '' mini-lps '' ( but distinctly different from the mini-lps of the 1980s ) were introduced in 1970 , with tracks selected from an album and packaging resembling the album they were taken from . this mini-lp format also became popular in america in the early 1970s for promotional releases , and also for use in jukeboxes . stevie wonder included a bonus four-song ep with his double lp songs in the key of life in 1976 . during the 1970s and 1980s , there was less standardization and eps were made on seven-inch ( 18 & nbsp ; cm ) , 10-inch ( 25 & nbsp ; cm ) or 12-inch ( 30 & nbsp ; cm ) discs running either 33 or 45 & nbsp ; rpm . some novelty eps used odd shapes and colors , and a few of them were picture discs . alice in chains was the first band to ever have an ep reach number one on the billboard album chart . its ep , jar of flies , was released on january 25 , 1994 . in 2004 , linkin park and jay-z 's collaboration ep , collision course , was the next to reach the number one spot after alice in chains . in 2010 , the cast of the television series glee became the first artist to have two eps reach number one , with glee : the music , the power of madonna on the week of may 8 , 2010 , and glee : the music , journey to regionals on the week of june 26 , 2010 . in 2010 , warner bros . records revived the format with their '' six-pak '' offering of six songs on a compact disc . . eps in the digital and streaming era . due to the increased popularity of music downloads and streaming beginning the late 2000s , eps have become a common marketing strategy for pop musicians wishing to remain relevant and deliver music in more consistent timeframes leading to or following full studio albums . in the late 2000s to early 2010s , reissues of studio albums with expanded track listings were common , with the new music often being released as stand-alone eps . in october 2010 , a vanity fair article regarding the trend noted post-album eps as '' the next step in extending albums ' shelf lives , following the '' deluxe '' editions that populated stores during the past few holiday seasons—add a few tracks to the back end of an album and release one of them to radio , slap on a new coat of paint , and—voila ! —a stocking stuffer is born . '' examples of such releases include lady gaga 's the fame monster ( 2009 ) following her debut album the fame ( 2008 ) , and kesha 's cannibal ( 2010 ) following her debut album animal ( 2010 ) . a 2019 article in forbes discussing miley cyrus ' decision to release her then-upcoming seventh studio album plastic hearts as a trilogy of three eps stated : '' by delivering a trio of eps throughout a period of several months , miley is giving her fans more of what they want , only in smaller doses . when an artist drops an album , they run the risk of it being forgotten in a few weeks , at which point they need to start work on the follow-up , while still promoting and touring their recent effort . miley is doing her best to game the system by recording an album and delivering it to fans in pieces . '' major-label pop musicians who had previously employed such release strategies include colbie caillat with her fifth album gypsy heart ( 2014 ) being released following an ep of the album 's first five tracks known as gypsy heart : side a three months prior to the full album ; and jessie j 's fourth studio album r.o.s.e . ( 2018 ) which was released as four eps in as many days entitled r ( realisations ) , o ( obsessions ) , s ( sex ) and e ( empowerment ) . definition . the first eps were seven-inch vinyl records with more tracks than a normal single ( typically five to nine of them ) . although they shared size and speed with singles , they were a recognizably different format than the seven-inch single . although they could be named after a lead track , they were generally given a different title . examples include the beatles ' the beatles ' hits ep from 1963 , and the troggs ' troggs tops ep from 1966 , both of which collected previously released tracks . the playing time was generally between 10 and 15 minutes . they also came in cardboard picture sleeves at a time when singles were usually issued in paper company sleeves . eps tended to be album samplers or collections of singles . eps of all original material began to appear in the 1950s . examples are elvis presley 's love me tender from 1956 and '' just for you '' , '' peace in the valley '' and '' jailhouse rock '' from 1957 , and the kinks ' kinksize session from 1964 . twelve-inch eps were similar , but generally had between three and five tracks and a length of over 12 minutes . like seven-inch eps , these were given titles . ep releases were also issued in cassette and 10-inch vinyl formats . with the advent of the compact disc ( cd ) , more music was often included on '' single '' releases , with four or five tracks being common , and playing times of up to 25 minutes . these extended-length singles became known as maxi singles and while commensurate in length to an ep were distinguished by being designed to feature a single song , with the remaining songs considered b-sides , whereas an ep was designed not to feature a single song , instead resembling a mini album . eps of original material regained popularity in the punk rock era , when they were commonly used for the release of new material , e.g . buzzcocks ' spiral scratch ep . these featured four-track seven-inch singles played at 33 & nbsp ; rpm , the most common understanding of the term ep . beginning in the 1980s , many so-called '' singles '' have been sold in formats with more than two tracks . because of this , the definition of an ep is not determined only by the number of tracks or the playing time ; an ep is typically seen as four ( or more ) tracks of equal importance , as opposed to a four-track single with an obvious a-side and three b-sides . in the united states , the recording industry association of america , the organization that declares releases '' gold '' or '' platinum '' based on numbers of sales , defines an ep as containing three to five songs or under 30 minutes . on the other hand , the recording academy 's rules for grammy awards state that any release with five or more different songs and a running time of over 15 minutes is considered an album , with no mention of eps . in the united kingdom , any record with more than four distinct tracks or with a playing time of more than 25 minutes is classified as an album for sales-chart purposes . if priced as a single , they will not qualify for the main album chart but can appear in the separate budget albums chart . an intermediate format between eps and full-length lps is the mini-lp , which was a common album format in the 1980s . these generally contained 20–30 minutes of music and about seven tracks . in underground dance music , vinyl eps have been a longstanding medium for releasing new material , e.g . fourteenth century sky by the dust brothers . double eps . a double extended play is a name typically given to vinyl records or compact discs released as a set of two discs , each of which would normally qualify as an ep . the name is thus analogous to double album . as vinyl records , the most common format for the double ep , they consist of a pair of 7-inch discs recorded at 45 or 33 rpm , or two 12-inch discs recorded at 45 & nbsp ; rpm . the format is useful when an album 's worth of material is being pressed by a small plant geared for the production of singles rather than albums and may have novelty value which can be turned to advantage for publicity purposes . double eps are rare , since the amount of material recordable on a double ep could usually be more economically and sensibly recorded on a single vinyl lp . in the 1950s , capitol records had released a number of double eps by its more popular artists , including les paul . the pair of double eps ( ebf 1–577 , sides 1 to 8 ! ) were described on the original covers as '' parts . of a four-part album '' . in 1960 , joe meek released four tracks from his planned i hear a new world lp on an ep that was marked '' part 1 '' . a second ep was planned , but never appeared ; only the sleeve was printed . the first double ep released in britain was the beatles ' magical mystery tour film soundtrack . released in december 1967 on emi 's parlophone label , it contained six songs spread over two 7-inch discs and was packaged with a lavish colour booklet . in the united states and some other countries , the songs were augmented by the band 's single a- and b-sides from 1967 to create a full lp – & nbsp ; a practice that was common in the us but considered exploitative in the uk . the style council album the cost of loving was originally issued as two 12-inch eps . it is becoming more common to release two 12-inch 45s rather than a single 12-inch lp . though there are 11 songs that total about 40 minutes , enough for one lp , the songs are spread across two 12 '' 45 & nbsp ; rpm discs . also , the vinyl pressing of hail to the thief by radiohead uses this practice but is considered to be a full-length album . in 1982 cabaret voltaire released their studio album '' 2x45 '' on the uk-based label rough trade , featuring extended tracks over four sides of two 12-inch 45 & nbsp ; rpm discs , with graphics by artist neville brody . the band subsequently released a further album in this format , 1985 's '' drinking gasoline '' , on the virgin records label . there are a limited number of double eps which serve other purposes , however . an example of this is the dunedin double ep , which contains tracks by four different bands . using a double ep in this instance allowed each band to have its tracks occupying a different side . in addition , the groove on the physical record could be wider and thus allow for a louder album . jukebox ep . thumb in the 1960s and 1970s , record companies released ep versions of long-play ( lp ) albums for use in jukeboxes . these were commonly known as '' compact 33s '' or '' little lps '' . it was played at 33 & nbsp ; rpm , was pressed on seven-inch vinyl and frequently had as many as six songs . what made them ep-like was that some songs were omitted for time purposes , and the tracks deemed the most popular were left on . unlike most eps before them , and most seven-inch vinyl in general ( pre-1970s ) , these were issued in stereo . biggest selling debut ep all time . the hard rock band ugly kid joe holds the record of highest selling debut ep with as ugly as they wan na be , which sold two million copies in 1991 . . see also . list of number-one eps ( uk ) . references .