Icaria

second world war . the island suffered losses in property and lives during the second world war as the result of the italian and then german occupation . there are no exact figures on how many people starved , but in the village of karavostamo alone over 100 perished from starvation . '' red rock '' . after the ravages of the war the nationalists and communists fought in the greek civil war ( 1946–49 ) , and the greek government used the island to exile about 13,000 communists . to this date , a number of locals have remained sympathetic to left parties and communism , and , for this reason , icaria is referred to by some as the '' red rock '' ( κόκκινος βράχος , kokkinos vrahos ) . in his analysis , '' rebels and radicals ; icaria 1600–2000 '' , historian anthony j . papalas ( east carolina university ) examines modern icaria in the light of such 20th-century questions as poverty , emigration to america , the nature of the axis occupation , the rise of communism , the greek civil war , and the rightwing reaction to radical postwar movements . modern era . the quality of life improved greatly after 1960 , when the greek government began to invest in the infrastructure of the island to assist in the promotion of tourism . today , icaria is considered one of the world 's five '' blue zones '' – places where the population regularly lives to an advanced age ( one in three make it to their 90s ) . this is due to healthy diet , lifestyle , and genetics . this was tried to be understood through the ikaria study . demographics . the inhabitants of the island are known as icarians or icariots . , ikariótes ) . an icarian diaspora is found throughout greece , specifically on thimena and fournoi korseon , as well as in athens , where a large community is found . the people of icarian diaspora can be found throughout the world , mainly in australia , the united states , canada , and the united kingdom . icarian greeks are closely related to other aegean island greeks , such as greeks from samos , chios , fournoi korseon , and patmos , as well as greeks from anatolia . municipality . the present municipality ikaria was formed in the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following three former municipalities , that became municipal units : agios kirykos evdilos raches . subdivisions . the municipal units agios kirykos , evdilos and raches are subdivided into the following communities ( constituent villages in brackets ) : agios kirykos agios kirykos ( agios kirykos , therma ikarias , katafygio , lardades , mavrato , koundouma , mavrikato , xylosyrtis , oxea , tsouredes , faros ) perdiki ( perdiki , kioni , mileopo , monokampi , ploumari ) chrysostomos ( chrysostomos , vardarades , vaoni , livadi , plagia ) evdilos evdilos ( evdilos , kambos , agia kyriaki , droutsoulas , kerameio , kyparissi , xanthi , fytema ) arethousa ( arethousa , kyparissi , pera arethousa , foinikas ) dafni ( dafni , akamatra , kosoikia , petropouli , steli ) karavostamo manganitis ( manganitis , kalamonari ) frantato ( frantato , avlaki , kalamourida , kampos , kremasti , maratho , pigi , stavlos ) raches raches ( christos , agios dimitrios , armenistis , vrakades , kares , nas ( ikaria ) , kouniadoi , mavriannos , nanouras , xinta , proespera , profitis ilias , tsakades ) agios polykarpos ( agios polykarpos , agios panteleimonas , gialiskari , kastanies , lapsachades , lomvardades , mandria ) karkinagri ( karkinagri , amalo , kalamos , lagkada , pezi , trapalo ) . museums . archeological museum of kampos the archaeological museum , located in the village of kambos , stands on a hill which was once the ancient fortress of oinoe , and is immediately next to agia irini , ikaria 's oldest church . the museum contains over 250 artifacts , including neolithic tools , pottery vessels , clay statuettes , columns , coins , and carved headstones . archeological museum of agios kirikos housed in the former lycee of agios kirikos , which was built by immigrant ikarians living in america , the recently renovated neoclassical building dating to 1925 is the home of ikaria 's archeological museum . this listed building will house all of ikaria 's most relevant finds and highlight the history and culture of the island in the facilities of a modern museum and research/conservation center . complete with multimedia displays and films dedicated to the myth of ikaros and the ancient citadel of drakano , the museum presents ikaria 's archeological findings and relates to the visitor an understanding of the cultural , commercial and social development of the settlements of ancient ikaria throughout the course of the island 's history . folk & historical museum of agios kirikos located in agios kirikos , the folk & history museum of agios kirikos in ikaria was launched in july 2010 , and is the result of the long efforts by professor themistocles katsaros . its mission is to preserve and promote ikarian folklore , traditions and customs through its display of over 1,500 objects that reflect the history and heritage of ikaria and its inhabitants . the museum exhibits items of cultural importance from the island , including dresses , textiles , household articles , pottery , agriculture and trade tools & instruments , photos , documents and many other objects . of particular interest amongst the items displayed in the museum is the flag of the free state of ikaria ( 1912 ) . some of the exhibits have been organised thematically and chronologically , so that objects and images give visitors an idea of social and economic life in ikaria from the 18th century to the 1970s , when traditional life still continued in the region . folklore museum of vrakades the folklore museum of vrakades is located in the scenic village of vrakades , 650 meters above sea level on the north-western side of the island . the village was founded in the 17th century and contains old stone houses and captains ' villas of architectural note . the museum houses an interesting collection of items related to the history and people of the region . of particular interest are documents and memorabilia from the free state of ikaria . other exhibits include various clay and wooden objects used by housewives , beekeepers , and farmers , ecclesiastical relics from profit elias in vrakades and the convent of evagelistrias mavrianou , books by ikarian writers , ikarian records and documents over 500 years old . of note is the cutter , '' lanari '' in greek , used for the processing of wool and goat hairs from which the modest local clothing was made , the '' lisgos '' , a simple tool used for making ropes , an old digging tool , and many other tools belonging to the first inhabitants of the island . notable people connected with icaria . eleftheria arvanitaki ( born 1957 ) , singer , originates from icaria ( 1887–1927 ) , harvard professor of classical philology aris poulianos ( born 1924 ) , anthropologist , born in icaria zack space ( born 1961 ) , american politician , family originates from icaria christodoulos i . stefanadis ( born 1947 ) professor of cardiology , born on icaria christodoulos xiros , ( born 1958 ) , greek terrorist ( member of november 17 terrorist group ) anthony maras , greek australian film director . references . external links . '' the island where people forget to die '' by dan buettner , the new york times , october 24 , 2012