Tobacco mosaic virus

history . in 1886 , adolf mayer first described the tobacco mosaic disease that could be transferred between plants , similar to bacterial infections . translated into english in johnson , j . , ed . ( 1942 ) phytopathological classics ( st . paul , minnesota : american phytopathological society ) no . 7 , pp . 11–24 . in 1892 , dmitri ivanovsky gave the first concrete evidence for the existence of a non-bacterial infectious agent , showing that infected sap remained infectious even after filtering through the finest chamberland filters . translated into english in johnson , j . , ed . ( 1942 ) phytopathological classics ( st . paul , minnesota : american phytopathological society ) no . 7 , pp . 27–30 . later , in 1903 , ivanovsky published a paper describing abnormal crystal intracellular inclusions in the host cells of the affected tobacco plants and argued the connection between these inclusions and the infectious agent . however , ivanovsky remained rather convinced , despite repeated failures to produce evidence , that the causal agent was an unculturable bacterium , too small to be retained on the employed chamberland filters and to be detected in the light microscope . in 1898 , martinus beijerinck independently replicated ivanovsky 's filtration experiments and then showed that the infectious agent was able to reproduce and multiply in the host cells of the tobacco plant . translated into english in johnson , j . , ed . ( 1942 ) phytopathological classics . ( st . paul , minnesota : american phytopathological society ) no . 7 , pp . 33–52 ( st . paul , minnesota ) beijerinck coined the term of '' virus '' to indicate that the causal agent of tobacco mosaic disease was of non-bacterial nature . tobacco mosaic virus was the first virus to be crystallized . it was achieved by wendell meredith stanley in 1935 who also showed that tmv remains active even after crystallization . for his work , he was awarded 1/4 of the nobel prize in chemistry in 1946 , even though it was later shown some of his conclusions ( in particular , that the crystals were pure protein , and assembled by autocatalysis ) were incorrect . the first electron microscopical images of tmv were made in 1939 by gustav kausche , edgar pfankuch and helmut ruska – the brother of nobel prize winner ernst ruska . in 1955 , heinz fraenkel-conrat and robley williams showed that purified tmv rna and its capsid ( coat ) protein assemble by themselves to functional viruses , indicating that this is the most stable structure ( the one with the lowest free energy ) . the crystallographer rosalind franklin worked for stanley for about a month at berkeley , and later designed and built a model of tmv for the 1958 world 's fair at brussels . in 1958 , she speculated that the virus was hollow , not solid , and hypothesized that the rna of tmv is single-stranded . this conjecture was proven to be correct after her death and is now known to be the + strand . the investigations of tobacco mosaic disease and subsequent discovery of its viral nature were instrumental in the establishment of the general concepts of virology . . structure . map at 3.6 å resolution . ; inside the capsid helix , near the core , is the coiled rna molecule , which is made up of 6,395 ±10 nucleotides . . genome . the tmv genome consists of a 6.3–6.5 kb single-stranded ( ss ) rna . the 3 ’ -terminus has a trna-like structure , and the 5 ’ terminus has a methylated nucleotide cap . ( m7g5 ’ pppg ) . expasy viralzone tobamovirus the genome encodes 4 open reading frames ( orfs ) , two of which produce a single protein due to ribosome readthrough of a leaky uag stop codon . the 4 genes encode a replicase ( with methyltransferase mt and rna helicase hel domains ) , an rna-dependent rna polymerase , a so-called movement protein ( mp ) and a capsid ( cp ) . . physicochemical properties . tmv is a thermostable virus . on a dried leaf , it can withstand up to 50 & nbsp ; °c ( 120 degree fahrenheit ) for 30 minutes . tmv has an index of refraction of about 1.57 . . disease cycle . tmv does not have a distinct overwintering structure . rather , it will over-winter in infected tobacco stalks and leaves in the soil , on the surface of contaminated seed ( tmv can even survive in contaminated tobacco products for many years ) . with the direct contact with host plants through its vectors ( normally insects such as aphids and leafhoppers ) , tmv will go through the infection process and then the replication process . infection and transmission . after its multiplication , it enters the neighbouring cells through plasmodesmata . the infection spreads by direct contact to the neighbouring cells , for its smooth entry , tmv produces a 30 kda movement protein called p30 which enlarges the plasmodesmata . tmv most likely moves from cell-to-cell as a complex of the rna , p30 , and replicate proteins . it can also spread through phloem for longer distance movement within the plant . moreover , tmv can be transmitted from one plant to another by direct contact . although tmv does not have defined transmission vectors , the virus can be easily transmitted from the infected hosts to the healthy plants , by human handling . replication . following entry into its host via mechanical inoculation , tmv uncoats itself to release its viral +rna strand . as uncoating occurs , the methel : pol gene is translated to make the capping enzyme methel and the rna polymerase . then the viral genome will further replicate to produce multiple mrnas via a -rna intermediate primed by the trna his at the +rna 3 ' end . the resulting mrnas encode several proteins , including the capsid and an rna-dependent rna polymerase ( rdrp ) , as well as the movement protein . thus tmv can replicate its own genome . after the coat protein and rna genome of tmv have been synthesized , they spontaneously assemble into complete tmv virions in a highly organized process . the protomers come together to form disks or 'lockwashers ' composed of two layers of protomers arranged in a helix . the helical capsid grows by the addition of protomers to the end of the rod . as the rod lengthens , the rna passes through a channel in its center and forms a loop at the growing end . in this way the rna can easily fit as a spiral into the interior of the helical capsid . . host and symptoms . like other plant pathogenic viruses , tmv has a very wide host range and has different effects depending on the host being infected . tobacco mosaic virus has been known to cause a production loss for flue cured tobacco of up to two percent in north carolina . it is known to infect members of nine plant families , and at least 125 individual species , including tobacco , tomato , pepper ( all members of the useful solanaceae ) , cucumbers , a number of ornamental flowers , and beans including phaseolus vulgaris and vigna unguiculata . there are many different strains . the first symptom of this virus disease is a light green coloration between the veins of young leaves . this is followed quickly by the development of a '' mosaic '' or mottled pattern of light and dark green areas in the leaves . rugosity may also be seen where the infected plant leaves display small localized random wrinkles . these symptoms develop quickly and are more pronounced on younger leaves . its infection does not result in plant death , but if infection occurs early in the season , plants are stunted . lower leaves are subjected to '' mosaic burn '' especially during periods of hot and dry weather . in these cases , large dead areas develop in the leaves . this constitutes one of the most destructive phases of tobacco mosaic virus infection . infected leaves may be crinkled , puckered , or elongated . however , if tmv infects crops like grape and apple , it is almost symptomless . environment . tmv is known as one of the most stable viruses . it has a very wide survival range . as long as the surrounding temperature remains below approximately 40 degrees celsius , tmv can sustain its stable form . all it needs is a host to infect . if necessary , greenhouses and botanical gardens would provide the most favorable condition for tmv to spread out , due to the high population density of possible hosts and the constant temperature throughout the year . treatment and management . one of the common control methods for tmv is sanitation , which includes removing infected plants and washing hands in between each planting . crop rotation should also be employed to avoid infected soil/seedbed for at least two years . as for any plant disease , looking for resistant strains against tmv may also be advised . furthermore , the cross protection method can be administered , where the stronger strain of tmv infection is inhibited by infecting the host plant with mild strain of tmv , similar to the effect of a vaccine . in the past ten years , the application of genetic engineering on a host plant genome has been developed to allow the host plant to produce the tmv coat protein within their cells . it was hypothesized that the tmv genome will be re-coated rapidly upon entering the host cell , thus it prevents the initiation of tmv replication . later it was found that the mechanism that protects the host from viral genome insertion is through gene silencing . tmv is inhibited by a product of the myxomycete slime mold physarum polycephalum . both tobacco and the beans p . vulgaris and v . sinensis suffered almost no lesioning in vitro from tmv when treated with a p . polycephalum extract . . scientific and environmental impact . and a few simple laboratory procedures , a scientist can easily produce several grams of the virus . james d . watson , in his memoir the double helix , cites his x-ray investigation of tmv 's helical structure as an important step in deducing the nature of the dna molecule . . applications . plant viruses can be used to engineer viral vectors , tools commonly used by molecular biologists to deliver genetic material into plant cells ; they are also sources of biomaterials and nanotechnology devices . viral vectors based on tmv include those of the magnicon® and trbo plant expression technologies . due to its cylindrical shape , high aspect ratio , self-assembling nature , and ability to incorporate metal coatings ( nickel and cobalt ) into its shell , tmv is an ideal candidate to be incorporated into battery electrodes . addition of tmv to a battery electrode increases the reactive surface area by an order of magnitude , resulting in an increase in the battery 's capacity by up to six times compared to a planar electrode geometry .