1959 in literature

events . january 31 – sandu tudor begins a 40-year sentence at jilava prison for '' conspiracy against social order '' and '' intense activity against the working class '' , as meted out by a communist romania tribunal . he will die in 1962 at aiud prison , possibly from torture . april 30 – bertolt brecht 's saint joan of the stockyards receives its stage première . it was originally performed on radio in 1932 . may 7 – scientist and novelist c . p . snow delivers in the senate house , university of cambridge a rede lecture on the two cultures , to do with a perceived breakdown of communication between the sciences and humanities . it is later published as the two cultures and the scientific revolution . may 28 – the mermaid theatre opens in the city of london . july 21 – d . h . lawrence 's lady chatterley 's lover is one of three books whose bans are overturned in court with assistance from the lawyer charles rembar in the united states , the others being tropic of cancer and fanny hill . grove press , inc . v . christenberry , 175 f . supp . 488 ( sdny 1959 ) , 21 july 1959 . the book , published in 1928 , legally circulates in the u.s . after a 31-year obscenity ban . july 29 – the u.k . obscene publications act becomes law , coming into force on august 29 . it requires a work to be seen as a whole , permitting a '' public good '' defence against a prosecution for obscenity , and making prosecutions for obscene libel difficult . september – anthony burgess , teaching in brunei , suffers a breakdown and is forced to return to the uk , where he becomes a full-time novelist . october 29 – astérix the gaul makes a first appearance in the first regular issue of the comic magazine pilote . november 11 – in the united states , the short film pull my daisy is released , adapted from an unperformed play by jack kerouac , beat generation and narrated by him . it stars poets allen ginsberg , peter orlovsky and gregory corso . unknown dates aldous huxley turns down a knighthood . colin dexter begins teaching at corby grammar school . frank herbert begins researching dune . frederik pohl becomes an editor of the american science fiction magazine galaxy . marcel achard is elected to the académie française . literature wales is established as the academi gymreig . the first butoh performance , kinjiki by tatsumi hijikata , is played at a dance festival in japan . it is based on the novel of that name ( forbidden colors ) by yukio mishima and explores the taboos of male homosexuality and pedophilia . . new books . fiction . isaac asimov – nine tomorrows saul bellow – henderson the rain king robert bloch – psycho antoine blondin – a monkey in winter ( un singe en hiver ) heinrich böll – billiards at half-past nine ( billard um halb zehn ) ray bradbury – a medicine for melancholy jurij brězan – der gymnasiast john brunner echo in the skull the world swappers algis budrys – the falling torch william s . burroughs – naked lunch taylor caldwell – dear and glorious physician john dickson carr – scandal at high chimneys : a victorian melodrama james hadley chase – the world in my pocket agatha christie – cat among the pigeons ivy compton-burnett – a heritage and its history richard condon – the manchurian candidate alexander cordell – rape of the fair country julio cortázar – las armas secretas ( the secret weapons , short stories ) richard crichton – the great impostor allen drury – advise and consent alfred duggan – children of the wolf jane duncan – my friends the miss boyds ( first in the my friends series of 19 books ) shusaku endo ( 遠藤 周作 ) – wonderful fool ( おバカさん ) william faulkner – the mansion ian fleming – goldfinger paul gallico – mrs . 'arris goes to paris william golding – free fall richard gordon – doctor and son günter grass – the tin drum ( die blechtrommel ) vasily grossman – life and fate ( « жизнь и судьба » ; completed but unpublished until the 1980s ) robert a . heinlein the menace from earth starship troopers the unpleasant profession of jonathan hoag dorothy hewett – bobbin up hwang sun-won – '' rain shower '' ( 소나기 , sonagi , short story ) jabra ibrahim jabra – tammūz fī al-madīnah ( tammuz in the city ) shirley jackson – the haunting of hill house uwe johnson – mutmassungen über jakob ( speculations about jakob ) john knowles – a separate peace h . p . lovecraft etc . – the shuttered room and other pieces john lymington – night of the big heat john d . macdonald deadly welcome the beach girls the crossroads ross macdonald – the galton case colin macinnes – absolute beginners compton mackenzie – the lunatic republic alistair maclean the last frontier night without end naguib mahfouz – children of gebelaawi ( أولاد حارتنا ) norman mailer – advertisements for myself james a . michener – hawaii v.s . naipaul – miguel street mervyn peake – titus alone david piper ( as peter towry ) – trial by battle raymond queneau – zazie in the metro ( zazie dans le métro ) robert randall ( as robert silverberg and randall garrett ) – the dawning light mordecai richler – the apprenticeship of duddy kravitz kate roberts – te yn y grug ( short stories ) philip roth – goodbye , columbus robert ruark – poor no more nathalie sarraute – le planétarium andré schwarz-bart – the last of the just ( le dernier des justes ) mary shelley ( died 1851 ) – mathilda ( novella , written 1819–20 ) alan sillitoe – the loneliness of the long distance runner aimée sommerfelt – the road to agra ( veien til agra ) terry southern – the magic christian howard spring – all the day long rex stout – plot it yourself valerie taylor – the girls in 3-b john updike – the same door kurt vonnegut – the sirens of titan keith waterhouse – billy liar sheila watson – the double hook . children and young people . bruce carter – four wheel drift rené goscinny – le petit nicolas joseph krumgold – onion john spike milligan – silly verse for kids bill peet hubert 's hair-raising adventure goliath ii dr . seuss – happy birthday to you ! margery sharp – the rescuers ( first in the eponymous series of nine novels ) . drama . edward albee the death of bessie smith ( written ) the zoo story ( premiered in german ) jean anouilh – becket john arden – serjeant musgrave 's dance alan ayckbourn ( as roland allen ) – the square cat samuel beckett – embers ( first broadcast ) bertolt brecht ( died 1956 ) – saint joan of the stockyards ( die heilige johanna der schlachthöfe , first stage performance ) albert camus – the possessed ( les possédés ) beverley cross – one more river refik erduran – cengiz han ’ ın bisikleti ( the bicycle of genghis khan ) jack gelber – the connection jean genet – the blacks ( play ) ( les nègres , clownerie , first performed ) lorraine hansberry – a raisin in the sun eugène ionesco – the killer ( tueur sans gages ) harold pinter – the caretaker ( first published ) zofia posmysz – pasażerka z kabiny 45 ( passenger from cabin 45 , radio drama ) jean-paul sartre – the condemned of altona ( les séquestrés d'altona , translated as loser wins ) n . f . simpson – one way pendulum wole soyinka – the lion and the jewel arnold wesker roots the kitchen tennessee williams – sweet bird of youth egon wolff – parejas de trapo zhou xinfang with xu siyan – hai rui submits his memorial ( 海瑞上疏 , hai rui shangshu ) . non-fiction . kenneth anger – hollywood babylon l . sprague de camp – engines august derleth arkham house : the first 20 years some notes on h . p . lovecraft savitri devi – impeachment of man g . h . dury – the face of the earth c . s . forester – sink the bismarck ! ( also as the last nine days of the bismarck ) georges friedmann – signal d'une troisième voie ? erving goffman – the presentation of self in everyday life laurie lee – cider with rosie miguel león-portilla – the broken spears garrett mattingly – the defeat of the spanish armada czesław miłosz – rodzinna europa ( native realm ) iona and peter opie – the lore and language of schoolchildren james pope-hennessy – queen mary 1867–1953 karl popper – the logic of scientific discovery cornelius ryan – the longest day william strunk jr . and e . b . white – the elements of style wilfred thesiger – arabian sands barbara wootton , baroness wootton of abinger ( with v . g . seal and r . chambers ) – social science and social pathology . births . january 8 – ovidiu pecican , romanian writer and poet january 9 – rigoberta menchú , guatemalan writer and nobel peace prize winner january 20 – r . a . salvatore , american science fiction and fantasy author january 28 – megan mcdonald , american children 's author february 2 – jari tervo , finnish author march 11 – dejan stojanović , serbian-american poet and essayist march 15 – ben okri , nigerian poet and novelist march 18 – frédéric-yves jeannet , french-born writer in french and spanish april 15 – emma thompson , english actress and screenwriter april 30 – alessandro barbero , italian historian , novelist and essayist c . may 1 – yasmina reza , french novelist and dramatist may 3 – ben elton , english comedian , novelist and screenwriter may 13 – zeruya shalev , israeli novelist june 12 – hilary mckay , english children 's writer june 13 – maurice g . dantec , french science fiction author july 19 – vigdis hjorth , norwegian novelist august 27 – jeanette winterson , english novelist september 9 – matti rönkä , finnish television journalist and novelist september 29 jon fosse , norwegian fiction writer , playwright and poet benjamin sehene , rwandan writer october 1 – brian p . cleary , american humorist , author and poet october 31 – neal stephenson , american science fiction writer november 1 – susanna clarke , english novelist november 22 – christoph klimke , german writer december 20 – sandra cisneros , mexican-born american author . deaths . january 3 – edwin muir , scottish poet , novelist and translator ( born 1887 ) january 14 – g . d . h . cole , english political theorist , economist and historian ( born 1889 ) january 29 – pauline smith , south african novelist ( born 1882 ) february 20 – laurence housman , english playwright and writer ( born 1865 ) february 22 – percy f . westerman , english children 's author ( born 1876 ) february 23 – luis palés matos , puerto rican poet ( heart failure ( born 1898 ) february 28 – maxwell anderson , american playwright and film writer ( born 1888 ) march 4 – w . w . greg , english literary scholar ( born 1875 ) march 17 – galaktion tabidze ( galaktioni ) , georgian poet ( suicide , born 1892 ) march 26 – raymond chandler , american crime writer ( born 1888 ) april 14 – julien josephson , american screenwriter ( born 1881 ) may 18 – apsley cherry-garrard , english memoirist and explorer ( born 1886 ) may 20 – alfred schütz , austrian philosopher and sociologist ( born 1899 ) june 1 – sax rohmer ( arthur henry ward ) , english novelist ( born 1883 ) june 23 – boris vian , french novelist ( heart attack , born 1920 ) june 30 – josé vasconcelos , mexican poet and political writer ( born 1882 ) july 3 – johan bojer , norwegian novelist ( born 1872 ) july 26 – manuel altolaguirre , spanish poet , editor and publisher ( car accident , born 1905 ) august 8 – emil františek burian , czech poet , journalist and playwright ( born 1904 ) september 14 – laxmi prasad devkota , nepali poet , playwright , and novelist ( born 1909 ) september 18 – benjamin péret , french poet and surrealist ( born 1899 ) october 12 – arnolt bronnen , austrian playwright and director ( born 1895 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : rosemary sutcliff , the lantern bearers hugo award for best novel : james blish , a case of conscience james tait black memorial prize for fiction : morris west , the devil 's advocate james tait black memorial prize for biography : christopher hassall , edward marsh miles franklin award : vance palmer , the big fellow newbery medal for children 's literature : elizabeth george speare , the witch of blackbird pond nobel prize for literature : salvatore quasimodo premio nadal : ana maria matute , primera memoria prix goncourt : andré schwarz-bart , the last of the just january 22 , 1961 st . petersburg times pulitzer prize for drama : archibald macleish , j . b . pulitzer prize for fiction : robert lewis taylor , the travels of jaimie mcpheeters pulitzer prize for poetry : stanley kunitz , selected poems 1928-1958 queen 's gold medal for poetry : francis cornford . references .