Asda

toyou . alongside asda 's distribution supply chain now exists the toyou parcel service . in 2015 , the store chain announced that it would be getting involved in click and collect plus returns for online orders from retailers such as asos and ideal world . . financial performance . as of 19 may 2019 , asda was in second-equal place in the uk grocery market top 4 share , with : tesco 27.3 % , sainsburys 15.2 % , asda 15.2 % , morrisons 10.4 % . employee relations . the company has featured prominently in lists of '' best companies to work for '' , appearing in second place in the times newspaper list for 2005 . it offers staff a discount of 10 % on most items ( exceptions include fuel , stamps , lottery , giftcards and tobacco related items ) . the company was fined £850,000 in 2006 for offering 340 staff at a dartford depot a pay rise in return for giving up a union collective bargaining agreement . poor relations continued as asda management attempted to introduce new rights and working practices shortly thereafter at another centre in washington , tyne and wear . some compromise was reached by june of that year , when a five-day strike was called off after asda management and the gmb union reached an agreement . relations have improved since , with both asda and the gmb marking the death of a worker together on workers ' memorial day in 2010 . in 2013 , tens of thousands of asda workers across the uk were hit with a tax complication because of an anomaly in asda 's payroll system . asda employees receive their pay every four weeks , which meant , according to their spokesperson , that once every 20 years they are paid 14 times a year rather than 13 . whilst most companies handle this properly , asda 's payroll system did not , which meant that workers had , through no fault of their own , paid less tax for the year than they should have . this resulted in most full-time and a small number of part-time workers receiving a demand from hm revenue & customs for between £72 and £160 . . marketing . in the 'asda price ' campaign , customers tap their trouser pocket twice , producing a 'chinking ' sound as the coins that asda 's low prices have supposedly left in their pockets knock together . the pocket tap ads were launched in 1977 and over the next 30 years , a range of celebrities have been '' tappers '' , including from 1978 , actors richard beckinsale , paula wilcox and james bolam . and later , julie walters , and football player michael owen . in the late 1970s , adverts also included actor leonard rossiter . in 1980 , carry on actress hattie jacques appeared in the advert as a crossing guard . between 1981 and 1985 , asda used the slogan 'all together better ' in conjunction with the 'asda price ' pocket tap campaign in tv commercials and newspaper and magazine advertisements . when the new green capitalised asda logo started to appear from 1985 , in early 1986 onwards and until early 1989 , two slogans were used . the first , 'you 'd be off your trolley to go anywhere else ' , was replaced in 1987 by 'one trip and you 're laughing' . in 1989 , and until late 1991 , before the reintroduction of the pocket tap campaign , advertising for asda had featured the fairground attraction song '' perfect '' with the slogan 'it 'asda be asda ' , which was based upon the lyrics of the song . when the asda price slogan was reintroduced in 1992 , the strapline pocket the difference ( capitalised ) was added alongside it . this was replaced by permanently low prices , forever in 1996 . from 1990 to 1991 , asda were the sponsors of sheffield wednesday f.c . in december 1997 , the spice girls licensed their name and image to asda for the creation of over 40 different spice items for christmas 1997 , including goods such as party supplies , official merchandise , and spice girl branded kids ' meals in the stores ' restaurants . the spice girls reportedly earned £1 & nbsp ; million from the deal . in the smiley face '' rollback '' campaign , also used by walmart , a cgi smiley face bounced from price tag to price tag , knocking them down as customers watch . in 2006 , asda advertising was themed around singing children and the slogan '' more for you for less '' , and the previous tap of the trouser pocket advertising was reduced to a double-tap on a stylised ' a ' , still producing the 'chinking ' sound . for christmas 2007 , asda reintroduced the '' that 's asda price '' slogan . in 2008 , the company refocused on price with a '' why pay more ? '' campaign both on tv and in stores . asda tv commercials in april 2009 focused on price comparisons between asda and its rivals , using information from mysupermarket . the music being used in these adverts is the billy childish version of the classic dad 's army theme tune . the old asda jingle is not included in these , but appeared in a 2008 christmas advert . asda has been winner of the grocer magazine '' lowest price supermarket '' award for the past 16 years , and uses this to promote itself across the uk . in august 2005 , rival supermarket chain tesco challenged asda 's ability to use the claim that it was the cheapest supermarket in the country , by complaining to the advertising standards agency . the asa upheld the complaint and ordered asda to stop using it . . corporate social responsibility . energy efficiency . asda was the top-performing supermarket in the crc energy efficiency scheme performance league table , coming in at 37 and beating morrisons at 56 , tesco at 93 , and sainsbury 's at 164 . . ethical trading . asda has signed up to the ethical trading initiative ( eti ) which respects workers ' rights for freedom of association and a living wage . implementing this initiative is difficult , however , because the concept of a living wage varies by country and the buying strategies of a major importer like asda have an indirect impact on national minimum wages by obliging governments to set them low enough to stop businesses from going elsewhere . industry pressure groups such as labour behind the label and war on want have argued that asda and other budget retailers use unethical labour practices in the developing world to keep uk prices low . the national farmers ' union , representing uk farmers and growers , has argued that asda and other major supermarkets have made large profits and kept consumer prices low '' by squeezing suppliers ' margins to the point where many of them have gone out of business '' . asda have also refused to sign up to and donate to the rana plaza donors trust fund , to donate compensation to the families of workers in bangladesh killed when their factory building in rana plaza collapsed in 2013 . instead , asda donated an undisclosed sum to the poverty relief charity building relationships across communities , who in turn pledged around £1.3m to the fund . campaigners believe asda is unwilling to set a precedent on indemnity pay for large scale industrial accidents . in 2009 , asda 's valentine 's day roses , sold at £2 for a dozen , were said to be ethically sourced by the supermarket . this claim went against research carried out by war on want . . call for boycott . in october 2010 , chairman andy bond was a signatory to a controversial letter to the daily telegraph , which claimed that '' the private sector should be more than capable of generating additional jobs to replace those lost in the public sector , and the redeployment of people to more productive activities will improve economic performance , so generating more employment opportunities . '' this was followed by calls by the pressure group liberal conspiracy for a boycott of asda , as well as the companies represented by the other signatories to the letter on the grounds that '' companies that support the csr are failed corporate citizens . '' . children . in january 2018 asda became the first supermarket to ban selling energy drinks such as red bull to under 16's . . sponsorships . asda sponsored kwik cricket for kids . . charities . asda supports the following charities through its stores : tommy 's - funds research to find out why things go wrong in pregnancy and birth , and provides information free of charge bbc children in need breast cancer care everyman - a campaign charity since 2011 . fields in trust - charity partnership from 2010 - 2012 . the challenge aims to protect outdoor recreational spaces , to create a permanent living legacy of both the queen 's diamond jubilee and the london 2012 olympics . asda foundation - supporting local causes of asda store workers , with projects supported across the uk . . controversies . dairy price fixing . in december 2007 , asda , sainsbury 's and other retailers and dairy firms admitted to the price fixing of dairy products between 2002 and 2003 . the price fixing operation was calculated to have cost consumers around £270 & nbsp ; million . asda commented , '' everyone at asda regrets what happened , particularly as we are passionate about lowering prices . our intention was to provide more money for dairy farmers , who were under severe financial pressure at the time . '' in total , asda was fined £18.21 & nbsp ; million by the office of fair trading for its part in the cartel . . false and misleading advertising . in 2010 , a national press ad for asda on a double-page spread was headed '' the big asda rollback '' with headings stating '' lower prices on everything you buy , week in week out '' with equal prominence to a column headed '' lower prices than any other supermarket '' ; that the arrows underneath the heading '' lower prices than any other supermarket '' compared prices at asda with prices at sainsbury 's , tesco and morrisons . the asa ruled that in the context in which it appeared , it was ambiguous in that it could be interpreted either as referring to price reductions that had taken place within asda or to price comparisons with the named competitors . in addition , because the ad did not explain that the price reductions had not necessarily taken place in the week that immediately preceded the ad , they concluded that the headings which stated the number of price reductions that had taken place in each product category were misleading . the asa also concluded that the '' lower prices than any other supermarket '' claim in the advert was misleading . the asa disagreed , and referred to the claim '' everything is at least half price ! '' was likely to imply to viewers that all toys were included in the sale . as all toys were not included in the sale , and in the absence of a qualifying statement , the ad was misleading . the asa ruled that a television advertisement in 2011 for the new asda price guarantee was misleading in that the small on-screen text that stated '' exclusions apply '' was not sufficient to warn viewers that the asda price guarantee did not apply to non-grocery items . the asa also ruled against two national press ads one which showed hardback and children 's books and one that showed football related items with text stating '' if your grocery shopping could have cost less elsewhere we 'll give you the difference - guaranteed ! '' . although each advert had '' exclusions apply '' and that other text stated '' if your grocery shopping could have cost less elsewhere we 'll give you the difference '' , it felt that given the prominent appearance of the hardback and children 's activity books and football related items and the prominent appearance of the logo '' asda price guarantee '' and '' guaranteed ! '' , they considered the footnote and other text referred to above was not sufficient to warn readers that non-grocery items particularly those included in the advertisement were not included in the asda price guarantee . another advertisement from asda , in which it featured world cup related products and an asda price guarantee was misleading as the world cup related products were exclusive to asda and not , therefore , available at morrisons , tesco or sainsbury's . in 2009 , the asa challenged whether a press ad which showed a large green arrow bearing down on a smaller yellow arrow with a crumpled tip and '' asda 2955 products cheaper '' should set out how the general price claims made in the ads could be verified by consumers . because it was not possible for consumers or competitors to check the products and prices used in the comparison using mysupermarket.co.uk , and because the ads did not set out how consumers and competitors could check that information for themselves , the asa concluded that the ads did not satisfy the criterion of verifiability as defined in the 2006 european court of justice ruling , and were therefore in breach of the advertising codes . the asa ruled that , due to the significant limitations and qualifications to the basis of the price comparison which were not included in the ad , or in the terms and conditions on asda 's website , the approach taken in making the comparisons was unfair and misleading . a press ad , which appeared on 26 september 2011 , was headlined '' only one supermarket is . always 10 % cheaper or we 'll give you the difference guaranteed '' . however , at the top of the ad there was a banner that contained the claims '' sale '' , '' half price '' , '' price drop '' , '' 50 % off '' , '' 1/2 price '' , '' cheap '' and that part of the headline claim '' . always 10 % cheaper '' appeared in bold text in the middle of the ad . the asa considered the banner , together with the headline was likely to be interpreted by consumers as claims that referred to the price of asda goods . since consumers could interpret that claim as one which guaranteed to refund the difference , should asda not be the lowest on price , the asa considered the presence of the claim '' only one supermarket is always 10 % cheaper '' could create the impression that asda were always 10 % cheaper and would be interpreted as a 'lowest price ' claim . the asa therefore concluded that the advert was misleading . it also noted the footnote explaining the apg contradicted asda 's absolute claim that they were always the lowest on price , and that the disclaimer was also misleading . in 2009 , a four-page regional press wraparound included several maps and images of a proposed development in new barnet , and described the benefits the development would bring to the local area . the advert included a development site plan and map , which marked out the proposed asda store , the existing sainsbury store and the sites of the proposed , approved and existing tesco stores . because it was not clear that the marked-out area relating to the asda store was for only the store floorspace , whereas the marked-out area relating to the sainsburys store included store floorspace and additional buildings , and the marked-out area relating to the proposed tesco area was not based on an approved plan , the asa concluded the advertisement was misleading . . 2013 horsemeat scandal . in 2013 , dna tests revealed that horsemeat was present in asda 's chosen by you fresh beef bolognese sauce , the first instance during the 2013 meat adulteration scandal of horsemeat being found in fresh meat . . award . march 2009 : voted innovative employer of the year , at the oracle retail week awards . . see also . 2007 uk petrol contamination european marketing distribution purchasing organization list of convenience stores list of department stores list of hypermarkets list of superstores list of supermarkets . references . external links .