Zwijndrecht, Belgium

history . origin of the name . the name zwijndrecht is derived from the old germanic words “ swina drifti . ” the words “ swina ” and “ drifti ” are synonyms and both mean creek . “ drifti ” evolved from dhreghi > drigti > dricht to drecht ; the suffix –drecht appears frequently in place-names north of the river scheldt , where streams and creeks are abundant . . early history . while very little archaeological excavation has been done in the municipality of zwijndrecht itself , numerous findings have been documented in the surrounding region , which is referred to as the waasland . these have indicated occupation in the area from as early as the end of the neolithic period ( c . 2200-1800 b.c . ) . verelst 1990 , p . 64 . numerous indications of roman occupation have also been uncovered in the waasland area . in the early middle ages , zwijndrecht-burcht was sparsely populated , its landscape consisting mainly of wet woodland and small settlements separated by forests . this situation remained until the latter half of the 11th century , when an increase in population necessitated changes in land use : the forests between settlements were cleared and fields were formed into communal agricultural spaces , using a three-course crop rotation system . verelst 1990 , p . 67 . these were referred to as “ kouters ” or ploughshares . raised paths through the wetlands evolved into dikes , and by the 14th century , polders were in use . feudal period . on april 15 , 1281 , the count of flanders , gwijde van dampierre , granted manorial rights to nikolaas van kets , making him lord of zwijndrecht . the seat of the lords of zwijndrecht was a manor house called the kraaienhof ( the ruins of which were demolished in the mid-20th century ) , which was located in what is now the village of burcht . the van kets held the manorial rights until 1445 , when wouter van kets sold them to jan vilain . they passed by inheritance to the van montmorency family . due to financial pressures , the heir filips ii de montmorency , count of horne ( 1524-1568 ) was forced to sell the title , property and rights to a conglomeration of four cities , brugge , gent , ieper and the brugse vrije , known as the “ vier leden ” ( four members ) . after rebelling against spanish rule during the eighty years war , the vier leden were forced to forfeit the property to the spanish crown in 1585 , but it was later returned to them . the dikes and infrastructure were so badly damaged and neglected during the eighty years war , that the vier leden were forced to loan money for repairs and restoration from jan van hove . when the vier leden defaulted on the loan , the property , rights and title defaulted to jan van hove , making him the new lord of zwijndrecht-burcht . van hove held the property until 1621 , when the staten van vlaanderen ( formerly the vier leden ) was able to pay its debts and reacquire it . after regaining the property , the staten van vlaanderen promptly auctioned it off to the highest bidder , an italian businessman named jacomo antonio carenna , who then became lord of zwijndrecht and burcht . in 1666 , he divided the property between his two sons , jan francisco carenna ( zwijndrecht ) and ignacius carenna ( burcht ) . burcht and zwijndrecht became separate villages and remained so until they were reunited as the municipality of zwijndrecht in 1977 . for the further history specifically of burcht , see the article on burcht . paulo carenna , lord of zwijndrecht and grandson of jacomo carenna , auctioned off the property and title on antwerp ’ s historical vrijdagmarkt in 1699 . it was purchased by jacques de lannoy . it passed by inheritance through his daughter anne marie de lannoy to his son-in-law , daniel gerardo melijn in 1732 . daniel malijn ’ s heir was also a daughter , anna marie isabella melijn , and therefore her husband louis balthasar de heuvel became lord of zwijndrecht . louis balthasar de heuvel 's son , louis charles joseph de heuvel , fought for his mother ’ s inheritance in court as his father did not want to give it up to him . however , before the case could be resolved , the french revolution and the resultant dissolution of feudal rights and titles made their legal conflict moot . at this point louis charles joseph , who had become broken and paranoid of his father ’ s wrath , became a vagabond . he died in a french prison in 1800 . industrialization : the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . geographically and historically , zwijndrecht and burcht were originally part of the province of east flanders , which fell under the jurisdiction of the count of flanders . however , in 1923 , the two villages were transferred to the province of antwerp . the villages were primarily agrarian , but by the middle of the nineteenth century , burcht had become the site of heavy industry . the fertile land in borgerweert ( part of burcht ) was filled in with dredged slurry from the river scheldt to accommodate the building of factories . among the industries established there at the time were a guano factory , a linoleum factory , a cement factory , a pots and pans factory , and a lard processing plant . it is currently the seat of the ytong plant , which manufactures building blocks . the lt . thoumsin military base , which houses the 11th battalion of engineers of the belgian army , is also located in burcht . in the nineteenth century , zwijndrecht became a bedroom community for antwerp , while mostly maintaining its agrarian character . it became heavily industrialized in the twentieth century , becoming the location for numerous industries , most of which are clustered around harbors on the scheldt . . world wars . during world war i , zwijndrecht and burcht and its two forts were part of the belgian defensive line . by 1914 , the two villages were full of belgian soldiers , and orders were issued to reinforce the fort of zwijndrecht and the fort of kruibeke . local civilian residents were recruited for the reinforcement work , soldiers were quartered in private homes and factories , farmers were required to loan their horses and carts for military use , and food and goods were confiscated for the military . in spite of all efforts , belgium fell to the germans in october 1914 and burcht and zwijndrecht , like all the german-occupied communities in belgium , suffered greatly for the next four years from food shortages . by the end of the war , 80 young people from zwijndrecht and burcht had perished on the front . 82 civilian unemployed civilians from burcht as well as 99 non-unemployed citizens had been deported to germany as forced labor . in addition , 5 civilians were deported to germany for political reasons . a total of 8 citizens from burcht lost their lives as a result of these deportations . zwijndrecht counted 155 forced laborers and civilian prisoners deported to germany , of which 5 did not survive . three of these , jan baptist wathy and jozef and frans van gaever lost their lives when the ship transporting them was torpedoed . by 1939 , zwindrecht and burcht were once again preparing for war with germany . on may 18 , 1940 , the swastika flag had already been raised on the antwerp cathedral . although retreating belgian troops attempted to blow up the two tunnels leading to the left bank of the scheldt to prevent the germans from crossing easily , the explosives in the pedestrian tunnel failed to detonate completely , allowing the german troops to cross the river . during the resulting battle on the streets of zwijndrecht , 16 german and 29 belgian soldiers lost their lives , in addition to 32 civilians . raeymaekers 2004 , p . 162 . after years of nazi occupation , the british army liberated antwerp in september 1944 . in an attempt to prevent the allies from being able to use the port of antwerp , the germans bombarded the harbor with v-1 and v-2 rockets . however , most of the rockets missed their intended target ( the port ) and fell instead in the surrounding areas , including burcht and zwijndrecht . a total of 76 v-bombs fell on zwijndrecht-burcht between october 25 , 1944 and march 28 , 1945 . in zwindrecht , a total of 19 civilians were killed and 48 were wounded by the v-rockets and 85 houses were rendered uninhabitable . in burcht , 14 citizens were killed . 50 houses were destroyed completely , and more than 250 houses were badly damaged . raeymaekers 2004 , p . 177 . . notable residents . paul anspach ( 1882–1991 ) , épée and foil fencer , two-time olympic champion gia baldi ( stage name of maria lea joos ) , b . 1936 in burcht . opera singer . , b . 1942 in burcht . painter and graphic artist . pastor michiel cop , 1755-1799 . pastor of the church in zwijndrecht , he resisted the french occupation under the sanculottes , and died while escaping a prison camp in guyana . , 1897-1881 . author . b . 1981 . t.v . reporter and announcer . gino de keersmaeker , b . 1970 in zwijndrecht . paralympic athlete . alfred ost , ( 1884 zwijndrecht-1945 ) . painter and graphic artist . jean baptist tassijns , 1751-1799 . boerenkrijger ( resistance fighter ) against the french occupation under the sansculottes , he was executed in haasdonck in 1799 . leo tindemans , b . 1922 in zwijndrecht . politician , former prime minister of belgium . twin towns — sister cities . zwijndrecht is twinned with : idstein , germany zwijndrecht , netherlands . references . external links . official website of the municipality website of the folklore and historical society of zwijndrecht-burcht