Peggy Guggenheim

collecting , before world war ii . in january 1938 , guggenheim opened a gallery for modern art in london featuring jean cocteau drawings in its first show , and began to collect works of art . guggenheim often purchased at least one object from each of her exhibitions at the gallery . after the outbreak of world war ii , she purchased as much abstract and surrealist art as possible . walsh , john . '' the priceless peggy guggenheim '' , the independent , october 21 , 2009 , accessed march 12 , 2012 her first gallery was called guggenheim jeune , the name ingeniously chosen to associate her gallery with both the epitome of a gallery , the french bernheim-jeune , and with the name of her own well-known family . the gallery on 30 cork street , next to roland penrose 's and e . l . t . mesens ' show-case for the surrealist movement , proved to be successful , thanks to many friends who gave advice and who helped to run the gallery . marcel duchamp , whom she had known since the early 1920s , when she lived in paris with her first husband laurence vail , had introduced guggenheim to the art world ; it was through him that she met many artists during her frequent visits to paris . he taught her about contemporary art and styles , and he conceived several of the exhibitions held at guggenheim jeune . the cocteau exhibition was followed by exhibitions of wassily kandinsky ( his first one-man-show in england ) , yves tanguy , wolfgang paalen and several other well-known and some lesser-known artists . peggy guggenheim also held group exhibitions of sculpture and collage , with the participation of the now-classic moderns antoine pevsner , henry moore , henri laurens , alexander calder , raymond duchamp-villon , constantin brâncuși , john ferren , jean arp , max ernst , pablo picasso , georges braque and kurt schwitters . she also greatly admired the work of john tunnard ( 1900–1971 ) and is credited with his discovery in mainstream international modernism . plans for a museum . when guggenheim realized that her gallery , although well received , had made a loss of £600 in the first year , she decided to spend her money in a more practical way . a museum for contemporary arts was exactly the institution she could see herself supporting . most certainly on her mind also were the adventures in new york city of her uncle , solomon r . guggenheim , who , with the help and encouragement of artist baroness hilla von rebay , had created the solomon r . guggenheim foundation two years earlier . the main aim of this foundation had been to collect and to further the production of abstract art , resulting in the opening of the museum of non-objective painting ( from 1952 : the solomon r . guggenheim museum ) earlier in 1939 on east 54th street in manhattan . guggenheim closed guggenheim jeune with a farewell party on 22 june 1939 , at which colour portrait photographs by gisèle freund were projected on the walls . she started making plans for a museum of modern art in london together with the english art historian and art critic herbert read . she set aside 40,000 for the museum 's running costs . however , these funds were soon overstretched by the organisers ' ambitions . in august 1939 , guggenheim left for paris to negotiate loans of artworks for the first exhibition . in her luggage was a list drawn up by herbert read for this occasion . shortly after her departure the second world war broke out , and the events following 1 september 1939 made her abandon the scheme , willingly or not . she then '' decided now to buy paintings by all the painters who were on herbert read 's list . having plenty of time and all the museum 's funds at my disposal , i put myself on a regime to buy one picture a day . '' when finished , she had acquired 10 picassos , 40 ernsts , eight mirós , four magrittes , four ferrens , three man rays , three dalís , one klee , one wolfgang paalen and one chagall , among others . in the meantime , she had also made new plans and in april 1940 had rented a large space in the place vendôme as a new home for her museum . a few days before the germans reached paris , guggenheim had to abandon her plans for a paris museum , and fled to the south of france , from where , after months of safeguarding her collection and artist friends , she left europe for new york in the summer of 1941 . there , in the following year , she opened a new gallery—which actually was in part a museum—at 30 west 57th street . it was called the art of this century gallery . three of the four galleries were dedicated to cubist and abstract art , surrealism and kinetic art , with only the fourth , the front room , being a commercial gallery . guggenheim held other important shows , such as the show for 31 women artists , at the gallery . her interest in new art was instrumental in advancing the careers of several important modern artists including the american painters jackson pollock and william congdon , the austrian surrealist wolfgang paalen , the sound poet ada verdun howell and the german painter max ernst , whom she married in december 1941 . biography , peggy guggenheim collection retrieved june 25 , 2010 she had assembled her collection in only seven years . . the collection , after world war ii . following world war ii – and her 1946 divorce from max ernst – she closed the art of this century gallery in 1947 , and returned to europe , deciding to live in venice , italy . in 1948 , she was invited to exhibit her collection in the disused greek pavilion of the venice biennale and in 1949 established herself in the palazzo venier dei leoni ( 'unfinished palazzo of the lions ' ) on the grand canal . her collection became one of the few european collections of modern art to promote a significant number of works by americans . in the 1950s she promoted the art of two local painters , edmondo bacci and tancredi parmeggiani . by the early 1960s , guggenheim had almost stopped collecting art and began to concentrate on presenting what she already owned . she loaned out her collection to museums in europe and in 1969 to the solomon r . guggenheim museum in new york city , which was named after her uncle . eventually , she decided to donate her home and her collection to the solomon r . guggenheim foundation , a gift which was concluded inter vivos in 1976 , before her death in 1979 . the peggy guggenheim collection is one of the most important museums in italy for european and american art of the first half of the 20th century . pieces in her collection embrace cubism , surrealism and abstract expressionism . guggenheim lived in venice until her death in camposampiero near padua , italy , after a stroke . her ashes are interred in the garden ( later the nasher sculpture garden ) of her home , the palazzo venier dei leoni ( inside the peggy guggenheim collection ) , next to her dogs . . private life . according to both guggenheim and her biographer anton gill , it was believed that while living in europe , she had '' slept with 1,000 men '' . '' thomas messer '' , telegraph obituary , 23 may 2013 she claimed to have had affairs with numerous artists and writers , and in return many artists and others have claimed affairs with her . when asked by conductor thomas schippers how many husbands she had , she replied , '' you mean my own , or other people 's ? '' in her autobiography , peggy provides the names of some of these lovers , including yves tanguy , roland penrose and e . l . t . mesens . out of this century : confessions of an art addict , peggy guggenheim , published by andre deutsch , london . 2005 . her first marriage was to laurence vail , a dada sculptor and writer with whom she had two children , michael cedric sindbad vail ( 1923–1986 ) and pegeen vail guggenheim ( 1925–1967 ) . they divorced in about 1928 following his affair with writer kay boyle , whom he later married . soon after her first marriage dissolved , she had an affair with john ferrar holms , a writer with writer 's block who had been a war hero . karole vail peggy guggenheim : a centennial celebration solomon r . guggenheim foundation ( 1998 ) , p . 78 . starting in december 1939 , she and samuel beckett had a brief but intense affair , and he encouraged her to turn exclusively to modern art . she married her second husband , painter max ernst , in 1941 and divorced him in 1946 . among her eight grandchildren is karole vail , who was appointed director of the peggy guggenheim collection in 2017 . barone , joshua . '' the peggy guggenheim collection names its new director '' , the new york times , june 8 , 2017 , accessed july 30 , 2017 . portrayal in popular culture . guggenheim was portrayed by amy madigan in the movie pollock ( 2000 ) , directed by and starring ed harris , based on the life of jackson pollock . a play by lanie robertson based on guggenheim 's life , woman before a glass , opened at the promenade theatre on broadway , new york on march 10 , 2005 . this is a one-woman show which focuses on guggenheim 's later life . mercedes ruehl played guggenheim and received an obie award for her performance . in may 2011 , the abingdon theater arts complex in new york featured a revival of this play , starring veteran stage actress judy rosenblatt , directed by austin pendleton . in bethan roberts ' first play for radio , my own private gondolier , guggenheim 's troubled daughter , pegeen , leaves her three children behind when she travels to venice to spend the summer with her mother . the play was first broadcast on bbc radio 4 on october 19 , 2010 . guggenheim was played by fiona shaw ; pegeen was played by hattie morahan jack . in april 2015 , a new documentary film , peggy guggenheim : art addict , began premiering at film festivals , including the san francisco jewish film festival on july 26 , 2015 . references . notes sources . further reading . davidson , susan and philip rylands , eds . ( 2005 ) . '' peggy guggenheim & fredrick kiesler : the story of art of this century '' ( exhibition catalogue ) , venice : peggy guggenheim collection mary dearborn affairs of the art : mistress of modernism , the life of peggy guggenheim ( houghton mifflin , 2004 , weld , jacqueline bograd . peggy , the wayward guggenheim ( new york : e . p . dutton , 1986 ) . external links . '' peggy guggenheim : mistress of modernism '' by helen gent , marie claire , 19 june 2009