Heat transfer

overview . heat is defined in physics as the transfer of thermal energy across a well-defined boundary around a thermodynamic system . the thermodynamic free energy is the amount of work that a thermodynamic system can perform . enthalpy is a thermodynamic potential , designated by the letter '' h '' , that is the sum of the internal energy of the system ( u ) plus the product of pressure ( p ) and volume ( v ) . joule is a unit to quantify energy , work , or the amount of heat . heat transfer is a process function ( or path function ) , as opposed to functions of state ; therefore , the amount of heat transferred in a thermodynamic process that changes the state of a system depends on how that process occurs , not only the net difference between the initial and final states of the process . thermodynamic and mechanical heat transfer is calculated with the heat transfer coefficient , the proportionality between the heat flux and the thermodynamic driving force for the flow of heat . heat flux is a quantitative , vectorial representation of heat-flow through a surface . in engineering contexts , the term heat is taken as synonymous to thermal energy . this usage has its origin in the historical interpretation of heat as a fluid ( caloric ) that can be transferred by various causes , and that is also common in the language of laymen and everyday life . the transport equations for thermal energy ( fourier 's law ) , mechanical momentum ( newtonian fluid ) , and mass transfer ( fick 's laws of diffusion ) are similar , and analogies among these three transport processes have been developed to facilitate prediction of conversion from any one to the others . thermal engineering concerns the generation , use , conversion , and exchange of heat transfer . as such , heat transfer is involved in almost every sector of the economy . heat transfer is classified into various mechanisms , such as thermal conduction , thermal convection , thermal radiation , and transfer of energy by phase changes . mechanisms . the fundamental modes of heat transfer are : ; advection : advection is the transport mechanism of a fluid from one location to another , and is dependent on motion and momentum of that fluid . ; conduction or diffusion : the transfer of energy between objects that are in physical contact . thermal conductivity is the property of a material to conduct heat and evaluated primarily in terms of fourier 's law for heat conduction . ; convection : the transfer of energy between an object and its environment , due to fluid motion . the average temperature is a reference for evaluating properties related to convective heat transfer . ; radiation : the transfer of energy by the emission of electromagnetic radiation . advection . by transferring matter , energy—including thermal energy—is moved by the physical transfer of a hot or cold object from one place to another . this can be as simple as placing hot water in a bottle and heating a bed , or the movement of an iceberg in changing ocean currents . a practical example is thermal hydraulics . this can be described by the formula : : \phi_q v \rho c_p \delta t where \phi_q is heat flux ( w/m 2 ) , \rho is density ( kg/m 3 ) , c_p is heat capacity at constant pressure ( j/kg·k ) , \delta t is the difference in temperature ( k ) , v is velocity ( m/s ) . conduction . on a microscopic scale , heat conduction occurs as hot , rapidly moving or vibrating atoms and molecules interact with neighboring atoms and molecules , transferring some of their energy ( heat ) to these neighboring particles . in other words , heat is transferred by conduction when adjacent atoms vibrate against one another , or as electrons move from one atom to another . conduction is the most significant means of heat transfer within a solid or between solid objects in thermal contact . fluids—especially gases—are less conductive . thermal contact conductance is the study of heat conduction between solid bodies in contact . the process of heat transfer from one place to another place without the movement of particles is called conduction , such as when placing a hand on a cold glass of water—heat is conducted from the warm skin to the cold glass , but if the hand is held a few inches from the glass , little conduction would occur since air is a poor conductor of heat . steady state conduction is an idealized model of conduction that happens when the temperature difference driving the conduction is constant , so that after a time , the spatial distribution of temperatures in the conducting object does not change any further ( see fourier 's law ) . in steady state conduction , the amount of heat entering a section is equal to amount of heat coming out , since the change in temperature ( a measure of heat energy ) is zero . an example of steady state conduction is the heat flow through walls of a warm house on a cold day—inside the house is maintained at a high temperature and , outside , the temperature stays low , so the transfer of heat per unit time stays near a constant rate determined by the insulation in the wall and the spatial distribution of temperature in the walls will be approximately constant over time . transient conduction ( see heat equation ) occurs when the temperature within an object changes as a function of time . analysis of transient systems is more complex , and analytic solutions of the heat equation are only valid for idealized model systems . practical applications are generally investigated using numerical methods , approximation techniques , or empirical study . . convection . the flow of fluid may be forced by external processes , or sometimes ( in gravitational fields ) by buoyancy forces caused when thermal energy expands the fluid ( for example in a fire plume ) , thus influencing its own transfer . the latter process is often called '' natural convection '' . all convective processes also move heat partly by diffusion , as well . another form of convection is forced convection . in this case the fluid is forced to flow by using a pump , fan or other mechanical means . convective heat transfer , or convection , is the transfer of heat from one place to another by the movement of fluids , a process that is essentially the transfer of heat via mass transfer . bulk motion of fluid enhances heat transfer in many physical situations , such as ( for example ) between a solid surface and the fluid . convection is usually the dominant form of heat transfer in liquids and gases . although sometimes discussed as a third method of heat transfer , convection is usually used to describe the combined effects of heat conduction within the fluid ( diffusion ) and heat transference by bulk fluid flow streaming . the process of transport by fluid streaming is known as advection , but pure advection is a term that is generally associated only with mass transport in fluids , such as advection of pebbles in a river . in the case of heat transfer in fluids , where transport by advection in a fluid is always also accompanied by transport via heat diffusion ( also known as heat conduction ) the process of heat convection is understood to refer to the sum of heat transport by advection and diffusion/conduction . free , or natural , convection occurs when bulk fluid motions ( streams and currents ) are caused by buoyancy forces that result from density variations due to variations of temperature in the fluid . forced convection is a term used when the streams and currents in the fluid are induced by external means—such as fans , stirrers , and pumps—creating an artificially induced convection current . . convection-cooling . convective cooling is sometimes described as newton 's law of cooling : however , by definition , the validity of newton 's law of cooling requires that the rate of heat loss from convection be a linear function of ( '' proportional to '' ) the temperature difference that drives heat transfer , and in convective cooling this is sometimes not the case . in general , convection is not linearly dependent on temperature gradients , and in some cases is strongly nonlinear . in these cases , newton 's law does not apply . convection vs . conduction . in a body of fluid that is heated from underneath its container , conduction and convection can be considered to compete for dominance . if heat conduction is too great , fluid moving down by convection is heated by conduction so fast that its downward movement will be stopped due to its buoyancy , while fluid moving up by convection is cooled by conduction so fast that its driving buoyancy will diminish . on the other hand , if heat conduction is very low , a large temperature gradient may be formed and convection might be very strong . the rayleigh number ( \rm ra ) is the product of the grashof ( \rm gr ) and prandtl ( \rm pr ) numbers . it is a measure which determines the relative strength of conduction and convection . : \mathrm l^2/ \alpha . convection occurs when the rayleigh number is above 1,000–2,000 . radiation . thermal radiation occurs through a vacuum or any transparent medium ( solid or fluid or gas ) . it is the transfer of energy by means of photons in electromagnetic waves governed by the same laws . thermal radiation is energy emitted by matter as electromagnetic waves , due to the pool of thermal energy in all matter with a temperature above absolute zero . thermal radiation propagates without the presence of matter through the vacuum of space . thermal radiation is a direct result of the random movements of atoms and molecules in matter . since these atoms and molecules are composed of charged particles ( protons and electrons ) , their movement results in the emission of electromagnetic radiation , which carries energy away from the surface . the stefan-boltzmann equation , which describes the rate of transfer of radiant energy , is as follows for an object in a vacuum : : \phi_q \epsilon \sigma t^4 . for radiative transfer between two objects , the equation is as follows : : \phi_q \epsilon \sigma f ( t_a^4 - t_b^4 ) , where \phi_q is the heat flux , \epsilon is the emissivity ( unity for a black body ) , \sigma is the stefan–boltzmann constant , f is the view factor between two surfaces a and b , and t_a and t_b are the absolute temperatures ( in kelvins or degrees rankine ) for the two objects . radiation is typically only important for very hot objects , or for objects with a large temperature difference . radiation from the sun , or solar radiation , can be harvested for heat and power . unlike conductive and convective forms of heat transfer , thermal radiation – arriving within a narrow angle i.e . coming from a source much smaller than its distance – can be concentrated in a small spot by using reflecting mirrors , which is exploited in concentrating solar power generation or a burning glass . for example , the sunlight reflected from mirrors heats the ps10 solar power tower and during the day it can heat water to . the reachable temperature at the target is limited by the temperature of the hot source of radiation . ( t 4 -law lets the reverse-flow of radiation back to the source rise . ) the ( on its surface ) somewhat 4000 k hot sun allows to reach coarsly 3000 k ( or 3000 & nbsp ; °c , which is about 3273 k ) at a small probe in the focus spot of a big concave , concentrating mirror of the mont-louis solar furnace in france . megan crouse : this gigantic solar furnace can melt steel manufacturing.net , 28 july 2016 , retrieved 14 april 2019 . . phase transition . image : lightning in arlington.jpg thumb right 300px lightning is a highly visible form of energy transfer and is an example of plasma present at earth 's surface . typically , lightning discharges 30,000 amperes at up to 100 million volts , and emits light , radio waves , x-rays and even gamma rays . see flashes in the sky : earth 's gamma-ray bursts triggered by lightning plasma temperatures in lightning can approach 28,000 kelvins ( 27,726.85 & nbsp ; °c ) ( 49,940.33 & nbsp ; °f ) and electron densities may exceed 10 24 m −3 . phase transition or phase change , takes place in a thermodynamic system from one phase or state of matter to another one by heat transfer . phase change examples are the melting of ice or the boiling of water . the mason equation explains the growth of a water droplet based on the effects of heat transport on evaporation and condensation . phase transitions involve the four fundamental states of matter : solid – deposition , freezing and solid to solid transformation . gas – boiling / evaporation , recombination / deionization , and sublimation . liquid – condensation and melting . plasma – ionization . boiling . left the boiling point of a substance is the temperature at which the vapor pressure of the liquid equals the pressure surrounding the liquid and the liquid evaporates resulting in an abrupt change in vapor volume . in a closed system , saturation temperature and boiling point mean the same thing . the saturation temperature is the temperature for a corresponding saturation pressure at which a liquid boils into its vapor phase . the liquid can be said to be saturated with thermal energy . any addition of thermal energy results in a phase transition . at standard atmospheric pressure and low temperatures , no boiling occurs and the heat transfer rate is controlled by the usual single-phase mechanisms . as the surface temperature is increased , local boiling occurs and vapor bubbles nucleate , grow into the surrounding cooler fluid , and collapse . this is sub-cooled nucleate boiling , and is a very efficient heat transfer mechanism . at high bubble generation rates , the bubbles begin to interfere and the heat flux no longer increases rapidly with surface temperature ( this is the departure from nucleate boiling , or dnb ) . at similar standard atmospheric pressure and high temperatures , the hydrodynamically-quieter regime of boiling film is reached . heat fluxes across the stable vapor layers are low , but rise slowly with temperature . any contact between fluid and the surface that may be seen probably leads to the extremely rapid nucleation of a fresh vapor layer ( '' spontaneous nucleation '' ) . at higher temperatures still , a maximum in the heat flux is reached ( the critical heat flux , or chf ) . the leidenfrost effect demonstrates how nucleate boiling slows heat transfer due to gas bubbles on the heater 's surface . as mentioned , gas-phase thermal conductivity is much lower than liquid-phase thermal conductivity , so the outcome is a kind of '' gas thermal barrier '' . condensation . condensation occurs when a vapor is cooled and changes its phase to a liquid . during condensation , the latent heat of vaporization must be released . the amount of the heat is the same as that absorbed during vaporization at the same fluid pressure . there are several types of condensation : homogeneous condensation , as during a formation of fog . condensation in direct contact with subcooled liquid . condensation on direct contact with a cooling wall of a heat exchanger : this is the most common mode used in industry : filmwise condensation is when a liquid film is formed on the subcooled surface , and usually occurs when the liquid wets the surface . dropwise condensation is when liquid drops are formed on the subcooled surface , and usually occurs when the liquid does not wet the surface . : dropwise condensation is difficult to sustain reliably ; therefore , industrial equipment is normally designed to operate in filmwise condensation mode . melting . melting is a thermal process that results in the phase transition of a substance from a solid to a liquid . the internal energy of a substance is increased , typically with heat or pressure , resulting in a rise of its temperature to the melting point , at which the ordering of ionic or molecular entities in the solid breaks down to a less ordered state and the solid liquefies . molten substances generally have reduced viscosity with elevated temperature ; an exception to this maxim is the element sulfur , whose viscosity increases to a point due to polymerization and then decreases with higher temperatures in its molten state . c . michael hogan ( 2011 ) sulfur , encyclopedia of earth , eds . a . jorgensen and c . j . cleveland , national council for science and the environment , washington dc . modeling approaches . heat transfer can be modeled in various ways . heat equation . the heat equation is an important partial differential equation that describes the distribution of heat ( or variation in temperature ) in a given region over time . in some cases , exact solutions of the equation are available ; in other cases the equation must be solved numerically using computational methods such as dem-based models for thermal/reacting particulate systems ( as critically reviewed by peng et al . ) . lumped system analysis . lumped system analysis often reduces the complexity of the equations to one first-order linear differential equation , in which case heating and cooling are described by a simple exponential solution , often referred to as newton 's law of cooling . system analysis by the lumped capacitance model is a common approximation in transient conduction that may be used whenever heat conduction within an object is much faster than heat conduction across the boundary of the object . this is a method of approximation that reduces one aspect of the transient conduction system—that within the object—to an equivalent steady state system . that is , the method assumes that the temperature within the object is completely uniform , although its value may be changing in time . in this method , the ratio of the conductive heat resistance within the object to the convective heat transfer resistance across the object 's boundary , known as the biot number , is calculated . for small biot numbers , the approximation of spatially uniform temperature within the object can be used : it can be presumed that heat transferred into the object has time to uniformly distribute itself , due to the lower resistance to doing so , as compared with the resistance to heat entering the object . . climate models . climate models study the thermal radiation by using quantitative methods to simulate the interactions of the atmosphere , oceans , land surface , and ice . engineering . heat transfer has broad application to the functioning of numerous devices and systems . heat-transfer principles may be used to preserve , increase , or decrease temperature in a wide variety of circumstances . heat transfer methods are used in numerous disciplines , such as automotive engineering , thermal management of electronic devices and systems , hvac , insulation , materials processing , and power station engineering . insulation , radiance and resistance . thermal insulation are materials specifically designed to reduce the flow of heat by limiting conduction , convection , or both . thermal resistance is a heat property and the measurement by which an object or material resists to heat flow ( heat per time unit or thermal resistance ) to temperature difference . radiance or spectral radiance are measures of the quantity of radiation that passes through or is emitted . radiant barriers are materials that reflect radiation , and therefore reduce the flow of heat from radiation sources . good insulators are not necessarily good radiant barriers , and vice versa . metal , for instance , is an excellent reflector and a poor insulator . the effectiveness of a radiant barrier is indicated by its reflectivity , which is the fraction of radiation reflected . a material with a high reflectivity ( at a given wavelength ) has a low emissivity ( at that same wavelength ) , and vice versa . at any specific wavelength , reflectivity 1 - emissivity . an ideal radiant barrier would have a reflectivity of 1 , and would therefore reflect 100 percent of incoming radiation . vacuum flasks , or dewars , are silvered to approach this ideal . in the vacuum of space , satellites use multi-layer insulation , which consists of many layers of aluminized ( shiny ) mylar to greatly reduce radiation heat transfer and control satellite temperature . devices . 300px a heat engine is a system that performs the conversion of a flow of thermal energy ( heat ) to mechanical energy to perform mechanical work . fundamentals of classical thermodynamics , 3rd ed . p . 159 , ( 1985 ) by g . j . van wylen and r . e . sonntag : '' a heat engine may be defined as a device that operates in a thermodynamic cycle and does a certain amount of net positive work as a result of heat transfer from a high-temperature body and to a low-temperature body . often the term heat engine is used in a broader sense to include all devices that produce work , either through heat transfer or combustion , even though the device does not operate in a thermodynamic cycle . the internal-combustion engine and the gas turbine are examples of such devices , and calling these heat engines is an acceptable use of the term . '' mechanical efficiency of heat engines , p . 1 ( 2007 ) by james r . senf : '' heat engines are made to provide mechanical energy from thermal energy . '' a thermocouple is a temperature-measuring device and widely used type of temperature sensor for measurement and control , and can also be used to convert heat into electric power . a thermoelectric cooler is a solid state electronic device that pumps ( transfers ) heat from one side of the device to the other when electric current is passed through it . it is based on the peltier effect . a thermal diode or thermal rectifier is a device that causes heat to flow preferentially in one direction . heat exchangers . a heat exchanger is used for more efficient heat transfer or to dissipate heat . heat exchangers are widely used in refrigeration , air conditioning , space heating , power generation , and chemical processing . one common example of a heat exchanger is a car 's radiator , in which the hot coolant is cooled by the flow of air over the radiator 's surface . common types of heat exchanger flows include parallel flow , counter flow , and cross flow . in parallel flow , both fluids move in the same direction while transferring heat ; in counter flow , the fluids move in opposite directions ; and in cross flow , the fluids move at right angles to each other . common types of heat exchangers include shell and tube , double pipe , extruded finned pipe , spiral fin pipe , u-tube , and stacked plate . each type has certain advantages and disadvantages over other types . a heat sink is a component that transfers heat generated within a solid material to a fluid medium , such as air or a liquid . examples of heat sinks are the heat exchangers used in refrigeration and air conditioning systems or the radiator in a car . a heat pipe is another heat-transfer device that combines thermal conductivity and phase transition to efficiently transfer heat between two solid interfaces . applications . architecture . efficient energy use is the goal to reduce the amount of energy required in heating or cooling . in architecture , condensation and air currents can cause cosmetic or structural damage . an energy audit can help to assess the implementation of recommended corrective procedures . for instance , insulation improvements , air sealing of structural leaks or the addition of energy-efficient windows and doors . smart meter is a device that records electric energy consumption in intervals . thermal transmittance is the rate of transfer of heat through a structure divided by the difference in temperature across the structure . it is expressed in watts per square meter per kelvin , or w/ ( m 2 k ) . well-insulated parts of a building have a low thermal transmittance , whereas poorly-insulated parts of a building have a high thermal transmittance . thermostat is a device to monitor and control temperature . climate engineering . climate engineering consists of carbon dioxide removal and solar radiation management . since the amount of carbon dioxide determines the radiative balance of earth atmosphere , carbon dioxide removal techniques can be applied to reduce the radiative forcing . solar radiation management is the attempt to absorb less solar radiation to offset the effects of greenhouse gases . greenhouse effect . the greenhouse effect is a process by which thermal radiation from a planetary surface is absorbed by atmospheric greenhouse gases , and is re-radiated in all directions . since part of this re-radiation is back towards the surface and the lower atmosphere , it results in an elevation of the average surface temperature above what it would be in the absence of the gases . heat transfer in the human body . the principles of heat transfer in engineering systems can be applied to the human body in order to determine how the body transfers heat . heat is produced in the body by the continuous metabolism of nutrients which provides energy for the systems of the body . hartman , carl ; bibb , lewis . ( 1913 ) . '' the human body and its enemies '' . world book co . , p . 232 . the human body must maintain a consistent internal temperature in order to maintain healthy bodily functions . therefore , excess heat must be dissipated from the body to keep it from overheating . when a person engages in elevated levels of physical activity , the body requires additional fuel which increases the metabolic rate and the rate of heat production . the body must then use additional methods to remove the additional heat produced in order to keep the internal temperature at a healthy level . convective heat transfer is driven by the movement of fluids over the surface of the body . this convective fluid can be either a liquid or a gas . for heat transfer from the outer surface of the body , the convection mechanism is dependent on the surface area of the body , the velocity of the air , and the temperature gradient between the surface of the skin and the ambient air . cengel , yunus a . and ghajar , afshin j . '' heat and mass transfer : fundamentals and applications '' , mcgraw-hill , 4th edition , 2010 . the normal temperature of the body is approximately 37 & nbsp ; °c . heat transfer occurs more readily when the temperature of the surroundings is significantly less than the normal body temperature . this concept explains why a person feels cold when not enough covering is worn when exposed to a cold environment . clothing can be considered an insulator which provides thermal resistance to heat flow over the covered portion of the body . tao , xiaoming . '' smart fibres , fabrics , and clothing '' , woodhead publishing , 2001 this thermal resistance causes the temperature on the surface of the clothing to be less than the temperature on the surface of the skin . this smaller temperature gradient between the surface temperature and the ambient temperature will cause a lower rate of heat transfer than if the skin were not covered . in order to ensure that one portion of the body is not significantly hotter than another portion , heat must be distributed evenly through the bodily tissues . blood flowing through blood vessels acts as a convective fluid and helps to prevent any buildup of excess heat inside the tissues of the body . this flow of blood through the vessels can be modeled as pipe flow in an engineering system . the heat carried by the blood is determined by the temperature of the surrounding tissue , the diameter of the blood vessel , the viscosity , velocity of the flow , and the heat transfer coefficient of the blood . the velocity , blood vessel diameter , and the fluid thickness can all be related with the reynolds number , a dimensionless number used in fluid mechanics to characterize the flow of fluids . latent heat loss , also known as evaporative heat loss , accounts for a large fraction of heat loss from the body . when the core temperature of the body increases , the body triggers sweat glands in the skin to bring additional moisture to the surface of the skin . the liquid is then transformed into vapor which removes heat from the surface of the body . the rate of evaporation heat loss is directly related to the vapor pressure at the skin surface and the amount of moisture present on the skin . therefore , the maximum of heat transfer will occur when the skin is completely wet . the body continuously loses water by evaporation but the most significant amount of heat loss occurs during periods of increased physical activity . cooling techniques . . evaporative cooling . evaporative cooling happens when water vapor is added to the surrounding air . the energy needed to evaporate the water is taken from the air in the form of sensible heat and converted into latent heat , while the air remains at a constant enthalpy . latent heat describes the amount of heat that is needed to evaporate the liquid ; this heat comes from the liquid itself and the surrounding gas and surfaces . the greater the difference between the two temperatures , the greater the evaporative cooling effect . when the temperatures are the same , no net evaporation of water in air occurs ; thus , there is no cooling effect . laser cooling . in quantum physics , laser cooling is used to achieve temperatures of near absolute zero ( −273.15 & nbsp ; °c , −459.67 & nbsp ; °f ) of atomic and molecular samples to observe unique quantum effects that can only occur at this heat level . doppler cooling is the most common method of laser cooling . sympathetic cooling is a process in which particles of one type cool particles of another type . typically , atomic ions that can be directly laser-cooled are used to cool nearby ions or atoms . this technique allows cooling of ions and atoms that can not be laser cooled directly . magnetic cooling . magnetic evaporative cooling is a process for lowering the temperature of a group of atoms , after pre-cooled by methods such as laser cooling . magnetic refrigeration cools below 0.3k , by making use of the magnetocaloric effect . radiative cooling . radiative cooling is the process by which a body loses heat by radiation . outgoing energy is an important effect in the earth 's energy budget . in the case of the earth-atmosphere system , it refers to the process by which long-wave ( infrared ) radiation is emitted to balance the absorption of short-wave ( visible ) energy from the sun . the thermosphere ( top of atmosphere ) cools to space primarily by infrared energy radiated by carbon dioxide ( co2 ) at 15 μm and by nitric oxide ( no ) at 5.3 μm the global infrared energy budget of the thermosphere from 1947 to 2016 and implications for solar variability martin g . mlynczak linda a . hunt james m . russell iii b . thomas marshall christopher j . mertens r . earl thompson transport of heat and evaporative transport of latent heat both remove heat from the surface and redistribute it in the atmosphere . thermal energy storage . thermal energy storage includes technologies for collecting and energy storage for later use . it may be employed to balance energy demand between day and nighttime . the thermal reservoir may be maintained at a temperature above or below that of the ambient environment . applications include space heating , domestic or process hot water systems , or generating electricity . see also . combined forced and natural convection heat capacity heat transfer physics stefan–boltzmann law thermal contact conductance thermal physics thermal resistance in electronics thermal science heat transfer enhancement . references . external links . a heat transfer textbook - ( free download ) . thermal-fluidspedia - an online thermal fluids encyclopedia . hyperphysics article on heat transfer - overview interseasonal heat transfer - a practical example of how heat transfer is used to heat buildings without burning fossil fuels . aspects of heat transfer , cambridge university thermal-fluids central energy2d : interactive heat transfer simulations for everyone