Gwalior

economy . gwalior is surrounded by three industrial areas – sitholi , banmore and malanpur . all three of these sectors are on nh 75 , nh-3 and nh 92 respectively , with malanpur being the largest . the city once had large manufacturing industries , such as gwalior grasim and j.c . mills of birlanagar , but now this sector is left with only one major factory – j.b.mangharam ltd . the important industries in the other sectors are dairy , chemical , manufacturing , and textiles . handicraft and small industries are also found . gwalior is also an important historical and tourism sector of the country . therefore , the tourism sector also puts an effect into the city 's economy . gwalior is one of the cmas to new delhi to dissipate the load of urbanization from ncr ( see . most of the population is involved with trading firms or are self-employed . many run omes and smes with gwalior and agra as the local market . the city is scattered with coaching institutes and educational institutions which provide employment to a large section of city 's population . trade fair . gwalior trade fair was started in 1905 by maharaja madho rao scindia , king of gwalior . the gwalior trade fair is an annual trade fair showcasing the economy of gwalior . it has become the biggest fair of madhya pradesh and one of the most colourful fairs of india . it starts in the second week of january and continues until february . gwalior metro and suburbs . the 2011 census put the population of gwalior 's urban area / metropolitan region , comprising gwalior and morar cantonment , at 1,117,740 . . old town . the old town of gwalior , commonly called kila gate is around from hazira , the largest area in old town , which is of considerable size but irregularly built . it lies at the eastern base of the rock and contains the tomb of the sufi saints , khwaja khanoon and muhammad ghaus , erected during the early part of mughal emperor akbar ’ s reign , and the tomb of tansen , a great singer and one of the 'nine jewels ' of akbar 's court . a town called by his name ghauspura situated near the tomb of mohaommed ghaus.reold town consisted of some streets and mohallas which are presumed to be 700 to 800 yrs old areas in gwalior which are still backward areas in gwalior due to improper management of new town . these old areas are as follows . koteshwar temple . this temple is a 700 year old temple of lord shiva whose shivling was on gwalior fort , but when the mughals conquered it they ordered the shivling thrown out . when the troops did that , the shivling was automatically established in a field below the fort without any harm . muslim gazi told the emperor not to harm the shivling . in the late 18th century scindias built a temple for that shivling , now known as koteshwar mahadev . baba kapoor- this place is 500 meters away from ghas mandi . this place was named baba kapoor because of saint shah abdul gafoor . kashi naresh ki gali- this a 600 year old residential street in gwalior it was given name as kashi naresh ki gali because in the 14th century when the emperor of kashi was defeated in war he was sent to exile by oppositions at that time gwalior emperor and kashi 's emperor were good friends when kashi 's emperor told gwalior 's emperor whole story , emperor gave him an entire street for living at that time which is now known as kashi naresh ki gali . their family even now resides there in kashi naresh ki gali in rajaji ka bada . ( meanings : naresh king rajaji ; gali street in hindi language ; bada big area . ) . subcity . the name of lashkar is a persian word meaning 'army ' or 'camp ' , as this was originally the camp , and later the permanent capital , of the scindia dynasty of gwalior state . lashkar was the capital of madhya bharat from 1950 to 1956 . jayaji chowk is the central focus of lashkar , with a large square , a former opera house , banks , tea , coffee and juice stands and a municipal market building . thriving bazaars surround the chowk . many jewellery shops are situated near jayaji chowk , also known as maharaj bada . a source of water for the city is tighra dam , built on the saank river 20 & nbsp ; km to the north . the gajra raja medical college , founded in 1946 by the maharaja jiwaji rao scindia and the maharani vijayaraje scindia , is situated in lashkar on palace road , near katora taal , together with a group of hospitals . jai vilas palace , patterned on the french palace of versailles , is located here . morar cantonment . morar cantonment , formerly a separate town , lies east of the old city . it was formerly a british military cantonment . morar is generally considered a rural farming town . the area is known as the '' green part '' of gwalior because much of the area is still rural . morar was the scene of the most serious uprising in central india . on 1 june 1858 , jayajirao led his forces to morar to fight a rebel army led by tatya tope , rani lakshmibai and rao sahib . this army had 7,000 infantry , 4,000 cavalry and 12 guns while he had only 1,500 cavalry , his bodyguard of 600 men and 8 guns . in this attack , the rebel cavalry took the guns and most of the gwalior forces except the bodyguard went over to the rebels ( some deserted ) . the maharaja and the remainder fled without stopping until they reached the british garrison at agra . edwardes , michael ( 1975 ) red year . london : sphere books ; p . 124 by 1900 it had become a centre for local trade and had an important training industry , with a population of 19,179 in 1901 . the is situated in morar at residency road . the cantonment area makes up a large area of morar which contains official residences for the indian army . it has many canteens for army personnel . saint paul 's school and pragati vidyapeeth school are nearby . there is an air force base in the pinto park region . thatipur . thatipur is said to have got its name from state army unit 34 , which once resided there . gandhi road divides thatipur into two areas . morar at one end of the road and balwant nagar on the other . thatipur primarily consists of residential areas like darpan colony , madhav rao scindhiya enclave , the government blocks , vivek nagar , and suresh nagar . places of note are the dwarikadhish mandir , bhagwan colony , tomar building , chauhan pyaau ( the chauhan family ) , galla kothar , ramkrishna aashram , saraswati nagar , govindpuri , gayatri vihar , shakti vihar , shakuntalapuri , dushyant nagar , shanti vihar , and mayur market along with sai baba mandir in shakti vihar colony . healthcare . the prominent hospitals of gwalior include gajara raja medical college and the associated j.a . hospital , kamla raja hospital , sahara hospital , mascot hospital , bimr hospital , cancer hospital & research institute and many private doctor clinics . the cancer hospital & research institute is a nationally acclaimed medical centre in oncology . there is also a charitable hospital named satch ( shri anandpur trust charitable hospital ) which provides free treatment . there is a government ayurveda college and a private homeopathy college ( vasundhara raje homoeopathic medical college ) which is run by the biochemic and homoeopathic association of gwalior , also providing health care education and services . future developments . gwalior west is being developed as a '' counter magnet '' project with funding support from the national capital region . it has been introduced to increase investment in education , industry and real estate . this is hoped to counteract the closing of manufacturers such as hotline , cimmco and grasim gwalior . the gwalior master plan launched by the local collector and municipal corporation initiates to improve the basic civic infrastructure of the city to meet the growing population of the city as well as to make the city beautiful for tourists . architecture . gwalior fort . at the heart of gwalior is gwalior fort of the tomara dynasty . this structure was reputed to be one of the most structurally sound forts of india , having been improved by raja man singh tomar where a previous structure existed . it occupies an isolated rock outcrop . the hill is steepened to make it virtually unscalable and is surrounded by high walls which enclose buildings from several periods . the old town of gwalior lies at the eastern base of the fortress . lashkar , founded by daulat rao scindia , formerly a separate town that originated as a military camp , lies to the south , and morar , also a formerly separate town , lies to the east . gwalior , lashkar and morar are part of the gwalior municipal corporation . the fort , popularly called '' the gibraltar of india '' , overlooks the city . the emperor babur reputedly described it as '' the pearl in the necklace of the forts of hind '' . this fort 's architecture is unique . it displays a chinese influence on indian architecture , as chinese dragons have been crafted at the hilt of the pillars . this influence was due to trade between china and india at the time of the fort 's construction . after the death of sher shah suri in 1545 , who was ruling north india at that time , his son islam shah shifted his capital from delhi to gwalior and constructed 'sher shah mandir ' ( or 'sher shah fort ' ) in his father 's memory . islam shah operated from gwalior until his death in 1553 . islam shah had appointed the hindu warrior 'hemu ' or hem chandra vikramaditya as his prime minister in sher shah fort for the first time , who later on became the hem chandra vikramaditya king at delhi and established 'hindu raj ' in north india . in the east of the city are two examples of early mughal architecture : the mausoleum of the 16th century sufi saint ghous mohammed and the tomb of mian tansen , a singer and one of the 'nine jewels ' of the mughal emperor akbar 's court . right next to them is the gujari mahal , built by tomar rajput king man singh tomar on demand of his consort gujar princess mrignayani . close to the heart of the city is jai vilas mahal of the scindia dynasty , patterned on the palace of versailles . it combines tuscan , italian and corinthian styles of architecture . historically and architecturally , gwalior is interesting first as an ancient seat of jain worship ; second for its example of palace architecture of the hindu period between 1486 and 1516 ; and third as an historic fortress . many historical places are found near the dabra-bhitarwar road . prior to the founding of gwalior , the region was also known by its ancient name of gopasetra . gwalior had an institutional seat of the bhattarakas of kashtha sangh and later mula sangh . gopachal parvat is situated on the mountainous terrain at the slopes of gwalior fort . gopachal parvat contains unique statues of jain tirthankaras . the idol of parshvanath seated on a lotus ( carved out of a single stone ) is the largest in the world , towering at in height and in breadth . there is a series of 26 jain statues in a single line . built between 1398 and 1536 by tomar kings , these jain tirthankar statues are one of a kind in architecture . municipality museum , is situated a little distance from rani lakshmibai 's tomb . modern 5d is madhya pradesh 's first multi-dimensional theatre launched in the 2011 trade fair of gwalior . it was built by gwalior 's leading enterprise modern techno projects ( p ) ltd . modern 5d is recognised as india 's first own multi-dimensional theatre . shyam vatika is a banquet hall which has the world 's largest indoor mural , as recognised by guinness world records . within the fort are some marvels of medieval architecture . the 15th century gujari mahal is a monument to the love of raja mansingh tomar for his gujar queen , mrignayani . the outer structure of gujari mahal has survived in an almost total state of preservation ; the interior has been converted into an archaeological museum housing rare antiquities , some of them dating back to the 1st century a.d . many of these have been defaced by the iconoclastic mughals . sas-bahu temple - a 9th-century shrine , sas-bahu temple in the fort allures not only the devotees but also the tourists with its artistic value . despite what its name may suggest , these temples are not dedicated to sas ( mother-in-law ) and bahu ( daughter-in-law ) but rather the short form of shashtra bahu , another name for lord vishnu . these temples situated adjacent to each other and the larger one is elaborately decorated with carvings and sculptures . the roof of the larger temple is adorned with a lotus carving . teli ka mandir ( telangana mandir ) - a structure of about 100 feet , teli ka mandir in gwalior fort distinguishes itself from the other compositions of its time because of its unique architecture . though the roof of the temple holds a dravidian style , the sculptures are typically north indian . the temple bears a close resemblance to the temple of prathihara vishnu , and is filled with images of coiled serpents , passionate couples , river goddesses , and a flying garuda . the temple architecture follows the indo-aryan and nagara styles and is believed to be among the oldest constructions in the fort . the telikā mandir , or 'oil-man 's temple ' , owes its name to teli , a term for an oil grinder or oil dealer . many suggestions have been put forward to explain this name historically , but in fact the name is not old , the temple being used for processing oil before the british occupied the fort and used the building , albeit temporarily , as a coffee shop . the telikā mandir is the loftiest temple among all the buildings in gwalior fort with a height of about 30 meters . the temple consists of a garba griha , that is , sanctum proper for the deity , and an antarala to enter into the temple . it can be approached by a flight of steps provided on the eastern side . the most striking feature of the temple is the wagon-vaulted roof , a form used over rectangular shrines which normally accommodated a row of mother goddesses . m . willis , temples of gopakṣetra : a regional history of architecture in central india ( london , 1996 ) . the goddesses from the interior vanished centuries ago and have not been traced . the exterior walls of the temple are decorated with sculptures , many of which are damaged ; the niches , shaped like temples , are empty . the building carries a dedicatory inscription to the goddess in a niche on the southern side , but otherwise does not have any history . willis , inscriptions of gopakṣetra : materials for the history of central india ( london , 1995 ) , illustration . the architectural style points to a date in the late 8th century . willis , temples of gopakṣetra . the entrance gateway on the eastern side is a later addition of the british period , made by major keith in 1881 . it was built as a way of saving various historic pillars and other pieces no longer in their original context . jain rock-cut sculptures - a striking part of the jain remains at gwalior is a series of caves or rock-cut sculptures , excavated in the rock on all sides , and numbering nearly a hundred , great and small . most of them are mere niches to hold statues , though some are cells that may have been originally intended for residences . according to inscriptions , they were all excavated within a short period of about thirty-three years , between 1441 and 1474 . one of the colossal figures is 57 & nbsp ; ft ( 17 & nbsp ; m ) high , taller than any other in northern india . gurudwara datta bandi choodh- gwalior fort also has the gurudwara , built in the memory of the sixth sikh , guru har gobind . this gurudwara is particularly large and grand , built entirely of marble with coloured glass decorating the main building . recital of the guru granth sahib takes place here and mughal kings used to visit gwalior regularly . there is a gurdwara that was converted to a mandir of '' kalli devi '' and process is on to take it back by sikhs . adhyatma niketan is an important ashram near gwalior fort . jai vilas mahal . also called jai vilas palace , is the residential palace turned museum of the maratha rulers of gwalior - the scindias . the palace has notable collections of antiques . the museum is one of the largest in madhya pradesh and has the world 's largest chandelier and the complex is a mixture of british and hindu architecture . the palace was constructed in 1874 as an attempt to bring the palace of versailles to gwalior . tombs and chatris of historic importance . chatris of scindias is situated close to the city near achaleshwar temple and is the burial place for the scindias who ruled the city for numerous years . designated persons like maharaja madhavrao scindia , vijayaraje scindia and his highness jivajirao scindia were cremated here . tansen 's tomb : gwalior is the birthplace of the musician tansen . he was one of the '' nine gems of akbar '' . gaus mohammad 's tomb : the tombs of great gaus mohammad and tansen are situated on the same territory . tomb of rani lakshmibai , a famous freedom fighter , at phoolbag area . it is here where the she died in 1858 fighting against the british . it is also her burial place . sun temple . located in , the sun temple '' vivsvaan mandir '' is dedicated to the sun god surya . designed as a facsimile of the sun temple of konark in odisha , the temple was sponsored and built in the 1980s by the birla family . the temple is located in a serene ambience and a well-maintained garden within the temple premises is very attractive . this holy temple draws the locals and tourists alike who gather here to render their prayers . before the temple was built the gardens had the name tapovan . the gardens were the location of an ill-fated attempt to introduce african lions by the maharaja of gwalior state . . notable people . amjad ali khan , sarod player and musician atal bihari vajpayee , former prime minister of india javed akhtar , famous poet , lyricist and writer , born in gwalior kartik aaryan , actor , born in gwalior sharad kelkar , actor , born in gwalior piyush mishra , indian film and theatre actor , music director , lyricist , singer , scriptwriter . mamta sharma , singer munni badnam , fevicol se etc . , born in gwalior ganesh shankar vidyarthi , famous hindi writer , born in gwalior nida fazli , famous urdu writer and poet roop singh , indian hockey player and olympian shivendra singh , indian national hockey player , born and lives in gwalior tansen , court musician of the mughal emperor akbar salman khan , arbaaz khan , studied at scindia school narendra singh tomar pran kumar sharma , cartoonist and comic creator of chacha chaudhary fame moved here after the partition sunil bharti mittal , ceo of bharti airtel . he first joined the wynberg allen school in mussoorie , but later attended scindia school at gwalior anurag kashyap , an indian film director , screenwriter , producer and actor . he did his early schooling from green school dehradun and after the age of eight , he attended the scindia school in gwalior krishnarao shankar pandit , noted musician of the gwalior gharana meet bros , the musician duo hail from gwalior . pawan karan , noted indian major hindi poet and writer . meeta pandit , famous musician of gwalior gharana amitabh mitra , indo-english poet , visual artist and head of emergency medicine and trauma , south africa . he studied at gajara raja medical college , gwalior harshvardhan rane , telugu and bollywood actor kushal tandon , indian television actor . he did his schooling at scindia school in gwalior nitin mukesh , singer . he did his schooling at scindia school in gwalior navniti prasad singh , former chief justice of kerala high court . gallery . file : sun temple - gwl - f3101 wiki veethi.jpg sun temple file : tighra dam.jpg tighra dam file : mythological statue guarding gujari mahal.jpg statue guarding entrance to gujari mahal file : gwalior fort gate.jpg one of the seven gates of the gwalior fort file : gujari mahal.jpg gujari mahal , now a museum , inside gwalior fort file : gwalior-temple.jpg sas-bahu ka mandir at gwalior fort file:241 gwalior.jpg former central press at gwalior file:256 gwalior.jpg beautiful chinese hand craft work on the walls of gwalior fort file : sp a0135.jpg former vidhan sabha when gwalior was capital of madhya bharat file : tomb of mohammadghauz.jpg tomb of mohammad ghauz . references . external links . official website of gwalior gwalior municipal corporation satellite map of gwalior junction and nearby railway stations gwalior information centre under construction website of gwalior city r . nath mughal architecture image collection , images from gwalior - university of washington digital collection