Polykleitos

name . his greek name was traditionally latinized polycletus , but is also transliterated polycleitus , classical greek , '' much-renowned '' ) and , due to iotacism in the transition from ancient to modern greek , polyklitos or polyclitus . he is called sicyonius ( lit . '' the sicyonian '' , usually translated as '' of sicyon '' ) pliny the elder natural histories 34.19.23 by latin authors including pliny the elder and cicero , and ἀργεῖος ( lit . '' the argive '' , trans . '' of argos '' ) by others like plato and pausanias . he is sometimes called the elder , in cases where it is necessary to distinguish him from his son , who is regarded as a major architect but a minor sculptor . early life and training . as noted above , polykleitos is called '' the sicyonian '' by some authors , all writing in latin , and who modern scholars view as relying on an error of pliny the elder in conflating another more minor sculptor from sikyon , a disciple of phidias , with polykleitos of argos . pausanias is adamant that they were not the same person , and that polykleitos was from argos , in which city state he must have received his early training , that a '' school of argos '' existed during the fifth century is minimized as '' marginal '' by jeffery m . hurwit , '' the doryphoros : looking backward '' , in warren g . moon , ed . polykleitos , the doryphoros , and tradition , 1995:3-18 . and a contemporary of phidias ( possibly also taught by ageladas ) . works . polykleitos 's figure of an amazon for ephesus was admired , while his colossal gold and ivory statue of hera which stood in her temple—the heraion of argos—was favourably compared with the olympian zeus by pheidias . he also sculpted a famous bronze male nude known as the doryphoros ( '' spear bearer '' ) , which survives in the form of numerous roman marble copies . further sculptures attributed to polykleitos are the discophoros ( '' discus-bearer '' ) , diadumenos ( '' youth tying a headband '' ) and a hermes at one time placed , according to pliny , in lysimachia ( thrace ) . polykleitos 's astragalizontes ( '' boys playing at knuckle-bones '' ) was claimed by the emperor titus and set in a place of honour in his atrium . pliny the elder , naturalis historia pliny also mentions that polykleitos was one of the five major sculptors who competed in the fifth century b.c . to make a wounded amazon for the temple of artemis ; marble copies associated with the competition survive . . diadumenos . the statue of diadumenos , also known as youth tying a headband is one of polykleitos 's sculptures known from many copies . the gesture of the boy tying his headband represents a victory , possibly from an athletic contest . “ it is a first-century a.d . roman copy of a greek bronze original dated around 430 b.c . ” polykleitos sculpted the outline of his muscles significantly to show that he is an athlete . “ the thorax and pelvis of the diadoumenos tilt in opposite directions , setting up rhythmic contrasts in the torso that create an impression of organic vitality . the position of the feet poised between standing and walking give a sense of potential movement . this rigorously calculated pose , which is found in almost all works attributed to polykleitos , became a standard formula used in greco-roman and , later , western european art . '' . doryphoros . another statue created by polykleitos is the doryphoros , also called the spear bearer . it is a typical greek sculpture depicting the beauty of the male body . “ polykleitos sought to capture the ideal proportions of the human figure in his statues and developed a set of aesthetic principles governing these proportions that was known as the canon or 'rule' . he created the system based on mathematical ratios . '' though we do not know the exact details of polykleitos ’ s formula , the end result , as manifested in the doryphoros , was the perfect expression of what the greeks called symmetria . on this sculpture , it shows somewhat of a contrapposto pose ; the body is leaning most on the right leg . the doryphoros has an idealized body , contains less of naturalism . in his left hand , there was once a spear , but if so it has since been lost . the posture of the body shows that he is a warrior and a hero . . style . polykleitos , along with phidias , created the classical greek style . although none of his original works survive , literary sources identifying roman marble copies of his work allow reconstructions to be made . contrapposto , a pose that visualizes the shifting balance of the body as weight is placed on one leg , was a source of his fame . the refined detail of polykleitos 's models for casting executed in clay is revealed in a famous remark repeated in plutarch 's moralia , that '' the work is hardest when the clay is under the fingernail '' . plutarch , quaest . conv . ii 3 , 2 , 636b-c , quoted in stewart . . the canon of polykleitos and '' symmetria '' . polykleitos consciously created a new approach to sculpture , writing a treatise ( an artistic canon ( from , a measuring rod or standard ) and designing a male nude exemplifying his theory of the mathematical basis of ideal proportions . though his theoretical treatise is lost to history , he is quoted as saying , '' perfection . comes about little by little through many numbers '' . philo , mechanicus , quoted in stewart . by this he meant that a statue should be composed of clearly definable parts , all related to one another through a system of ideal mathematical proportions and balance . though his canon was probably represented by his doryphoros , the original bronze statue has not survived , but later marble copies exist . references to the kanon by other ancient writers imply that its main principle was expressed by the greek words , the hippocrates principle of ( '' equilibrium '' ) , and . galen wrote that polykleitos 's kanon '' got its name because it had a precise commensurability ( symmetria ) of all the parts to one another . '' galen , . he also wrote that the kanon defines beauty '' in the proportions , not of the elements , but of the parts , that is to say , of finger to finger , and of all the fingers to the palm and the wrist , and of these to the forearm , and of the forearm to the upper arm , and of all the other parts to each other . '' the art historian kenneth clark observed that '' polykleitos 's general aim was clarity , balance , and completeness ; his sole medium of communication the naked body of an athlete , standing poised between movement and repose '' . clark 1956:63 . . conjectured reconstruction . thumb suggested that earlier work to reconstruct the canon had failed because previous researchers had made a flawed assumption of a foundation in linear ratios rather than areal proportion . he conjectured that the canon begins from the length of the outermost part ( the '' distal phalange '' ) of the little finger . the length of the diagonal of a square of this side ( mathematically , , about 1.4142 ) gives the length of the middle phalange . repeating the process gives the length of the proximal phalange ; doing so again gives the length of the metacarpal plus the carpal bones the distance from knuckle to the head of the ulna . next , a square of side equal to the length of the hand from little finger to wrist yields a diagonal of length equal to that of the forearm . this '' diagonal of a square '' process gives the relative ratios of many other key reference distances in the human male body . the process would not require measurement of square roots : the artist could take a long cord and make knots separated from each other by a distance which equals the diagonal of the square drawn on the preceding length . on the body proper , the process is repeated but the geometric progression is taken and retaken from the top of the head ( rather than additively , as on the hand/arm ) : the head from crown to chin is the same size as the fore-arm ; from crown to clavicle is as long as the upper arm ; a diagonal on that square yields the distance from the crown to the line of the nipples . tobin validated his calculation by comparing his theoretical model with a roman copy of doryphoros in the national archaeological museum of naples . . followers . polykleitos and phidias were among the first generation of greek sculptors to attract school ( discipline ) . polykleitos 's school lasted for at least three generations , but it seems to have been most active in the late 4th century and early 3rd century bc . the roman writers pliny and pausanias noted the names of about twenty sculptors in polykleitos 's school , defined by their adherence to his principles of balance and definition . skopas and lysippus are among the best-known successors of polykleitos . polykleitos 's son , polykleitos the younger , worked in the 4th century bc . although the son was also a sculptor of athletes , his greatest fame was won as an architect . he designed the great theatre at epidaurus . gallery . file : amazzone ferita - wounded amazon - polykleitos - v cent . bc - musei capitolini roma . jpg wounded amazon , musei capitolini , rome file : doryphoros mia 866.jpg doryphoros , minneapolis institute of art file : bronze statue of an athlete from ephesus cleaning his strigil 1st century ce copy of 4th century bce greek original.jpg bronze statue of an athlete from ephesus cleaning his strigil ; 1st century ce copy of a possible original by polykleitos file : statua di pan col flauto , copia imperiale da originale di policleto , dall'italia.jpg pan with flute , roman copy of a possible original by polykleitos . notes . references . references . pausanias , description of greece . . external links . smarthistory - diadumenos