Mega Man

artbooks . various artbooks and source books have been released for many years in japan , often including conceptual artwork , interviews with production staff , and background information on the storyline and concepts that are not present within the games themselves . one of the most well-known is the rockman perfect memories sourcebook released in 2002 which first confirmed the presence of an alternate timeline ( for battle network ) , as well as exactly where the legends series fit into the fictional mega man universe . recently a series of artbooks called the official complete works has been published for individual mega man series , showcasing a large collection of artwork and background information . to date , books for the zero , classic and x ( released together as r20 ) , star force , and battle network series have been produced . although these books have for many years been exclusive to japan , udon has finished translating the official complete works series for the north american market , called '' r25 '' . mega man : official complete works was re-released as a hardcover on october 16 , 2018 , mega man x : official complete works was followed by a hardcover re-release on november 27 , 2018 . a hardcover re-release of mega man zero : official complete works was released on june 11 , 2019 . on april 2 , 2019 , it was announced that mega man battle network official complete works would be getting a hardcover re-release on august 20 , 2019 . on october 31 , 2019 , it was announced that mega man star force official complete works would be getting a hardcover re-release on may 5 , 2020 . . comics . mega man has also been featured in many comics and manga in japan , although few have been localized in north america . the most well-known series is produced by hitoshi ariga ( who went on to provide character designs and artwork for future official capcom releases , including the super famicom game mega man and bass ) . the series began with rockman remix , followed with rockman megamix , and is currently being serialized as rockman gigamix . the megamix portion of the series would eventually be brought to north american shores thanks to udon , also responsible for the localization of the short mega man zx manga by shin ogino . in the original mega man series , dr . light was known as dr . right , so many of his robots featured in ariga 's comic have '' r '' s in their designs . udon did not alter this detail in the english version of mega man megamix . ariga , hitoshi . mega man megamix volume 1 . udon . table of contents . in addition , viz media localized the 13-volume rockman exe manga by ryo takamisaki under the name megaman nt warrior . takamisaki would later serialize a short adaptation of mega man star force 3 that was never published outside japan . some other manga series that have not been localized outside japan include a 12-volume rockman x adaptation by yoshihiro iwamoto , over 15 classic and x adaptations by shigeto ikehara , a light-hearted adaptation of rockman zero by hideto kajima , a slapstick adaptation of shooting star rockman by masaya itagaki , another battle network adaptation by jun keijima and miho asada called rockman exe battle story , and a short series of slapstick battle network and star force-themed adaptations by takumi kawano . dreamwave and brazilian publisher magnum press made its own comic books based on the classic game series . the brazilian series , novas aventuras de megaman ( '' new adventures of megaman '' ) , were originally published and sold in brazil between 1996 and 1997 and drew certain criticism for featuring bizarrely altered storylines ( with characters from several installments appearing at random , as well as erotic and sexual innuendo in mega man and x 's relationship with roll ) as well for frequent nudity involving roll 5 iconic characters who got insane reboots in foreign comics and an original character named princesa , which attempted to take over the status as the main character of the comics ; its sudden end on a cliffhanger . the series was illustrated by erica awano , eduardo francisco , daniel hdr and others . megaman 1 the dreamwave series lasted only four issues and also ended abruptly , with plot-threads from the first three issues being dropped completely in the final issue and the inclusion of a short story promising a mega man x follow-up that never materialized . this was one of several dreamwave capcom comics that were cut short or simply never made it to issue 1 , including maximo , darkstalkers and rival schools . on july 20 , 2017 it was announced that mega man megamix would be getting remastered on january 24 , 2018 , titled “ mega man : mastermix ” these releases will contain remastered versions of the original stories and in full color provided by josh perez . and on september 29 , 2018 , it was announced that mega man mastermix would be getting released in trade paperback form on april 2 , 2019 . . archie comics . in april 2011 , archie comics released their first issue in an ongoing series of licensed comics based on the mega man franchise which features the titular character going against his nemesis dr . wily in various , original story arcs . the overall concept is created and almost exclusively written by ian flynn , who is also the current head writer for archie comics ' other video game licensed comic series sonic the hedgehog . consequently , as of may 2013 , both series have been crossed-over in a major story arc called '' worlds collide '' , which spans twelve issues between the mega man comics , the main sonic the hedgehog comics , and the latter 's side-series sonic universe . the popularity of this crossover is such that another meeting of the two series , '' worlds unite '' , was announced for spring of 2015 . the series was put on “ indefinite hiatus ” after issue 55 . junior novel . in 1990 , a junior novel version of mega man 2 was released as part of the worlds of power novel series . mega man is turned human by dr . light during an accident in a machine designed to clone mega man . instead of a mega buster , human mega man uses a hand gun , and instead of being able to copy the robot master 's weapons , he instead takes them off of their arms . for some reason , being human does not affect him much and he is still able to consume e-drinks ( energy tanks ) and gain a power boost . the book follows the general plot of mega man 2 and even provides game hints at the end of some chapters . music . ascertaining the identity of video game composers , especially prior to the fifth generation of consoles , can be difficult , as the composers were often uncredited or credited under a pseudonym . recent soundtrack releases and interviews have discovered the true names of the composers ; and in some cases , specific track credits . the indie rock music group the protomen dedicated their first two albums to a rock opera based on mega man , called the protomen ( 2005 ) and act ii : the father of death ( 2009 ) . independent rap artist mega ran remixed several mega man tracks for an album called mega ran ( 2007 ) and several follow-up albums , which were officially licensed by capcom . he now holds a guinness world record for the most songs recorded referencing megaman with 130 . . miscellaneous . in 1999 , the brazilian role-playing game magazine dragão brasil 14 published an adaptation for 3d & t by marcelo cassaro revista dragão brasil and joão paulo nogueira . reception and legacy . according to gamesradar , the mega man games were the first to feature a non-linear '' level select '' option . this was a stark contrast to both linear games ( like super mario bros . ) and open world games ( like the legend of zelda and metroid ) . gamesradar credits the '' level select '' feature of mega man as the basis for the non-linear mission structure found in most open-world , multi-mission , sidequest-heavy games , including modern games like grand theft auto , red dead redemption and spider-man : shattered dimensions . in street fighter : assassin 's fist tenth episode '' raging demon '' , ryu and ken were seen playing mega man 2 from a gift from ken 's father . the original mega man series was well received , with ign ranking all six original titles in the top 100 best nes games . mega man 2 in particular is regarded as the best of the entire series and one of the finest and most influential platformers of all-time . ign ranked it as the 4th best nes game , behind only super mario and legend of zelda titles , calling it '' virtually flawless '' and its gameplay '' oft-replicated and never exceeded '' . the mega man x series has been positively received . the first mega man x game was widely acclaimed by critics since its release . gaming magazines in the united states and europe including electronic gaming monthly ( egm ) , gamepro , game players , nintendo power , super play , and the german version of total ! consistently lauded the game 's visuals , audio , control , and overall gameplay . game players summarized mega man x as '' a near-perfect cart with classic gameplay , excellent graphics and sound and tons of hidden items and power-ups '' . nintendo power stated that the game had '' great control and fun '' along with '' challenging play '' . websites such as ign , gamespot , gamesradar , and 1up.com retrospectively held mega man x as a successful milestone in transitioning the mega man series from its increasingly stale existence on the nes to the snes . brett elston of gamesradar stated , '' x was a total reinvention of the series , a perfectly executed update that had fans anticipating its release with a fervor the franchise had n't seen since the mega man 2 and 3 days . '' mega man x received criticism from some publications as well . ed semrad , danyon carpenter , and al manuel of the egm review panel all noted that the game may have too low a difficulty level ; semrad disliked the introductory stage and felt that the game was too short as well . super play editor zy nicholson lowered his review score of the game because he found the levels were neither large nor challenging . '' a few elementary tricks like repeating easy sections to recoup energy and weapon power will see you through the harder bits , '' nicholson explained . '' within the level you 'll also find restart points , extra lives , and no harsh time limit to put pressure on your performance . couple this with a password system that records your level completion , status and weapon accumulation and you 'll see we 're not looking at a lasting challenge for the experienced player . '' nintendo power criticized how little the game had changed stating that '' the theme remains the same as the game boy and nes mega man titles . '' the game 's title initially proved a source of some confusion ; the gaming media reported that many gamers mistook the '' x '' for the roman numeral 10 . mega man x was ranked number 58 in nintendo powers '' 100 best nintendo games of all time '' in its 100th issue in september 1997 , number 103 in the publication 's '' top 200 games '' list for its 200th issue in february 2006 , and the 11th best snes game of all time in its august 2008 issue . both gamesradar and screwattack listed mega man x as the screwattack 's top 10 . gamepro similarly listed it as the eighth greatest 16-bit video game . game informer considered it the 120th best game of all time in its own 200th issue in december 2009 . ign named it the twelfth-best on its own top 100 snes games list in 2011 . mega man x was a commercial success . the snes version has sold 1.16 million copies worldwide to date , making it the 41st best-selling capcom game of all time . ign 's jeremy dunham speculated that the game 's more mature storyline and its inclusion of numerous gameplay extensions over the original mega man series helped create a '' unique cadre of fans '' . a spin-off series , mega man zero , began in 2002 on the game boy advance handheld as a result of the immense popularity of the character zero . the mega man zero games have earned generally positive reviews . review sources both criticized and praised the high difficulty level of the game and remarked that they were similar in nature to earlier installments in the mega man series . positive reviews noted the variety of abilities and customization along with an engaging story than compared to its prequel series , while negative reviews focused on the series repetitiveness and lack of originality . review scores were lower for the last two games in the series , with critics pointing out that the games were just using the same gameplay without introducing anything new . when the first game in the series came out , reviewers were quick to hail a return to what they considered '' the mega man roots '' , however some fans criticized that the lack of knowing which boss the player will face next was a change for the worse and that it '' takes away what made the series unique in the past '' . overall , the character of mega man has been well received by critics . ign called him an icon of capcom . nintendo power listed mega man as their fourth favourite hero , citing his ability to steal weapons from downed robot masters . mega man was also listed as the best robot in video games by many sources such joystick division , ugo networks , and complex . gamedaily ranked him as the best capcom character of all time . ugo networks listed mega man as one of their best heroes of all time , and called him '' one of the most iconic video game heroes of all time '' . he was included in gamespot 's '' all time greatest video game hero '' contest and reached the '' elite eight '' round before losing to mario . in a famitsu poll done in february 2010 , mega man was voted by readers as the twenty-second most popular video game character . the 2011 guinness world records gamer 's edition lists mega man as the 23rd most popular video game character . in 2012 , gamesradar ranked him as the 12th '' most memorable , influential , and badass '' protagonist in games . complex ranked him as having the tenth best fighting game cameos for his guest appearances in street fighter x tekken in 2012 . joystick division cited his rivalry with dr . wily as seventh of the ten greatest in video games , adding giving '' great credit to this rivalry for its open-endedness '' and gamesradar listed him and proto man as having one of the best brotherly rivalries in gaming . ugo networks have placed mega man as the eighth character who most deserves his own movie . 1up.com described mega man as '' capcom 's ill-treated mascot '' , and '' one of the most incongruous characters of all time '' , saying '' it would n't be completely incorrect to assume that the popularity of the series has almost nothing to do with mega man himself '' , but with '' his rivals , his enemies , and their abilities . '' ign agreed with his dependency on support characters , saying zero is '' cooler than mega man '' . den of geek listed mega man 's incarnation from street fighter x tekken as the 15th best cameo in fighting game history due to how it represented capcom 's lack of interest in featuring other games as of 2012 , as well as the apparent self-mockery of it due to mega man 's poor characterization . destructoid described this mega man as '' legit '' stating it was '' an unexpected and interesting creative decision by capcom using this version of mega man to represent them in what may be one of their biggest games of 2012 '' . mega man series director keiji inafune announced the similarly themed mighty no . 9 in september 2013 , but after much controversy surrounding delays and mishandling , the game was released in june 2016 to a mixed-to-negative reception . batterystaple games released the mega man x-inspired 20xx in 2014 . related . 20xx mighty gunvolt mighty no . 9 azure striker gunvolt