Orlande de Lassus

life . orlande de lassus was born in mons in the county of hainaut , habsburg netherlands ( modern-day belgium ) . information about his early years is scanty , although some uncorroborated stories have survived , the most famous of which is that he was kidnapped three times because of the singular beauty of his singing voice . at the age of twelve , he left the low countries with ferrante gonzaga and went to mantua , sicily , and later milan ( from 1547 to 1549 ) . while in milan , he made the acquaintance of the madrigalist spirito l'hoste da reggio , a formative influence on his early musical style . he then worked as a singer and a composer for costantino castrioto in naples in the early 1550s , and his first works are presumed to date from this time . next he moved to rome , where he worked for cosimo i de ' medici , grand duke of tuscany , who maintained a household there , and in 1553 , he became maestro di cappella of the basilica of saint john lateran , the ecumenical mother church of rome and a spectacularly prestigious post indeed for a man only twenty-one years old . however , he stayed there for only a year . ( palestrina would assume this post a year later , in 1555 . ) no solid evidence survives for his whereabouts in 1554 , but there are contemporary claims that he traveled in france and england . in 1555 he returned to the low countries and had his early works published in antwerp ( 1555–1556 ) . in 1556 he joined the court of albert v , duke of bavaria , who was consciously attempting to create a musical establishment on a par with the major courts in italy . lassus was one of several netherlanders to work there , and by far the most famous . he evidently was happy in munich and decided to settle there . in 1558 he married regina wäckinger , the daughter of a maid of honor of the duchess . they had two sons , both of whom became composers , and his daughter married the painter hans von aachen . daughter of '' de lasso '' in karel van mander 's 1604 dictionary of biographies called schilder-boeck by 1563 lassus had been appointed maestro di cappella , succeeding ludwig daser in the post . lassus remained in the service of albrecht v and his heir , wilhelm v , for the rest of his life . by the 1560s lassus had become quite famous , and composers began to go to munich to study with him . andrea gabrieli went there in 1562 , and possibly remained in the chapel for a year . giovanni gabrieli also possibly studied with him in the 1570s . his renown had spread outside strictly musical circles , for in 1570 emperor maximilian ii conferred nobility upon him , a rare circumstance for a composer . pope gregory xiii knighted him and in 1571 , and again in 1573 , the king of france , charles ix , invited him to visit . some of these kings and aristocrats attempted to woo him away from munich with more attractive offers , but lassus was evidently more interested in the stability of his position , and the splendid performance opportunities of albrecht 's court , than in financial gain . '' i do not want to leave my house , my garden , and the other good things in munich '' , he wrote to the duke of electorate of saxony in 1580 , upon receiving an offer for a position in dresden . in the late 1570s and 1580s lassus made several visits to italy , where he encountered the most modern styles and trends . in ferrara , the center of avant-garde activity , he doubtless heard the madrigals being composed for the d'este court . however , his own style remained conservative and became simpler and more refined as he aged . in the 1590s his health began to decline , and he went to a doctor named thomas mermann for treatment of what was called '' melancholia hypocondriaca '' , but he was still able to compose as well as travel occasionally . his final work was often considered one of his best pieces : an exquisite set of twenty-one madrigali spirituali known as the lagrime di san pietro ( '' tears of st . peter '' ) , which he dedicated to pope clement viii , and which was published posthumously in 1595 . lassus died in munich on 14 june 1594 , the same day that his employer decided to dismiss him for economic reasons . he never saw the letter . he was buried in munich in the alter franziskaner friedhof , a cemetery that was cleared of gravestones in 1789 and is now the site of max-joseph-platz . . music and influence . one of the most prolific , versatile , and universal composers of the late renaissance , lassus wrote over 2,000 works in all latin , french , italian and german vocal genres known in his time . these include 530 motets , 175 italian madrigals and villanellas , 150 french chansons , and 90 german lieder . no strictly instrumental music by lassus is known to survive , or ever to have existed : an interesting omission for a composer otherwise so wide-ranging and prolific , during an age when instrumental music was becoming an ever-more prominent means of expression , all over europe . the german music publisher adam berg dedicated 5 volumes of his patrocinium musicum ( published from 1573–1580 ) to lassus ' music . sacred music . lassus remained catholic during this age of religious discord , though this neither hindered him in writing worldly secular songs nor in employing music originally to racy texts in his magnificats and parody masses nevertheless , the catholic counter-reformation , which under jesuit influence was reaching a peak in bavaria in the late sixteenth century , had a demonstrable impact on lassus ' late work , including the liturgical music for the roman rite , the burgeoning number of magnificats , the settings of the catholic ulenberg psalter ( 1588 ) , and especially the great penitential cycle of spiritual madrigals , the lagrime di san pietro ( 1594 ) . masses . almost 60 masses have survived complete ; most of them are parody masses ) using as melodic source material secular works written by himself or other composers . technically impressive , they are nevertheless the most conservative part of his output . he usually conformed the style of the mass to the style of the source material , which ranged from gregorian chant to contemporary madrigals , but always maintained an expressive and reverent character in the final product . several of his masses are based on extremely secular french chansons ; some of the source materials were outright obscene . entre vous filles de quinze ans , '' oh you fifteen-year old girls '' , by jacob clemens non papa , gave him source material for his 1581 missa entre vous filles , probably the most scandalous of the lot . this practice was not only accepted but encouraged by his employer , which can be confirmed by evidence from their correspondence , much of which has survived . in addition to his traditional imitation masses , he wrote a considerable quantity of missae breves , '' brief masses '' , syllablic short masses meant for brief services ( for example , on days when duke albrecht went hunting : evidently he did not want to be detained by long-winded polyphony music ) . the most extreme of these is a work actually known as the jäger mass ( missa venatorum ) —the '' hunter 's mass '' . some of his masses show influence from the venetian school , particularly in their use of polychoral techniques ( for example , in the eight-voice missa osculetur me , based on his own motet ) . three of his masses are for double choir , and they may have been influential on the venetians themselves ; after all , andrea gabrieli visited lassus in munich in 1562 , and many of lassus 's works were published in venice . even though lassus used the contemporary , sonorous venetian style , his harmonic language remained conservative in these works : he adapted the texture of the venetians to his own artistic ends . motets and other sacred music . lassus is one of the composers of a style known as musica reservata—a term which has survived in many contemporary references , many of them seemingly contradictory . the exact meaning of the term is a matter of fierce debate , though a rough consensus among musicologists is that it involves intensely expressive setting of text and chromaticism , and that it may have referred to music specifically written for connoisseurs . a famous composition by lassus representative of this style is his series of 12 motets entitled prophetiae sibyllarum , in a wildly chromatic idiom which anticipates the work of gesualdo ; some of the chord progressions in this piece were not to be heard again until the 20th century . lassus wrote four settings of the passion , one for each of the evangelists , st . matthew , mark , luke and john . all are for a cappella voices . he sets the words of christ and the narration of the evangelist as chant , while setting the passages for groups polyphonically . as a composer of motets , lassus was one of the most diverse and prodigious of the entire renaissance . his output varies from the sublime to the ridiculous , and he showed a sense of humor not often associated with sacred music : for example , one of his motets satirizes poor singers ( his setting of super flumina babylonis , for five voices ) which includes stuttering , stopping and starting , and general confusion ; it is related in concept if not in style to mozart 's a musical joke . many of his motets were composed for ceremonial occasions , as could be expected of a court composer who was required to provide music for visits of dignitaries , weddings , treaties and other events of state . but it was as a composer of religious motets that lassus achieved his widest and most lasting fame . lassus 's 1584 setting of the seven penitential psalms of david ( penitential psalms ( lassus ) ) , ordered by charles ix of france ordered them as an expiation of his soul after the massacre of st . bartholomew against the huguenots , is one of the most famous collections of psalm settings of the entire renaissance . the counterpoint is free , avoiding the pervasive imitation of the netherlanders such as gombert , and occasionally using expressive devices foreign to palestrina . as elsewhere , lassus strives for emotional impact , and uses a variety of texture and care in text-setting towards that end . the penultimate piece in the collection , his setting of the psalm 130 ( psalm 129/130 ) , is considered by many scholars to be one of the high-water marks of renaissance polyphony , ranking alongside the two settings of the same text by josquin des prez . among his other liturgical compositions are hymns , canticles ( including over 100 magnificats ) , responsories for holy week , passions , lamentations , and some independent pieces for major feasts . secular music . lassus wrote in all the prominent secular forms of the time . in the preface to his collection of german songs , lassus lists his secular works : italian madrigals and french chansons , german and dutch songs . he is probably the only renaissance composer to write prolifically in five languages & nbsp ; – latin in addition to those mentioned above & nbsp ; – and he wrote with equal fluency in each . many of his songs became hugely popular , circulating widely in europe . in these various secular songs , he conforms to the manner of the country of origin while still showing his characteristic originality , wit , and terseness of statement . madrigals . in his madrigals , many of which he wrote during his stay in rome , his style is clear and concise , and he wrote tunes which were easily memorable ; he also '' signed '' his work by frequently using the word 'lasso ' ( and often setting with the sol-fege syllables la-sol , i.e . a-g in the key of c ) . his choice of poetry varied widely , from petrarch for his more serious work to the lightest verse for some of his amusing canzonettas . lassus often preferred cyclic madrigals , i.e . settings of multiple poems in a group as a set of related pieces of music . for example , his fourth book of madrigals for five voices begins with a complete sestina by petrarch , continues with two-part sonnets , and concludes with another sestina : therefore the entire book can be heard as a unified composition with each madrigal a subsidiary part . chansons . another form which lassus cultivated was the french chanson , of which he wrote about 150 . most of them date from the 1550s , but he continued to write them even after he was in germany : his last productions in this genre come from the 1580s . they were enormously popular in europe , and of all his works , they were the most widely arranged for instruments such as lute and keyboard . most were collected in the 1570s and 1580s in three publications : one by petrus phalesius the elder in 1571 , and two by le roy and ballard in 1576 and 1584 . stylistically , they ranged from the dignified and serious , to playful , bawdy , and amorous compositions , as well as drinking songs suited to taverns . lassus followed the polished , lyrical style of sermisy rather than the programmatic style of clément janequin for his writing . one of the most famous of lassus 's drinking songs was used by shakespeare in henry iv , part ii . english words are fitted to un jour vis un foulon qui fouloit ( as monsieur mingo ) and sung by the drunken justice silence , in act v , scene iii . german lieder . a third type of secular composition by lassus was the german lied . most of these he evidently intended for a different audience , since they are considerably different in tone and style from either the chansons or madrigals ; in addition , he wrote them later in life , with none appearing until 1567 , when he was already well-established at munich . many are on religious subjects , although light and comic verse is represented as well . he also wrote drinking songs in german , and contrasting with his parallel work in the genre of the chanson , he also wrote songs on the unfortunate aspects of overindulgence . dutch songs . in the preface to his collection of german songs , lassus states that he had composed dutch songs . however , no dutch song has been preserved . jan willem bonda , de meerstemmige nederlandse liederen van de vijftiende en zestiende eeuw , uitgeverij verloren , 1996 , , , p . 23 . in popular culture . in the arthur conan doyle short story '' the adventure of the bruce-partington plans , '' sherlock holmes is working on a monograph about the polyphonic motets of lassus . media . notes . references and further reading . james haar , '' orlande de lassus '' , in the new grove dictionary of music and musicians , ed . stanley sadie . 20 vol . london , macmillan publishers ltd . , 1980 . gustave reese , music in the renaissance . new york , w.w . norton & co . , 1954 . harold gleason and warren becker , music in the middle ages and renaissance ( music literature outlines series i ) . bloomington , indiana . frangipani press , 1986 . jean-paul c . montagnier , the polyphonic mass in france , 1600-1780 : the evidence of the printed choirbooks , cambridge : cambridge university press , 2017 ( chapter 5 , '' lassus as model '' ) . external links . list of compositions of orlande de lassus listen to free recordings of songs from umeå akademiska kör listen to a streaming recording of a complete live performance by chanticleer of '' the divine orlando '' at instant encore database of orlando di lasso manuscripts listen to '' lassus and wine '' at bbc sounds , early music podcast part 1 27/1/21