Sacrificial tripod

ancient china . image : liu ding.jpg thumb left a ding from the late shang dynasty . tripod pottery have been part of the archaeological assemblage in china since the earliest neolithic cultures of cishan and peiligang in the 7th and 8th millennium bc . sacrificial tripods were also found in use in ancient china usually cast in bronze but sometimes appearing in ceramic form . eberhard , wolfram , a history of china , berkeley and los angeles : university of california press , 3rd edition , 1969 . cf . p.49 for illustration of ancient bronze tripod found at anyang . they are often referred to as '' dings '' and usually have three legs , but in some usages have four legs . the chinese use sacrificial tripods in modern times , such as in 2005 , when a '' national unity tripod '' made of bronze was presented by the central chinese government to the government of northwest china 's xinjiang to mark its fiftieth birthday . it was described as a traditional chinese sacrificial vessel symbolizing unity . '' national unity tripod '' presented to mark xinjiang 's 50th birthday '' , people 's daily , china , october 01 , 2005 . ancient greece . the most famous tripod of ancient greece was the delphic tripod on which the pythia took her seat to deliver the oracles of the deity . the seat was formed by a circular slab on the top of the tripod , on which a branch of laurel was deposited when it was unoccupied by the priestess . in this sense , by classical times the tripod was sacred to apollo . according to the myth , heracles went to the oracle of delphi in order to ask what to do in order to be expiated from the murder of iphitos . the oracle did not want to give him an omen . the enraged hero then grabbed the tripod on which the pythia sat in order to pronounce her oracles . apollo tried to prevent him and this resulted in a fight between the god and the hero . finally , zeus had to intervene in order to end this quarrel . the mytheme of heracles contesting with apollo for the tripod appears in vase-paintings older than the oldest written literature . vase-paintings with the mythic motif begin in geometric style , but the identifications of heracles and apollo become certain only in the 6th century . ( walter burkert , homo necans ( 1982 ) translated by peter bing ( university of california press ) 1983 , p 121 , and bibliographical note . the oracle originally may have been related to the primal deity , the earth . in the geometric period , the tripods were fastened to the cauldrons they supported . in the museum of delphi there are fragments of such tripods , most distinctive of which is the one with a ring-shaped handle . another well-known tripod in delphi was the plataean tripod ; it was made from a tenth part of the spoils taken from the persian army after the battle of plataea . this consisted of a golden basin , supported by a bronze serpent with three heads ( or three serpents intertwined ) , with a list of the states that had taken part in the war inscribed on the coils of the serpent . the golden bowl was carried off by the phocis during the third sacred war ( 356–346 bc ) ; the stand was removed by the emperor constantine to constantinople in 324 , where in modern istanbul it still can be seen in the hippodrome , the atmeydanı , although in damaged condition : the heads of the serpents have disappeared , however one is now on display at the nearby istanbul archaeology museums . the inscription , however , has been restored almost entirely . such tripods usually had three ears ( rings which served as handles ) and frequently had a central upright as support in addition to the three legs . tripods frequently are mentioned by homer as prizes in athletic games and as complimentary gifts ; in later times , highly decorated and bearing inscriptions , they served the same purpose . they appear also to be precious gifts for the guests , as in the case of the phaeakes , who offered a cauldron and tripod to odysseus . our guest has already packed up the clothes , wrought gold , and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance ; let us now , therefore , present him further , each one of us , with a large tripod and a cauldron . we will recoup ourselves by the levy of a general rate ; for private individuals can not be expected to bear the burden of such a handsome present . odyssey , 13.10-15 tr . s . butler they also were used as dedicatory sacrifice to the deities , and in the dramatic contests at the dionysia the victorious choregus ( a wealthy citizen who bore the expense of equipping and training the chorus ) received a crown and a tripod . he would either dedicate the tripod to some deity or set it upon the top of a marble structure erected in the form of a small circular temple in a street in athens , called the street of tripods , jane ellen harrison ; margaret verrall , mythology and monuments of ancient athens being a translation of a portion of the attica of pausanias , london and new york : macmillan , 1890 . cf . p.243 from the large number of memorials of this kind . one of these , the choragic monument of lysicrates , erected by him to commemorate his victory in a dramatic contest in 335 bc , still stands . the form of the victory tripod , now missing from the top of the lysicrates monument , has been rendered variously by scholars since the 18th century . thumb martin l . west writes that the pythia at delphi shows many traits of shamanistic practices , likely inherited or influenced from central asian practices . he cites her sitting in a cauldron on a tripod , while making her prophecies , her being in an ecstatic trance state , similar to shamans , and her utterings , unintelligible . martin litchfield west , the orphic poems , p.147 . '' the pythia resembles a shaman at least to the extent that she communicates with her god while in a state of trance , and conveys as much to those present by uttering unintelligible words . it is particularly striking that she sits on a cauldron supported by a tripod . this eccentric perch can hardly be explained except as a symbolic boiling , and , as such , it looks very much like a reminiscence of the initiatory boiling of the shaman translated from hallucinatory experience into concrete visual terms . it was in this same cauldron , probably , that the titans boiled dionysus in the version of the story known to callimachus and euphorion , and his remains were interred close by '' . see also mircea eliade , spirit language . according to herodotus ( the histories , i.144 ) , the victory tripods were not to be taken from the temple sanctuary precinct , but left there as dedications . herodotus , the histories ( ed . a . d . godley ) , book i.cxliv : : '' just as the dorians of what is now the country of the 'five cities ' -- formerly the country of the 'six cities ' -- forbid admitting any of the neighboring dorians to the triopian temple , and even barred from using it those of their own group who had broken the temple law . 2 for long ago , in the games in honor of triopian apollo , they offered certain bronze tripods to the victors ; and those who won these were not to carry them away from the temple but dedicate them there to the god . 3 now when a man of halicarnassus called agasicles won , he disregarded this law , and , carrying the tripod away , nailed it to the wall of his own house . for this offense the five cities -- lindus , ialysus , camirus , cos , and cnidus -- forbade the sixth city -- halicarnassus -- to share in the use of the temple . such was the penalty imposed on the halicarnassians . '' . historical and typological evolution of the tripod . at the end of the geometric period an innovation is introduced : the tripods are detached from the large bronze cauldron ( lebes ) , which is now placed on them . in the museum there is a distinctive specimen : on a fine , bronze tripod standing on cast legs , lay a large globular cauldron . on its lip there are developed heads of griffins and lions , as well as winged female figures , possibly sirens . these creatures originate from the middle east , whereas the technique of casting followed by hammering also alludes to oriental workshops . in reference to ancient greek tripod cauldrons , after the 8th century most increased in both size and amount of detail , becoming more decorative , and were used almost exclusively as dedication to the gods in sanctuaries . file : delphi tripod.jpg delphic tripod ( red-figured krater , paestum , c . 330 bc ) file : relief sacrifice glyptothek munich.jpg ritual vessel supported on a tripod ( roman relief 1st-century ad ) file : affresco romano - pompei - casa dei triclini - triclinio c seconda vittoria alata.jpg winged victory bearing a tripod ( wall painting , pompeii , 64 ad ) file : relief of medea and the peliades antikensammlung berlin.jpg medea and the peliades around a tripod ( 1828 relief after a 5th-century bc greek original ) . notes . references . smith , william , a dictionary of greek and roman antiquities , 1870 . cf . p . & nbsp ; 1162 , article on tripos martin litchfield west , the orphic poems , oxford , 1983 . wilson , peter , the athenian institution of the khoregia : the chorus , the city , the stage , 2000 . ( cf . chapter v - monumentalising victory , pp . & nbsp ; 198- for discussion and plates of tripods as awards ) . further reading . benton , sylvia , '' the evolution of the tripod-lebes '' , the annual of the british school at athens , vol . 35 , ( 1934/1935 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 74–130 . external links . lysikrates monument and street of tripods in athens photographs of the lysikrates monument and street of tripods in athens