Vestal Virgin

history . the roman imperial period authors livy , plutarch , and aulus gellius attribute the creation of the vestals as a state-supported priestesshood to king numa pompilius , who reigned circa 717–673 & nbsp ; bc . according to livy , writing in the augustan age , numa introduced the vestals and assigned them salaries from the aerarium . livy also says that the priestesshood of vesta had its origins at alba longa . livy , ab urbe condita , 1:20 . the 2nd-century ad antiquarian aulus gellius writes that the first vestal taken from her parents was led away in hand by numa . also writing in the 2nd century , plutarch attributes the founding of the temple of vesta to numa , who appointed at first two priestesses ; servius tullius increased the number to four . life of numa pompilius 9.5–10 . ambrose alludes to a seventh in late antiquity . numa also appointed the pontifex maximus to watch over the vestals . the first vestals , according to the 1st-century bc author varro , were named gegania , english pronunciation : veneneia , canuleia , and tarpeia . tarpeia , daughter of spurius tarpeius , was portrayed as traitorous in legend . the vestals became a powerful and influential force in the roman state . when sulla included the young julius caesar in his proscriptions , the vestals interceded on caesar 's behalf and gained him pardon . suetonius , julius caesar , 1.2 . augustus included the vestals in all major dedications and ceremonies . they were held in awe , and attributed certain magical powers . pliny the elder , for example , in book & nbsp ; 28 of his natural history discussing the efficacy of magic , chooses not to refute , but rather tacitly accept as truth : pliny ( 1855 ) , the natural history of pliny , volume & nbsp ; 5 , p . & nbsp ; 280 . the 4th-century ad urban prefect symmachus , who sought to maintain traditional roman religion during the rise of christianity , wrote : because a vestal 's virginity was thought to be directly correlated to the sacred burning of the fire , if the fire were extinguished it might be assumed that either the vestal had acted wrongly or that the vestal had simply neglected her duties . the final decision was the responsibility of the pontifex maximus , or the head of the pontifical college , as opposed to a judicial body . while the order of the vestals was in existence for over one thousand years there are only ten recorded convictions for unchastity and these trials all took place at times of political crisis for the roman state . it has been suggested that vestals were used as scapegoats since the health of city was perceived in some way to be linked to the purity and spiritual health of the vestals , suspicions may have been fuelled in times of trouble . the allusions to a possible scapegoat could have been reinforced by the vestals throwing argei into the tiber each year on may & nbsp ; 15 . cf . in times of great crisis . pliny the younger was convinced that cornelia , who as virgo maxima was buried alive at the orders of emperor domitian , was innocent of the charges of unchastity , and he describes how she sought to keep her dignity intact when she descended into the chamber : dionysius of halicarnassus claims that the earliest vestals at alba longa were whipped and '' put to death '' for breaking their vows of celibacy , and that their offspring were to be thrown into the river . according to livy , rhea silvia , the mother of romulus and remus , had been forced to become a vestal virgin , and when she gave birth to the twins , it is stated that she was merely loaded down with chains and cast into prison , her babies put into the river . dionysius also relates the belief that live burial was instituted by the roman king tarquinius priscus , and inflicted this punishment on the priestess pinaria . the 11th & nbsp ; century byzantine historian george kedrenos is the only extant source for the claim that prior to priscus , the roman king numa pompilius had instituted death by stoning for unchaste vestal virgins , and that it was priscus who changed the punishment into that of live burial . smith , anthon ( 1843 ) , '' a dictionary of greek and roman antiquities '' , new york : harper & brothers p.1040 but whipping with rods sometimes preceded the immurement as was done to urbinia in 471 & nbsp ; bc . suspicions first arose against minucia through an improper love of dress and the evidence of a slave . she was found guilty of unchastity and buried alive . similarly postumia , who though innocent according to livy was tried for unchastity with suspicions being aroused through her immodest attire and less than maidenly manner . postumia was sternly warned '' to leave her sports , taunts , and merry conceits '' . aemilia , licinia , and martia were executed after being denounced by the servant of a barbarian horseman . a few vestals were acquitted . some cleared themselves through ordeals . the paramour of a guilty vestal was whipped to death in the forum boarium or on the comitium . image : casa-vestali.png thumb a reconstruction of the house of the vestals by christian hülsen ( 1905 ) . house of the vestals . the house of the vestals was the residence of the vestal priestesses in rome . behind the temple of vesta ( which housed the sacred fire ) , the atrium vestiae was a three-storey building at the foot of the palatine hill . vestal festivals . the chief festivals of vesta were the vestalia celebrated june & nbsp ; 7 until june & nbsp ; 15 . on june & nbsp ; 7 only , her sanctuary ( which normally no one except her priestesses the vestals entered ) was accessible to mothers of families who brought plates of food . the simple ceremonies were officiated by the vestals and they gathered grain and fashioned salty cakes for the festival . this was the only time when they themselves made the mola salsa , for this was the holiest time for vesta , and it had to be made perfectly and correctly , as it was used in all public sacrifices . attire . throughout time , the image of the vestal virgin has been a woman draped in white priestly garments denoting the essence of purity and divinity through such attire . the important elements of the vestal costume include the stola and the vittae . these two items are closely related to the traditional attire of roman brides and the roman matron , and therefore are not unique to the vestals . the vittae that the vestals wore was a cloth ribbon worn in the vestals ' hair . it is closely associated with status of roman matron . vittae were worn by a wider range of women at different stages of life and therefore can not be accepted as unique to just one stage . unmarried girls , matrons , as well as the vestal virgins all wore them . however , the vestals did not share all elements of the bride 's attire , specifically they did not wear the flammeum that brides did , but instead wore the suffibulum . the vestals also wore a stola , which is associated with roman matrons , not with roman brides . furthermore , the manner in which the vestals styled their hair was the way that roman brides wore their hair on their wedding day . this juxtaposition between the attire and style worn by vestal virgins and brides or matrons is particularly intriguing and studied by scholars in numerous instances . the gowns worn by the vestals and roman brides were also similar in the way that they were tied . the distinction , though is that the vestals wore the stola , which is associated more with matrons , while brides were associated with the tunica recta . the stola is a long gown that covers the body , and this covering of the body by way of the gown '' signals the prohibitions that governed the vestals sexuality '' . stola literally communicates the message of '' hands off '' and further communicates their virginity . the connection between vestals and roman brides suggests that the vestals have the connotation of being ambivalent . they are perceived as eternally stuck at the moment between virginal status and marital status . their main articles of clothing consisted of an infula , a suffibulum , and a palla . the infula was a fillet , which was worn by priests and other religious figures in rome . a vestal 's infula was white and made from wool . the suffibulum was the white woolen veil which was worn during rituals and sacrifices . usually found underneath were red and white woolen ribbons , symbolizing the vestal 's commitment to keeping the fire of vesta and to her vow of purity , respectively . the palla was the long , simple shawl , a typical article of clothing for roman women . the palla , and its pin , were draped over the left shoulder . vestals also had an elaborate hairstyle consisting of six or seven braids , which roman brides also wore . festus 454 in the edition of lindsay , as cited by robin lorsch wildfang , rome 's vestal virgins : a study of rome 's vestal priestesses in the late republic and early empire ( routledge , 2006 ) , p . & nbsp ; 54 laetitia la follette , '' the costume of the roman bride '' , in the world of roman costume ( university of wisconsin press , 2001 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 59–60 ( on discrepancies of hairstyles in some vestal portraits ) '' recreating the vestal virgin hairstyle '' video . in 2013 janet stephens became the first to recreate the hairstyle of the vestals on a modern person . . list of vestals . from the institution of the vestal priesthood to its abolition , an unknown number of vestals held office . several are named in roman myth and history . legendary vestals . rhea silvia , a vestal at alba longa , was the mythical mother of rome 's founders , romulus and remus . aemilia , a roman vestal who prayed to vesta for assistance on one occasion when the sacred fire was extinguished , and then miraculously rekindled it by throwing a piece of her garment upon the extinct embers . ; valerius maximus , i.1.§7 . vestals in the republic ( 509–27 bc ) . oppia was a vestal virgin in the early republic . in 483 , following a series of portents , and advice from the soothsayers that the religious ceremonies were not being duly attended to , she was found guilty of a breach of chastity and punished . orbinia , put to death for misconduct in 471 . dionysius of halicarnassus , ix . 40 . postumia , tried for misconduct in 420 , but acquitted . livy , iv . 44 . minucia , put to death for misconduct in 337 . livy , viii . 15 . sextilia , put to death for misconduct in 273 . livy , periochae , 14 . caparronia , committed suicide in 266 when accused of misconduct . orosius , iv . 5 § 9 . tuccia , accused of misconduct , perhaps in 230 , she proved her innocence . valerius maximus , viii.1 § 5 . broughton , vol . i , pp . 227 , 228 ( note 2 ) . floronia , opimia , convicted of misconduct in 216 , one was buried alive , the other committed suicide . livy , xxii . 57 . claudia ap . f . ap . n . , daughter of appius claudius pulcher , consul in 143 . during the triumph of her father , she walked beside him to repulse a tribune of the plebs , who was trying to veto his triumph . cicero , pro caelio , 14 . licinia c . f . , vestal in 123 , her dedication of an altar was cancelled by the pontiffs because it had been done without the approval of the people . she was possibly the same as the vestal executed for misconduct in 113 . cicero , pro domo sua , 136 . aemilia , marcia , and licinia , accused of multiple acts of incestum ( violations of their vows of chastity ) in 114 . aemilia , who had supposedly led the two others to follow her example , was condemned outright and put to death . marcia , who was accused of only one offence , and licinia , who was accused of many , were at first acquitted by the pontifex , but were retried by lucius cassius longinus ravilla ( consul 127 ) , and condemned to death in 113 . wildfang , robin lorsch , rome 's vestal virgins : a study of rome 's vestal priestesses in the late republic and early empire , routledge/taylor & francis , 2007 , p . 93ff the prosecution offered two sibylline books in support of the final verdicts . the charges were almost certainly trumped up , and may have been politically motivated . phyllis cunham , in harriet flower ( ed ) , the cambridge companion to the roman republic , cambridge university press , 2004 , p.155 googlebooks partial preview . the accusations against licinia included fraternal incest . she was a contemporary and possible political ally of the gracchi brothers . in 123 & nbsp ; bc the roman senate had annulled her attempted rededication of bona dea 's aventine temple as illegal and '' against the will of the people '' . she may have fallen victim to the factional politics of the times . broughton , vol . i , p . 534 . fonteia , served c . 91–69 , recorded as a vestal during the trial of her brother in 69 , but she would have begun her service before her father 's death in 91 . cicero , pro fonteio 46–49 aulus gellius 1.12.2 t.r.s . broughton , the magistrates of the roman republic ( american philological association , 1952 ) , vol . 2 , pp . & nbsp ; 24–25 . fabia , chief vestal ( b . c . 98–97 ; fl . 50 ) , admitted to the order in 80 , half-sister of terentia ( cicero 's first wife ) , and full sister of fabia the wife of dolabella who later married her niece tullia ; she was probably mother of the later consul of that name . wildfang , robin lorsch , rome 's vestal virgins : a study of rome 's vestal priestesses in the late republic and early empire , routledge/taylor & francis , 2007 , p . 96 , preview via google books in 73 she was acquitted of incestum with lucius sergius catilina . the case was prosecuted by cicero . licinia ( flourished 1st & nbsp ; century ) was supposedly courted by her kinsman , the so-called '' triumvir '' marcus licinius crassus – who in fact wanted her property . this relationship gave rise to rumors . plutarch says : '' and yet when he was further on in years , he was accused of criminal intimacy with licinia , one of the vestal virgins and licinia was formally prosecuted by a certain plotius . now licinia was the owner of a pleasant villa in the suburbs which crassus wished to get at a low price , and it was for this reason that he was forever hovering about the woman and paying his court to her , until he fell under the abominable suspicion . and in a way it was his avarice that absolved him from the charge of corrupting the vestal , and he was acquitted by the judges . but he did not let licinia go until he had acquired her property . '' licinia became a vestal in 85 and remained a vestal until 61 . arruntia , perpennia m . f . , popillia , attended the inauguration of lucius cornelius lentulus niger as flamen martialis in 69 . licinia , crassus ' relative , was also present . broughton , vol . ii , pp . 135-137 ( note 14 ) . occia , vestal for 57 years between 38 bc and 19 ad . broughton , vol . ii , p . 395 . . imperial vestals . junia torquata ( 1st-century ) , vestal under tiberius , sister of gaius junius silanus . tacitus , annales , iii . 69 . rubria ( 1st-century ) , said by suetonius to have been raped by nero . aquilia severa ( 3rd century ) , whom emperor elagabalus married amid considerable scandal . clodia laeta ( 3rd century ) . flavia publicia ( mid-3rd century ) . coelia concordia ( 4th century ) , the last head of the order . outside rome . inscriptions record the existence of vestals in other locations than the centre of rome . manlia severa , virgo albana maxima , ils & nbsp ; 6190 , found in 1728 at the xi & nbsp ; mile of the via appia , now in the lapidary gallery of the vatican museums : it mentions the dedication of a clipeus by her brother . a chief alban vestal at bovillae whose brother was probably the l . manlius severus named as a rex sacrorum in a funerary inscription . mommsen thought he was rex sacrorum of rome , view that is now not considered probable . ils & nbsp ; 4942 presently no longer reperible in the palazzo mattei in rome . flavia ( or valeria ) vera , a virgo vestalis maxima arcis albanae , chief vestal virgin of the alban arx ( roman ) . ils & nbsp ; 5011 , found in rome near the basilique of st . saba , now in the lapidary gallery of the vatican museum . it is a dedicatory inscription on a little base , possibly of a statuette that was housed in the home of the same vestal on the little aventine . m . g . granino cecere '' vestali non di roma '' in studi di epigrafia latina 20 2003 p . & nbsp ; 70-71 . caecilia philete , a senior virgin ( virgo maior ) of laurentum-lavinium , virgo maior regia laurentium lavinatium , , as read by pirro ligorio , now housed in the palazzo borghese at pratica di mare . cecere above p . & nbsp ; 72 . as commemorated by her father , q . caecilius papion . the title maior means at lavinium the vestals were only two . saufeia alexandria , virgo vestalis tiburtium . ils & nbsp ; 6244 on the base of an honorary statue , now irreperible . possibly also mentioned in . cecere above p . & nbsp ; 73-74 cossinia l ( ucii ) f ( iliae ) , a virgo vestalis of tibur ( tivoli ) . inscr . it . iv n . & nbsp ; 213 . inscription on funerary monument discovered at tivoli in july 1929 . on the front the name of the vestal is incised within an oak wreath onto which adheres the sacred infula , knot of the order ; with the name of the dedicant ( l . cossinius electus , a relative , probably brother or nephew ) on the lower margin . cecere above p . & nbsp ; 75 . primigenia , alban vestal of bovillae , mentioned by symmachus in two of his letters . vestals in western art . the vestals were used as models of female virtue in allegory portraiture of the later west . elizabeth i of england was portrayed holding a sieve to evoke tuccia , the vestal who proved her virtue by carrying water in a sieve . marina warner , monuments and maidens : the allegory of the female form ( university of california press , 1985 ) , p . 244 ; robert tittler , '' portraiture , politics and society , '' in a companion to tudor britain ( blackwell , 2007 ) , p . 454 ; linda shenk , learned queen : the image of elizabeth i in politics and poetry ( palgrave macmillan , 2010 ) , p . 13 . tuccia herself had been a subject for artists such as jacopo del sellaio ( d . 1493 ) and stradanus , and women who were arts patrons started having themselves painted as vestals . warner , monuments and maidens , p . 244 . in the libertine environment of 18th century france , portraits of women as vestals seem intended as fantasies of virtue infused with ironic eroticism . kathleen nicholson , '' the ideology of feminine 'virtue ' : the vestal virgin in french eighteenth-century allegorical portraiture , '' in portraiture : facing the subject ( manchester university press , 1997 ) , p . 58ff . later vestals became an image of republican virtue , as in jacques-louis david 's the vestal virgin . the discovery of a '' house of the vestals '' in pompeii made the vestals a popular subject in the 18th century and the 19th century . portraits as vestals . file : metsys elizabeth i the sieve portrait c1583.jpg sieve portrait of queen elizabeth i ( 1583 ) by quentin metsys the younger file : jean raoux – vestal virgin.jpg vestal virgin ( 1677–1730 ) by jean raoux file : madame henriette de france as a vestal virgin ( c . 1749 ) by jean-marc nattier.jpg madame henriette de france as a vestal virgin ( 1749 ) by jean-marc nattier file : angelica kauffmann , portrait of a woman as a vestal virgin , 1780-1785 02.jpg portrait of a woman as a vestal virgin ( 1770s ) by angelica kauffman