Pat Buchanan

the american conservative magazine . in 2002 , buchanan partnered with former new york post editorial page editor scott mcconnell and journalist taki theodoracopulos to found the american conservative , a new magazine intended to promote traditional conservative viewpoints on economic , immigration and foreign policies . the first issue was dated october 7 , 2002 . accusations of antisemitism and holocaust denial . in december 1991 , a 40,000-word article by william f . buckley jr . was published in the national review discussing antisemitism among conservative commentators focused largely on buchanan ; the article and many responses to it were collected in the book in search of anti-semitism ( 1992 ) . he concluded : '' i find it impossible to defend pat buchanan against the charge that what he did and said during the period under examination amounted to anti-semitism '' . the anti-defamation league has called buchanan an '' unrepentant bigot '' who '' repeatedly demonizes jews and minorities and openly affiliates with white supremacists . '' in article for the washington post in march 1992 , conservative columnist charles krauthammer suggested : '' the real problem with buchanan . is not that his instincts are antisemitic but that they are , in various and distinct ways , fascistic . '' '' there 's no doubt , '' said krauthammer in 1999 when contacted for a salon article , '' he makes subliminal appeals to prejudice . '' he added : '' the interesting thing is how he can say these things and still be considered a national figure . '' buchanan denies assertions that he is an antisemite , and some of his fellow journalists , including murray rothbard , jack germond , al hunt and mark shields , have defended him against the charge . . nazi war criminals . around 1982 , buchanan began to defend cleveland auto-worker john demjanjuk against the charge that demjanjuk was a nazi war criminal nicknamed '' ivan the terrible '' responsible for the mass murder of jews at treblinka . in 1986 , while he was a senior figure in the reagan administration , he was highly critical of the charges brought by office of special investigations ( osi ) , the nazi war crimes unit of justice department . he claimed demjanjuk was the victim of mistaken identity and possibly the victim of a plot by the soviet union . the following year , while still a member of the administration , he made unofficial attempts to stop the deportation of suspected nazi war criminals from east europe , including estonian karl linnas as well as demjanjuk . menachem z . rosensaft , in a new york times op-ed , described buchanan 's '' oft-expressed sympathy for a host of nazi criminals '' like linnas as being '' a constitutionally protected perversion '' . buchanan referred to such cases as being pursued by '' revenge-obsessed nazi hunters '' in 1987 . as a member of the reagan white house , he was accused of having suppressed the reagan justice department 's investigation into nazi scientists brought to america by the oss 's operation paperclip . in 1990 , allan ryan jr . , a former head of the osi said buchanan 's accusation of kgb involvement in the demjanjuk case was '' an absolutely cockamamie theory . '' ryan accused buchanan of being '' the spokesman for nazi war criminals in america '' . neal sher , osi head in 1990 said buchanan had never contacted them , even when he was a government official . '' he essentially took what was fed him by our opponents , sometimes holocaust-deniers , and just regurgitated it , '' sher told the washington post . in 2009 , menachem z . rosensaft in the times of israel and jeffrey goldberg in the atlantic , objected to buchanan in his syndicated column comparing demjanjuk to jesus christ and buchanan calling him an '' american dreyfuss '' . it was viewed by goldberg as an example of the libel that the jewish deicide killed christ . describing buchanan 's comparison as '' strikingly offensive '' and an attempt to '' revive the charge of blood libel '' against jews , peter wehner wrote in commentary magazine : '' rarely do you find such an obscene mix of blasphemy and bigotry , and all in less than 900 words '' . the former guard had been deported to germany , where he was convicted of being an accessory to the murder of 28,000 jews at the sobibor extermination camp . . bitburg visit by president reagan . buchanan supported president reagan 's plan to visit a german military cemetery at bitburg in 1985 , where among buried wehrmacht soldiers were the graves of 48 waffen ss members . at the insistence of german chancellor helmut kohl and over the vocal objections of jewish groups , the trip went ahead . in a 1992 interview , elie wiesel described attending a white house meeting of jewish leaders about the trip : '' the only one really defending the trip was pat buchanan , saying , 'we can not give the perception of the president being subjected to jewish pressure . ' '' buchanan accused wiesel of fabricating the story in an abc interview in 1992 : '' i did n't say it and elie wiesel was n't even in the meeting . that meeting was held three weeks before the bitburg summit was held . if i had said that , it would have been out of there within hours and on the news '' . quoted by crossfire , cnn , february 24 , 1992 , transcript 514 . . comments on the holocaust . in a 1990 column for the new york post , buchanan wrote that it was impossible for 850,000 jews to be killed by diesel exhaust fed into the gas chamber at treblinka in a return to his interest in the demjanjuk case . '' diesel engines do not emit enough carbon monoxide to kill anybody , '' he wrote . the washington post cited the belief of experts who said there is more than sufficient carbon monoxide present in the fumes to speedily asphyxiate victims causing their death . patrick j . buchanan . '' ivan the terrible ' - more doubts '' , new york post , march 17 , 1990 . buchanan once argued treblinka '' was not a death camp but a transit camp used as a 'pass-through point ' for prisoners '' . in fact , historians have estimated that some 900,000 jews died at treblinka . lichtblau , eric , ( 2015 ) the nazis next door , how america became a save haven for hitler 's men , p . 194 , published by houghton , mifflin , harcourt , boston . when george will challenged him on the issue on tv in december 1991 , buchanan did not reply . . comments about israel . in the context of the gulf war , on august 26 , 1990 , buchanan appeared on the mclaughlin group and said : '' there are only two groups that are beating the drums for war in the middle east – the israeli defense ministry and its 'amen corner ' in the united states . '' buchanan on the mclaughlin group on june 15 1990 , asserted : '' capitol hill is israeli occupied territory '' . he also said in the august 1990 program : '' the israelis want this war desperately because they want the united states to destroy the iraqi war machine . they want us to finish them off . they do n't care about our relations with the arab world . '' a.m . rosenthal , in an article for the new york times explicitly accused buchanan of antisemitism on the grounds that he had used the word '' israelis '' as a cover for jews . abraham foxman , the director of the adl , compared buchanan 's comments to insinuations made during the world war ii '' that jews were the only ones who sought american entry in the war against nazi germany '' . holocaust survivor elie wiesel in september 1990 said buchanan '' leaves the memory of jewish victims in such disdain ; a man who always takes the side of those accused of being killers ; a man who is constantly criticizing israel ; a man who always has something nasty to say about the jewish people '' . . statements on race and immigration . central park jogger case . in a 1989 column , buchanan called for the lynching of a 16-year old black teenager and the horsewhipping of four other younger african-american and hispanic teenagers for having allegedly raped a white jogger in the central park jogger case . he also called for the civilization of '' barbarians '' by putting the '' fear of death '' in them . robert c . smith , professor of political science at san francisco state university , characterized the column as racist . the five teenagers were convicted but later exonerated , and their convictions overturned , when in 2002 the real perpetrator of the crime confessed and dna testing affirmed his guilt . . personal life . buchanan married white house staffer shelley ann scarney in 1971 . they had a tabby cat named gipper , who reportedly sat on buchanan 's lap during staff meetings . buchanan identifies as a traditionalist catholic who attends mass in the extraordinary form of the roman rite , and strongly defended summorum pontificum . . electoral history . publications . books . . . . . . . . buchanan , patrick j . , state of emergency ( book ) . new york : thomas dunne books , 2006 . full text available . . . . . . major speeches . 1992 republican national convention keynote , august 17 , 1992 the cultural war for the soul of america , september 14 , 1992 1996 campaign announcement , march 20 , 1995 1996 campaign speech , georgia primary stump speech february 29 , 1996 free trade , chicago council on global affairs speech november 18 , 1998 2000 campaign announcement , march 2 , 1999 a time for truth about china , commonwealth club speech april 5 , 1999 to reunite a nation , richard nixon library speech on immigration january 18 , 2000 2000 reform party nomination acceptance , august 12 , 2000 death of the west , commonwealth club speech january 14 , 2002 . selected articles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . interviews . . . . . . slen , peter . in depth with pat buchanan . c-span , may 2 , 2010 . . . see also . christian right constitution party ( united states ) culture war non-interventionism old right ( united states ) paleoconservatism right-wing populism protectionism . references . external links . patrick j . buchanan at openlibrary patrick j . buchanan at worldcat . archives . patrick j . buchanan papers ( white house special files ) ( 1969-1972 ) works by patrick j . buchanan at internet archive works by patrick j . buchanan at lewrockwell.com works by patrick j . buchanan at theamericancause.org -