Eastern Michigan University

campus media and publications . the eastern echo , emu 's independent student newspaper , is published three times a week during the fall and winter semesters and once a week during the spring semester , as well as publishing content online . the paper won eight awards in the 2005 division 1 michigan collegiate press association contest , including second place in the general excellence category . the newspaper , which is funded through advertising revenue and university funds , is not under the editorial control of the university . also part of the emu student media office is cellar roots , the school 's student-run literary and fine arts magazine . cellar roots celebrated its 35th anniversary in 2006 with a week of events that highlighted the history of the publication . cellar roots is a five-time winner of the national pacemaker award for design , an award often equated with the pulitzer prize for the college level , as well numerous other awards . emu hosts two radio stations wqbr and wemu 89.1 fm . wemu is a national public radio member station . the radio station , which features jazz music , has many student employees and broadcasts many emu athletic games . wqbr stands for quirk building radio , where the station was once hosted in quirk . today wqbr is named eagle radio and is no longer hosted in quirk . eagle radio broadcasts from halle library and is an internet only radio station at www.eagleradio.org . the linguist list is a major online resource for the academic field of linguistics . it was founded by anthony aristar in early 1990 at the university of western australia , and is used as a reference by the national science foundation in the united states . its main and oldest feature is the premoderated electronic mailing list , now with thousands of subscribers all over the world , where queries and their summarized results , discussions , journal table of contents , dissertation abstracts , calls for papers , book and conference announcements , software notices and other useful pieces of linguistic information are posted . traditions . eastern michigan has several campus-wide traditions throughout the school year . longstanding traditions include homecoming , martin luther king jr . week and the use of the pray-harrold kiosk by students . the pray-harrold kiosk is a large cement pillar outside snow health center and the rec/im . the pillar is painted by various organizations for campus awareness , advertisements and organization unity . the legend is that the kiosk started as a flagpole and layers of paint have accumulated over the years . during eastern 's fall semester , traditions include fajita fest , community plunge , and homecoming . fajita fest occurs during the school 's orientation and welcoming weekend in september . the event brings more than 300 campus offices , and student organizations together in university park & bowen field house to showcase campus organizations and services . community plunge also occurs during orientation and offers the opportunity for students , staff and faculty to participate in service in the ypsilanti community . during eastern 's winter semester campus traditions include : ethos week ; the gold medallion awards ; relay for life ; and martin luther king jr . week , held in conjunction with the martin luther king jr . day holiday , with speakers , community building events and awards in celebration of king and his dream . ethos week is a week-long annual event occurring in march and is led by the cob . the event promotes business ethics and ethics education . the gold medallions awards are split into two ceremonies . the gold medallion awards started in 1982 and is organized by eastern 's student affairs division to recognize faculty , students and staff . in 1996 , the student gold medallion awards were established . the award ceremony recognizes student leaders , student organizations , divisional programs , activities or service . eastern 's relay for life event is a 24-hour , yearly event held in university park that started in 1985 . the event is centered on supporting the american cancer society . the event brings in campus organizations from the entire campus . the event has been held at various times during the year but in recent times the event is held in early april before the school-year ends . residence halls & apartments . eastern michigan university has 14 residence halls . as of fall 2014 first-year only residence halls will include putnam and phelps . upperclassmen student living options include : the village , buell , and the three apartment complexes . sellers , wise , walton , downing , wise , hill , hoyt , pittman and best house all students , regardless of class ranking . honors students are housed in downing and best halls . past locations included jones and goddard halls . eastern also offers faculty , staff and family housing options in cornell courts , and westview apartments . according to the university , approximately 5,000 students live on campus . in the fall of 2010 , emu began housing some full-time students in the village complex from washtenaw community college , which is less than half a mile away , however the program ended in 2011 when housing enrollment went up . in 2011 , eastern michigan became the first university in michigan and the eighth nationwide to offer a targeted program to house single parents with their children on campus . called '' keys to degrees '' , the program will house single-parent families near each other in one of eastern michigan 's on-campus apartment complexes , and will offer extra academic and personal support to enrollees . . dining . dining services at emu are operated by chartwells . facilities include one buffet-style dining hall , two à la carte dining halls , the student center food court , and convenience stores across campus . athletics . eastern michigan athletic teams have been successful on a national level , winning three ncaa division ii national championships and 13 naia division i national championships in five different sports ( baseball , men 's cross country , men 's swimming and diving , men 's indoor track and field , and men 's outdoor track and field ) . emu has also been ncaa division i national runner-up twice in 1940 and 1976 . in 1940 , the men 's cross country team finished second to indiana university . in 1976 , the baseball team was defeated by the university of arizona in the final game of the college world series . the eagles have the most mac championships in a single sport , 29 , in men 's swimming and diving . for men 's and women 's track and field ( indoor and outdoor ) , collectively holds the record for most mac titles out of all the emu athletics teams . eastern 's men 's basketball team has appeared in four ncaa division i tournaments , and have a 3-4 record , tied for third best among michigan colleges . in the 1996 men 's basketball tournament , eastern michigan defeated the duke university in the opening round . the 2006–2007 season was a successful one for eastern michigan , as they won an emu and mid-american conference record eight conference titles : men 's cross country , men 's swimming and diving , women 's swimming and diving , softball , men 's indoor track , women 's gymnastics , men 's golf and men 's outdoor track . this beat the school 's previous record of five titles as well as the previous mac record of six . traditionally , eastern 's football teams have struggled to attract fans , partially due to the team 's proximity to the university of michigan . in 1987 , emu won its first mid-american conference title then defeated 17½-point favorite san jose state in the california bowl . there have been small successes though , such as a 6-4 record against rivals western michigan and central michigan in the 5 years under coach jeff genyk from 2004 to 2008 , setting a school record for a 5-year span against western and central . . nicknames . since the 1991 season , eastern michigan university athletic teams have gone by the nickname '' eagles '' . prior to the 1991 season emu used the name '' hurons '' . emu used the hurons name and indian logo from 1929 until 1991 . despite much controversy , support of the huron tribes in oklahoma and quebec , and anger among its alumni , emu changed the logo after the michigan department of civil rights issued a report suggesting all schools drop such logos . during the michigan state normal college years the school went by the nicknames such as '' normalites '' and '' men from ypsi '' and various other titles . notable alumni . eastern michigan university has more than 145,000 living alumni , more than 100,000 of whom still reside in michigan . some notable eastern michigan university alumni include joseph sobran , dann florek , winsor mccay , andrew blackbird , akkineni nagarjuna , greg mathis , dave coverly , chuku wachuku , rodney e . slater , marilyn jean kelly , jack roush , john harvey kellogg , and bruce halle . nfl player charlie batch and nba players earl boykins , kennedy mcintosh and george gervin also attended eastern michigan .