1955 in literature

events . february 8 – jin yong 's first wuxia novel , the book and the sword ( 書劍恩仇錄 ) , begins publication in the new evening post ( hong kong ) , where he is an editor . march 3 – jean cocteau is elected to the académie française ( inducted october 20 ) ; on january 8 he has been elected to the royal academies for science and the arts of belgium ( inducted october 1 ) . april 16 – sir laurence olivier 's film version of shakespeare 's richard iii is released in u.k . cinemas . july 10 – jorge luis borges is appointed director of the national library of the argentine republic . july 14 – director stephen joseph sets up britain 's first theatre in the round at scarborough , north yorkshire , predecessor of the stephen joseph theatre . july 30 – the english poet philip larkin , having become university librarian at the university of hull on march 21 , is inspired on a train from hull to grantham to write a poem , '' the whitsun weddings '' . contrary to his later recollection of the event . his collection the less deceived is published in november ( dated october ) . august the american speculative fiction author charles beaumont 's short story '' the crooked man '' , depicting a homosexual society where heterosexuality is persecuted , is published in playboy magazine after being rejected by esquire . an article in the british journal of education criticises enid blyton 's novels as formulaic . august 3 – the english-language première of samuel beckett 's play waiting for godot , directed by peter hall , opens at the arts theatre , london . the initial reaction is hostile , but '' everything changed on sunday 7 august 1955 with kenneth tynan 's and harold hobson 's reviews in the observer and the sunday times . beckett was always grateful to the two reviewers for their support . which more or less transformed the play overnight into the rage of london . '' august 27 – the first hardback edition of guinness world records appears in london . september – vladimir nabokovs lolita appears in paris three years before its us publication . september 26 – the madan puraskar is established as an annual award for outstanding books in the nepali language , endowed by rani jagadamba kumari devi ( first awards 1956 ) . november – frank herbert 's first novel the dragon in the sea begins as a three-part serial , under pressure , in the monthly astounding science-fiction . november 28 – ray lawler 's summer of the seventeenth doll is first staged by the melbourne theatre company in melbourne with the playwright in a lead . it is the first authentically naturalistic drama in the theatre of australia . unknown date violette leduc 's novel ravages is issued in france but the publisher , éditions gallimard , suppresses the opening section depicting a semi-autobiographical lesbian awakening , which will be published as a novella , thérèse et isabelle , in 1966 . the indian guru mani madhava chakyar performs koodiyattam outside a temple for the first time . . new books . fiction . kingsley amis – that uncertain feeling isaac asimov the end of eternity the martian way and other stories elisabeth augustin – labyrinth ( auswege ) nigel balchin – the fall of the sparrow john bingham – the paton street case antoine blondin – l'humeur vagabonde leigh brackett – the long tomorrow ray bradbury – the october country henry cecil – brothers in law louis-ferdinand céline – conversations with professor y ( entretiens avec le professeur y ) agatha christie – hickory dickory dock arthur c . clarke – earthlight ivy compton-burnett – mother and son thomas b . costain – the tontine marco denevi – rosaura a las 10 ( rosaura at 10 o'clock ) patrick dennis – auntie mame john dickson carr – captain cut-throat j . p . donleavy – the ginger man friedrich dürrenmatt – once a greek ( grieche sucht griechin ) mircea eliade – the forbidden forest ( noaptea de sânziene ) ian fleming – moonraker andré franquin – la corne de rhinocéros gillian freeman – the liberty man william gaddis – the recognitions gao yubao ( with guo yongjiang ) – gao yubao david garnett – aspects of love william golding – the inheritors richard gordon – doctor at large graham greene the quiet american loser takes all henri rené guieu l'agonie du verre commandos de l'espace univers parallèles l.p . hartley – a perfect woman robert a . heinlein – tunnel in the sky georgette heyer – bath tangle patricia highsmith – the talented mr . ripley robert e . howard and l . sprague de camp – tales of conan aldous huxley – the genius and the goddess mac hyman – no time for sergeants roger ikor – les eaux mêlées dan jacobson – the trap robin jenkins – the cone gatherers ruth prawer jhabvala – to whom she will mackinlay kantor – andersonville nikos kazantzakis – the last temptation of christ ( o teleutaios peirasmos ) yaşar kemal – memed , my hawk ( i̇nce memed ) alexander lernet-holenia – count luna józef mackiewicz droga donikąd ( the road to nowhere ) karierowicz alistair maclean – hms ulysses norman mailer – the deer park gabriel garcía márquez the story of a shipwrecked sailor ( relato de un náufrago ) leaf storm ( la hojarasca ) j . j . marric – gideon 's day brian moore – the lonely passion of judith hearne vladimir nabokov – lolita flannery o'connor – a good man is hard to find and other stories ( including '' a good man is hard to find '' and '' good country people '' ) john o'hara – ten north frederick pier paolo pasolini – ragazzi di vita anthony powell – the acceptance world marin preda – moromeții , vol . 1 barbara pym – less than angels alain robbe-grillet – le voyeur robert ruark – something of value juan rulfo – pedro páramo rafael sánchez ferlosio – el jarama a . s . t . fisher ( as michael scarrott ) – ambassador of loss isaac bashevis singer – satan in goray howard spring – these lovers fled away mary stewart – madam , will you talk ? rex stout – before midnight jim thompson – after dark , my sweet morton thompson – not as a stranger j . r . r . tolkien – the lord of the rings : the return of the king evelyn waugh – officers and gentlemen patrick white – the tree of man leonard wibberley – the mouse that roared sloan wilson – the man in the gray flannel suit herman wouk – marjorie morningstar john wyndham – the chrysalids . children and young people . bb ( denys watkins-pitchford ) – the forest of boland light railway paul berna – le cheval sans tête ( horse without a head , translated as a hundred million francs ) crockett johnson – harold and the purple crayon c . s . lewis – the magician 's nephew william mayne – a swarm in may janet mcneill – my friend specs mccann iona and peter opie – the oxford nursery rhyme book philippa pearce – minnow on the say marjorie kinnan rawlings ( died 1953 ) – the secret river barbara sleigh – carbonel : the king of the cats e . c . spykman – a lemon and a star catherine storr – clever polly and the stupid wolf patricia wrightson – the crooked snake eva-lis wuorio – return of the viking . drama . arthur adamov – le ping-pong enid bagnold – the chalk garden samuel beckett – waiting for godot ( english version ) bertolt brecht – trumpets and drums ( pauken und trompeten ; adaptation of farquhar 's the recruiting officer , 1706 ) joão cabral de melo neto – morte e vida severina ( severine life and death , verse ) alice childress – trouble in mind john dighton – man alive ! sonnie hale – the french mistress william inge – bus stop eugène ionesco jack , or the submission ( jacques ou la soumission ) the new tenant ( le nouveau locataire ) kol jakova – toka jonë ( our land ) ray lawler – summer of the seventeenth doll jerome lawrence and robert edwin lee – inherit the wind philip mackie – the whole truth arthur miller a view from the bridge ( one-act verse version ) a memory of two mondays j.b . priestley – mr . kettle and mrs . moon reginald rose – twelve angry men ( stage version ) jean-paul sartre – nekrassov ariano suassuna – o auto da compadecida ( the compassionate self ) orson welles – moby dick—rehearsed thornton wilder the matchmaker a life in the sun tennessee williams – cat on a hot tin roof carl zuckmayer – the cold light ( das kalte licht ) . musical theater . cole porter 's musical silk stockings opens at imperial theatre new york city for 461 performances . poetry . philip larkin – the less deceived r.s . thomas – song at the year 's turning . non-fiction . richard aldington – lawrence of arabia : a biographical inquiry james baldwin – notes of a native son frank barlow – the feudal kingdom of england ivan bunin ( died 1953 ) – about chekhov g . d . h . cole – studies in class structure thomas e . gaddis – birdman of alcatraz antonio gramsci – gli intellettuali e l'organizzazione della cultura ( intellectuals and cultural organization ) robert graves – the greek myths guinness world records , 1st edition morris k . jessup – the case for the ufo keith kelsall – higher civil servants in britain t . e . lawrence ( 352087 a/c ross ; died 1935 ) – the mint ( book ) ( written 1928 ; 1st trade edition ) c . s . lewis – surprised by joy walter lippmann – essays in the public philosophy walter lord – a night to remember herbert marcuse – eros and civilization alan marshall – i can jump puddles garrett mattingly – renaissance diplomacy meher baba – god speaks j . h . plumb – studies in social history rand – a million random digits with 100,000 normal deviates donald j . west – homosexuality . births . january 11 – max lucado , american religious writer january 12 – rockne s . o'bannon , american writer and producer january 13 – jay mcinerney , american novelist january 27 – alexander stuart , english-born american novelist and screenwriter february 2 – leszek engelking , polish poet , fiction writer and translator february 8 – john grisham , american novelist february 17 – mo yan , chinese fiction writer march 19 – john burnside , scottish poet and fiction writer march 23 – lloyd jones , new zealand novelist march 27 – patrick mccabe , irish novelist april 8 – barbara kingsolver , american novelist , essayist and poet april 30 – zlatko topčić , bosnian author and screenwriter may 13 – mark abley , canadian poet and non-fiction writer may 30 – colm tóibín , irish novelist , playwright and poet june 4 – val mcdermid , scottish crime novelist june 16 – j . jill robinson , canadian fiction writer june 20 – tor nørretranders , danish science author july 1 candia mcwilliam , scottish fiction writer lisa scottoline , american writer of legal thrillers july 5 sebastian barry , irish novelist , playwright and poet mia couto ( antónio emílio leite couto ) , mozambican fiction writer and poet july 6 michael boyd , british theatre director william wall , irish author and poet july 10 – regina yaou , ivory coast novelist ( died 2017 ) july 12 – robin robertson , scottish-born poet , novelist and editor august 2 – caleb carr , american writer august 7 – vladimir sorokin , russian writer august 8 – iain pears , english writer september 6 – raymond benson , american novelist september 13 – hiromi itō ( 伊藤 比呂美 ) , japanese poet , essayist and translator october 19 – jason shinder , american poet and editor ( died 2008 ) november 12 – katharine weber , american author and academic november 23 – steven brust , american fantasy author december 28 – liu xiaobo ( 刘晓波 ) , chinese critic , writer and activist ( died 2017 ) unknown date – wang xiaoni ( 王小妮 ) , chinese poet . deaths . january 20 – robert p . tristram coffin , american poet , essayist and novelist ( born 1892 ) february 23 – paul claudel , french poet , dramatist and diplomat ( born 1868 ) april 10 – pierre teilhard de chardin , french philosopher and essayist ( born 1881 ) may 16 – james agee , american writer ( born 1909 ) june 6 – joseph jefferson farjeon , english crime writer ( born 1883 ) june 17 – constance holme , english novelist and dramatist ( born 1880 ) june 19 – adrienne monnier , french poet and publisher ( born 1892 ) june 21 – roger mais , jamaican novelist ( born 1905 ) june 30 – gilbert cannan , british writer ( born 1884 ) july 3 – beatrice chase , english writer ( born 1874 ) august 1 – charles shaw , australian writer ( born 1900 ) august 2 – wallace stevens , american poet ( born 1879 ) august 12 – thomas mann , german novelist ( born 1875 ) august 14 – herbert putnam , american librarian of congress ( born 1861 ) august 29 – hong shen ( 洪深 ) , chinese dramatist ( born 1894 ) september 20 – robert riskin , american dramatist and screenwriter ( born 1897 ) october 18 – josé ortega y gasset , spanish philosopher ( born 1883 ) november 1 – dale carnegie , american writer ( born 1888 ) november 12 – tin ujević , croatian poet ( born 1891 ) november 14 ruby m . ayres , english romance novelist ( born 1881 ) robert e . sherwood , american playwright ( born 1896 ) december – al . t . stamatiad , romanian poet ( born 1885 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : eleanor farjeon , the little bookroom frost medal : leona speyer james tait black memorial prize for fiction : ivy compton-burnett , mother and son james tait black memorial prize for biography : r . w . ketton-cremer , thomas gray newbery medal for children 's literature : meindert dejong , the wheel on the school nobel prize for literature : halldor laxness premio nadal : rafael sánchez ferlosio , el jarama prix goncourt : roger ikor , les eaux mêlées pulitzer prize for drama : tennessee williams , cat on a hot tin roof pulitzer prize for fiction : william faulkner , a fable pulitzer prize for poetry : wallace stevens , collected poems queen 's gold medal for poetry : ruth pitter . references .