Henry Kendall (poet)

early life . kendall was born in a settler 's hut by yackungarrah creek in yatte yattah near ulladulla , new south wales . he was registered as thomas henry kendall , but never appears to have used his first name . his three volumes of verse were all published under the name of '' henry kendall '' . his father , basil kendall , was the son of the rev . thomas kendall who came to sydney in 1809 and five years later went as a missionary to new zealand . australian dictionary of biography – thomas kendall ( 1778–1832 ) thomas henry kendall has also been known as henry clarence kendall , for reasons unknown ( however at the age of 5 , his parents moved to the clarence river area of northern new south wales ) . journalist and fellow poet a . g . stephens sought to correct the confusion in 1928 , where the poet was baptised thomas henry kendall , but stated the name of henry clarence kendall at his wedding . he received only a slight education . when he was 15 he went to sea with one of his uncles on a whaling voyage and was away for about two years . adult life . returning from his maritime experience to sydney when 17-years-old , kendall found his mother keeping a boarding-school ; it was necessary that he should do something to earn a living , and he became a shop-assistant . he had begun to write verses and this brought him in contact with two well-known verse writers of the day , joseph sheridan moore who published a volume of verse , spring life lyrics , in 1864 , and james lionel michael . michael , who was a solicitor , took kendall into his office and gave him the run of his library . he removed to grafton in 1861 and kendall was again employed by him for about six months during the following year . australian dictionary of biography – thomas henry kendall ( 1839–1882 ) kendall made another friend in henry parkes , who was editing the empire from 1850 to 1857 and published a few of his youthful verses . in 1862 he sent some poems to the london athenaeum which printed three of them and gave the author kindly praise . in the same year his first volume , poems and songs , was published at sydney . it was well received and eventually the whole edition of 500 copies was sold . representations were made to the government , and in 1863 a position was found for the poet in the lands department . he was transferred to the colonial secretary 's department in 1864 and appears to have discharged his duties in a conscientious way ; his hours were not long and he had some leisure for literature . his salary , originally £150 a year , became increased to £250 and he was able to make a home for his mother and sisters . in 1868 he married charlotte rutter , the daughter of a sydney physician , and in the following year resigned from his position in the government service and went to melbourne , which had become a larger city than sydney and more of a literary centre . kendall 's decision to give up his position must at the time have seemed very unwise . but he had become financially embarrassed before his marriage on account of the extravagance of his family , and his wife found it impossible to live with his mother , who had joined the young couple . the elder mrs kendall was in fact practically a dipsomaniac , and the poet felt that the only chance of happiness for himself and his wife was to make a fresh start in another city . they travelled south to melbourne where he was welcomed by his fellow writers , such as george gordon mccrae , marcus clarke and adam lindsay gordon . he and clarke worked together to produce the short-lived satirical magazine humbug ( 1869-70 ) . kendall , however , had none of the qualities of a successful journalist . some of his work was accepted by the press and george robertson published his second volume of poetry , leaves from australian forests , soon after his arrival . the poem 'bell-birds ' , one of australia 's best-known poems , was published in that volume . the press notices were favourable , one reviewer in his enthusiasm going so far as to say that '' swinburne , arnold and morris are indulgently treated if we allow them an equal measure of poetic feeling with kendall '' . despite this , comparatively few copies were sold and the publisher made a loss . the poet found that he could not make a living by literature and , probably by the good offices of george gordon mccrae , a temporary position was found for him in the government statist 's office . kendall , however , had no head for figures . he did his best but found his tasks hopeless . one day mccrae was called out into the passage to see kendall , an agitated , trembling figure who told him he must go , he could not stand it any longer . years later henry lawson was to write '' just as in southern climes they give the hard-up rhymer figures ! '' kendall had indeed lost heart ; he drifted into drinking and alexander sutherland in his essay draws a lurid picture of the depths into which the poet had fallen . it is true that he had the authority of kendall 's poem '' on a street '' , but years afterwards george gordon mccrae reported that kendall '' made the worst of everything including himself '' . mccrae had no doubt about kendall having at times given way to excessive drinking , but stated positively that he had never actually seen him the worse for drink . mccrae was a good friend to kendall and he had many other friends in spite of his retiring and sensitive nature . but his friends could not save him from himself , and his two years in melbourne were among the most miserable of his life . a pathetic letter is still in existence , in which kendall tells mccrae that he could not go to gordon 's funeral because he was penniless . in december 1870 he was charged with forging and uttering a cheque but found not guilty on the ground of insanity . unable to support his family , he was forced back to sydney by poverty , ill health and drunkenness . intervals of dogged literary effort alternated with lapses into melancholia . his wife had to return to her mother and kendall became a derelict ; in early 1873 he spent four months in the gladesville hospital for the insane . in november 1873 '' henry kendall , the man and the myths '' by michael ackland , 1995 kendall was taken in by the fagan brothers , timber merchants near gosford , and was afterwards given a position in the business of one of the brothers , michael fagan , at camden haven . there he stayed six years and found again his self-respect . writing in october 1880 to george gordon mccrae he said , referring to his employer , '' i want you to know the bearer . he is the man who led me out of gethsemane and set me in the sunshine '' . in 1880 he published his third volume , songs from the mountains . it was an outstanding success , doing much to re-establish his reputation . the volume contained a satirical poem on a politician of the day and had to be withdrawn under threat of a libel action . the original edition is now very rare . the volume was reissued with another poem substituted . final years . in 1881 his old friend sir henry parkes had him appointed inspector of state forests at a salary of £500 a year . but his health , never strong , broke down due to the required long rides in all weather . he caught a severe chill , developed consumption , and died at redfern in sydney on 1 august 1882 . he was buried in waverley cemetery . his widow survived him for more than 40 years , and during the last sixteen years of her life received a commonwealth literary fund pension . legacy . a posthumous portrait , painted by tom roberts , is at the national library of australia , canberra . in 1938 his son , frederick c . kendall published henry kendall , his later years , self-described as '' a refutation of mrs hamilton-grey 's book kendall our god-made chief '' . in 1886 a memorial edition of his poems was published at melbourne . the small village of kendall on the mid north coast of new south wales is named after him and not , as some suspect , after the similarly-spelled ancient town of kendal in the county of cumbria in england . a street in elwood , victoria was also named after him . a street in campbelltown , padstow heights and heathcote in new south wales were also named after him . likewise , a street and a park in tarrawanna near wollongong . on the central coast . on the new south wales central coast , a number of locations are named in his honour . henry kendall street in west gosford is home to the stone building ( now a museum known as 'henry kendall cottage ' ) where he lived for some time with the fagans . a retirement village in the nearby suburb of wyoming is also named in his honour ; henry kendall gardens ( formally the henry kendall village ) . henry kendall high school ( also in west gosford ) was named in his honour . the biennial henry kendall poetry award , link text . central coast poets inc . ( nsw ) run by central coast poets inc . , has been won by poets louise oxley , judy johnson and joan kerr . bibliography . poetry . poems and songs ( 1862 ) leaves from australian forests ( 1869 ) songs from the mountains ( 1880 ) poems of henry kendall ( 1886 ) . major individual works . '' the glen of the white man 's grave '' ( 1860 ) '' the curlew song '' ( 1860 ) '' fainting by the way '' ( 1861 ) '' the barcoo : the squatter 's song '' ( 1862 ) '' the last of his tribe '' ( 1864 ) '' daniel henry deniehy '' ( 1865 ) '' the voyage of telegonus '' ( 1866 ) '' campaspe '' ( 1866 ) '' the warrigal '' ( 1867 ) '' bell-birds '' ( 1867 ) '' a death in the bush '' ( 1868 ) '' moss on a wall '' ( 1868 ) '' rose lorraine '' ( 1869 ) '' prefatory sonnets : i '' ( 1869 ) '' prefatory sonnets : ii '' ( 1869 ) '' the hut by the black swamp '' ( 1869 ) '' aboriginal death-song '' ( 1869 ) '' bush lyrics : no . ii : camped by the creek '' ( 1870 ) '' song of the shingle splitters '' ( 1874 ) '' the voice in the native oak '' ( 1874 ) '' mooni '' ( 1875 ) '' bill the bullock driver '' ( 1876 ) '' araluen '' ( 1879 ) '' orara '' ( 1879 ) '' dedication : to a mountain '' ( 1880 ) '' the song of ninian melville '' ( 1880 ) '' beyond kerguelen '' ( 1880 ) '' kerrassu '' . references . external links . – kendall 's poetical works online at sydney university .