1977 in literature

events . february 20 – an episode of doctor on the go , co-written by douglas adams and graham chapman , marks the beginning of adams ' career as a writer for bbc radio . march 4 – andrés caicedo 's novel ¡que viva la música ! ( '' let music live ! '' , translated as liveforever ) is published in his hometown of cali , colombia . this afternoon he commits suicide by overdose , aged 25 . april 27 – héctor germán oesterheld , argentine comic book writer born 1919 ) , is kidnapped by the military authorities ; he is believed to have died in detention a few months later . july 11 – the english magazine gay news is found guilty of blasphemous libel for publishing a homoerotic poem , '' the love that dares to speak its name '' by james kirkup , in a case ( whitehouse v lemon ) at the old bailey in london , on behalf of mary whitehouse 's national viewers and listeners association . john mortimer appears for the defence . it is the first such prosecution since 1921 and will be the last before the offense is abolished in 2008 . criminal justice and immigration act 2008 ( england and wales ) . september 15 – christopher tolkien , with guy gavriel kay , completes and publishes his late father 's work , the silmarillion . fall – philosophy and literature appears as an academic journal founded at johns hopkins university . it explores connections between literary and philosophical studies , presenting ideas on the aesthetics of literature , critical theory , and the philosophical interpretation of literature . october – norman mailer punches gore vidal in the face at a new york city party . december – ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o and ngugi wa mirii are detained in kamiti maximum security prison , kenya , six weeks after the première of their political kikuyu language play ngaahika ndeenda ( i will marry when i want ) at the open-air kamiriithu community education and cultural centre . while imprisoned , ngũgĩ will write the first modern novel in kikuyu , devil on the cross ( caitaani mũtharaba-inĩ ) , on prison-issue toilet paper . new books . fiction . ales adamovich , janka bryl and uladzimir kalesnik – я из огненной деревни ( belarusian : я з вогненнай вёскі ; out of the fire ) jorge amado – tieta do agreste jay anson – the amityville horror margaret atwood – dancing girls richard bach – illusions richard bachman – rage leland bardwell – girl on a bicycle caroline blackwood – great granny webster gerd brantenberg – egalias døtre ( the daughters of egalia , 1985 , also egalia 's daughters , 1986 ) terry brooks – the sword of shannara andrés caicedo – ¡que viva la música ! j . m . coetzee – in the heart of the country robin cook – coma robert coover – the public burning basil copper – and afterward , the dark l . sprague de camp the hostage of zir the queen of zamba l . sprague de camp and lin carter – conan of aquilonia michel déon – the foundling 's war philip k . dick – a scanner darkly joan didion – a book of common prayer buchi emecheta – the slave girl howard fast – the immigrants timothy findley – the wars leon forrest – the bloodworth orphans john fowles – daniel martin marilyn french – the women 's room jane gardam – bilgewater pauline gedge – child of the morning richard gordon – the invisible victory günter grass – the flounder ( der butt ) mark helprin – refiner 's fire shirley hughes – dogger hammond innes – the big footprints erica jong – how to save your own life elias khoury – الجبل الصغير ( al-jabal al-saghir , the little mountain ) stephen king – the shining derek lambert – blackstone on broadway john le carré – the honourable schoolboy ernest lehman – the french atlantic affair robert ludlum – the chancellor manuscript brian lumley – the horror at oakdeene and others george r . r . martin – dying of the light colleen mccullough – the thorn birds larry mcmurtry – terms of endearment robert merle – fortune de france toni morrison – song of solomon iris murdoch – the sea , the sea péter nádas – the end of a family story john neal – the genius of john neal : selections from his writings ( edited by benjamin lease and hans-joachim lang ) patrick o'brian – the mauritius command ellis peters – a morbid taste for bones barbara pym – quartet in autumn ruth rendell – a judgement in stone alun richards – ennal 's point harold robbins – dreams die first paul scott – staying on erich segal – oliver 's story irwin shaw – beggarman , thief m . p . shiel – prince zaleski and cummings king monk sidney sheldon – bloodline elizabeth smart – a bonus botho strauß – devotion remy sylado – gali lobang gila lobang craig thomas – firefox j . r . r . tolkien ( died 1973 ) – the silmarillion melvin van peebles – the true american , a folk fable mario vargas llosa – aunt julia and the scriptwriter ( la tía julia y el escribidor ) p . g . wodehouse ( died 1975 ) – sunset at blandings christopher wood – james bond , the spy who loved me . children and young people . richard adams – the plague dogs sandra boynton – hippos go berserk ! helen cresswell – the bagthorpe saga willi glasauer – le journal enseveli ( the buried newspaper ) rumer godden – the rocking horse secret shirley hughes – dogger diana wynne jones – charmed life ruth manning-sanders – a book of enchantments and curses c . l . moore ( with alicia austin ) – black god 's shadow bill peet – big bad bruce maurice sendak – seven little monsters barbara smucker – underground to canada ( also runaway to freedom : a story of the underground railway ) peter spier – noah 's ark . drama . robert bolt – state of revolution roger hall – middle-age spread tony harrison ( adapter ) – the mysteries mike leigh – abigail 's party heiner müller – hamletmachine ( written ) mary o'malley – once a catholic dennis potter – brimstone and treacle ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o and ngugi wa mirii – ngaahika ndeenda . poetry . frank belknap long – in mayan splendor . non-fiction . alfred d . chandler , jr . – the visible hand : the managerial revolution in american business bruce chatwin – in patagonia robert coles – children of crisis vol . 4 , eskimos , indians , chicanos vol . 5 , the privileged ones : the well-off and the rich in america esther deans – esther deans ' gardening book : growing without digging len deighton – fighter : the true story of the battle of britain patrick leigh fermor – a time of gifts jim fixx – the complete book of running michael herr – dispatches edith holden ( died 1920 ) – the country diary of an edwardian lady r . c . majumdar – the history and culture of the indian people , vol . 11 bharati mukherjee and clark blaise – days and nights in calcutta v . s . naipaul – india : a wounded civilization david m . potter – the impending crisis , 1848–1861 e . f . schumacher – a guide for the perplexed a . t . q . stewart – the narrow ground : aspects of ulster 1609–1969 lawrence stone – the family , sex and marriage in england , 1500–1800 peter ustinov – dear me . births . february 21 – jonathan safran foer , american novelist may 2 – alessandro d'avenia , italian writer august 24 – john green , american author and youtube vlogger october 16 – laura wade , english playwright september 5 – tena štivičić , croatian playwright september 15 – chimamanda ngozi adichie , nigerian novelist november 12 – richelle mead , american young-adult novelist . deaths . january 14 – anaïs nin , french-cuban erotic novelist and diarist ( born 1903 ) january 26 – william glynne-jones , welsh novelist and children 's writer ( born 1907 ) february 27 – john dickson carr , american crime novelist ( born 1906 ) march 4 andrés caicedo , colombian novelist and cinéaste ( suicide , born 1951 ) alexandru ivasiuc , romanian novelist ( killed in earthquake , born 1933 ) march 15 – hubert aquin , french canadian novelist , essayist and political activist ( suicide , born 1929 ) ) april 7 – jim thompson , american fiction writer ( born 1906 ) april 11 – jacques prévert , french poet and screenwriter ( born 1900 ) may 9 – james jones , american novelist ( heart failure , born 1921 ) july 2 – vladimir nabokov , russian/american novelist ( born 1899 ) august 20 – gurbaksh singh , punjabi novelist ( born 1914 ) august 26 – h . a . rey , german-born american children 's writer and illustrator ( born 1898 ) september 4 – e . f . schumacher , german-born economist ( born 1911 ) september 12 – robert lowell , american poet ( heart attack , born 1917 ) october 27 – james m . cain , american novelist and newspaperman ( born 1892 ) november 10 – dennis wheatley , english occult novelist ( born 1897 ) november 30 miloš crnjanski , serbian poet and novelist ( born 1893 ) terence rattigan , english dramatist ( bone cancer , born 1911 ) december 9 – clarice lispector , brazilian novelist ( ovarian cancer , born 1920 ) december 22 – frank thiess , german novelist ( born 1890 ) . awards . nobel prize in literature : vicente aleixandre . canada . 1977 governor general 's awards . france . prix goncourt : didier decoin , john l'enfer prix médicis french : michel butel , l'autre amour prix médicis international : héctor bianciotti , le traité des saisons – argentina . spain . premio miguel de cervantes : alejo carpentier . united kingdom . booker prize : paul mark scott , staying on carnegie medal for children 's literature : gene kemp , the turbulent term of tyke tiler eric gregory award : tony flynn , michael vince , david cooke , douglas marshall , melissa murray james tait black memorial prize for fiction : john le carré , the honourable schoolboy james tait black memorial prize for biography : george painter , chateaubriand : volume 1 – the longed-for tempests knighthood for services to the theatre : peter hall queen 's gold medal for poetry : norman nicholson 1977 whitbread awards : beryl bainbridge , injury time . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for the novel , saul bellow nebula award : frederik pohl , gateway newbery medal for children 's literature : mildred d . taylor , roll of thunder , hear my cry phi beta kappa award in science : gerard k . o'neill , the high frontier : human colonies in space pulitzer prize for drama : michael cristofer , the shadow box pulitzer prize for fiction : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : james merrill , divine comedies pulitzer prize for history : david m . potter : the impending crisis , 1841-1861 ( completed and edited by don e . fehrenbacher ) . pulitzer prize for biography : john e . mack : a prince of our disorder : the life of t.e . lawrence . rest of the world . miles franklin award : ruth park , swords and crowns and rings premio nadal : josé asenjo sedano , conversación sobre la guerra viareggio prize : davide lajolo , veder l'erba dalla parte delle radici . references .