Regression toward the mean

conceptual background . consider a simple example : a class of students takes a 100-item true/false test on a subject . suppose that all students choose randomly on all questions . then , each student 's score would be a realization of one of a set of independent and identically distributed random variables , with an expected mean of 50 . naturally , some students will score substantially above 50 and some substantially below 50 just by chance . if one selects only the top scoring 10 % of the students and gives them a second test on which they again choose randomly on all items , the mean score would again be expected to be close to 50 . thus the mean of these students would '' regress '' all the way back to the mean of all students who took the original test . no matter what a student scores on the original test , the best prediction of their score on the second test is 50 . if choosing answers to the test questions was not random – i.e . if there were no luck ( good or bad ) or random guessing involved in the answers supplied by the students – then all students would be expected to score the same on the second test as they scored on the original test , and there would be no regression toward the mean . most realistic situations fall between these two extremes : for example , one might consider exam scores as a combination of skill and luck . in this case , the subset of students scoring above average would be composed of those who were skilled and had not especially bad luck , together with those who were unskilled , but were extremely lucky . on a retest of this subset , the unskilled will be unlikely to repeat their lucky break , while the skilled will have a second chance to have bad luck . hence , those who did well previously are unlikely to do quite as well in the second test even if the original can not be replicated . the following is an example of this second kind of regression toward the mean . a class of students takes two editions of the same test on two successive days . it has frequently been observed that the worst performers on the first day will tend to improve their scores on the second day , and the best performers on the first day will tend to do worse on the second day . the phenomenon occurs because student scores are determined in part by underlying ability and in part by chance . for the first test , some will be lucky , and score more than their ability , and some will be unlucky and score less than their ability . some of the lucky students on the first test will be lucky again on the second test , but more of them will have ( for them ) average or below average scores . therefore , a student who was lucky and over-performed their ability on the first test is more likely to have a worse score on the second test than a better score . similarly , students who unluckily score less than their ability on the first test will tend to see their scores increase on the second test . the larger the influence of luck in producing an extreme event , the less likely the luck will repeat itself in multiple events . other examples . if your favourite sports team won the championship last year , what does that mean for their chances for winning next season ? to the extent this result is due to skill ( the team is in good condition , with a top coach , etc . ) , their win signals that it is more likely they will win again next year . but the greater the extent this is due to luck ( other teams embroiled in a drug scandal , favourable draw , draft picks turned out to be productive , etc . ) , the less likely it is they will win again next year . if one medical trial suggests that a particular drug or treatment is outperforming all other treatments for a condition , then in a second trial it is more likely that the outperforming drug or treatment will perform closer to the mean the next quarter . if a business organisation has a highly profitable quarter , despite the underlying reasons for its performance being unchanged , it is likely to do less well the next quarter . baseball players who hit well in their rookie season are likely to do worse their second ; the '' sophomore slump '' . similarly , regression towards the mean is an explanation for the sports illustrated cover jinx — periods of exceptional performance which results in a cover feature are likely to be followed by periods of more mediocre performance , giving the impression that appearing on the cover causes an athlete 's decline . goldacre , ben . bad science . page 39 . london : fourth estate , 2008 . . history . the concept of regression comes from genetics and was popularized by sir francis galton during the late 19th century with the publication of regression towards mediocrity in hereditary stature . galton observed that extreme characteristics ( e.g . , height ) in parents are not passed on completely to their offspring . rather , the characteristics in the offspring regress towards a mediocre point ( a point which has since been identified as the mean ) . by measuring the heights of hundreds of people , he was able to quantify regression to the mean , and estimate the size of the effect . galton wrote that , '' the average regression of the offspring is a constant fraction of their respective midparent deviations '' . this means that the difference between a child and its parents for some characteristic is proportional to its parents ' deviation from typical people in the population . if its parents are each two inches taller than the averages for men and women , then , on average , the offspring will be shorter than its parents by some factor ( which , today , we would call one minus the regression analysis ) times two inches . for height , galton estimated this coefficient to be about 2/3 : the height of an individual will measure around a midpoint that is two thirds of the parents ' deviation from the population average . galton coined the term '' regression '' to describe an observable fact in the inheritance of multi-factorial quantitative genetic traits : namely that the offspring of parents who lie at the tails of the distribution will tend to lie closer to the centre , the mean , of the distribution . he quantified this trend , and in doing so invented linear regression analysis , thus laying the groundwork for much of modern statistical modelling . since then , the term '' regression '' has taken on a variety of meanings , and it may be used by modern statisticians to describe phenomena of sampling bias which have little to do with galton 's original observations in the field of genetics . though his mathematical analysis was correct , galton 's biological explanation for the regression phenomenon he observed is now known to be incorrect . he stated : '' a child inherits partly from his parents , partly from his ancestors . speaking generally , the further his genealogy goes back , the more numerous and varied will his ancestry become , until they cease to differ from any equally numerous sample taken at haphazard from the race at large . '' this is incorrect , since a child receives its genetic make-up exclusively from its parents . there is no generation-skipping in genetic material : any genetic material from earlier ancestors must have passed through the parents ( though it may not have been expressed in them ) . the phenomenon is better understood if we assume that the inherited trait ( e.g . , height ) is controlled by a large number of recessive genes . exceptionally tall individuals must be homozygous for increased height mutations at a large proportion of these loci . but the loci which carry these mutations are not necessarily shared between two tall individuals , and if these individuals mate , their offspring will be on average homozygous for '' tall '' mutations on fewer loci than either of their parents . in addition , height is not entirely genetically determined , but also subject to environmental influences during development , which make offspring of exceptional parents even more likely to be closer to the average than their parents . this population genetic phenomenon of regression to the mean is best thought of as a combination of a binomially distributed process of inheritance plus normally distributed environmental influences . in contrast , the term '' regression to the mean '' is now often used to describe the phenomenon by which an initial sampling bias may disappear as new , repeated , or larger samples display sample means that are closer to the true underlying population mean . importance . regression toward the mean is a significant consideration in the design of experiments . take a hypothetical example of 1,000 individuals of a similar age who were examined and scored on the risk of experiencing a heart attack . statistics could be used to measure the success of an intervention on the 50 who were rated at the greatest risk . the intervention could be a change in diet , exercise , or a drug treatment . even if the interventions are worthless , the test group would be expected to show an improvement on their next physical exam , because of regression toward the mean . the best way to combat this effect is to divide the group randomly into a treatment group that receives the treatment , and a control group that does not . the treatment would then be judged effective only if the treatment group improves more than the control group . alternatively , a group of disadvantaged children could be tested to identify the ones with most college potential . the top 1 % could be identified and supplied with special enrichment courses , tutoring , counseling and computers . even if the program is effective , their average scores may well be less when the test is repeated a year later . however , in these circumstances it may be considered unethical to have a control group of disadvantaged children whose special needs are ignored . a mathematical calculation for shrinkage can adjust for this effect , although it will not be as reliable as the control group method ( see also stein 's example ) . the effect can also be exploited for general inference and estimation . the hottest place in the country today is more likely to be cooler tomorrow than hotter , as compared to today . the best performing mutual fund over the last three years is more likely to see relative performance decline than improve over the next three years . the most successful hollywood actor of this year is likely to have less gross than more gross for his or her next movie . the baseball player with the highest batting average by the all-star break is more likely to have a lower average than a higher average over the second half of the season . misunderstandings . the concept of regression toward the mean can be misused very easily . in the student test example above , it was assumed implicitly that what was being measured did not change between the two measurements . suppose , however , that the course was pass/fail and students were required to score above 70 on both tests to pass . then the students who scored under 70 the first time would have no incentive to do well , and might score worse on average the second time . the students just over 70 , on the other hand , would have a strong incentive to study and concentrate while taking the test . in that case one might see movement away from 70 , scores below it getting lower and scores above it getting higher . it is possible for changes between the measurement times to augment , offset or reverse the statistical tendency to regress toward the mean . statistical regression toward the mean is not a causal phenomenon . a student with the worst score on the test on the first day will not necessarily increase his score substantially on the second day due to the effect . on average , the worst scorers improve , but that is only true because the worst scorers are more likely to have been unlucky than lucky . to the extent that a score is determined randomly , or that a score has random variation or error , as opposed to being determined by the student 's academic ability or being a '' true value '' , the phenomenon will have an effect . a classic mistake in this regard was in education . the students that received praise for good work were noticed to do more poorly on the next measure , and the students who were punished for poor work were noticed to do better on the next measure . the educators decided to stop praising and keep punishing on this basis . kahneman , d . ( 2011 ) 'thinking fast and slow , fsg . such a decision was a mistake , because regression toward the mean is not based on cause and effect , but rather on random error in a natural distribution around a mean . although extreme individual measurements regress toward the mean , the second sample of measurements will be no closer to the mean than the first . consider the students again . suppose the tendency of extreme individuals is to regress 10 % of the way toward the mean of 80 , so a student who scored 100 the first day is expected to score 98 the second day , and a student who scored 70 the first day is expected to score 71 the second day . those expectations are closer to the mean than the first day scores . but the second day scores will vary around their expectations ; some will be higher and some will be lower . in addition , individuals that measure very close to the mean should expect to move away from the mean . the effect is the exact reverse of regression toward the mean , and exactly offsets it . so for extreme individuals , we expect the second score to be closer to the mean than the first score , but for all individuals , we expect the distribution of distances from the mean to be the same on both sets of measurements . related to the point above , regression toward the mean works equally well in both directions . we expect the student with the highest test score on the second day to have done worse on the first day . and if we compare the best student on the first day to the best student on the second day , regardless of whether it is the same individual or not , there is a tendency to regress toward the mean going in either direction . we expect the best scores on both days to be equally far from the mean . regression fallacies . many phenomena tend to be attributed to the wrong causes when regression to the mean is not taken into account . an extreme example is horace secrist 's 1933 book the triumph of mediocrity in business , in which the statistics professor collected mountains of data to prove that the profit rates of competitive businesses tend toward the average over time . in fact , there is no such effect ; the variability of profit rates is almost constant over time . secrist had only described the common regression toward the mean . one exasperated reviewer , harold hotelling , likened the book to '' proving the multiplication table by arranging elephants in rows and columns , and then doing the same for numerous other kinds of animals '' . hotelling , h . ( 1934 ) . open letters , journal of the american statistical association , 29 , 198–199 . the calculation and interpretation of '' improvement scores '' on standardized educational tests in massachusetts probably provides another example of the regression fallacy . in 1999 , schools were given improvement goals . for each school , the department of education tabulated the difference in the average score achieved by students in 1999 and in 2000 . it was quickly noted that most of the worst-performing schools had met their goals , which the department of education took as confirmation of the soundness of their policies . however , it was also noted that many of the supposedly best schools in the commonwealth , such as brookline high school ( with 18 national merit scholarship finalists ) were declared to have failed . as in many cases involving statistics and public policy , the issue is debated , but '' improvement scores '' were not announced in subsequent years and the findings appear to be a case of regression to the mean . the psychologist daniel kahneman , winner of the 2002 nobel memorial prize in economic sciences , pointed out that regression to the mean might explain why rebukes can seem to improve performance , while praise seems to backfire . to put kahneman 's story in simple terms , when one makes a severe mistake , their performance will later usually return to their average level anyway . this will seem as an improvement and as '' proof '' of a belief that it is better to criticize than to praise ( held especially by anyone who is willing to criticize at that '' low '' moment ) . in the contrary situation , when one happens to perform high above average , their performance will also tend to return to their average level later on ; the change will be perceived as a deterioration and any initial praise following the first performance as a cause of that deterioration . just because criticizing or praising precedes the regression toward the mean , the act of criticizing or of praising is falsely attributed causality . the regression fallacy is also explained in rolf dobelli 's the art of thinking clearly . uk law enforcement policies have encouraged the visible siting of static or mobile speed cameras at accident blackspots . this policy was justified by a perception that there is a corresponding reduction in serious road traffic accidents after a camera is set up . however , statisticians have pointed out that , although there is a net benefit in lives saved , failure to take into account the effects of regression to the mean results in the beneficial effects being overstated . the times , 16 december 2005 speed camera benefits overrated statistical analysts have long recognized the effect of regression to the mean in sports ; they even have a special name for it : the '' sophomore slump '' . for example , carmelo anthony of the nba 's denver nuggets had an outstanding rookie season in 2004 . it was so outstanding that he could not be expected to repeat it : in 2005 , anthony 's numbers had dropped from his rookie season . the reasons for the '' sophomore slump '' abound , as sports rely on adjustment and counter-adjustment , but luck-based excellence as a rookie is as good a reason as any . regression to the mean in sports performance may also explain the apparent '' sports illustrated cover jinx '' and the '' madden curse '' . john hollinger has an alternative name for the phenomenon of regression to the mean : the '' fluke rule '' , while bill james calls it the '' plexiglas principle '' . because popular lore has focused on regression toward the mean as an account of declining performance of athletes from one season to the next , it has usually overlooked the fact that such regression can also account for improved performance . for example , if one looks at the batting average of major league baseball players in one season , those whose batting average was above the league mean tend to regress downward toward the mean the following year , while those whose batting average was below the mean tend to progress upward toward the mean the following year . for an illustration see nate silver , '' randomness : catch the fever ! '' , baseball prospectus , may 14 , 2003 . . other statistical phenomena . regression toward the mean simply says that , following an extreme random event , the next random event is likely to be less extreme . in no sense does the future event '' compensate for '' or '' even out '' the previous event , though this is assumed in the gambler 's fallacy ( and the variant law of averages ) . similarly , the law of large numbers states that in the long term , the average will tend towards the expected value , but makes no statement about individual trials . for example , following a run of 10 heads on a flip of a fair coin ( a rare , extreme event ) , regression to the mean states that the next run of heads will likely be less than 10 , while the law of large numbers states that in the long term , this event will likely average out , and the average fraction of heads will tend to 1/2 . by contrast , the gambler 's fallacy incorrectly assumes that the coin is now '' due '' for a run of tails to balance out . the opposite effect is regression to the tail , resulting from a distribution with non-vanishing probability density towards infinity . definition for simple linear regression of data points . this is the definition of regression toward the mean that closely follows sir francis galton 's original usage . suppose there are n data points , where ex and ey are the expected values of x and y , respectively , and σ x and σ y are the standard deviations of x and y , respectively . hence the conditional expected value of y , given that x is t standard deviations above its mean ( and that includes the case where it 's below its mean , when t & nbsp ; chernick & friis ( 2003 ) hence , if 0 & nbsp ; ≤ & nbsp ; r & nbsp ; let x 1 , x 2 be random variables with identical marginal distributions with mean μ . in this formalization , the joint distribution of x 1 and x 2 is said to exhibit reversion toward the mean if , for every number c , we have : & mu ; & nbsp ; ≤ & nbsp ; ex 2 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; x 1 & nbsp ; > & nbsp ; c & nbsp ; 1 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; x 1 & nbsp ; > & nbsp ; c , and : & mu ; & nbsp ; ≥ & nbsp ; ex 2 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; x 1 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; ex 1 & nbsp ; & nbsp ; x 1 & nbsp ; < & nbsp ; c this definition is '' general '' in the sense that every bivariate distribution with identical marginal distributions exhibits reversion toward the mean . see also . hardy–weinberg principle internal validity law of large numbers martingale regression dilution selection bias . references . further reading . article , including a diagram of galton 's original data . stephen senn . regression : a new mode for an old meaning , the american statistician , vol 44 , no 2 ( may 1990 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 181–183 . david c . schmittlein . surprising inferences from unsurprising observations : do conditional expectations really regress to the mean ? the american statistician , vol 43 , no 3 ( august 1989 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 176–183 . regression toward the mean and the study of change , psychological bulletin a non-mathematical explanation of regression toward the mean . a simulation of regression toward the mean . amanda wachsmuth , leland wilkinson , gerard e . dallal . galton 's bend : an undiscovered nonlinearity in galton 's family stature regression data and a likely explanation based on pearson and lee 's stature data ( a modern look at galton 's analysis . ) massachusetts standardized test scores , interpreted by a statistician as an example of regression : see discussion in sci.stat.edu and its continuation . gary smith , what the luck : the surprising role of chance in our everyday lives , new york : overlook , london : duckworth .