Fault (geology)

mechanisms of faulting . owing to friction and the rigidity of the constituent rocks , the two sides of a fault can not always glide or flow past each other easily , and so occasionally all movement stops . the regions of higher friction along a fault plane , where it becomes locked , are called asperities . stress builds up when a fault is locked , and when it reaches a level that exceeds the strength threshold , the fault ruptures and the accumulated strain energy is released in part as seismic waves , forming an earthquake . strain occurs accumulatively or instantaneously , depending on the rheology of the rock ; the ductile lower crust and mantle accumulate deformation gradually via shearing , whereas the brittle upper crust reacts by fracture – instantaneous stress release – resulting in motion along the fault . a fault in ductile rocks can also release instantaneously when the strain rate is too great . slip , heave , throw . slip is defined as the relative movement of geological features present on either side of a fault plane . a fault 's sense of slip is defined as the relative motion of the rock on each side of the fault concerning the other side . . in measuring the horizontal or vertical separation , the throw of the fault is the vertical component of the separation and the heave of the fault is the horizontal component , as in '' throw up and heave out '' . the vector of slip can be qualitatively assessed by studying any drag folding of strata , which may be visible on either side of the fault ; the direction and magnitude of heave and throw can be measured only by finding common intersection points on either side of the fault ( called a piercing point ) . in practice , it is usually only possible to find the slip direction of faults , and an approximation of the heave and throw vector . hanging wall and footwall . the two sides of a non-vertical fault are known as the hanging wall and footwall . the hanging wall occurs above the fault plane and the footwall occurs below it . . this terminology comes from mining : when working a tabular ore body , the miner stood with the footwall under his feet and with the hanging wall above him . these terms are important for distinguishing different dip-slip fault types : reverse faults and normal faults . in a reverse fault , the hanging wall displaces upward , while in a normal fault the hanging wall displaces downward . distinguishing between these two fault types is important for determining the stress regime of the fault movement . fault types . based on the direction of slip , faults can be categorized as : strike-slip , where the offset is predominantly horizontal , parallel to the fault trace ; dip-slip , offset is predominantly vertical and/or perpendicular to the fault trace ; or oblique-slip , combining strike and dip slip . strike-slip faults . in a strike-slip fault ( also known as a wrench fault , tear fault or transcurrent fault ) , the fault surface ( plane ) is usually near vertical , and the footwall moves laterally either left or right with very little vertical motion . strike-slip faults with left-lateral motion are also known as sinistral faults and those with right-lateral motion as dextral faults . each is defined by the direction of movement of the ground as would be seen by an observer on the opposite side of the fault . a special class of strike-slip fault is the transform fault when it forms a plate boundary . this class is related to an offset in a spreading center , such as a mid-ocean ridge , or , less common , within continental lithosphere , such as the dead sea transform in the middle east or the alpine fault in new zealand . transform faults are also referred to as '' conservative '' plate boundaries since the lithosphere is neither created nor destroyed . dip-slip faults . dip-slip faults can be either normal ( '' extensional '' ) or reverse . in a normal fault , the hanging wall moves downward , relative to the footwall . a downthrown block between two normal faults dipping towards each other is a graben . an upthrown block between two normal faults dipping away from each other is a horst . low-angle normal faults with regional tectonic significance may be designated detachment faults . a reverse fault is the opposite of a normal fault—the hanging wall moves up relative to the footwall . reverse faults indicate compressive shortening of the crust . the dip of a reverse fault is relatively steep , greater than 45° . the terminology of '' normal '' and '' reverse '' comes from coal-mining in england , where normal faults are the most common . a thrust fault has the same sense of motion as a reverse fault , but with the dip of the fault plane at less than 45° . thrust faults typically form ramps , flats and fault-bend ( hanging wall and footwall ) folds . flat segments of thrust fault planes are known as flats , and inclined sections of the thrust are known as ramps . typically , thrust faults move within formations by forming flats and climb up sections with ramps . fault-bend folds are formed by the movement of the hanging wall over a non-planar fault surface and are found associated with both extensional and thrust faults . faults may be reactivated at a later time with the movement in the opposite direction to the original movement ( fault inversion ) . a normal fault may therefore become a reverse fault and vice versa . thrust faults form nappes and klippen in the large thrust belts . subduction zones are a special class of thrusts that form the largest faults on earth and give rise to the largest earthquakes . oblique-slip faults . a fault which has a component of dip-slip and a component of strike-slip is termed an oblique-slip fault . nearly all faults have some component of both dip-slip and strike-slip ; hence , defining a fault as oblique requires both dip and strike components to be measurable and significant . some oblique faults occur within transtensional and transpressional regimes , and others occur where the direction of extension or shortening changes during the deformation but the earlier formed faults remain active . the hade angle is defined as the complement of the dip angle ; it is the angle between the fault plane and a vertical plane that strikes parallel to the fault . listric fault . listric faults are similar to normal faults but the fault plane curves , the dip being steeper near the surface , then shallower with increased depth . the dip may flatten into a sub-horizontal décollement , resulting in a horizontal slip on a horizontal plane . the illustration shows slumping of the hanging wall along a listric fault . where the hanging wall is absent ( such as on a cliff ) the footwall may slump in a manner that creates multiple listric faults . ring fault . ring faults , also known as caldera faults , are faults that occur within collapsed volcanic calderas and the sites of bolide strikes , such as the chesapeake bay impact crater . ring faults are the result of a series of overlapping normal faults , forming a circular outline . fractures created by ring faults may be filled by ring dikes . . synthetic and antithetic faults . synthetic and antithetic faults are terms used to describe minor faults associated with a major fault . synthetic faults dip in the same direction as the major fault while the antithetic faults dip in the opposite direction . these faults may be accompanied by rollover anticlines ( e.g . the niger delta structural style ) . fault rock . all faults have a measurable thickness , made up of deformed rock characteristic of the level in the crust where the faulting happened , of the rock types affected by the fault and of the presence and nature of any mineralising fluids . fault rocks are classified by their textures and the implied mechanism of deformation . a fault that passes through different levels of the lithosphere will have many different types of fault rock developed along its surface . continued dip-slip displacement tends to juxtapose fault rocks characteristic of different crustal levels , with varying degrees of overprinting . this effect is particularly clear in the case of detachment faults and major thrust faults . the main types of fault rock include : cataclasite – a fault rock which is cohesive with a poorly developed or absent planar fabric , or which is incohesive , characterised by generally angular clasts and rock fragments in a finer-grained matrix of similar composition . tectonic or fault breccia – a medium- to coarse-grained cataclasite containing > 30 % visible fragments . fault gouge – an incohesive , clay-rich fine- to ultrafine-grained cataclasite , which may possess a planar fabric and containing . impacts on structures and people . in geotechnical engineering , a fault often forms a discontinuity that may have a large influence on the mechanical behavior ( strength , deformation , etc . ) of soil and rock masses in , for example , tunnel , foundation , or slope construction . the level of a fault 's activity can be critical for ( 1 ) locating buildings , tanks , and pipelines and ( 2 ) assessing the seismic shaking and tsunami hazard to infrastructure and people in the vicinity . in california , for example , new building construction has been prohibited directly on or near faults that have moved within the holocene epoch ( the last 11,700 years ) of the earth 's geological history . also , faults that have shown movement during the holocene plus pleistocene epochs ( the last 2.6 million years ) may receive consideration , especially for critical structures such as power plants , dams , hospitals , and schools . geologists assess a fault 's age by studying soil features seen in shallow excavations and geomorphology seen in aerial photographs . subsurface clues include shears and their relationships to carbonate nodules , eroded clay , and iron oxide mineralization , in the case of older soil , and lack of such signs in the case of younger soil . radiocarbon dating of organic material buried next to or over a fault shear is often critical in distinguishing active from inactive faults . from such relationships , paleoseismology can estimate the sizes of past earthquakes over the past several hundred years , and develop rough projections of future fault activity . faults and ore deposits . many ore deposits lie on or are associated with faults . this is because the fractured rock associated with fault zones allow for magma ascent or the circulation of mineral-bearing fluids . intersections of near-vertical faults are often locations of significant ore deposits . an example of a fault hosting valuable porphyry copper deposits is northern chile 's domeyko fault with deposits at chuquicamata , collahuasi , el abra , el salvador , escondida and potrerillos . further south in chile los bronces and el teniente porphyry copper deposit lie each at the intersection of two fault systems . . see also . vertical displacement - vertical movement of earth 's crust . notes . references . . external links . fault motion animations at iris consortium aerial view of the san andreas fault in the carrizo plain , central california , from '' how earthquakes happen '' at usgs landsat image of the san andreas fault in southern california , from '' what is a fault ? '' at usgs