Pamela Colman Smith

biography . smith was born at 28 belgrave road in pimlico , part of central london . she was the only child of an american merchant from brooklyn , new york , charles edward smith , son of brooklyn mayor cyrus p . smith , and his wife corinne colman , sister of the painter samuel colman . the family was based in manchester for the first decade of smith 's life , but they moved to jamaica when charles smith took a job in 1889 with the west india improvement company ( a financial syndicate involved in extending rail transport in jamaica ) . the smiths lived in the capital , kingston , for several years , travelling to london and new york . by 1893 , smith had moved to brooklyn , where , at the age of 15 , she enrolled at the pratt institute , which had been founded six years earlier . there she studied art under arthur wesley dow , painter , print maker , photographer , and influential arts educator . her mature drawing style shows clear traces of the visionary qualities of fin-de-siècle symbolism and the romanticism of the preceding arts and crafts movement . while smith was in art school , her mother died in jamaica , in 1896 . smith herself was ill on and off during these years and in the end left pratt in 1897 without a degree . she became an illustrator ; some of her first projects included the illustrated verses of william butler yeats , a book on the actress ellen terry by bram stoker , and two of her own books , widdicombe fair and fair vanity ( a reference to vanity fair ) . in 1899 her father died , leaving smith at the age of 21 without either parent . she returned to england that year , continuing to work as an illustrator , and branching out into theatrical design for a miniature theatre . in london , she was taken under the wing of the lyceum theatre group led by ellen terry ( who is said to have given her the nickname 'pixie ' ) , henry irving , and bram stoker and traveled with them around the country , working on costumes and stage design . in 1901 , she established a studio in london and held a weekly open house for artists , authors , actors , and others involved with the arts . arthur ransome , then in his early 20s , describes one of these '' at home '' evenings , and the curious artistic circle around smith , in his 1907 bohemia in london . smith wrote and illustrated two books about jamaican folklore : annancy stories ( 1899 ) and chim-chim , folk stories from jamaica ( 1905 ) . these books included culture of jamaica involving the traditional african folk figure anansi the spider . she also continued her illustration work , taking on projects for william butler yeats and his brother , the painter jack yeats . she illustrated bram stoker 's last novel , the lair of the white worm in 1911 , and ellen terry 's book on diaghilev 's ballets russes , the russian ballet in 1913 . smith supported the struggle for the right to vote , and through the suffrage atelier , a collective of professional illustrators , she contributed artwork to further the cause of women 's suffrage in great britain . additionally , smith donated her services for more poster designs and toys to the red cross during world war i . in 1903 , smith launched her own magazine under the title the green sheaf , with contributions by yeats , christopher st john ( christabel marshall ) , cecil french , a . e . ( george william russell ) , gordon craig ( ellen terry 's son ) , dorothy ward , john todhunter , and others . the green sheaf survived for a little over a year , a total of 13 issues . discouraged by the green sheaf 's lack of financial success , colman shifted her efforts towards setting up a small press in london . in 1904 , she established the green sheaf press which published a variety of novels , poems , fairy tales , and folktales until at least 1906 , mostly by women writers . in 1907 , alfred stieglitz gave smith an exhibition of paintings in new york at his little galleries of the photo-secession ( also known as gallery 291 ) , making smith the first painter to have a show at what had been until then a gallery devoted exclusively to the photographic avant-garde . stieglitz was intrigued by smith 's synesthesia sensibility ; in this period , smith would paint visions that came to her while listening to music . the show was successful enough that stieglitz issued a platinum print portfolio of 22 of her paintings and showed her work twice more , in 1908 and 1909 . some smith works that did not sell remained with stieglitz and ended up in the stieglitz/georgia o'keeffe archive at yale university . norfleet , phil . '' alfred stieglitz and pamela colman smith : biography of pamela colman smith '' yeats introduced smith to the hermetic order of the golden dawn , which she joined in 1901 and in the process met waite . when the golden dawn splintered due to personality conflicts , smith moved with waite to the independent and rectified rite of the golden dawn ( or holy order of the golden dawn ) . in 1909 , waite commissioned smith to produce a tarot deck with appeal to the world of art , and the result was the unique waite-smith tarot deck . published by rider ( imprint ) of london , it has endured as the world 's most popular 78-card tarot deck . the innovative cards depict full scenes with figures and symbols on all of the cards including the pips , and smith 's distinctive drawings have become the basis for the design of many subsequent packs . jensen , k . frank ( 2006 ) the story of the waite-smith tarot , croydon hills , australia . apart from book illustration projects and the tarot deck , her art found little in the way of commercial outlets after her early success with stieglitz in new york . several examples of her works done in gouache were collected by her cousin , the american sherlock holmes actor william gillette , and may be found today prominently displayed in his castle in connecticut . in 1911 , smith converted to catholicism . after the end of the first world war , smith received an inheritance from an uncle that enabled her to lease a house on the lizard peninsula in cornwall , an area popular with artists . for income , she established a vacation home for catholic priests in a neighboring house . her longtime friend , nora lake , joined her in cornwall and helped to run the vacation home . after several years of financial difficulty , smith left the lizard and relocated first to exeter in 1939 , and then to bude in the early 1940s . although she continued writing and illustrating , she was unable to find publishers for her work , likely due to changes in public taste following the first world war . smith died in her apartment at the bencoolen house in bude on september 18 , 1951 . her possessions were auctioned off to pay her debts . the location of her gravesite is unknown , but it is likely that she was buried in an unmarked grave in st . michael 's cemetery in bude . . waite-smith tarot . the 78 illustrations that make up the rider-waite tarot deck '' represent archetypal subjects that each become a portal to an invisible realm of signs and symbols , believed to be channeled through processes of divination . '' they are original works of art and unique in terms of the cards ’ stylization , draftsmanship , and composition , which is a significant aesthetic achievement . they are one of the best examples of smith 's jaw-dropping imagination for fantasy , folly , ecstasy , death , and the macabre . when smith 's tarot was first published by rider , in england , in december 1909 , it was simply called tarot cards and it was accompanied by arthur edward waite 's guide entitled the key to the tarot . the following year waite added smith 's black-and-white drawings to the book and published it as the pictorial key to the tarot . in 1971 , u.s . games bought the right to publish the deck and published it under the title the rider tarot deck ( because of differences in u.s . and u.k . copyright law , the extent of their copyright in the waite-smith deck is disputed ) . in later editions they changed the name to rider tarot and then rider waite tarot . today most scholars , in order to recognize the importance of smith 's contribution , refer to the deck as the waite-smith tarot . tarot writers often refer to the deck with the simple abbreviation of rws , for rider-waite-smith . in the century since the deck 's first printing , there have been dozens of editions put out by various publishers ; for some of these the smith drawings were redrawn by other artists , and for others the cards were rephotographed to create new printing plates . many versions have been recolored as the coloration is rather harsh in the original deck , due to the limitations of color printing at the time . one example is the 1968 albano-waite tarot , which has brighter colors overlaid on the same-pen and-ink drawings . some recent u.s . games editions have removed smith 's hand-drawn titles for each card , substituting text in a standard typeface . altogether , these decks encompass the full range from editions very closely based on the original printings to decks that can at most be termed 'inspired ' by the waite-smith deck . waite is often cited as the designer of the waite-smith tarot , but it would be more accurate to consider him as half of a design team , with responsibility for the major concepts , the structure of individual cards , and the overall symbolic system . because waite was not an artist himself , he commissioned smith to create the actual deck . waite , arthur edward . shadow of life and thought . kessinger publishing , page 184 it is likely that smith worked from waite 's written and verbal instructions rather than from sketches ; that is , from detailed descriptions of the desired designs . this is how illustrators often work , and as a commercial illustrator , smith would probably have been comfortable with such a working process . it appears that waite provided detailed instructions mainly or exclusively for the major arcana , and simple lists of meanings for the minor arcana or 'pip ' cards . thus the memorable scenes of the minor arcana owe largely to smith 's own invention . the minor arcana are indeed one of the notable achievements of this deck , as most earlier tarot decks ( especially those of the marseilles type ) have extremely simple pip cards . smith 's innovative illustrations for the minor arcana , with their rich symbolism , made the waite-smith deck a widely imitated model for other tarot decks . smith and waite drew on a number of sources as inspirations for the deck 's designs . in particular , it appears that waite took his inspiration for the trumps mainly from the french tarot of marseilles ( although the oldest date from the 16th century , his model was possibly a marseilles deck from the 18th century ) . it is not unlikely that other marseilles-type italian tarot decks from the 18th or 19th century were used as additional models . for the pips , it appears that smith drew mainly on the 15th century italian sola busca tarot ; place , robert m . ( 2005 ) the tarot : history , symbolism , and divination , tarcher/penguin , new york , 2005 , pages 177-186 the 3 of swords , for example , clearly shows the congruity between the two decks . in addition , there is evidence that some figures in the deck are portraits of smith 's friends , notably actresses ellen terry ( the queen of wands ) and florence farr ( the world ) . jensen , frank k . the early waite-smith tarot editions , p . 31 . smith completed the art for the deck in the six months between april and october 1909 . this is a short period of time for an artist to complete some 80 pictures ( the number claimed by smith in a letter to stieglitz in 1909 and corresponding almost exactly to the standard 78-card tarot deck ) . kaplan , stuart r . the encyclopedia of tarot volume iii , u.s . games inc . , stanford , ct , 1990 , p . 30 the illustrations were most likely done in pen and ink , possibly over a pencil underdrawing ; the original drawings are lost so this can not be determined with certainty at present . they were either colored with watercolor by smith or colored by someone else after the fact . posthumous exhibitions . an exhibition of smith 's art entitled to all believers—the art of pamela colman smith was held in the united states in 1975 . it was sponsored by the university of delaware and the delaware art museum in association with the delaware chapter of the victorian society in america . the exhibition was held at the delaware art museum from september 11 to october 19 , and at the princeton university art museum , from november 4 to december 7 . an exhibition , georgia o'keeffe and the women of the stieglitz circle , was held in 2007–2008 . it was at three museums : the georgia o'keeffe museum in santa fe , new mexico ; the high museum of art in atlanta , georgia ; and the san diego museum of art in san diego , california . the exhibition included works by smith and other women artists who were active in the art and photography scene prior to o'keeffe . their works help to put o'keeffe 's art in the context of the time . the exhibition was based on the scholarly book modernism and the feminine voice : o'keeffe and the women of the stieglitz circle by kathleen pyne , which contains a chapter on smith . . references . see for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the and tags , and the template below . -- > . external links . american women in the arts bryn mawr college library special collections biographical information