Hazzan

sh'liaḥ tzibbur and the evolution of the hazzan . the person leading the congregation in public prayers is called the shaliah tzibbur ( hebrew for '' emissary of the congregation '' ) . halakha restricts this role to adult jews ; among orthodox jews , it is restricted to males . in theory , any lay person can be a sh'liaḥ tzibbur ; many synagogue-attending jews will serve in this role from time to time , especially on weekdays or when having a yartzeit . someone with good hebrew pronunciation is preferred . in practice , in synagogues without an official hazzan , or in the absence of the hazzan , if there is no hazzan sheni those with the best voice and the most knowledge of the prayers serve most often . as public worship was developed in the geonim period and as the knowledge of the hebrew language declined , singing gradually superseded the didactic and hortatory element in the worship in the synagogue . thus , while the idea of a cantor as a paid professional does not exist in classical rabbinic sources , the office of the hazzan increased in importance with the centuries , evolving a specialized set of skills and becoming a career in itself . . qualifications . even in the earliest times the chief qualifications demanded of the hazzan , in addition to knowledge of biblical and liturgical literature as well as the prayer motifs ( known as steiger ) , were a pleasant voice and an artistic delivery ; for the sake of these , many faults were willingly overlooked . the hazzan was required to possess a pleasing appearance , u-firko naeh , wording in the hineni prayer recited by the hazzan on the high holidays to be married , and to have a flowing beard . the jewish encyclopedia,1906 ( public domain ) , p.285 , sometimes , according to isaac of vienna ( 13th century ) , a young hazzan having only a slight growth of beard was tolerated . maimonides decided that the hazzan who recited the prayers on an ordinary shabbat and on weekdays need not possess an appearance pleasing to everybody ; he might even have a reputation not wholly spotless , provided he was living a life morally free from reproach at the time of his appointment . but all these moderations of the rule disappeared on holidays ; then an especially worthy hazzan was demanded , one whose life was absolutely irreproachable , who was generally popular , and who was endowed with an expressive delivery . even a person who had ever litigated in a non-jewish court , instead of a jewish court , could not act as hazzan on those days , unless he had previously done penance . shulkhan arukh , orah hayyim , 581 however many authorities were lenient in this regard , and as long as a cantor was '' merutzeh l'kehal , '' desired by the congregation , he was permitted to lead the prayers even on the holiest of days . today , a hazzan , particularly in more formal ( usually not orthodox ) synagogues , is likely to have academic credentials—most often a degree in music or in sacred music , sometimes a degree in music education or in jewish religious education or a related discipline . the doctor of music degree is sometimes awarded to honour a hazzan . professional status . the role of hazzanim as a respected full-time profession has become a reality in recent centuries . in the last two centuries jews in a number of european communities , notably germany and britain , came to view professionally trained hazzanim as clergy and the hazzan as the deputy rabbi . after the enlightenment , when european nations gave full citizenship and civil rights to jews , professionally trained hazzanim were accepted by the secular governments as clergy just as rabbis were . in a paradoxical turn of events , the united states government recognized cantors as the first jewish clergy , even before rabbis were recognized : as a congregation could be organized and led by a committee of jewish laypersons , who would not have the expertise in liturgy a hazzan would have , newly forming congregations in the late 19th and early 20th centuries sometimes hired a hazzan for a synagogue ( and made sure that a kosher butcher was established in the neighborhood ) for some time before setting about hiring a rabbi , seeing the hazzan ( and the butcher ) as a more immediate need . the hazzan therefore solemnized marriages and otherwise represented the congregation in the eyes of civil authorities . in the united states , many hazzanim supplement their ministry by also earning certification as and working as mohels , for bris ceremonies . in the united states there are three main organizations for professionally trained hazzanim , one from each of the major jewish denominations : american conference of cantors—reform judaism cantors assembly—conservative judaism cantors assembly cantorial council of america—orthodox judaism belz school of jewish music . training . many members of the cantors assembly are trained at the jewish theological seminary of america cantorial school at the jewish theological seminary of america . many members of the american conference of cantors are trained at the debbie friedman school of sacred music at hebrew union college—jewish institute of religion , school of sacred music ( new york ) reform . both of these programs offer a five-year training program . members of the cantorial council can train at the philip and sarah belz school of jewish music at yeshiva university in new york city . aleph , the movement for jewish renewal , includes a cantorial training program as part of its ordination program . full cantorial training is also offered by the cantorial school of the academy for jewish religion ( california ) in los angeles , the cantorial program at the similarly named academy for jewish religion in new york , and the school of jewish music at hebrew college . these institutions are unaffiliated with any particular jewish denomination . the curricula for students in these programs generally include , but are not limited to : hebrew : modern , biblical ( torah ) , and liturgical ( siddur ) nusach ( liturgical tradition ) laws and traditions pertaining to jewish prayer service history and content of the siddur music theory , sight-reading playing an instrument , usually a piano or guitar singing technique cantillation—tropes for the liturgical chanting of biblical books choral conducting jewish history tanakh ( hebrew bible ) jewish music history pastoral care and counseling theology . non-orthodox titles . until 2012 , neither the reform nor conservative streams used the term '' ordained '' for trained cantors ; use of the term '' invested '' precluded confusion with those they titled rabbi . conservative judaism has retained that distinction . female cantors in non-orthodox judaism . traditionally a hazzan was always a man . according to the shulchan aruch the code of jewish law a chazzan or cantor must be a male past the age of accepting the mitzvos today most streams of non-orthodox judaism no longer maintain gender distinctions , hence a woman can fill their cantorial needs . julie rosewald , called “ cantor soprano ” by her congregation , was america 's first female cantor ( though she was born in germany ) , serving san francisco 's temple emanu-el from 1884 until 1893 . julie rosewald : america 's first woman cantor jewish women 's archive the forgotten woman cantor : julie rosewald now getting her due jewish week barbara ostfeld became the first female cantor to be ordained in reform judaism in 1975 , and erica lippitz and marla rosenfeld barugel became the first female cantors in conservative judaism in 1987 . the cantors assembly , a professional organization of cantors associated with conservative judaism , did not allow women to join until 1990 . sharon hordes became the first cantor ( female or otherwise ) in reconstructionist judaism in 2002 . avitall gerstetter , who lived in germany , became the first female cantor in jewish renewal ( and the first female cantor in germany ) in 2002 . susan wehle became the first american female cantor in jewish renewal in 2006 , serving until her death in 2009 . the first american women to be ordained as cantors in jewish renewal after susan wehle 's ordination were michal rubin and abbe lyons , both ordained on january 10 , 2010 . in 2001 deborah davis became the first cantor ( female or otherwise ) in humanistic judaism ; however , humanistic judaism has since stopped graduating cantors . in 2009 iran-born tannoz bahremand foruzanfar was ordained as a cantor by the non-denominational academy for jewish religion ( california ) , becoming the first female persian ordained cantor in the united states . as of 2011 , the hebrew union college-jewish institute of religion , the main seminary for reform judaism , has invested 208 women cantors . . golden age . the period between the two world wars is often referred to as the '' golden age '' of hazzanut ( cantorial performance ) . the great figures of this era include zavel kwartin ( 1874–1953 ) , moritz henle ( 1850–1925 ) , yossele rosenblatt ( 1882–1933 ) , gershon sirota ( 1874–1943 ) , and leib glantz . in the post–world war ii period , prominent cantors were moshe koussevitzky , david werdyger , frank birnbaum , richard tucker and abraham lopes cardozo ( 1914–2006 ) . operatic tenor jan peerce , whose cantorial recordings were highly regarded , was never a cantor by profession but often served as one during the high holidays . popular contemporary cantors include shmuel barzilai , naftali hershtik , yitzchak meir helfgot , chazzan avraham aharon weingarten , ari klein , yaakov lemmer , joseph malovany , benzion miller , jacob ( jack ) mendelson , aaron bensoussan , aaron aderet , alberto mizrahi , yaakov yoseph stark , jochen ( yaacov ) fahlenkamp , meir finkelstein , daniel gross , azi schwartz , netanel hershtik and eli weinberg . hazzan sheni . the title hazzan sheni ( sheni means second ) can refer to a hazzan who plays that role when the main hazzan does not officiate a hazzan who fills a different spot , such as when the main hazzan leads musaf , and the sheni leads shacharit . see also . cantor in reform judaism cantors assembly ( conservative ) hassan ( surname ) hebrew union college-jewish institute of religion ( reform ) jewish music rabbi synagogue timeline of women hazzans in the united states . references . external links . jewish encyclopedia : hazzan