Optical telegraph

etymology and terminology . the word semaphore was coined in 1801 by the french inventor of the semaphore line itself , claude chappe . groundbreaking scientific experiments , inventions & discoveries of the 18th century , jonathan shectman , p . 172 he composed it from the greek elements σῆμα ( sêma , '' sign '' ) ; and from φορός ( phorós , '' carrying '' ) , oxford english dictionary . or φορά ( phorá , '' a carrying '' ) from φέρειν ( phérein , '' to bear '' ) . webster 's unabridged dictionary . chappe also coined the word tachygraph , meaning '' fast writer '' . beyer , rick , the greatest stories never told , a & e television networks / the history channel , , p . 60 however , the french army preferred to call chappe 's semaphore system the telegraph , meaning '' far writer '' , which was coined by french statesman andré françois miot de mélito . le robert historique de la langue française , 1992 , 1998 the word semaphoric was first printed in english in 1808 : '' the newly constructed semaphoric telegraphs '' , referring to the destruction of telegraphs in france . 500 years of new words , bill sherk the first use of the word semaphore in reference to english use was in 1816 : '' the improved semaphore has been erected on the top of the admiralty '' , referring to the installation of a simpler telegraph invented by sir home popham . semaphore telegraphs are also called , '' chappe telegraphs '' or '' napoleonic semaphore '' . early designs . optical telegraphy dates from ancient times , in the form of hydraulic telegraphs , torches ( as used by ancient cultures since the discovery of fire ) and smoke signals . modern design of semaphores was first foreseen by the british polymath robert hooke , who gave a vivid and comprehensive outline of visual telegraphy to the royal society in a 1684 submission in which he outlined many practical details . the system ( which was motivated by military concerns , following the battle of vienna in 1683 ) was never put into practice . one of the first experiments of optical signalling was carried out by the anglo-irish landowner and inventor , sir richard lovell edgeworth in 1767 . he placed a bet with his friend , the horse racing gambler lord march , that he could transmit knowledge of the outcome of the race in just one hour . using a network of signalling sections erected on high ground , the signal would be observed from one station to the next by means of a telescope . the signal itself consisted of a large pointer that could be placed into eight possible positions in 45 degree increments . a series of two such signals gave a total 64 code elements and a third signal took it up to 512 . he returned to his idea in 1795 , after hearing of chappe 's system . france . credit for the first successful optical telegraph goes to the french engineer claude chappe and his brothers in 1792 , who succeeded in covering france with a network of 556 stations stretching a total distance of . le système chappe was used for military and national communications until the 1850s . development in france . during 1790–1795 , at the height of the french revolution , france needed a swift and reliable military communications system to thwart the war efforts of its enemies . france was surrounded by the forces of britain , the netherlands , prussia , austria , and spain , the cities of marseille and lyon were in revolt , and the british fleet held toulon . the only advantage france held was the lack of cooperation between the allied forces due to their inadequate lines of communication . in mid-1790 , the chappe brothers set about devising a system of communication that would allow the central government to receive intelligence and to transmit orders in the shortest possible time . chappe considered many possible methods including audio and smoke . he even considered using electricity , but could not find insulation for the conductors that would withstand the high-voltage electrostatic sources available at the time . patrice flichy , dynamics of modern communication , p . 33 , sage , 1995 holzmann & pehrson , p . 53 chappe settled on an optical system and the first public demonstration occurred on 2 march 1791 between brûlon and parcé , a distance of . the system consisted of a modified pendulum clock at each end with dials marked with ten numerals . the hands of the clocks almost certainly moved much faster than a normal clock . the hands of both clocks were set in motion at the same time with a synchronisation signal . further signals indicated the time at which the dial should be read . the numbers sent were then looked up in a codebook . in their preliminary experiments over a shorter distance , the chappes had banged a pan for synchronisation . in the demonstration , they used black and white panels observed with a telescope . the message to be sent was chosen by town officials at brûlon and sent by rené chappe to claude chappe at parcé who had no pre-knowledge of the message . the message read '' si vous réussissez , vous serez bientôt couverts de gloire '' ( if you succeed , you will soon bask in glory ) . it was only later that chappe realised that he could dispense with the clocks and the synchronisation system itself could be used to pass messages . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 53–55 the chappes carried out experiments during the next two years , and on two occasions their apparatus at place de l'étoile , paris was destroyed by mobs who thought they were communicating with royalist forces . their cause was assisted by ignace chappe being elected to the legislative assembly . in the summer of 1792 claude was appointed ingénieur-télégraphiste and charged with establishing a line of stations between paris and lille , a distance of 230 kilometres ( about 143 miles ) . it was used to carry dispatches for the war between france and austria . in 1794 , it brought news of a french capture of condé-sur-l'escaut from the austrians less than an hour after it occurred . how napoleon 's semaphore telegraph changed the world , bbc news , hugh schofield , 16 june 2013 the first symbol of a message to lille would pass through 15 stations in only nine minutes . the speed of the line varied with the weather , but the line to lille typically transferred 36 symbols , a complete message , in about 32 minutes . another line of 50 stations was completed in 1798 , covering 488 & nbsp ; km between paris and strasbourg . from 1803 on , the french also used the 3-arm depillon semaphore at coastal locations to provide warning of british incursions . . chappe system technical operation . the chappe brothers determined by experiment that it was easier to see the angle of a rod than to see the presence or absence of a panel . their semaphore was composed of two black movable wooden arms , connected by a cross bar ; the positions of all three of these components together indicated an alphabetic letter . with counterweights ( named forks ) on the arms , the chappe system was controlled by only two handles and was mechanically simple and reasonably robust . each of the two 2-metre-long arms could display seven positions , and the 4.6-metre-long cross bar connecting the two arms could display four different angles , for a total of 196 symbols ( 7×7×4 ) . night operation with lamps on the arms was unsuccessful . holzmann & pehrson , p . 213 to speed up transmission and to provide some semblance of security , a code book was developed for use with semaphore lines . the chappes ' corporation used a code that took 92 of the basic symbols two at a time to yield 8,464 coded words and phrases . the revised chappe system of 1795 provided not only a set of codes but also an operational protocol intended to maximize line throughput . symbols were transmitted in cycles of '' 2 steps and 3 movements . '' step 1 , movement 1 ( setup ) : the operator turned the indicator arms to align with the cross bar , forming a non-symbol , and then turned the cross bar into position for the next symbol . step 1 , movement 2 ( transmission ) : the operator positioned the indicator arms for current symbol and waited for the downline station to copy it . step 2 , movement 3 ( completion ) : the operator turned the cross bar to a vertical or horizontal position , indicating the end of a cycle . in this manner , each symbol could propagate down the line as quickly as operators could successfully copy it , with acknowledgement and flow control built into the protocol . a symbol sent from paris took 2 minutes to reach lille through 22 stations and 9 minutes to reach lyon through 50 stations . a rate of 2–3 symbols per minute was typical , with the higher figure being prone to errors . this corresponds to only 0.4–0.6 wpm , but with messages limited to those contained in the code book , this could be dramatically increased . holzmann & pehrson . history . after chappe 's initial line ( between paris and lille ) , the paris to strasbourg with 50 stations followed soon after ( 1798 ) . napoleon bonaparte made full use of the telegraph by obtaining speedy information on enemy movements . in 1801 he had abraham chappe build an extra-large station to transmit across the english channel in preparation for an invasion of britain . a pair of such stations were built on a test line over a comparable distance . the line to calais was extended to boulogne in anticipation and a new design station was briefly in operation at boulogne , but the invasion never happened . in 1812 , napoleon took up another design of abraham chappe for a mobile telegraph that could be taken with him on campaign . this was still in use in 1853 during the crimean war . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 71–73 the invention of the telegraph was followed by an enthusiasm concerning its potential to support direct democracy . for instance , based on rousseau 's argument that direct democracy was improbable in large constituencies , the french intellectual alexandre-théophile vandermonde commented : . united kingdom . in ireland , richard lovell edgeworth returned to his earlier work in 1794 , and proposed a telegraph there to warn against an anticipated french invasion ; however , the proposal was not implemented . lord george murray , stimulated by reports of the chappe semaphore , proposed a system of visual telegraphy to the british admiralty in 1795 . he employed rectangular framework towers with six five-foot-high octagonal shutters on horizontal axes that flipped between horizontal and vertical positions to signal . lieutenant watson 's telegraph mechanics ' magazine , volume 8 no . 222 , knight and lacey , 1828 , pages 294-299 the rev . mr gamble also proposed two distinct five-element systems in 1795 : one using five shutters , and one using five ten-foot poles . the british admiralty accepted murray 's system in september 1795 , and the first system was the 15 site chain from london to deal . f.b . wrixon ( 2005 ) , codes , ciphers , secrets and cryptic communication pp . 444-445 cover murray 's shutter telegraph in the u.k . , with codes . messages passed from london to deal in about sixty seconds , and sixty-five sites were in use by 1808 . chains of murray 's shutter telegraph stations were built along the following routes : london–deal and sheerness , london–great yarmouth , and london–portsmouth and plymouth . the line to plymouth was not completed until 4 july 1806 , and so could not be used to relay the news of trafalgar . the shutter stations were temporary wooden huts , and at the conclusion of the napoleonic wars they were no longer necessary , and were closed down by the admiralty in march 1816 . military signals from the south coast , john goodwin , 2000 following the battle of trafalgar , the news was transmitted to london by frigate to falmouth , from where the captain took the dispatches to london by coach along what became known as the trafalgar way ; the journey took 38 hours . this delay prompted the admiralty to investigate further . a replacement semaphore system was sought , and of the many ideas and devices put forward the admiralty chose the simpler semaphore system invented by sir home popham . a popham semaphore was a single fixed vertical 30 foot pole , with two movable 8 foot arms attached to the pole by horizontal pivots at their ends , one arm at the top of the pole , and the other arm at the middle of the pole . the signals of the popham semaphore were found to be much more visible than those of the murray shutter telegraph . popham 's 2-arm semaphore was modeled after the 3-arm depillon french semaphore . an experimental semaphore line between the admiralty and chatham was installed in july 1816 , and its success helped to confirm the choice . subsequently , the admiralty decided to establish a permanent link to portsmouth and built a chain of semaphore stations . work started in december 1820 with popham 's equipment replaced with another two-arm system invented by charles pasley . each of the arms of pasley 's system could take on one of eight positions and it thus had more codepoints than popham's . holzmann & pehrson , p . 196 in good conditions messages were sent from london to portsmouth in less than eight minutes . c . i . hamilton , the making of the modern admiralty : british naval policy-making , 1805–1927 , p . 92 , cambridge university press , 2011 . the line was operational from 1822 until 1847 , when the railway and electric telegraph provided a better means of communication . the semaphore line did not use the same locations as the shutter chain , but followed almost the same route with 15 stations : admiralty ( london ) , chelsea royal hospital , putney heath , coombe warren , claygate , chatley heath , pewley hill , witley , haste hill ( haslemere ) , woolbeding , harting , compton down , camp down , lumps fort ( southsea ) , and hmnb portsmouth . the semaphore tower at chatley heath , which replaced the netley heath station of the shutter telegraph , is currently being restored by the landmark trust as self-catering holiday accommodation . there will be public access on certain days when the restoration is complete . the board of the port of liverpool obtained a private act of parliament to construct a chain of popham optical semaphore stations from liverpool to holyhead in 1825 . faster than the wind , the liverpool to holyhead telegraph , frank large , an avid publication the system was designed and part-owned by barnard l . watson , a reserve marine officer , and came into service in 1827 . the line is possibly the only example of an optical telegraph built entirely for commercial purposes . it was used so that observers at holyhead could report incoming ships to the port of liverpool and trading could begin in the cargo being carried before the ship docked . the line was kept in operation until 1860 when a railway line and associated electrical telegraph made it redundant . holzmann & pehrson , p . 197 seija-riitta laakso , across the oceans : development of overseas business information transmission 1815-1875 , bod - books on demand , 2018 many of the prominences on which the towers were built ( 'telegraph hills ' ) are known as telegraph hill to this day . british empire . in ireland r.l . edgeworth was to develop an optical telegraph based on a triangle pointer , measuring up to 16 feet in height . following several years promoting his system , he was to get admiralty approval and engaged in its construction during 1803–1804 . the completed system ran from dublin to galway and was to act as a rapid warning system in case of french invasion of the west coast of ireland . despite its success in operation , the receding threat of french invasion was to see the system disestablished in 1804 . adrian james kirwan , ' r.l . edgeworth and optical telegraphy in ireland , c . 1790-1805 ' in proceedings of the royal irish academy ( 2017 ) . in canada , prince edward , duke of kent established the first semaphore line in north america . in operation by 1800 , it ran between the city of halifax and the town of annapolis in nova scotia , and across the bay of fundy to saint john and fredericton in new brunswick . in addition to providing information on approaching ships , the duke used the system to relay military commands , especially as they related to troop discipline . the duke had envisioned the line reaching as far as the british garrison at quebec city , but the many hills and coastal fog meant the towers needed to be placed relatively close together to ensure visibility . the labour needed to build and continually man so many stations taxed the already stretched-thin british military and there is doubt the new brunswick line was ever in operation . with the exception of the towers around halifax harbour , the system was abandoned shortly after the duke 's departure in august 1800 . the british military authorities began to consider installing a semaphore line in malta in the early 1840s . initially , it was planned that semaphore stations be established on the bell towers and domes of the island 's churches , but the religious authorities rejected the proposal . due to this , in 1848 new semaphore towers were constructed at għargħur and għaxaq on the main island , and another was built at ta ' kenuna on gozo . further stations were established at the governor 's palace , selmun palace and the giordan lighthouse . each station was manned by the royal engineers . in india , semaphore towers were introduced in 1810 . a series of towers were built between fort william , kolkata to chunar fort near varanasi.the towers in the plains were tall and those in the hills were tall , and were built at an interval of about . . iberia . in portugal , the british forces fighting peninsular war soon found that the portuguese army had already a very capable semaphore terrestrial system working since 1806 , giving the duke of wellington a decisive advantage in intelligence . the innovative portuguese telegraphs , designed by francisco ciera , a mathematician , were of 3 types : 3 shutters , 3 balls and 1 pointer/moveable arm ( the first for longer distances , the other two for short ) and with the advantage of all having only 6 significant positions . he also wrote the code book '' táboas telegráphicas '' , with 1554 entries from 1 to 6666 ( 1 to 6 , 11 to 16 , . 61 to 66 , 111 to 116 , . etc . ) , the same for the 3 systems . since early 1810 the network was operated by '' corpo telegráfico '' , the first portuguese military signal corps . in spain , the engineer agustín de betancourt developed his own system which was adopted by that state ; in 1798 he received a royal appointment , and the first stretch of line connecting madrid and aranjuez was in operation as of august 1800 . spain was spanned by an extensive semaphore telegraph network in the 1840s and 1850s . the three main semaphore lines radiated from madrid . the first ran north to irun on the atlantic coast at the french border . the second ran west to the mediterranean , then north along the coast through barcelona to the french border . the third ran south to cadiz on the atlantic coast . these lines served many other spanish cities , including : aranjuez , badajoz , burgos , castellon , ciudad real , córdoba , cuenca , gerona , pamplona , san sebastian , seville , tarancon , taragona , toledo , valladolid , valencia , vitoria and zaragoza . the rugged topography of the iberian peninsula that facilitated the design of semaphore lines conveying information from hilltop to hilltop , made it difficult to implement wire telegraph lines when that technology was introduced in the mid 19th century . the madrid-cadiz line was the first to be dismantled in 1855 , but other segments of the optical system continued to function until the end of the carlist wars in 1876 . aguilar pérez , antonio ; y martínez lorente , gaspar , la telegrafía óptica en cataluña , scripta nova , revista electrónica de geografía y ciencias sociales.vol . vii , núm . 137 , 15 de marzo de 2003 . universidad de barcelona . issn 1138-9788 . . others . once it had proved its success in france , the optical telegraph was imitated in many other countries , especially after it was used by napoleon to coordinate his empire and army . in most of these countries , the post office operated the semaphore lines . many national services adopted signalling systems different from the chappe system . for example , the uk and sweden adopted systems of shuttered panels ( in contradiction to the chappe brothers ' contention that angled rods are more visible ) . in some cases , new systems were adopted because they were thought to be improvements . but many countries pursued their own , often inferior , designs for reasons of national pride or not wanting to copy from rivals and enemies . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 179–180 in 1801 , the danish post office installed a semaphore line across the great belt strait , storebæltstelegrafen , between islands funen and zealand with stations at nyborg on funen , on the small island sprogø in the middle of the strait , and at korsør on zealand . it was in use until 1865 . the age of invention 1849–1920 , post & tele museum danmark , website visited on may 8 , 2010 . in the kingdom of prussia , frederick william iii ordered the construction of an experimental line in 1819 , but due to the procrastination of defence minister karl von hake , nothing happened until 1830 when a short three-station line between berlin and potsdam was built . the design was based on the swedish telegraph with the number of shutters increased to twelve . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 184–185 postrat carl pistor proposed instead a semaphore system based on watson 's design in england . an operational line of this design running berlin-magdeburg-dortmund-köln-bonn-koblenz was completed in 1833 . the line employed about 200 people , comparable to sweden , but no network ever developed and no more official lines were built . the line was decommissioned in 1849 in favour of an electrical line . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 185–187 although there were no more government sponsored official lines , there was some private enterprise . johann ludwig schmidt opened a commercial line from hamburg to cuxhaven in 1837 . in 1847 , schmidt opened a second line from bremen to bremerhaven . these lines were used for reporting the arrival of commercial ships . the two lines were later linked with three additional stations to create possibly the only private telegraph network in the optical telegraph era . holzmann & pehrson , p . 186 the telegraph inspector for this network was friedrich clemens gerke , who would later move to the hamburg-cuxhaven electrical telegraph line and develop what became the international morse code . huurdeman , p . 76 the hamburg line went out of use in 1850 , and the bremen line in 1852 . holzmann & pehrson , p . 187 in russia , tsar nicolas i inaugurated a line between moscow and warsaw of length in 1833 ; it needed 220 stations manned by 1,320 operators . the stations were noted to be unused and decaying in 1859 , so the line was probably abandoned long before this . in the united states , the first optical telegraph was built by jonathan grout in 1804 but ceased operation in 1807 . this line between martha 's vineyard with boston transmitted shipping news . an optical telegraph system linking philadelphia and the mouth of the delaware bay was in place by 1809 and had a similar purpose ; a second line to new york city was operational by 1834 , when its philadelphia terminus was moved to the tower of the merchants exchange . one of the principal hills in san francisco , california is also named '' telegraph hill '' , after the semaphore telegraph which was established there in 1849 to signal the arrival of ships into san francisco bay . first data networks . the optical telegraphs put in place at the turn of the 18th/19th centuries were the first examples of data networks . holzmann & pehrson , p . 214 chappe and edelcrantz independently invented many features that are now commonplace in modern networks , but were then revolutionary and essential to the smooth running of the systems . these features included control characters , routing , error control , flow control , message priority and symbol rate . edelcrantz documented the meaning and usage of all his control codes from the start in 1794 . the details of the early chappe system are not known precisely ; the first operating instructions to survive date to 1809 and the french system is not as fully explained as the swedish . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 210–216 some of the features of these systems are considered advanced in modern practice and have been recently reinvented . an example of this is the error control codepoint 707 in the edelcrantz code . this was used to request the repeat of a specified recent symbol . the 707 was followed by two symbols identifying the row and column in the current page of the logbook that it was required to repeat . this is an example of a selective repeat and is more efficient than the simple go back n strategy used on many modern networks . holzmann & pehrson , p . 216 this was a later addition ; both edelcrantz ( codepoint 272 ) , and chappe ( codepoint 2h6 ) the notation here follows that given in holzmann & pehrson ( p . 211 ) . the two digits represent , respectively the angle of the left and right indicators . vertical pointing up is '' 1 '' and each successive 45° from this position increments this number . '' h '' means the regulator is in the horizontal position and '' v '' the vertical . initially used only a simple '' erase last character '' for error control , taken directly from hooke 's 1684 proposal . holzmann & pehrson , pp . 214–215 routing in the french system was almost permanently fixed ; only paris and the station at the remote end of a line were allowed to initiate a message . the early swedish system was more flexible , having the ability to set up message connections between arbitrary stations . similar to modern networks , the initialisation request contained the identification of the requesting and target station . the request was acknowledged by the target station by sending the complement of the code received . this protocol is unique with no modern equivalent . this facility was removed from the codebook in the revision of 1808 . after this , only stockholm would normally initiate messages with other stations waiting to be polled . the prussian system required the coblenz station ( at the end of the line ) to send a '' no news '' message ( or a real message if there was one pending ) back to berlin on the hour , every hour . intermediate stations could only pass messages by replacing the '' no news '' message with their traffic . on arrival in berlin , the '' no news '' message was returned to coblenz with the same procedure . this can be considered an early example of a token passing system . this arrangement required accurate clock synchronisation at all the stations . a synchronisation signal was sent out from berlin for this purpose every three days . holzmann & pehrson , p . 188 another feature that would be considered advanced in a modern electronic system is the dynamic changing of transmission rates . edelcrantz had codepoints for faster ( 770 ) and slower ( 077 ) . chappe also had this feature . in popular culture . by the mid-19th century , the optical telegraph was well known enough to be referenced in popular works without special explanation . the chappe telegraph appeared in contemporary fiction and comic strips . in '' mister pencil '' ( 1831 ) , comic strip by rodolphe töpffer , a dog fallen on a chappe telegraph 's arm—and its master attempting to help get it down—provoke an international crisis by inadvertently transmitting disturbing messages . in '' lucien leuwen '' ( 1834 ) , stendhal pictures a power struggle between lucien leuwen and the prefect m . de séranville with the telegraph 's director m . lamorte . in chapter 60 ( '' the telegraph '' ) of alexandre dumas ' the count of monte cristo ( 1844 ) , the title character describes with fascination the semaphore line 's moving arms : '' i had at times seen rise at the end of a road , on a hillock and in the bright light of the sun , these black folding arms looking like the legs of an immense beetle . '' page 84 in le comte de monte-cristo tome iii he later bribes a semaphore operator to relay a false message in order to manipulate the french financial market . dumas also describes in details the functioning of a chappe telegraph line . in hector malot 's novel romain kalbris ( 1869 ) , one of the characters , a girl named dielette , describes her home in paris as '' . next to a church near which there was a clock tower . on top of the tower there were two large black arms , moving all day this way and that . i was told later that this was saint-eustache church and that these large black arms were a telegraph . '' see second paragraph in a fictional optical telegraph network forms a key part of the plot of the terry pratchett novels the fifth elephant , and especially going postal , where a telegraph system , known as '' the clacks '' and operated by the '' grand trunk company '' , stretches across the discworld . brief appearances are made in many of pratchett 's later novels . the '' clacks '' are described as being similar to real-life murray six-shutter telegraphs , although they are referred to as semaphore towers , and pratchett 's novels , in particular night watch , also describe manual semaphore being in use within the city watch , with the watch interacting with the semaphore towers . pratchett uses the clacks to introduce a number of jokes and references to the internet , including referring to letters sent via clacks as '' c-mail '' and describing groups of saboteurs as '' crackers '' .