Three Colours: Blue

plot . julie ( juliette binoche ) , wife of the famous composer patrice de courcy , must cope with the death of her husband and daughter in an automobile accident she herself survives . while recovering in hospital , julie attempts suicide by overdose , but can not swallow the pills . after being released from hospital , julie , who it is suggested wrote ( or helped to write ) much of her husband 's famous pieces , destroys what is left behind of them . calling olivier ( benoît régent ) , an unmarried collaborator of her husband 's who has always admired her , she spends a night with him and says goodbye . emptying the family house and putting it up for sale , she takes an apartment in paris near rue mouffetard without telling anyone , her only memento being a mobile of blue beads that the viewer assumes belonged to her daughter . julie disassociates herself from all past memories and distances herself from former friendships , even being no longer recognised by her mother , who suffers from alzheimer 's disease . she also reclaims and destroys the unfinished score for her late husband 's last commissioned work—a piece celebrating european unity following the end of the cold war . excerpts of its music , however , haunt her throughout the film . despite her desire to live anonymously and alone , life in paris forces julie to confront elements of her past that she would rather not face . a boy who saw the accident seeks her out to give her a christian cross he found by the car and to repeat her husband 's last words , the punchline of an indelicate joke . she reluctantly befriends an exotic dancer named lucille ( charlotte véry ) who is having an affair with one of the neighbors and helps her when she needs moral support . then on tv she sees olivier in an interview , announcing that he will try to complete patrice 's commission and showing pictures of patrice with an attractive young woman . while trying both to stop olivier from completing the score and to find out who her husband 's mistress was , she becomes more engaged in her former life . she tracks down sandrine ( florence pernel ) , patrice 's lover , and finds out that she is carrying his child ; julie arranges for her to have her husband 's house , not yet sold , and recognition of his paternity for the child . this prompts her to restart her relationship with olivier and to collaborate with him after all . in the final sequence , part of their completed unity of europe piece is played ( which features choir and a solo soprano singing in greek the praise of divine love in saint paul 's first letter to the corinthians ) and images are seen of all the people julie has affected by her actions . the final image is of julie , crying—the second time she does so in the film . kieślowski , krzysztof , and krzysztof piesiewicz . three colours trilogy : blue , white , red . translated by danusia stok . london : faber and faber , 1998 . . cast . juliette binoche as julie de courcy ( née vignon ) benoît régent as olivier benôit florence pernel as sandrine charlotte véry as lucille hélène vincent as the journalist philippe volter as the real estate agent emmanuelle riva as madame vignon , julie 's mother yann trégouët as antoine julie delpy as dominique ( cameo ) zbigniew zamachowski as karol karol ( cameo ) . production . blue was an international co-production between the french companies ced productions , eurimages , france 3 cinéma , and mk2 productions , the swiss company cab productions and the polish company studio filmowe tor . like the other films in the trilogy , blue makes frequent visual allusions to its title : numerous scenes are shot with blue filters or blue lighting , and many objects are blue . when julie thinks about the musical score that she has tried to destroy , blue light overwhelms the screen . the film also includes several references to the colours of the tricolor that inspired kieślowski 's trilogy : several scenes are dominated by red light , and in one scene , children dressed in white bathing suits with red floaters jump into the blue swimming pool . another scene features a link with the next film in the trilogy : while spotting the lawyer sandrine , her husband 's mistress , julie is seen entering a courtroom where karol , the polish main character of white , is being divorced by dominique , his estranged french wife . analysis . music plays an intricate element of the plot in that it illustrates julie 's efforts to be isolated from everything but can not do it , much as music can not be made with a single note but through harmony with all others and how everyone has ( or represents ) a different kind of music , such as the union of julie/patrice had a special tone , which is quite different and more raw with the union of julie/olivier . kieślowski , krzysztof . kieślowski on kieślowski . edited by danusia stok . london : faber and faber , 1998 , p . 224 . insdorf , annette . double lives , second chances : the cinema of krzysztof kieślowski . new york : hyperion , 1999 , p . 140 . another aspect in the film are the fade-outs , which are traditionally used in movies to represent time passing or to conclude a certain scene , but here instead bring the viewer back to the point in time when the fade-out began . the occasional fade-outs and fade-ins to julie 's character are used to represent an extremely subjective point of view . according to kieślowski , '' at a certain moment , time really does pass for julie while at the same time , it stands still . not only does her music come back to haunt her at a certain point , but time stands still for a moment . '' . reception . three colours : blue received widespread acclaim from film critics . on review aggregator rotten tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 98 % based on 46 reviews , with an average rating of 8.5/10 . the website 's critical consensus reads , '' three colors : blue contains some of director/co-writer krzysztof kieslowski 's most visually arresting , emotionally resonant work—and boasts an outstanding performance from juliette binoche in the bargain . '' on metacritic , another review aggregator , the film has a weighted average score of 85 out of 100 , indicating '' universal acclaim '' . marjorie baumgarten of the austin chronicle said : blue is a film that engages the mind , challenges the senses , implores a resolution , and tells , with aesthetic grace and formal elegance , a good story and a political allegory . baumgarten , marjorie . '' calendar : film listings - blue '' , the austin chronicle , march 18 , 1994 . accessed may 21 , 2007 . evangeline spachis of the girlonfilm states that : blue is a visual and arousing cinematic experience , one that deserves repeated and in-depth viewings . derek malcolm of the guardian wrote : blue remains an intense and moving tribute to the woman at its centre who , in coming back from tragedy , almost refuses , but ultimately accepts the only real love that 's on offer . . year-end lists . 9th & nbsp ; – james berardinelli , reelviews . soundtrack . awards and recognition . venice film festival , 1993 : golden lion , volpi cup for best actress ( juliette binoche ) , best cinematography ( sławomir idziak ) césar award , 1993 : best actress ( juliette binoche ) , best sound , best film editing golden globe award : best actress - motion picture drama ( juliette binoche , nominated ) goya awards ( spain 's academy awards ) : best european film guldbagge awards : best foreign film ( nominated ) . references . external links . three colors : a hymn to european cinema an essay by colin maccabe at the criterion collection blue : bare necessities an essay by nick james at the criterion collection