Flight attendant

cabin air quality . poor cabin air quality is a subject of ongoing study in relation to symptoms such as headache , fatigue , fever , and respiratory difficulties among many others that have been reported by flight attendants , particularly on long-haul routes . & nbsp ; there is also much concern regarding the transmission of infection , particularly tuberculosis . an open question remains whether & nbsp ; these complaints are due to poor cabin air quality or to other factors inherent in flights , such as lowered barometric pressure , hypoxia , low humidity , etc . other chemical contaminants found in the cabin may include engine leakages , pesticides and flame retardants , which contain compounds that may act as hormone disruptors and increase the risk of some cancers . . sleep disruption . flight attendants often have disrupted sleep cycles . they are more likely to have disruptions in their sleep patterns because they may work at night , cross time zones , and have irregular schedules . there is some evidence linking sleep disruptions to increased cancer risk . flight attendants may also have different lifestyle behaviours related to diet , physical activity , and health care than the general population which could affect overall health and cancer risk . . secondhand tobacco smoke . many of the flight attendants working today were exposed to second-hand in-flight smoke until 1998 with partial smoking bans enacted in 1988 . the long-term effects of this historical passive smoking exposure have not been well characterized . . sexual harassment . flight attendants are exposed to verbal and sexual harassment . studies in the united states and australia have found that the vast majority ( two-thirds ) of flight attendants experience sexual harassment in the course of their careers , including sexual assault , inappropriate touching and sexual comments both by colleagues and passengers . flight attendants describe the verbal sexual harassment as comments that are “ nasty , unwanted , lewd , crude , inappropriate , uncomfortable , sexual , suggestive , and dirty . ” they also report being subjected to passengers ’ explicit sexual fantasies , propositions , request for sexual “ favours ” and pornographic videos and pictures . the studies also found that 70 % of flight attendants who experience sexual harassment on the job '' chose not to report the incident because they did not think it would be dealt with appropriately or they were concerned reporting it would make the situation worse '' and '' their airline was not doing enough to put a stop to harassment '' , and that '' they have not noticed any employer efforts over the past year to address sexual harassment at work . '' . emotional labour . the concept of emotional labor as the process of managing feelings and expressions to fulfil the emotional requirements of a job through a publicly visible facial and bodily display within the workplace ( as opposed to the concept of emotion work , i.e . the management of one 's feelings in private life ) was first established and linked to the profession of flight attendants by professor emirita of sociology arlie hochschild , in her book , the managed heart . according to hochschild , flight attendants do emotional labour to enhance the status of the customer and entice further sales by their friendliness , and support this effort by evoking feelings that make the '' nice '' display seem natural . with regard to how flight attendants are supposed to use their smile in the job , the author writes : '' in the flight attendant ’ s work , smiling is separated from its usual function , which is to express a personal feeling , and attached to another one—expressing a company feeling . the company exhorts them to smile more , and “ more sincerely , ” at an increasing number of passengers . the workers respond to the speed-up with a slowdown : they smile less broadly , with a quick release and no sparkle in the eyes , thus dimming the company ’ s message to the people . it is a war of smiles . '' hochschild notes that corporate logic in the airline industry & nbsp ; generates a series of links between competition , market expansion , advertising , heightened passenger expectations about rights to display , and company demands for acting ; and when conditions allow this logic to work , private use of emotional exchange gives way to corporate use of emotional exchange . hochschild also writes of how flight attendants are trained to control passengers ' feelings during times of turbulence and dangerous situations while suppressing their own fear or anxiety . the emotional labor performed by flight attendants and cross-cultural aspects of it have since been actively studied and are a topic of ongoing research . . in advertising . in the 1960s and 1970s , many airlines began advertising the attractiveness and friendliness of their stewardesses . national airlines began a '' fly me '' ; campaign using attractive female flight attendants with taglines such as '' i 'm lorraine . fly me to orlando . '' ( a low budget 1973 film about three flight attendants , fly me , starring lenore kasdorf , was based on the ad campaign . ) braniff international airways presented a campaign known as the '' air strip '' with similarly attractive young female flight attendant changing uniforms mid-flight . in the united states , many airlines had a policy such that only unmarried women could be flight attendants , as well as a mandatory retirement age of 32 for stewardesses because of the belief women would be less appealing and attractive after this age . in 1968 , the eeoc declared age restrictions on flight attendants ’ employment to be illegal sex discrimination under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 . flight attendant roz hanby became a minor celebrity when she became the face of british airways in their '' fly the flag '' advertising campaign over a 7-year period in the 1980s . singapore airlines is currently one of the few airlines still choosing to use the image of their female flight attendants , known as singapore girls , in their advertising material . however , this is starting to be phased out , in favor of advertising which emphasises the modernity of their fleet . unions . flight attendant unions were formed , beginning at united airlines in the 1940s , to negotiate improvements in pay , benefits and working conditions . from skygirl to flight attendant , women and the making of a union by georgia panter nielsen , ilr press/cornell , ithaca , new york ( 1982 ) those unions would later challenge what they perceived as sexism stereotypes and unfair work practices such as age limits , size limits , limitations on marriage , and prohibition of pregnancy . many of these limitations have been lifted by judicial mandates . the largest flight attendants ' union is the association of flight attendants , representing nearly 60,000 flight attendants at 19 airlines within the us . the association of professional flight attendants represents the flight attendants of american airlines , the world 's largest carrier . apfa is the largest independent flight attendant union in the world . in the uk , cabin crew can be represented by either cabin crew '89 , or the much larger and more powerful transport and general workers ' union . in australia , flight attendants are represented by the flight attendants ' association of australia ( faaa ) . there are two divisions : one for international crews ( long-haul ) and one for domestic crews ( short-haul ) . in new zealand , flight attendants can be represented by either the flight attendants and related services association ( farsa ) or by the engineering , printing and manufacturing union ( epmu ) . in canada , flight attendants are represented by either the canadian union of public employees ( cupe ) or by the canadian flight attendants union ( cfau ) . discrimination . originally female flight attendants were required to be single upon hiring , and were fired if they got married , exceeded weight regulations , or reached age 32 or 35 depending on the airline . in the 1970s the group stewardesses for women 's rights protested sexist advertising and company discrimination , and brought many cases to court . in 1964 united states president lyndon b . johnson signed the civil rights act into law which prohibited sex discrimination and led to the creation of the equal employment opportunity commission in 1968 . the eeoc ruled that sex was not a bona fide occupational requirement to be a flight attendant . for stewardesses , this meant that they had an official governing body to report offences to and allowed them to successfully challenge age ceiling and marriage bans in relation to their effectiveness as employees . in 1968 , the eeoc declared age restrictions on flight attendants ’ employment to be illegal sex discrimination under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 . the restriction of hiring only women was lifted at all airlines in 1971 due to the decisive court case of diaz vs . pan am . the no-marriage rule was eliminated throughout the us airline industry by the 1980s . the last such broad categorical discrimination , the weight restrictions , were relaxed in the 1990s through litigation and negotiations . by the end of the 1970s , the term stewardess had generally been replaced by the gender-neutral alternative flight attendant . more recently the term cabin crew or cabin staff has begun to replace 'flight attendants ' in some parts of the world , because of the term 's recognition of their role as members of the crew . roles in emergencies . actions of flight attendants in emergencies have long been credited in saving lives ; in the united states , the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) and other aviation authorities view flight attendants as essential for safety , and are thus usually required on part 121 aircraft operations . studies , some done in light of british airtours flight 28m , have concluded that assertive cabin crew are essential for the rapid evacuation of aeroplanes . notable examples of cabin crew actions include : . september 11 , 2001 . the role of flight attendants received heightened prominence after the september 11 attacks when flight attendants ( such as sandra w . bradshaw and ceecee lyles of united airlines flight 93 ; robert fangman of united airlines flight 175 ; renee may of american airlines flight 77 ; and betty ong and madeline amy sweeney of american airlines flight 11 ) actively attempted to protect passengers from assault , and also provided vital information to air traffic controllers on the hijackings , as did many other passengers . in the wake of these attacks , many flight attendants at major airlines were laid off because of decreased passenger loads . . other emergencies . in april 1936 , flight attendant nellie granger aided survivors after the crash of twa flight 1 , then walked through a snowstorm to find help , before returning to the crash scene . senior purser neerja bhanot saved the lives of passengers and crew when pan am flight 73 was hijacked . she was killed while protecting children from the terrorists . after her death she received the special courage award from the united states department of justice and india 's highest civilian honor for bravery , the ashoka chakra ( military decoration ) . naila nazir , pakistani flight attendant ( employee of pakistan international airlines ) who received 1985 's flight safety foundation ( fsf ) heroism award for her brave handling of tense and dangerous situation during 13 days of flight pk-326 hijacking ordeal . british airtours flight 28m , the two forward flight attendants , arthur bradbury and joanna toff , repeatedly crawled into the smoke filled and burning cabin to drag a number of passengers to safety , and were subsequently awarded the queen 's gallantry medal . the two rear flight attendants , sharon ford and jacqui ubanski , who opened the rear doors but were overwhelmed by fire and smoke were awarded the same medal posthumously . scandinavian airlines flight 751 , when cabin crew recognised an emergency landing was imminent and commanded the passengers to '' bend down & nbsp ; . hold your knees '' to adopt the brace position . atlantic southeast airlines flight 529 , whose sole flight attendant , robin fech , provided emergency briefings , brace and evacuation commands to the passengers when the embraer emb 120 brasilia aircraft sustained serious damage to one of its engines and crash landed . the ntsb accident report commended '' the exemplary manner in which the flight attendant briefed the passengers and handled the emergency '' . boac flight 712 , where a flight attendant , barbara jane harrison died saving passengers from an on-board fire and was posthumously awarded the george cross . british airways flight 5390 , in which a flight attendant was able to prevent a pilot from being lost through a cockpit window that had failed . southern airways flight 242 , on which the cabin crew provided safety briefings to their passengers , and on their own initiative , warned passengers of the impending crash by commanding passengers to adopt the brace position . at least one flight attendant is known to have assisted in rescuing trapped passengers . air florida flight 90 , in which kelly duncan , the lone surviving flight attendant , passed the only life vest she could find to another passenger . she is recognised in the ntsb report for this '' unselfish act . '' twa flight attendant uli derickson who protected passengers during the twa flight 847 hijacking by assisting with negotiation efforts . twa flight 843 , when a twa lockheed l-1011 aircraft crashed after an aborted takeoff in 1992 . the aircraft was destroyed by fire . nine flight attendants , along with five off-duty flight attendants , evacuated all 292 persons on board without loss of life . the ntsb in their after accident reported noted , '' the performance of the flight attendants during the emergency was exceptional and probably contributed to the success of the emergency evacuation . '' on british airways flight 2069 , cabin crew stopped the plane from being crashed by a mentally ill passenger . crew on 2001 shoe bomb plot prevented shoe bomber richard colvin reid from blowing up the plane . flight attendants on qantas flight 1737 prevented their plane from being hijacked by a passenger with mental health issues . two of them were taken to hospital with stab wounds . aloha airlines flight 243 suffered a decompression which tore an section of fuselage away from the plane . the only fatality was flight attendant c.b . lansing who was blown out of the airplane . flight attendant michelle honda was thrown violently to the floor during the decompression but , despite her injuries , crawled up and down the aisle reassuring passengers . flight attendants on air canada flight 797 ( sergio benetti , judi davidson , laura kayama ) used procedures which were not specifically taught in training such as moving passengers to the front of the aircraft to move them away from the fire and smoke , and passing out towels for passengers to cover their nose and mouths with while the cabin was filling with smoke . chief flight attendant sergio benetti was the first to open the front door of the aircraft , and escaped out that way , leaving all passengers and other crew behind . usair flight attendant richard demary helped to evacuate surviving passengers and another crew member from the burning wreckage of usair flight 1016 , which crashed during a go-around in adverse weather conditions after a failed landing attempt at charlotte douglas international airport . flight attendants on us airways flight 1549 successfully evacuated all passengers from the aircraft within 90 seconds despite the fact that the rear was rapidly filling with water . nine cabin crew members aboard air france flight 358 successfully evacuated the aircraft within 90 seconds after the a340-300 overran a runway at toronto pearson international airport . the ntsb stated that the actions of the cabin crew contributed to the 100 % survival rate . the flight attendants of philippine airlines flight 434 kept the passengers calm after a bomb exploded during the flight from cebu to tokyo . though one passenger was killed during the explosion , they took care of the injured passengers . some exception include air canada flight 797 , where the investigative board found that the flight attendant in charge 's '' misleading '' reports about the fire '' influenced the captain 's decision to delay the initiation of a descent '' and that such '' delay increased the time for the fire to propagate and the time that passengers were exposed to the toxic environment before the airplane could be evacuated . '' the accident killed 23 passengers ; none of the flight attendants sustained any injuries . chief flight attendant sergio benetti was the first to open the front door of the aircraft , and escaped out that way , leaving all passengers and other crew behind . in popular culture . 1933 : air hostess portrays a love story about a flight attendant ( evalyn knapp ) and a pilot ( james murray ) . 1947 : the vicki barr : flight stewardess book series , in which vicki 's career '' brings her glamorous friends , exciting adventures , loyal roommates and dates with a hand some young pilot and an up-and-coming reporter '' , sells well in the us . 1950 : in batman 62 ( december/january ) , it is revealed that catwoman is an amnesiac flight attendant who had turned to crime after suffering a prior blow to the head during a plane crash she survived . the name of the airline she worked for was speed airlines . 1951 : three guys named mike is a film about flight attendant marcy ( jane wyman ) who has to choose between three admirers and becomes an advertising icon . 1955 : out of the clouds , british drama film directed by basil dearden , and starring anthony steel , robert beatty and james robertson justice . an ealing studios production , the film is composed of small stories dealing with the passengers and crew on a day at london airport ( the name of heathrow airport 1946–1966 ) . 1956 : julie , starring doris day may be the first film to feature a flight attendant piloting a plane to safety , later used in airport 1975 ( 1975 ) and parodied in airplane ! ( 1980 ) . 1959 : an angel on wheels , a german comedy with romy schneider as a guardian angel who disguises herself as a flight attendant . 1963 : come fly with me features dolores hart , pamela tiffin and lois nettleton as air stewardesses who find romance in this adaptation of bernard glemser 's 1960 novel , '' girl on a wing '' . 1965 : boeing boeing , based on a popular play , stars tony curtis as an american journalist in paris who is simultaneously engaged to three different flight attendants . 1965 : mickey rooney has a major role as a purser in the movie 24 hours to kill . it was filmed in lebanon using a comet jetliner . 1967 : memoir coffee , tea or me ? , by trudy baker and rachel jones recounts the romantic adventures of two flight attendants . in the late sixties the sexploitation film industry began producing erotic comedies and dramas based on the '' swinging stewardess '' fantasy image . this '' stewardess-sploitation '' cycle includes : bedroom stewardesses ( germany , 1968 ) , the stewardesses ( 1969 ) , stewardesses report ( switzerland , 1971 ) , the air stewardess ( greece , 1971 ) , swedish fly girls ( denmark , 1971 ) , fly me ( 1973 ) , the naughty stewardesses ( 1974 ) , blazing stewardesses ( 1975 ) , and stewardess school ( 1986 ) . 1978-1979 : flying high , short-lived comedy-drama tv series starring connie sellecca about the lives of three attractive flight attendants . 1985 : '' waitress in the sky '' , a derisive song about a stewardess , appeared on the critically praised album tim by the replacements . 1996 : australian comedian caroline reid creates the character '' pam ann '' to satirise the stereotypical aspects of the job of the female flight attendant . 1997 : jackie brown , a quentin tarantino directed crime drama starring pam grier as a flight attendant . 1997 : turbulence , action-thriller with lauren holly as a flight attendant . 2001 - 2008 , james wysong wrote a series of popular books about his life as a flight attendant under the '' wryly chosen '' penname , a . frank steward . 2003 : view from the top - romantic comedy starring gwyneth paltrow as an aspiring flight attendant . 2003 : '' toxic '' , music video for britney spears hit single features spears as a sexy stewardess in a highly stylized vintage pan am-style blue uniform . 2003 : mile high , british television series features a group of flight attendants working for the fictitious low-cost carrier '' fresh ! '' . 2004 : the single air hostess by busted reaches no . 2 in the uk singles chart . 2006 : attention please , japanese television drama about the training of flight attendants for japan airlines 2007 : british pop group scooch , comes 22nd in the eurovision song contest 2007 with the song '' flying the flag ( for you ) '' , featuring flight attendants and including a liberal amount of sexual innuendo . 2008 : happy flight , which is about a copilot and flight attendant on an ana flight to hawaii . schilling , mark . '' airplane flick tells only half the story . '' the japan times . friday 14 november 2008 . retrieved on 19 february 2010 . 2011-2012 : pan am , tv series period-piece drama set in 1963-1964 about the lives of pan american world airways stewardesses starring christina ricci and margot robbie . 2014 : take off ! with the savvy stews premieres on destination america hosted by two flight attendants bobby laurie and gailen david and profiling flight attendant layovers around the world . 2016 : neerja an indian movie about neerja bhanot , head flight attendant at the pan am flight 73 , who saved the life of her crew and passenger and was awarded ashoka chakra ( military decoration ) . notable flight attendants . ron akana served the second longest career as a flight attendant . from 1949 , up until his retirement in 2012 , ron worked for united airlines cabin crew for 63 years , retiring at the age of 84 . ant , tv personality celebrity fit club former american airlines flight attendant kathy augustine , a flight attendant prior to entering nevada politics rico barrera of pinoy big brother philippines season 1 and an actor who continues to fly with seair alex best , ex-wife of george best neerja bhanot , was a flight attendant for pan am airlines , based in bombay , india , who died while saving passengers from terrorists on board the hijacked pan am flight 73 on september 5 , 1986 . she received india 's highest civilian award for bravery , the ashoka chakra . regina bird , big brother australia 2003 winner deborah burlingame , sister of charles '' chic '' burlingame iii , pilot of hijacked american airlines flight 77 nh . dini , indonesian novelist and mother of french director pierre coffin . worked as a garuda indonesia flight attendant during her early life betty ong , was a flight attendant on board american airlines flight 11 the first of four hijacked aircraft 's on the morning of september 11 , 2001 . madeline amy sweeney , was also a flight attendant on board flight 11 , sweeney was the first to describe the hijackers , and their actions . beverly lynn burns , american airlines stewardess class of 1971 ; first woman boeing 747 captain in the world july 1984 terence cao , singaporean actor ellen church , first female flight attendant in history uli derickson , on duty during the twa flight 847 hijacking brian dowling , uk big brother 2001 winner gaëtan dugas , alleged patient zero for acquired immune deficiency syndrome ruth carol taylor , first verified african-american stewardess , hired by mohawk airlines in 1958 aviation : another first time , january 6 , 1958 roz hanby , face of the british airways '' fly the flag '' campaign ( 1970s/1980s ) barbara jane harrison , posthumously awarded the george cross for bravery jennifer hosten , 1970 miss world winner patricia ireland , former president of the national organization for women kris jenner , was a flight attendant , for a year , before marrying robert kardashian annita keating , dutch-born estranged wife of former australian prime minister paul keating , flew with klm and alitalia prior to her marriage . sonija kwok , 1999 miss hong kong , now a popular artist with tvb evangeline lilly , canadian actress , who coincidentally played a plane crash survivor on lost , worked for royal aviation . ziana zain , malaysian international artist , model , actress deltalina , american flight attendant famous for her finger wag in delta air lines ' in-flight safety video , which became a hit on youtube . kate linder , actress on the young and the restless , who continues to fly with united airlines on weekends when not filming . catherine maunoury , french winner of the aerobatics world championship in 1988 and 2000 pamela bianca manalo , a flight attendant for philippine airlines before she was crowned miss philippines-universe in 2009 lucy mcbath , a flight attendant for delta before becoming an activist and the congresswoman for georgia 's 6th congressional district carole middleton , mother of catherine , duchess of cambridge avis miller , playboy playmate miss november 1970 jane mcgrath , co-founder of the mcgrath foundation for breast cancer . nyla murphy , lawyer , real estate broker , member of the wyoming house of representatives naila nazir , pakistani air hostess who received 1985 's flight safety foundation ( fsf ) heroism award for bravely handling a tense and dangerous situation during the flight pk-326 hijacking froso papaharalambous , singer iris peterson , flew for united airlines from 1946 until 2007 , retiring at the age of 85 lyudmila putina , former wife of russian president vladimir putin , was a flight attendant early in her career . doria ragland , social worker , yoga instructor , and mother of meghan , duchess of sussex linda louise rowley , former beauty queen who held the title miss alaska usa lee seung-yeon , korean actress/talkshow host jóhanna sigurðardóttir , icelandic airlines , former prime minister of iceland and first openly lgbt head of government ellen simonetti , first flight attendant to be fired for blogging tania soni , beauty pageant winner silver tree , writer and producer sharon luk , 2005 miss hong kong first runner-up , artist with tvb skye chan , 2008 miss hong kong first runner-up and miss world 2008 contestant , artist with tvb gabriele von lutzau ( born gabriele dillmann ) was a flight attendant on hijacked lufthansa flight 181 and was credited for her loyalty to the passengers and crew . in the aftermath , she was named '' der engel von mogadischu '' ( the angel of mogadishu ) vesna vulović , guinness world record holder for surviving the highest fall without a parachute julie woodson , playboy playmate miss april 1973 queen silvia of sweden , was briefly a flight attendant before marrying king carl xvi gustaf of sweden . sara netanyahu , wife of israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu worked as an el al flight attendant . on august 9 , 2010 , steven slater gained immediate global fame when he claimed he was injured by the luggage of a passenger whom he had confronted on an arriving jetblue flight at new york 's jfk airport for disregarding his order to remain seated . passengers dispute his account of this confrontation . as the incident continued , he cursed at the passengers over the aircraft 's public address system , grabbed a beer , opened the evacuation slide and left the aircraft . he was later arrested and charged with several crimes . on august 30 , 2014 , robert reardon of delta air lines retired at the age of 90 after having eclipsed ron akana of united airlines as the world 's longest serving flight attendant and also having been the world 's oldest active flight attendant . reardon said the timing of his retirement was '' not of his choosing . '' . gallery . file : female flight attendant of air dolomiti.jpg air dolomiti flight attendant file : sas dc-9 , interior of cabin.jpg scandinavian airlines flight attendants in the 1960s file : sandra force1.png southwest airlines flight attendant file : hostess der swissair 1953.jpg swissair flight attendant , 1953 file : a wizz air airbus a320 típusú repülőgépének fedélzete légiutas-kísérővel.jpg wizz air flight attendant file : emirates flight attendant in the airbus a380 bar.jpg emirates flight attendant in the a380 bar for emirates . see also . aircrew , the entire staff operating in-flight ground crew . references . further reading . tiemeyer , phil ( 2013 ) . plane queer : labor , sexuality , and aids in the history of male flight attendants . berkeley , ca : university of california press . . external links . history of flight attendant review from missjeia.com