Wetzlar

oberbürgermeister . . coat of arms . wetzlar 's civic coat of arms might heraldically be described thus : in gules a spreadeagle sable armed , langued and crowned or , over its wing dexter a cross pattée argent . the black imperial eagle on a red background and with a golden crown stands for the town 's former imperial immediacy as a free imperial city ( see history ) . the silver cross stands for the former imperial city 's right to mint coins . the arms are almost unchanged from those borne in the 12th century . a new version of the coat of arms was to have been introduced in 2003 , but it did not catch on . in the end , the '' old '' arms were kept . transport . ; motorways : wetzlar lies on the a45 ( sauerland-line dortmund – aschaffenburg ) with the junctions wetzlarer kreuz wetzlar cross ( to a480 to wetzlar-north , asslar and wetzlar-blasbach ) , wetzlar-ost wetzlar-east ( to b49 in direction city centre ) and wetzlar-süd wetzlar-south ( into the southern quarters münchholzhausen and dutenhofen ) . the motorway a480 should actually lead from the luxembourg border over trier through the westerwald up to the hattenbacher dreieck ( hattenbach triangle to the a7 ) . this distance was planned as a48 . because of high costs it was never completely realized . now the b49 are to take up the traffic . today the part of the a48 between gießen and wetzlar is called a480 and leads only from the departure wetzlar-north/asslar up to the wetzlarer cross and beyond that up to the present motorway end with the improvised exit after wetzlar-blasbach . some kilometres to the northeast of gießen the part removed so far continues and leads from heuchelheim to the reiskirchener dreieck reiskirchen triangle at the a5 . ; federal highways : the following federal highways lead through the city : b49 ( trier – wetzlar – alsfeld ) in direction east–west and b277 ( siegen-dillenburg-wetzlar ) as north-south connection . the b277a is rather a bypass road , it connects asslar with wetzlar-dalheim . between wetzlar and limburg ( b49 ) the federal route is currently being expanded from one lane to two in each direction . ; railways : wetzlar lies on the railroad lines frankfurt am main – siegen – cologne and gießen – limburg – koblenz , which meet at wetzlar station and are operated by regionalbahn and regionalexpress-trains . since 2009 every morning and evening a eurocity stops on its way to klagenfurt or rather to siegen . beside the station wetzlar , a further station exists in dutenhofen . the earlier station in wetzlar-garbenheim was closed when this route to wetzlar was shut down . the freight station has become smaller ; since february 2007 , railion operates freight trains for central hesse . larger cities , which are directly reachable from wetzlar are : aachen , cologne , koblenz , frankfurt am main , munich , salzburg , siegen and stuttgart . ; public transport : the city has a well organised urban bus network with twelve lines , all connecting to the central bus station ( zob ) , in addition various lines handle the overland traffic into the surrounding countryside of wetzlar . in the late evening hours the night bus line 007 , the so-called discobus , serves nearly all parts of the city . on all lines , the rmv pricing applies . additionally the citybus links the old town for 50c , weekdays from 10:00 to 19:00 and on workdays to 15:00 with the station and the shopping centre forum wetzlar every 20 minutes . ; airports : the distance to frankfurt airport is about , to the regional airport siegen approx . economy and business . retailing . according to the figures of the gfk wetzlar is one of the most attractive commercial locations in germany . the city has a high centrality coefficient and a retail turnover of around eur 10,000 per inhabitant . in germany it takes third place among all cities with over 50,000 inhabitants . hanno bender und marcelo crescenti in der handel 06/2008 : die besten standorte . accessed 4 june 2009 . wetzlar has two large shopping centres , of those the forum wetzlar is the largest in central hesse ( mittelhessen ) . it has around 110 shops and accommodates a large multi-storey car park of 1700 places . retail trade is located mainly in the areas bahnhofsstraße , karl-kellner-ring and the historic old town . in the bahnhofstraße , the karl-kellner-ring and in the two shopping centres where almost all goods are available . enterprises . the city is home to some internationally active and well known enterprises . the buderus company was created in the year 1731 and is one of the oldest still existing ( large ) enterprises . as bbt thermotechnik , now part of the bosch group , buderus was for many decades one of the largest employers in the central hessian area with more than 10,000 persons employed in wetzlar alone ( worldwide over 16,000 ) , working in the areas casting ( with cement ) , high-grade steel and heating technologies . economic changes , repeated shifts of the stock majority as well as close-downs and sales of various divisions have strongly changed the company in the meantime . however , it ranks among the largest enterprises in hesse . wetzlar is apart from jena and oberkochen a german centre for optics as well as the most important german location for the precision engineering industry . the manufactured products have gained worldwide reputation . one of the most important companies in the area of microscopy is leica microsystems ( formerly known as ernst leitz ) , which in its peak times employed over 7000 people in the city . small format ( 35 & nbsp ; mm ) photography was invented in wetzlar , and leica cameras are well known for their excellent quality . in addition there are cameras of the companies leidolf and minox , binoculars and telescopes made by the company hensoldt ag ( now carl zeiss ) , part of the zeiss group ( over 2,000 people employed in peak times ) . other well-known firms are philips ( with about 1,200 employed at times ) or siemens ag and siemens vdo , since 2007 continental ag or the sancura bkk , a supraregional health insurance company , which is combined with the taunus bkk . the business park spilburg , former barracks , became home to a number of innovative enterprises , particularly in the area of optics/precision mechanics , information technology and services . additionally , areas in the westend as well as the hörnsheimer eck and the dillfeld are available for new businesses to set up . education system . wetzlar offers a wide variety of educational paths students can choose from . . nurseries . traditionally a child ’ s education starts in one of wetzlar ’ s 18 nurseries . there are public and private nurseries and religiously influenced ones . children will spend between one to four years in one of these day cares , until they move on to an elementary school . elementary school . wetzlar has around 12 elementary schools . this includes private schools and schools , who are dedicated to special needs children . most elementary schools offer an afterschool day care program for students , whos ’ parents are at work longer than the school day . in addition to these programs , the city has public day care facilities that provide afterschool care . the afterschool program consists of warm meals , tutors who help with homework and playtime . kita marienheim is an example . after spending four years in elementary school , students are off to middle school . secondary school . the middle ( secondary ) school system in germany is quite extravagant , wetzlar being no exception . there are three branches of middle school . the gymnasium ( comparable to a-levels ) , realschule ( normal secondary school ) and hauptschule ( lowest secondary school ) . wetzlar has four secondary schools . the august-bebel-gesamtschule and the eichendorfschule are so-called gesamtschulen . they offer all three branches of secondary school . the freiherr-vom-stein schule is a gymnasium ( a-level ) . the steinschule recently changed from a g8 program , graduation after grade 9 , to a g9 program , graduation after grade 10 . it has a special program dedicated to science and sports classes . when applying to the school , students can decide if they ’ d like to join a sports class , a science class or a regular class . if they join a special class they will enjoy benefits , such as a whole day dedicated to their chosen subject ( science or sports ) and different fieldtrips . next to the steinschule is the schule an der brühlsbacher warte . it is a school for special needs children . it is specialized in helping children with disabilities learn basic and career relevant skills . after completing grade 5 to grade 10 students now make important future decisions . they can now chosoe an apprenticeship , higher education , work , take a year off and many more . most students choose to pursue their education and go to one of wetzlar ’ s high schools . upper secondary education . wetzlar is home to three upper secondary schools . the käthe-kollwitz schule is a vocational center , which is specialized in nutrition , health , personal hygiene , and social affairs . the school is named after mrs . käthe kollwitz ( 1919-1945 ) , a german artist . the thedor-heuss-schule wetzlar is a ‘ fachhochschule ’ or ‘ kaufmännische berufsschule ’ , which can be roughly translated into ‘ commercial vocational school ’ . they primarily focus on health and economic education . it is named after the first federal president of the federal republic of germany , theodor heuss ( 1884-1963 ) . named after the johann wolfang goethe ( 1749-1832 ) , a famous german writer and statesman , the goetheschule wetzlar it is the biggest upper secondary school in hesse with over 1000 students and ca . 110 staff members . it is well known for its varieties of subjects and extracurricular activities , such as multiple language exchanges and class fieldtrips . before 2019 all three schools were sharing one facility that consisted of three smaller buildings connected by hallways , a shared auditorium and kiosk . shortly before the new school year in 2019 , the goetheschule wetzlar moved into a separate building . the old one was demolished , and the construction of the new school facility began . it is expected to be completed in 2021 . higher education . the technische hochschule mittelhessen is one of the largest universities of applied sciences in germany . the campus in wetzlar is located in a redeveloped former military barracks area . the zentrum dualer hochschulstudien ( zdh ) has been offering the studiumplus since april 25 , 2001 . studiumplus is a dual university degree , which is a cooperation between the th mittelhessen and the chamber of industry and commerce . the cooperation includes over 950 partner companies in the region . the dual study currently consists of seven bachelor ’ s degree programs such as business administration , engineering / mechanical engineering , engineering / electrical engineering , civil engineering , software technology , organizational management in medicine and industrial engineering as well as the three master ’ s degree programs in process management , systems engineering and technical sales . twin towns – sister cities . wetzlar is twinned with : avignon , france colchester , united kingdom ilmenau , germany neukölln , germany písek , czech republic reith bei kitzbühel , austria schladming , austria siena , italy . sponsorships . wetzlar also sponsors : dori , burkina faso . sightseeing . historic old town . the tightly woven ensemble of historic buildings and houses in the old town ( altstadt ) with its half-timbered houses and stone buildings from romanesque ( wetzlar cathedral ) to gothic to renaissance and baroque is to a great extent as it was in the late 18th century , preserved and extensively restored . thus the great squares of buttermarkt/domplatz ( '' butter market/cathedral square '' ) , fischmarkt ( '' fish market '' ) , eisenmarkt ( '' iron market '' ) , kornmarkt ( '' grain market '' ) , and the former franziskanerhof ( '' franciscan yard '' ) , now called schillerplatz . from the roughly 50 noteworthy buildings , a few are listed here : a straight-walled half-timbered house from 1356 the '' old coin '' ( alte münze ) at the iron market the '' roman emperor '' ( römische kaiser ) from the 15th century , a former theatre and ballroom the former teutonic knights ' court ( deutschordenshof ) , today a town museum the lottehaus , charlotte buff 's house the jerusalemhaus in which karl wilhelm jerusalem shot himself , thus attaining sad fame as werther the princely palais papius in which is nowadays found the collection of historical furniture assembled by dr irmgard freiin von lemmers-danforth also in the old outlying towns of langgasse and neustadt ( '' new town '' ) , connected to the old town by the old lahn bridge ( alte lahnbrücke ) , a number of historic buildings are preserved and are worth seeing . the new town , however , has lost its mediaeval feel owing to its 20th-century four-lane roads . the stone alte lahnbrücke was first mentioned in 1288 . a building meant to serve as the town hall , built in the mid 14th century , was used by the reichskammergericht as their seat and offices from 1689 to 1806 , after many remodellings . considerable remains of the town 's 13th- and 14th-century fortifications are still preserved , for instance a fortress tower known as the schneiderturm ( '' tailor 's tower '' ) or säuturm ( '' sow 's tower '' ) , the kalsmuntpforte ( '' kalsmunt gate '' – see history ) which was the town gate for the earlier suburb of silhofen , as well as large sections of the town wall . file : wetzlar altstadt 2003a.jpg in the old town file : wetzlar altstadt 2003b.jpg in the old town . wetzlar cathedral . the wetzlarer dom ( wetzlar cathedral ) is one of wetzlar 's landmark buildings . building work began on the cathedral in 1230 and is still not finished . it is the successor to a former '' church of the saviour '' consecrated in 897 . the monastery and parish church was called cathedral as of the late 17th century . this designation was acquired during the time that the reichskammergericht was active in wetzlar ( 1693–1806 ) , when the elector-archbishop of trier was monastery provost , making the church a '' bishop 's church '' . culture . the phantastische bibliothek wetzlar ( fantastic library of wetzlar ) is one of the largest public libraries specialising in fantastic literature worldwide , it is the largest in europe . it is generally a reference library , open for the public and scientists . arena wetzlar is a multi-functional arena and is primarily used for pop concerts , shows and team handball and is the home arena of hsg wetzlar ( handball bundesliga ) . every summer , operas , music and drama are performed in the open air at the freilichtbühne during the month-long wetzlar festival ( '' wetzlarer festspiele '' ) . notable people . friedrich sixt von armin ( 1851–1936 ) , prussian general klaus enders ( 1937–2019 ) , sidecar racer , world champion jörg siebert ( born 1944 ) , rower , olympic champion lukas müller ( born 1987 ) , rower , olympic champion mareike adams ( born 1990 ) , rower cenk tosun ( born 1991 ) , turkish footballer . references . external links .