Yahoo!

history . founding . in january 1994 , yang and filo were electrical engineering graduate students at stanford university , when they created a website named '' jerry and david 's guide to the world wide web '' . . yhoo.client.shareholder.com the site was a web directory , organized in a hierarchy , as opposed to a searchable index of pages . in march 1994 , '' jerry and david 's guide to the world wide web '' was renamed '' yahoo ! '' . the human-edited yahoo ! directory , provided for users to surf through the internet , became their first product and the company 's original purpose . the yahoo directory — once the internet ’ s most important search engine — is to close september 26 , 2014 , retrieved in june 3 , 2017 yahoo schließt seinen katalog from golem.de , september 27 , 2014 , retrieved in june 3 , 2017 the '' yahoo.com '' domain was created on january 18 , 1995 . the word '' yahoo '' is a backronym for '' yet another hierarchically organized oracle '' or '' yet another hierarchical officious oracle '' . the term '' hierarchical '' described how the yahoo database was arranged in layers of subcategories . the term '' oracle '' was intended to mean '' source of truth and wisdom '' , and the term '' officious '' , rather than being related to the word 's normal meaning , described the many office workers who would use the yahoo database while surfing from work . however , filo and yang insist they mainly selected the name because they liked the slang definition of a '' yahoo '' ( used by college students in david filo 's native louisiana in the late 1980s and early 1990s to refer to an unsophisticated , rural southerner ) : '' rude , unsophisticated , uncouth . '' this meaning derives from the yahoo race of fictional beings from gulliver 's travels . in 1995 , a search engine function , called yahoo ! search , was introduced . this allowed users to search yahoo ! directory . yahoo soon became the first popular online directory and search engine on the world wide web . . expansion . yahoo grew rapidly throughout the 1990s . yahoo became a public company via an initial public offering in april 1996 and its stock price rose 600 % within two years . like many search engines and web directories , yahoo added a web portal , putting it in competition with services like excite , lycos and america online . by 1998 , yahoo was the most popular starting point for web users , and the human-edited yahoo directory the most popular search engine , receiving 95 million page views per day which was triple the number compared to rival excite . it also made many high-profile acquisitions . yahoo began offering free e-mail from october 1997 after the acquisition of rocketmail , which was then renamed to yahoo ! mail . in 1998 , yahoo decided to replace altavista as the crawler-based search engine underlying the directory with inktomi . yahoo 's two biggest acquisitions were made in 1999 – that of geocities for 3.6 billion , and broadcast.com for 5.7 billion . its stock price skyrocketed during the dot-com bubble , closing at an all-time high of 118.75/share on january 3 , 2000 . however , after the dot-com bubble burst , it reached a post-bubble low of 8.11 on september 26 , 2001 . yahoo began using google for search in june 2000 . over the next four years , it developed its own search technologies , which it began using in 2004 partly using technology from its 280 million acquisition of inktomi in 2002 . in response to google 's gmail , yahoo began to offer unlimited email storage in 2007 . the company struggled through 2008 , with several large layoffs . in february 2008 , microsoft made an unsolicited bid to acquire yahoo ! for 44.6 billion . yahoo formally rejected the bid , claiming that it '' substantially undervalues '' the company and was not in the interest of its shareholders . by 2011 , yahoo had a market capitalization of 22.24 billion ( only half of what it had been offered by microsoft three years earlier ) . carol bartz replaced yang as ceo in january 2009 . in september 2011 , she was removed from her position at yahoo by the company 's chairman roy bostock , and cfo tim morse was named as interim ceo of the company . in early 2012 , after the appointment of scott thompson as ceo , rumors began to spread about looming layoffs . several key executives left , including chief product officer blake irving . on april 4 , 2012 , yahoo announced a cut of 2,000 jobs , or about 14 percent of its 14,100 workers . the cut was expected to save around 375 million annually after the layoffs were completed at end of 2012 . in an email sent to employees in april 2012 , thompson reiterated his view that customers should come first at yahoo . he also completely reorganized the company . on may 13 , 2012 , yahoo issued a press release stating that thompson was no longer with the company , and would immediately be replaced on an interim basis by ross levinsohn , recently appointed head of yahoo 's new media group . thompson 's total compensation for his 130-day tenure with yahoo was at least 7.3 million . on july 15 , 2012 , marissa mayer was appointed president and ceo of yahoo , effective july 17 , 2012 . matt mcgee , search engine land . '' confirmed : marissa mayer leaving google for yahoo ceo role . '' july 16 , 2012 . retrieved march 27 , 2017 . on may 19 , 2013 yahoo ! announced the 1.1 billion acquisition of blogging site tumblr . tumblr 's ceo and founder david karp became a large shareholder . the announcement reportedly signified a changing trend in the technology industry , as large corporations like yahoo , facebook , and google acquired start-up internet companies that generated low amounts of revenue as a way in which to connect with sizeable , fast-growing online communities . the wall street journal stated that the purchase of tumblr would satisfy yahoo 's need for '' a thriving social-networking and communications hub . '' the company also announced plans to open a san francisco office in july 2013 . yahoo plans splashy new san francisco digs ( and neon billboard dreams ) – kara swisher – news . allthingsd ( july 26 , 2013 ) . retrieved on august 16 , 2013 . on august 2 , 2013 , yahoo acquired rockmelt ; its staff was retained , but all of its existing products were terminated . data collated by comscore during july 2013 revealed that more people in the u.s . visited yahoo websites during the month than google ; the occasion was the first time that yahoo outperformed google since 2011 . the data did not count mobile usage , nor tumblr . on december 12 , 2014 , yahoo completed the acquisition of video advertising provider brightroll for 583 million . on november 21 , 2014 , it was announced that yahoo had acquired cooliris . by techcrunch '' . '' . decline , security breaches , and verizon purchase . by the fourth quarter of 2013 , the company 's share price had more than doubled since marissa mayer took over as president in july 2012 ; however , the share price peaked at about 35 in november 2013 . it did go up to 36.04 in the mid-afternoon of december 2 , 2015 , perhaps on news that the board of directors was meeting to decide on the future of mayer , whether to sell the struggling internet business , and whether to continue with the spinoff of its stake in china 's alibaba e-commerce site . not all had gone well during mayer 's tenure , including the 1.1 billion acquisition of tumblr that had yet to prove beneficial and the forays into original video content that led to a 42 million write-down . sydney finkelstein , a professor at dartmouth college 's tuck school of business , told the washington post that sometimes , '' the single best thing you can do . is sell the company . '' on february 2 , 2016 , yahoo ceo marissa mayer annoyed layoffs amounting to 15 % of its workforce . on july 25 , 2016 , verizon communications announced the acquisition of yahoo 's core internet business for 4.83 billion . following the conclusion of the purchase , these assets merged with aol to form a new entity known as oath inc . on june 13 , 2017 ; yahoo , aol , and huffpost were to continue operating under their own names , under the oath inc . umbrella . the deal excluded yahoo 's 15 % stake in alibaba group and 35.5 % stake in yahoo ! japan . following the completion of the acquisition , these assets were retained under the name altaba , with a new executive team . on september 22 , 2016 , yahoo disclosed a data breach that occurred in late 2014 , in which information associated with at least 500 million user accounts , one of the largest breaches reported to date . the united states have indicted four men , including two employees of russia 's federal security service ( fsb ) , for their involvement in the hack . on december 14 , 2016 , the company revealed that another separate data breach had occurred in 2014 , with hackers obtaining sensitive account information , including security questions , to at least one billion accounts . the company stated that hackers had utilized stolen internal software to forge http cookies . in response to these breaches , bloomberg news reported that verizon was attempting to re-negotiate the deal to reduce the purchase price by 250 million , causing a 2 % increase in yahoo stock prices . on february 21 , 2017 , verizon agreed to lower its purchase price for yahoo by 350 million , and share liabilities regarding the investigation into the data breaches . on june 8 , 2017 , yahoo shareholders approved the company 's sale of some of its internet assets to verizon for 4.48 billion . the deal officially closed on june 13 , 2017 . in a press release from october 3 , 2017 , oath inc . , a subsidiary of verizon , stated that all yahoo user accounts , some 3 billion , were affected by the august 2013 theft . . altaba inc . on june 16 , 2017 , parts of the original yahoo inc , which were not purchased by verizon communications were renamed altaba inc . nasdaq . '' yahoo ! name changed to 'altaba inc . ' . '' june 19 , 2017 . retrieved august 18 , 2017 . on october 4 , 2019 , after selling its stake in alibaba group , altaba was liquidated and dissolved . in october 2020 , altaba made a liquidating distribution to its shareholders . . chief executive officers . marissa mayer ( 2012–2017 ) ross levinsohn interim ( 2012 ) scott thompson ( 2012 ) tim morse interim ( 2011–2012 ) carol bartz ( 2009–2011 ) jerry yang ( 2007–2009 ) terry semel ( 2001–2007 ) timothy koogle ( 1995–2001 ) former chief operating officer henrique de castro departed from the company in january 2014 after mayer , who initially hired him after her appointment as ceo , dismissed him . de castro , who previously worked for google and mckinsey & company , was employed to revive yahoo 's advertising business . . products and services . current products . the yahoo ! home page is a web portal that provides news , entertainment , and sports information . the portal also gives users access to other yahoo services including yahoo ! search , yahoo ! mail , and yahoo ! finance . yahoo ! mail . in may 2007 , it began offering unlimited storage . this was cut back to 1 terabyte in 2013 . yahoo partners with numerous content providers in products such as yahoo sports , yahoo ! finance , yahoo movies , yahoo weather , yahoo ! news , yahoo ! answers to provide news and related content . yahoo provides a personalization service , my yahoo ! , which enables users to combine their favorite yahoo features , content feeds , and information onto a single page . yahoo developed partnerships with broadband providers such as at & t inc . ( via prodigy , bellsouth & sbc ) , verizon communications , rogers communications , and british telecom , offering a range of free and premium yahoo content and services to subscribers . yahoo mobile , a mobile virtual network operator in japan , offers services for email , instant messaging , and mobile blogging , as well as information services , searches and alerts . services for the camera phone include entertainment and ring tones . yahoo mobile is also a carrier in the us . yahoo introduced its internet search system , called onesearch , for mobile phones on march 20 , 2007 . the results include news headlines , images from flickr , business listings , local weather and links to other sites . instead of showing only , for example , popular movies or some critical reviews , onesearch lists local theaters that at the moment are playing the movie , along with user ratings and news headlines regarding the movie . a zip code or city name is required for onesearch to start delivering local search results . the results of a web search are listed on a single page and are prioritized into categories . as of 2012 , yahoo used novarra 's mobile content transcoding service for onesearch . yahoo offers shopping services such as yahoo shopping , yahoo autos , yahoo real estate and yahoo travel , which enables users to gather relevant information and make commercial transactions and purchases online . yahoo auctions were discontinued in 2007 except for asia . yahoo shopping is a price comparison service . yahoo ! gemini provides services such as sponsored search , local advertising and product/travel/directory submit that let different businesses advertise their products and services on the yahoo network . following the closure of a '' beta '' version on april 30 , 2010 , the yahoo ! publisher network was relaunched as an advertising tool that allows online publishers to monetize their websites through the use of site-relevant advertisements . yahoo launched its panama internet advertisement sales system in the fourth quarter of 2006 . it allows advertisers to bid for search terms to trigger their ads on search results pages . the system considers bids , ad quality , clickthrough rates and other factors in ranking ads . through panama , yahoo aims to provide more relevant search results to users , a better overall experience , and to increase monetization . on april 7 , 2008 , yahoo announced apt from yahoo , which was originally called amp from yahoo , an online advertising management platform . the platform simplifies advertising sales by unifying buyer and seller markets . the service was launched in september 2008 . in july 2009 , yahoo agreed to use microsoft as exclusive technology provider for its search services while microsoft provided contextual advertising to yahoo on a non-exclusive basis . yahoo was the exclusive worldwide relationship sales force for yahoo 's and microsoft 's premium search advertisers . in september 2011 , yahoo formed an ad selling strategic partnership with two of its top competitors , aol and microsoft . but by 2013 this was found to be underperforming in market share and revenue , as microsoft simply skimmed off four percent of the search market from yahoo , without growing their combined share . y ! connect enables individuals to leave comments in online publication boards by using their yahoo id , instead of having to register with individual publications . the wall street journal reported that yahoo plans to mimic this strategy used by rival facebook inc . to help drive traffic to its site . yahoo has invested resources to increase and improve access to the internet for the disabled community through the yahoo accessibility lab . . defunct services . yahoo ! games yahoo ! music yahoo ! directory kelkoo group is a european price comparison tool that was acquired by yahoo ! in 2004 and sold in 2008 . yahoo ! next was an incubation ground for future yahoo technologies currently undergoing testing . it contained internet forums for yahoo users to give feedback to assist in the development of these future yahoo technologies . yahoo ! search boss was a service that allows developers to build search applications based on yahoo 's search technology . early partners in the program include hakia , me.dium , delver , daylife and yebol . in early 2011 , the program switched to a paid model using a cost-per-query model from 0.40 to 0.75 cost per mille ( cost per 1000 boss queries ) . the price , as yahoo explained , depends on whether the query is of web , image , news or other information . it became defunct in 2016 and has been replaced by yahoo partner ads . yahoo meme was a beta social service , similar to the popular social networking sites twitter and jaiku . yahoo searchmonkey ( often misspelled search monkey ) was a yahoo service that allowed developers and site owners to use structured data to make yahoo search results more useful and visually appealing , and drive more relevant traffic to their sites . the service was shut down in october 2010 along with other yahoo services as part of the microsoft and yahoo search deal . the name searchmonkey is an homage to greasemonkey . officially the product name has no space and two capital letters . yahoo searchmonkey was selected as one of the top 10 semantic web products of 2008 . on march 31 , 2008 , yahoo launched shine , a site tailored for women seeking online information and advice between the ages of 25 and 54 . it was shut down in 2014 . yahoo ! messenger yahoo ! axis was a desktop web browser extension and mobile browser for ios devices created and developed by yahoo . the extension made its public debut on may 23 , 2012 and retired june 28 , 2013 . a copy of the private key used to sign official yahoo browser extensions for google chrome was accidentally leaked in the first public release of the chrome extension . yahoo ! maps , shut down in 2015 . yahoo provided social networking services and user-generated content , including products such as my web , yahoo personals , yahoo 360° , delicious , flickr , and yahoo buzz . yahoo closed yahoo buzz , mybloglog , and numerous other products on april 21 , 2011 . geocities was a popular web hosting service founded in 1995 and was one of the first services to offer web pages to the public . at one point it was the third-most-browsed site on the world wide web . yahoo purchased geocities in 1999 and ten years later the web host was closed , deleting some seven million web pages . a great deal of information was lost but many of those sites and pages were mirrored at the internet archive , oocities.com , and other such databases . yahoo go , a java-based phone application with access to most of yahoo services , was closed on january 12 , 2010 . yahoo 360° was a blogging/social networking beta service launched in march 2005 by yahoo and closed on july 13 , 2009 . yahoo mash beta was another social service closed after one year of operation prior to leaving beta status . on october 16 , 2007 , yahoo announced that it would discontinue yahoo 360° , including bug repairs ; the company explained that in 2008 it would instead establish a '' universal profile '' similar to the yahoo mash experimental system . yahoo photos was shut down on september 20 , 2007 , in favor of integration with flickr . yahoo tech was a website that provided product information and setup advice to users . yahoo launched the website in may 2006 . on march 11 , 2010 , yahoo closed down the service and redirected users to yahoo 's technology news section . other discontinued services include farechase , my web , audio search , pets , live , kickstart , briefcase , and yahoo for teachers . yahoo ! hotjobs was acquired by monster.com for 225 million in 2010 . yahoo koprol was an indonesian geo-tagging website that allowed users to share information about locations without the use of a gps device . koprol was acquired by yahoo a year following its inception and , in 2011 , 1.5 million people were utilizing the website , with users also based in singapore , the philippines and vietnam . however , eighty percent of users were indonesian . yahoo officially discontinued koprol on august 28 , 2012 because it did '' not meaningfully drive revenue or engagement '' . in june 2013 , the company shut down yahoo ! mail classic . all users of mail classic were required to switch to the new yahoo mail , use imap , or switch to another email service . april 2013 brought the closure of upcoming , yahoo deals , yahoo sms alerts , yahoo kids , yahoo mail and messenger feature phone ( j2me ) . in early july 2013 , yahoo announced the scheduled closure of the task management service astrid . yahoo had acquired the company in may 2013 and was to discontinue the service on august 5 , 2013 . the team at astrid has supplied its customers with a data export tool and recommended former competitors such as wunderlist and sandglaz . on october 14 , 2020 , yahoo ’ s parent company verizon media announced that yahoo ! groups will be shut down on december 15 , 2020 due to '' a steady decline in usage over the last several years . '' on december 15 , 2010 , one day after yahoo announced layoffs of 4 % of its workers across their portfolio , mybloglog founder eric marcoullier posted a slide from a yahoo employee on twitter . the slide was visible during an employee-only strategy webcast indicating changes in yahoo 's offerings . the following services were in a column under '' sunset '' : yahoo picks , altavista , mym , alltheweb , yahoo bookmarks , yahoo buzz , del.icio.us , and mybloglog . under the '' merge '' column were : upcoming , foxytunes , yahoo events , yahoo people search , sideline , and fireeagle . 11 other properties were listed that yahoo was interested in developing into feature sites within the portal to take the place of the '' sunset '' and '' merge '' vacancies , including the prior feature services ( before the new yahoo mail was launched ) , where yahoo address book , calendar , and notepad . despite notepad being listed as a feature service instead of sunset or merge in 2010 , yahoo has since taken steps to de-emphasize notepad . for example , in january 2013 , notepad was no longer linked within the new yahoo mail service , although it continued to be linked in the older classic version . also , starting in mid-to late january 2013 , notepad was no longer searchable . the blog on the del.icio.us website released a post by chris yeh after the slide was leaked in which yeh stated that '' sunset '' does n't necessarily mean that yahoo is closing down the site . yeh further explained that other possibilities—including del.icio.us leaving yahoo ( through sale or spinoff ) —were still being considered : '' we can only imagine how upsetting the news coverage over the past 24 hours has been to many of you . speaking for our team , we were very disappointed by the way that this appeared in the press . '' on april 27 , 2011 , yahoo 's sale of del.icio.us to avos was announced . yahoo buzz was closed down on april 21 , 2011 without an official announcement from yahoo . mybloglog was then discontinued by yahoo on may 24 , 2011 . . criticism . privacy . in september 2013 , yahoo 's transparency report said the company received 29 thousand requests for information about users from governments in the first six months of 2013 . over 12 thousand of the requests came from the united states . in october 2013 , the washington post reported that the u.s . national security agency intercepted communications between yahoo 's data centers , as part of a program named muscular . in late january 2014 , yahoo announced on its company blog that it had detected a '' coordinated effort '' to hack into possibly millions of yahoo mail accounts . the company prompted users to reset their passwords , but did not elaborate on the scope of the possible breach , citing an ongoing federal investigation . in august 2015 , researchers at malwarebytes , notified yahoo about its users getting hacked because of vulnerabilities in adobe flash player . according to them , the vulnerability could allow attackers to install '' ransomware '' on users ' computers and lock their files till the customers pay the criminals . . storing personal information and tracking usage . working with comscore , the new york times found that yahoo was able to collect far more data about users than its competitors from its web sites and advertising network . by one measure , on average yahoo had the potential in december 2007 to build a profile of 2,500 records per month about each of its visitors . in yahoo retains search requests for a period of 13 months . however , in response to european regulators , yahoo obfuscates the ip address of users after three months by deleting its last eight bits . on march 29 , 2012 , yahoo announced that it would introduce a '' do not track '' feature that summer , allowing users to opt out of web-visit tracking and customized advertisements . however , on april 30 , 2014 , yahoo announced that it would no longer support the '' do not track '' browser setting . yahoo privacy team ( april 30 , 2014 ) . '' yahoo 's default a personalized experience '' . yahoo . retrieved may 6 , 2014 . according to a 2008 article in computerworld , yahoo has a 2-petabyte , specially built data warehouse that it uses to analyze the behavior of its half-billion web visitors per month , processing 24 billion daily events . in contrast , the united states internal revenue service ( irs ) database of all united states taxpayers is only 150 terabytes . in september 2016 , it was reported that data from at least 500 million yahoo accounts was stolen in 2014 . in october 2016 , reuters reported that in 2015 , yahoo created software to search their customers ' e-mail at the request of nsa or fbi . joseph menn . '' exclusive : yahoo secretly scanned customer emails for u.s . intelligence – sources '' , reuters , reuters.com , october 4 , 2016 . retrieved october 4 , 2016 . . other . in 2000 , in the case of licra v . yahoo yahoo was sued by parties seeking to prevent french citizens from purchasing memorabilia relating to the nazi party . in march 2004 , yahoo launched a paid inclusion program whereby commercial websites were guaranteed listings on the yahoo search engine . yahoo discontinued the program at the end of 2009 . yahoo was criticized for providing ads via the yahoo ad network to companies who display them through spyware and adware . yahoo , as well as other search engines , great firewall to support internet censorship in the people 's republic of china . in april 2005 , dissident shi tao was sentenced to 10 years in prison for '' providing state secrets to foreign entities '' as a result of being identified by ip address by yahoo . human rights organizations and the company 's general counsel disputed the extent of yahoo 's foreknowledge of shi 's fate . human rights groups also accuse yahoo of aiding authorities in the arrest of dissidents li zhi and jiang lijun . in april 2017 , yahoo was sued for failing to uphold settlement agreements in this case . yahoo pledged to give support to the families of those arrested and create a relief fund for those persecuted for expressing their views online with yahoo human rights trust . of the 17.3 million allotted to this fund , 13 million had been used for a townhouse in washington , dc and other purchases . in september 2003 , dissident wang xiaoning was convicted of charges of '' incitement to subvert state power '' and was sentenced to ten years in prison . yahoo hong kong connected wang 's group to a specific yahoo e-mail address . both xiaoning 's wife and the world organization for human rights sued yahoo under human rights laws on behalf of wang and shi . as a result of media scrutiny relating to internet child predators and a lack of significant ad revenues , yahoo 's '' user created '' chatrooms were closed down in june 2005 . on may 25 , 2006 , yahoo 's image search was criticized for bringing up sexually explicit images even when safesearch was active . in august 2015 , yahoo purchased a 40 % ( 23 % in september 2013 ) owner of alibaba group , which was a subject of controversy for allowing the sale of shark-derived products . the company banned the sale of shark fin products on all its e-commerce platforms effective january 1 , 2009 . on november 30 , 2009 , yahoo was criticized by the electronic frontier foundation for sending a dmca notice to whistle-blower website '' cryptome '' for publicly posting details , prices , and procedures on obtaining private information pertaining to yahoo 's subscribers . after some concerns over censorship of private emails regarding a website affiliated with occupy wall street protests were raised , yahoo responded with an apology and explained it as an accident . following media reports about prism , nsa 's massive electronic mass surveillance , in june 2013 , several technology companies were identified as participants , including yahoo . yahoo is listed in the paradise papers , a set of confidential electronic documents relating to offshore investment that were leaked to the german newspaper süddeutsche zeitung . '' so lief die sz-recherche '' . süddeutsche zeitung . november 5 , 2017 . . international websites . yahoo offers a multi-lingual interface . the site is available in over 20 languages . the official directory for all of the yahoo international sites is world.yahoo.com . the company 's international sites are wholly owned by yahoo , with the exception of its japan and china sites . yahoo ! japan is a separate entity , controlled by softbank . yahoo ! xtra , launched in 2007 in new zealand is owned by yahoo ! 7 , a 50–50 agreement between yahoo and the seven network . yahoo used to hold a 40 % stake and 35 % voting power in alibaba , which manages a web portal in china using the yahoo brand name , yahoo ! china . on september 18 , 2012 , following years of negotiations , yahoo agreed to sell a 20 % stake back to alibaba for 7.6 billion . on march 8 , 2011 , yahoo launched its romanian website after years of delay due to the great recession . yahoo entered the mena region when it acquired maktoob , a pan-regional , arabic-language hosting and social services online portal on august 25 , 2009 . since the service is pan-regional , yahoo officially became yahoo maktoob in the region . on september 2 , 2013 , yahoo ! china shut down and was redirected to taobao.com , and has been being redirected to yahoo singapore 's search page . yahoo ! korea was the south korean affiliate of yahoo ! , founded in september 1997 . its headquarters was the yahoo ! tower on teheranno in the gangnam district of seoul . on december 31 , 2012 , yahoo ! korea shut down all its services and the website was redirected to the main yahoo ! search page . . logos and themes . yahoo got its first logo during its establishment in 1994—it consists of the '' yahoo '' wordmark which is colored black and is using the times new roman font , but it was later changed . in march 1995 , when the company changed its name to yahoo , it introduced another logo which is briefly changed to a more elaborate text that includes an exclamation point at the end , but it were short-lived for only 5 months . later , in august 1995 , that same year , yahoo changed its logo again and it became a stylized yellow jumping '' y '' figurine on a blue circle while the '' yahoo ! '' wordmark is written below , but the logo were also short-lived for 4 months until december 1995 . on january 1 , 1996 , yahoo introduced a simplified new logo that included the text '' yahoo '' and an exclamation mark , both in red with a slight shadow behind the text . by may 2009 , yahoo tweaked the logo by recoloring it from red to purple and removing the logo 's outline and shadow . at the time , the purple logo was accompanied by a new slogan , '' it 's y ! ou . '' a shortened variant of the logo , consisting of only the letter '' y '' and an exclamation point , was also used . on august 7 , 2013 , at around midnight edt , yahoo announced that the final version of the new logo would be revealed on september 5 , 2013 at 4:00 & nbsp ; a.m . utc . in the period leading up to the unveiling of the new logo , the '' 30 days of change '' campaign was introduced , whereby a variation of the logo was published every day for the 30 days following the announcement . the new logo was eventually launched with an accompanying video that showed its digital construction , and mayer published a personalized description of the design process on her tumblr page . mayer explains : so , one weekend this summer , i rolled up my sleeves and dove into the trenches with our logo design team . we spent the majority of saturday and sunday designing the logo from start to finish , and we had a ton of fun weighing every minute detail . we knew we wanted a logo that reflected yahoo – whimsical , yet sophisticated . modern and fresh , with a nod to our history . having a human touch , personal . proud . on september 19 , 2013 , yahoo launched a new version of the '' my yahoo '' personalized homepage . the redesign allows users to tailor a homepage with widgets that access features such as email accounts , calendars , flickr and other yahoo content , and internet content . users can also select '' theme packs '' that represent artists such as polly apfelbaum and alec monopoly , and bands such as empire of the sun . mayer then explained at a conference in late september 2013 that the logo change was the result of feedback from both external parties and employees . in september 2019 saw another logo change for yahoo , which the company claims is a '' refreshed brand identity that is simpler and more flexible , and looks back to the original , quirky 1996 logo . '' the logo is a white text set against a purple background , with both the “ y ” and “ ! ” of the logo reportedly set at an angle of 22.5 degrees . file : yahoo logo.svg yahoo 's fourth logo , january 1996–september 2013 file : yahoo ! ( 2013 ) . svg yahoo 's fifth and previous logo , september 2013–september 2019 file : yahoo ! ( 2019 ) . svg yahoo 's sixth and current logo , september 2019–present . see also . list of search engines list of web analytics software yahoo ! litigation yahoo ! messenger protocol . references . external links . altaba and yahoo ! edgar filing history