Tancred, King of Sicily

early career . after the death of duke roger , to prevent any future trouble , king roger ii kept tancred and his younger brother william in close custody in palermo . f . giunta , magnus comito tancredus , storiografia e storia , studi in onore di eugenio dupré theiseider ii , roma 1976 , 648 . on 9 march 1161 , tancred joined his uncle simon , prince of taranto , in invading the palace , detained the king and queen , william i and margaret , and their two sons , and incited a massacre of muslims . originally , the older of these two sons , roger iv , duke of apulia , was destined to be crowned in place of william , but soon the populace supported the accession of simon himself . before simon could put himself forward as a candidate , however , the rebellion had broken down and the people were restless . the insurrectionists were forced to free the king and retreat to their castles . pardon was given them on condition of exile and many , including tancred , took the offer . tancred was exiled to constantinople and returned to sicily in 1166 upon the accession of the new king , his cousin william ii . in 1174 tancred led a large fleet to egypt on behalf of william ii . the sicilians landed near alexandria but when they realised that their expected allies would not be coming ( due to king amalric i of jerusalem 's death ) and with saladin 's army approaching they returned to their ships and sailed home . steven runciman , a history of the crusades , vol . ii : the kingdom of jerusalem and the frankish east 1100-1187 , penguin books , 1990 , p . 403 . as william ii was heirless , tancred had a chance to claim the throne ; to prevent this , in october 1184 william released his aunt constance from monastery , approved her marriage and designated her as his heir . gisleberti chronicon hanoniense , c . 33 , ed . l . vanderkindere , bruxelles 1904 , 66 . in june 1185 , tancred led a huge sicilian fleet of 300 ships under the command of richard , count of acerra his brother-in-law to durazzo to attack the core of the byzantine empire . in august , surrounded by navy and army , thessaloniki was occupied and looted . the sicilian army was then heavily damaged by the army of the byzantine emperor isaac ii and was annihilated on the way back to the balkans , while the fleet of tancred returned to sicily unharmed . in june 1186 , tancred and margaritus of brindisi led the norman fleet to cyprus ( the governor of cyprus , isaac comnenus , had rebelled against byzantine ) , captured 70 warships of isaac ii easily , expelled the byzantine generals who came there , causing the greatest naval loss of byzantine empire ; later margaritus was appointed as counts of zakynthos , cephalonia , and ithaki . tanred was the governor of lecce : he built the church of st . nicholas in catado in lecce ( 1180 ) ; he built the complex of st . maria church near squinzano and the important works in the otranto cathedral . kingship . accession . despite having sworn fealty to constance , as soon as william ii died , in 1189 , tancred rebelled and seized control of the island . he was crowned early in 1190 . his coup was backed by the vice chancellor matthew d'ajello and the official class , while the rival claims of constance and her husband , henry vi , king of the romans , were supported by most of the nobles . roger of andria , also a candidate for sicilian throne , was among the supporters of constance and henry . matthew d'ajello managed to defame roger , and in the same year richard , count of acerra brother-in-law of tancred tricked roger into captivity and execution . matthew also persuaded pope clement iii to support tancred , and tancred appointed matthew as chancellor . treaty with richard . tancred was a good soldier , though his tiny stature earned him the nickname '' tancredulus '' from the poet chronicler peter of eboli . despite a measure of popular support , his rule faced daunting challenges right from the start . in 1190 richard i of england arrived in sicily at the head of a large crusading army on its way to the holy land . richard immediately demanded the release of his sister , william ii 's wife joan , imprisoned by tancred in 1189 , along with every penny of her dowry and dower ( in response of her vocal support of germans ) . he also insisted that tancred fulfil the financial commitments made by william ii to the crusade . when tancred balked at these demands , richard seized a monastery and the castle of la bagnara . richard was joined in sicily by the french crusading army , led by king philip ii . the presence of two foreign armies soon caused unrest among the locals . in october the people of messina revolted , demanding that the foreigners leave the island . richard responded by attacking messina , which he captured on 4 october 1190 . after the city had been looted and burned , richard established his base there and decided to stay the winter . richard remained at messina until march 1191 , when tancred finally agreed to a treaty . according to the treaty 's main terms : joan was to be released , receiving her dower along with the dowry . richard and philip recognised tancred as king of sicily and vowed to keep the peace among all three of their kingdoms . richard officially proclaimed his nephew arthur of brittany as his heir presumptive , and tancred promised to marry one of his daughters to arthur when he came of age ( arthur was four years old at the time ) . after signing the treaty richard and philip finally left sicily for the holy land . it is rumoured that before he left , richard gave tancred a sword he claimed was excalibur in order to secure their friendship . m . i . finley , denis mack smith and christopher duggan , a history of sicily ( new york : viking , 1987 ) , p . 65 . . contention with constance . having at last rid himself of the crusaders , tancred next confronted the threat from the north . in april 1191 in rome , henry and constance were crowned emperor and empress by pope celestine iii , and now the pair turned south to claim the kingdom of sicily . constance accompanied her husband at the head of a substantial imperial army that descended into the regno . the northern towns of the kingdom opened their gates to henry , including the earliest norman strongholds capua and aversa . salerno , once roger ii 's mainland capital , sent word ahead that henry was welcome and invited constance to stay in her father 's old palace to escape the summer heat . naples offered the first resistance of the whole campaign , withstanding a siege with the help of margaritus of brindisi 's fleet , until much of the imperial army had succumbed to malaria and disease . eventually the imperial army was forced to withdraw from the kingdom altogether . constance remained in salerno with a small garrison , as a sign that henry would soon return . once henry had withdrawn with the bulk of the imperial army , the towns that had supposedly fallen to the empire immediately declared their allegiance to tancred , for the most part now fearing his retribution . the populace of salerno saw an opportunity to win some favour with tancred and delivered constance to him in messina , an important prize given that henry had every intention of returning . tancred angrily blamed constance for german invasion , but constance , in her attire as empress , replied that she was taking back her dominion grabbed by tancred . despite this tancred always treated his aunt , now detained , honourably with courtesy , which his wife queen sibylla strongly opposed , believing this would implicitly acknowledge the claim of the latter . constance was sent to palermo supervised by sibylla , eating with her and sleeping in her bedroom . sybilla suggested that constance be put to death after sensing that the citizens of palermo seemed to sympathize with her or view her as the legal heiress of sicily , but tancred did not agree , worrying that this would harm his popularity ; instead , he suggested sybilla to consult with matthew d'ajello , and after receiving a letter written by matthew d'ajello in presence of sybilla , he had constance locked in castel dell'ovo in naples to be better-guarded . with the empress in his hand tancred initially wanted to force henry into a cease-fire and would not permit her to be ransomed unless henry recognized him . in 1192 he created margaritus count of malta , perhaps for his unexpected success in capturing the empress . however , tancred was willing to give up his negotiation advantage , that is , his aunt , in exchange for pope celestine iii legitimizing him as king of sicily . in turn , the pope was hoping that by securing constance 's safe passage back to rome , henry would be better disposed towards the papacy , and he was still hoping to keep the empire and the kingdom from uniting . under the pope 's threat of excommunication , tancred was forced to do so and gave constance gifts . however , imperial soldiers were able to intervene at the borders of the papal states before constance made it to rome ; and they returned her safely across the alps in summer 1192 . so both tancred and pope effectively gained nothing from the captivity of the empress . an introduction to the history of the principal states of europe , vol . 2 , p . 129 , samuel pufendorf ( freiherr von ) , antoine augustin bruzen de la martinière , joseph sayer henry had left garrisons along the frontiers of the regno . tancred now sought to win over the towns by extensive grants of privileges . at gravina ( june 1192 ) he reinforced his papal support by surrendering the royal legateship over sicily . in 1192 and 1193 he personally led successful campaigns against the apulian barons . but his death at palermo ( 20 february 1194 ) two months after that of his young son and co-king , roger iii , opened the way for hohenstaufen rule in sicily . his widow , sibylla of acerra , established a regency for their son , william iii , but henry returned to italy later that year , with his army financed by the lucrative ransom of richard i . naples surrendered in may , almost without a blow , and the rest of the regno followed . sybilla and the loyal margaritus prepared to defend palermo , but the citizens admitted the emperor on 20 november 1194 . tancred 's family fell into henry 's hands , and william iii , rumoured castrated and blinded , seemed to have died in germany in 1198 . . family . tancred 's children with sibylla were : roger iii , duke of apulia and king of sicily william iii , duke of apulia and king of sicily elvira , countess of lecce after the death of her brother ; married firstly walter iii of brienne , caffaro , genoa and the twelfth-century crusades , transl . martin hall and jonathan philips ( mike carr ) , crusades : volume 14 , ed . nikolaos g . chrissis , benjamin z kedar and jonathan phillips , ( ashgate publishing , 2015 ) , 248 . secondly giacomo sanseverino , count of tricario , and thirdly tigrini guidi , count of modigliano ( or count palatine in tuscany ? ) constance , married pietro ziani , later doge of venice medania valdrada , married giacomo tello , later doge of venice . notes . references . john julius norwich , the kingdom in the sun , reprinted as part of his the normans in sicily ,