Coors Brewing Company

history . founding . in 1873 , german immigrants adolph coors and jacob schueler from prussia emigrated to the united states and established a brewery in golden , colorado , after buying a recipe for a pilsner-style beer from a czech immigrant william silhan . coors invested 2,000 in the operation , and schueler invested 18,000 . in 1880 , coors bought out his partner and became sole owner of the brewery . prohibition . the coors brewing company managed to survive prohibition relatively intact . years before the volstead act went into effect nationwide , adolph coors with sons adolph jr . , grover , and herman established the adolph coors brewing and manufacturing company , which included herold porcelain and other ventures . the brewery itself was converted into a malted milk and near beer production facility . coors sold much of the malted milk to the mars candy company for the production of sweets . manna , the company 's non-alcoholic beer replacement , was a near beer similar to current non-alcoholic beverages . however , coors and his sons relied heavily on the porcelain company as well as a cement and real estate company to keep the coors brewing company afloat . by 1933 , after the end of prohibition , the coors brewery was one of only a handful of breweries that had survived . all of the non-brewery assets of the adolph coors company were spun off between 1989 and 1992 . the descendant of the original herold porcelain ceramics business continues to operate as coorstek . . products . for much of its first 100 years of existence , coors beer was marketed solely in the american west . while california and texas were part of the 11-state distribution area , washington and montana were not added until 1976 ( oregon did not approve sales in grocery stores until 1985 ) . this gave it mystique and made it a novelty , particularly on the east coast , and visitors returning from the western states often brought back a case . this iconic status was reflected in the 1977 film smokey and the bandit . the company finally established nationwide distribution in the united states in the mid-1980s . in 1959 , coors became the first american brewer to use an all-aluminum two-piece beverage can . also in 1959 , the company abandoned pasteurization and began to use sterile filtration to stabilize its beer . coors currently operates the largest aluminum can producing plant in the world , known as the rocky mountain metal container ( rmmc ) , in golden . rmmc is a joint venture between ball metal and coors , having been founded in 2003 . in the mid-1970s , coors invented the litter-free push tab can , in place of the ring pull-tab . however , consumers disliked the top and it was discontinued soon afterward . coors light was introduced in 1978 . the longtime slogan of '' silver bullet '' to describe it does not describe the beer , but rather the silver-colored can in which the beer is packaged . coors light was once produced in '' yellow-bellied '' cans like the full-strength coors , but when the yellow coloring was removed and the can was left mostly silver , many dubbed the beer the '' silver bullet '' . change of ownership . on july 22 , 2004 , the adolph coors company , the holding company that owned coors brewing , announced it would be merging with canadian brewing company molson , inc . the merger was completed february 9 , 2005 , with the merged company being named molson coors brewing company . coors brewing company became a subsidiary of the new company . due to the merger , molson coors was rated the third largest producer of beer in the united states , and the second largest brewer in the united kingdom . . brands . coors is responsible for originating a number of alcoholic beverage brands . the most notable of those brands are coors banquet , coors light , and blue moon . controversies . labor problems . in april 1977 , the brewery workers union at coors , representing 1,472 employees , went on strike . the brewery kept operating with supervisors and 250 to 300 union members , including one member of the union executive board who ignored the strike . soon after , coors announced that it would hire replacements for the striking workers . about 700 workers quit the picket line to go back to work , and coors replaced the remaining 500 workers , keeping the beer production process uninterrupted . dana parsons , '' why did strikers return ? '' , the denver post , october 3 , 1979 , p . 3 . in december 1978 , the workers at coors voted by greater than a two-to-one ratio to decertify the union , ending 44 years of union representation at coors . because the strike was by then more than a year old , striking workers could not vote in the election . karen newman , '' coors workers reject union by big margin '' , rocky mountain news ( denver ) , december 15 , 1978 , p . 1 . labor unions organized a boycott to punish coors for its labor practices . molly ivins , '' union at coors may be broken but it has n't halted its boycott '' , the new york times , may 28 , 1979 , p . a7 one tactic employed by the unions was a push for states to pass laws banning the sale of unpasteurized canned and bottled beer . '' coors union backing calif . beer roadblock '' , the denver post , december 5 , 1977 . because coors was the only major brewer at the time not pasteurizing its canned and bottled beer , such laws would hurt only coors . '' bill before missouri legislature would ban coors '' , the denver post november 2 , 1984 . sales of coors suffered during the decade-long labor union boycott , although coors stated that declining sales were also due to an industry-wide downturn in beer sales , and to increased competition . to maintain production , coors expanded its sales area from the 18 western states to which it had marketed for years , to nationwide distribution . bartell nyberg , '' coors brewing for long-term survival '' , the denver post , february 22 , 1987 , p . 1g . this was completed in 1991 , with indiana being the last state for the brand to appear . louisiana beer reviews : coors banquet beer revisited ( bottled version ) the afl-cio ended its boycott of coors in august 1987 , after negotiations with pete coors , head of brewery operations . the details of the settlement were not divulged , but were said to include an early union representation election in colorado and use of union workers to build the new coors brewery in virginia . '' afl-cio ends 10-year coors boycott '' , the denver post , august 19 , 1987 . in 1988 , the teamsters union , which represented brewery workers at the top three us beer makers at the time ( anheuser-busch , miller , and stroh ) , gained enough signatures to trigger a union representation election inside the coors company . coors workers again rejected union representation by more than a two-to-one ratio . jeffrey leib , '' coors workers reject union '' , the denver post , december 16 , 1988 , p . 1a . . minority issues . mexican americans charged coors with discriminatory hiring practices following the passage of the civil rights act , and launched a boycott of the company 's products beginning in the late 1960s . labor unions and gay rights activists joined the boycott , which lasted into the 1980s . a federal lawsuit in 1975 by the equal employment opportunity commission ended in a settlement with coors agreeing not to discriminate against blacks , hispanics , and women . in 1977 , coors was accused of firing gay and lesbian employees . from the late 1970s , coors agreed not to discriminate against homosexuals ; the first major brewery in the united states to make such a commitment . coors encouraged the organization of its gay and lesbian employees into the lesbian and gay employee resource ( lager ) in 1993 . justin berton , the other coors spokesman , westword ( denver ) september 2 , 1999 , p . 28 . in may 1995 , coors became the 21st publicly traded corporation in the united states to extend employee benefits to same-sex partners . michael booth , '' coors adds 'partners ' to benefits '' , the denver post , july 8 , 1995 , p . 1a . when company chairman pete coors was criticized for the company 's gay-friendly policy during his 2004 republican primary campaign for a united states senate seat from colorado , he defended the policy as a basic good business practice . john c . green , mark j . rozell , clyde wilcox , the values campaign ? washington , d.c . : georgetown university press , p . 185 . at the same time , critics cite the coors family ’ s castle rock foundation 's continuing history of gifts to organizations that actively promote explicitly anti-lgbt political campaigns and candidates , claiming that the coors family 's support of what critics view as anti-gay hate groups speaks more loudly than the company 's multi-million dollar image campaigns , or out gay son of william coors , scott coors ' public defense of his family 's firm 's civil rights and labor rights record . bruce mirken , coors courts gays , july 13 , 2001 , motherjones.com , . in popular culture . paul newman character hud bannon in the 1963 film hud drinks coors beer throughout the picture . the 1977 film smokey and the bandit centers around an illegal shipment of coors from texas to georgia . kurt russell character r.j . macready in john carpenter the thing is seen with a can of coors beer while also drinking j & b whiskey . william zabka karate kid character johnny lawrence is often seen drinking coors banquet in the web television series cobra kai . mel gibson 's character martin riggs from the lethal weapon film series drinks coors banquet .