Rat Pack

1950s . the name '' rat pack '' was first used to refer to a group of friends in new york , shawn levy , rat pack confidential , doubleday , 1998 lawrence j . quirk and william schoel , the rat pack , taylor publishing company 1998 and several explanations have been offered for the name . according to one version , lauren bacall saw her husband humphrey bogart and his friends returning from a night in las vegas and said , '' you look like a goddamn rat pack . '' '' rat pack '' may also be a shortened version of '' holmby hills rat pack '' , a reference to the home of bogart and bacall which served as a regular hangout . visiting members included errol flynn , ava gardner , nat king cole , robert mitchum , elizabeth taylor , janet leigh , tony curtis , mickey rooney , lena horne , jerry lewis , and cesar romero . according to stephen bogart , the original members of the holmby hills rat pack were frank sinatra ( pack master ) , judy garland ( first vice-president ) , sid luft ( cage master ) , bogart ( rat in charge of public relations ) , swifty lazar ( recording secretary and treasurer ) , nathaniel benchley ( historian ) , david niven , katharine hepburn , spencer tracy , george cukor , cary grant , rex harrison , and jimmy van heusen . . 1960s . the early 1960s version of the group included frank sinatra , dean martin , sammy davis jr . , peter lawford , and joey bishop . this group was originally known as the '' clan '' , but that name fell out of favor because it was reminiscent of the ku klux klan . marilyn monroe , angie dickinson , juliet prowse , buddy greco , and shirley maclaine were often referred to as the '' rat pack mascots '' . comedian don rickles wrote that '' i never received an official membership card but frank made me feel part of the fun . '' rickles , don and david ritz ( 2007 ) . rickles ' book : a memoir . simon & schuster . p . 91 . peter lawford was a brother-in-law of president john f . kennedy ( dubbed '' brother-in-lawford '' by sinatra ) , spada , p . 207 and kennedy spent time with sinatra and the others when he visited las vegas , during which members sometimes referred to the group as '' the jack pack '' . rat pack members played a role in campaigning for kennedy and the democrats , appearing at the july 1960 democratic national convention in los angeles . spada , p . 228 lawford asked sinatra if he would have kennedy as a guest at his palm springs house in march 1962 and sinatra went to great lengths to accommodate the president , including the construction of a helipad . spada , pp . 292-293 attorney general robert f . kennedy advised his brother to sever ties to sinatra because of his association with mafia figures such as sam giancana and he cancelled the visit . spada , p.293 kennedy instead stayed at bing crosby 's estate , which further infuriated sinatra . spada , p . 294 lawford was blamed for this and sinatra '' never again had a good word '' for him . spada , p . 295 lawford 's role was written out of the upcoming 4 for texas , and his part in robin and the 7 hoods was given to bing crosby . file : frank sinatra in 1957.jpg frank sinatra ( 1957 ) file : dean martin - publicity.jpg dean martin ( 1960 ) file : sammy davis jr . performing 1966.jpg sammy davis jr . ( 1966 ) file : peter lawford 1955.jpg peter lawford ( 1955 ) file : joey bishop marlo thomas danny thomas show 1961.jpg joey bishop ( 1961 ) file : shirley maclaine - 1960.jpg shirley maclaine ( 1960 ) . revival . sinatra , davis , and martin announced a 29-date tour called together again in december 1987 . at the press conference to announce the tour , martin joked about calling it off , and sinatra rebuked a reporter for using the term '' rat pack '' , referring to it as '' that stupid phrase '' . levy , shawn . rat pack confidential . fourth estate . london , 1999 . p . 339 dean martin 's son dean paul martin died in a plane crash in march 1987 on the san gorgonio mountain in california , the same mountain where sinatra 's mother was killed in a plane crash ten years earlier . martin had since become increasingly dependent on alcohol and prescription drugs . davis had hip replacement surgery two years previously , and was estranged from sinatra because of davis ' use of cocaine . haygood , wil . in black and white : the life of sammy davis , jr . random house . new york , 2003 . p . 450 davis was also experiencing severe financial difficulties , and was promised by sinatra 's people that he could earn between six and eight million dollars from the tour . haygood p . 466 martin had not made a film or recorded since 1984 and sinatra felt that the tour would be good for martin , telling davis , '' i think it would be great for dean . get him out . for that alone it would be worth doing '' . levy , p . 339 sinatra and davis still performed regularly , yet they had not recorded for several years . both sinatra and martin had made their last film appearances together in 1984 's cannonball run ii , which also starred davis . this marked the trio 's first feature film appearance since 1964 's robin and the 7 hoods . martin expressed reservations about the tour , wondering whether they could draw as many people as they had in the past . sinatra and davis complained during private rehearsals about the lack of black musicians in the orchestra . the tour began at the oracle arena on march 13 , 1988 to a sold-out crowd of 14,500 . davis opened the show , followed by martin and then sinatra ; after an interval , the three performed a medley of songs . during the show , martin threw a lit cigarette at the audience . summers , anthony , swan , robbyn . sinatra : the life . corgi . new york , 2006 p . 440 he withdrew from the tour after just five shows , citing a flare-up of a kidney problem . sinatra and davis continued the tour under the title '' the ultimate event '' with liza minnelli replacing martin as the third member of the trio . davis 's associate stated that sinatra 's people were skimming the top of the revenues from the concerts , as well as stuffing envelopes full of cash into suitcases after the performances . birkbeck , matt . deconstructing sammy . amistad . new york , 2008 . p . 213 in august 1989 , davis was diagnosed with throat cancer which caused his death in may 1990 . he was buried with a gold watch that sinatra had given him at the conclusion of the ultimate event tour . summers , swan , p . 440 a 1988 performance of the ultimate event in detroit was recorded and shown on showtime the following year as a tribute to the recently deceased davis . a review in the new york times praised davis 's performance , describing it as '' pure , ebullient , unapologetic show business . '' . reputation . concerning the group 's reputation for womanizing and heavy drinking , joey bishop stated in a 1998 interview : '' i never saw frank , dean martin , sammy or peter drunk during performances . that was only a gag ! and do you believe these guys had to chase broads ? they had to chase 'em away ! '' time.com and then there was one . films . it happened in brooklyn ( 1947 ) ( frank sinatra and peter lawford ) meet me in las vegas ( 1956 ) ( sinatra and sammy davis jr . – cameo appearances ) some came running ( 1958 ) ( sinatra and dean martin , co-starring shirley maclaine ) never so few ( 1959 ) ( sinatra , lawford , and initially davis , who was replaced by steve mcqueen ) ocean 's 11 ( 1960 ) ( sinatra , martin , davis , lawford , angie dickinson , joey bishop , cameo by maclaine ) pepe ( 1960 ) ( sinatra , martin , davis , lawford , and bishop – all cameos ) sergeants 3 ( 1962 ) ( sinatra , martin , davis , lawford , and bishop ) the road to hong kong ( 1962 ) ( sinatra and martin – cameos ) come blow your horn ( 1963 ) ( sinatra ; cameo by martin ) johnny cool ( 1963 ) ( davis and bishop ; peter lawford , executive producer ; henry silva of ocean 's 11 starred , with mort sahl and jim backus in supporting roles 4 for texas ( 1963 ) ( sinatra and martin ) robin and the 7 hoods ( 1964 ) ( sinatra , martin , davis , and initially lawford , who was replaced by bing crosby ) marriage on the rocks ( 1965 ) ( sinatra and martin ) the oscar ( 1966 ) ( sinatra uncredited , and lawford ) a man called adam ( 1966 ) ( davis and lawford ) texas across the river ( 1966 ) ( martin and bishop ) salt and pepper ( 1968 ) ( davis and lawford ) one more time ( 1970 ) ( davis and lawford ) the cannonball run ( 1981 ) ( martin and davis ) cannonball run ii ( 1984 ) ( sinatra , martin and davis , plus maclaine and silva ) archival footage of lawford and sinatra was used in the 1974 compilation film that 's entertainment ! . shirley maclaine appeared in the 1958 film some came running , along with sinatra and martin . she had a major role ( and sinatra a cameo ) in the 1956 oscar-winning film around the world in 80 days . maclaine played a hindu princess who is rescued by , and falls in love with , original rat pack associate david niven , and sinatra had a non-speaking , non-singing role as a piano player in a saloon , whose identity is concealed from the viewer until he turns his face toward the camera during a scene featuring marlene dietrich and george raft . maclaine appeared alongside sinatra in can-can . she also had an appearance in the 1960 film ocean 's 11 as a drunken woman . the 1984 film cannonball run ii , with maclaine , marked the final time members of the rat pack shared theatrical screen-time together . a biopic titled the rat pack , made by hbo in 1998 , starred ray liotta as sinatra , joe mantegna as martin , and don cheadle as davis , dramatizing their private lives and , in particular , their roles in the 1960 presidential campaign of john f . kennedy . music . christmas with the rat pack , a collection of holiday tunes sung by sinatra , martin and davis , was released in 2001 . the ultimate rat pack collection : live & swingin ' went on sale in 2003 . a concert featuring the three men , sands hotel in las vegas , is also available on cd . stage . the rat pack : live from las vegas tribute show originated on stage in london in 2000 and has been running continuously since then throughout europe and north america . see also . brat pack frat pack . references . bibliography . . external links . the rat pack : unpublished photos of frank , dean and sammy - slideshow by life magazine