Stereophonics

mainstream success ( 2001–2004 ) . the band released their third album , just enough education to perform , in april 2001 . the album included the track '' mr . writer '' , which includes lyrics that criticise a critic who the band believe gave them a negative review . the album also contained one of the band 's most famous tracks , '' have a nice day '' , which reached number five in the uk charts . to promote the new album , just enough education to perform , the stereophonics played a two-day festival , which was called a day at the races . this event was held in donington park on the first day and at cardiff 's millennium stadium on the second . the concerts were supported by ash , black crowes and the crocketts , with proud mary playing donington only . over 200,000 separate tickets were sold for the weekend festival . the performance was released on a dvd in 2002 . 2003 saw the release of their fourth album , titled you got ta go there to come back . in september 2003 , drummer stuart cable was sacked . according to reports , it was because of his lack of commitment to the band . cable , at the time , presented a tv show called '' cable tv '' and felt that the band would never improve . because of this , he missed several rehearsals and live concerts . he was eventually replaced by javier weyler . stereophonics drummer fired . bbc news . retrieved on 17 july 2007 . steve gorman , from the black crowes , stood in for cable during the band 's live performances until weyler was appointed . when asked about cable leaving the band in a 2010 interview with rip it up magazine , kelly jones admitted to the difficulty of the situation . towards the end of the year , stereophonics did a sold-out tour of the uk , ending with a christmas show at the millennium stadium , cardiff , supported by feeder , ocean colour scene and adam masterson . the show was closed with a live version of '' merry xmas everybody '' , originally recorded by slade . the group took a break after their 2003–2004 world tour , which included a set at the manchester move festival in july 2004 . drummer change and stuart cable 's death ( 2005–2010 ) . their fifth studio album , language . sex . violence . other ? was released in march 2005 . it marked their first recording with new drummer javier weyler . the band achieved their first number one hit in the uk singles charts with the album 's first single , '' dakota '' . the second single from the album was '' superman '' . however , that song did not repeat the success of '' dakota '' , peaking at number thirteen . after '' superman '' came '' devil '' , featuring a controversial video and reaching number eleven in the charts . the album was nominated for a the pop factory at the end of the year , losing out to feeder 's pushing the senses . on 2 july 2005 , the group appeared at the live 8 concert in hyde park , london , playing to their biggest audience yet . the band were also scheduled to support oasis for a number of dates across europe , in early 2006 , but pulled out due to family commitments . 2006 also saw the release of stereophonics ' first live album , live from dakota . the album is a two-disc compilation , featuring twenty tracks spanning all five of the band 's albums and capturing the best of their 2005 world tour . rather than being a recording of a single show , the tour was recorded every night and the band picked out the best version of each song individually . the album also features a track titled '' jayne '' , later released as part of kelly jones ' solo album , only the names have been changed . pull the pin was released in the uk on 15 october 2007 , along with a download-only taster ; '' bank holiday monday '' . the track was also available for free to people who pre-ordered tickets for the band 's concerts in 2007 . the album was written and recorded by november 2006 but held back for release until late 2007 . stereophonics : friends in the north video interview with stv.tv '' it means nothing '' was the first single of the album , released in september before the lp was released a week later on 15 october . the album contains twelve songs and reached number one in the uk 's official album chart . the next single , '' my friends '' , reached number thirty-two in the uk charts , their poorest chart performance since '' more life in a tramps vest '' from their debut album . on 20 may 2007 , at radio 1 's big weekend in preston , the band were joined on stage by casino frontman adam zindani . zindani continued to tour with the band for the remainder of the pull the pin tour , playing lead guitar and backing vocals . he has been credited for writing and performing on two of the band 's new tracks , '' you 're my star '' and '' my own worst enemy '' . on '' you 're my star '' , he sings backing vocals and plays lead guitar , whereas on '' my own worst enemy '' he only plays lead guitar . in november 2008 , stereophonics released their first greatest hits compilation , decade in the sun . on 8 december 2009 , the vancouver organizing committee for the 2010 olympic and paralympic winter games announced the line up for performers for the nightly victory ceremonies . these ceremonies included 30 minutes of entertainment from the evening 's host province/territory , 30 minutes of medal presentations , and a one-hour performance by a musical talent . stereophonics performed their song '' i got your number '' at this event on 20 february - yukon night . the band 's seventh album , titled keep calm and carry on , was released on 16 november 2009 . they decided on this name after seeing a poster in the white horse pub in richmond where they spent a lot of time whilst recording the album . the album 's debut single was '' innocent '' . the second single from the album , '' could you be the one ? '' , was released on 15 february 2010 . the band embarked on a seven-date tour to support the new album in march 2010 playing at aberdeen , newcastle , glasgow , nottingham , birmingham , manchester , sheffield and london . with support from glasgow band hip parade . on 5 june 2010 , stereophonics played the first-ever gig at the cardiff city stadium with support from unsigned south wales band 4th street traffic , followed by kids in glass houses and doves . the concert , known as '' summer in the city '' , was played to a sold-out audience of 30,000 . two days later , original drummer stuart cable was found dead in his home in aberdare having choked on his own vomit after binge drinking . after the keep calm and carry on tour concluded , and their contract with universal at an end , kelly jones wanted to change the way the band works and so decided to take a break from writing and recording an album every two years . . graffiti on the train , keep the village alive , scream above the sounds and kind . ( 2011–present ) . on 3 march 2011 , stereophonics announced on their facebook page that they were working on new music in the studio . in july 2012 it was announced that weyler and the band had parted company . the announcement was made on the band 's facebook page , though no reason was given for his departure . it was announced on 24 september 2012 that jamie morrison , former drummer for noisettes , had replaced weyler in the band . on 8 october 2012 , stereophonics released the video to a track titled '' violins and tambourines '' from the upcoming album . on 4 november , the first single from the new album , '' in a moment '' , was released as a free download from the band 's website . on the same day , nme.com reported that the album would be titled graffiti on the train . the album was released on 4 march 2013 . second single preceding the album , '' indian summer '' was released in january 2013 ; by 10 march it had peaked at number 30 in the uk , making it their group 's first uk top-40 single since 2007 . a third single , the album 's title track , was released on 13 may . in late september 2014 , it was announced via their twitter page that a new album has been mixed and that it should be released in 2015 . on 21 march 2015 , stereophonics performed in bristol and in london 's royal albert hall and debuted 3 new songs '' c'est la vie '' , '' i wan na get lost with you '' and '' song for the summer '' which are to be on their 9th album keep the village alive with the release date of 11 september . '' c'est la vie '' was released as the first single of the album . in september 2015 the band appeared on bbc two 's later . with jools holland . during the keep the summer alive tour , kelly jones announced he would like to release the band 's tenth studio album '' before next summer '' to commemorate the 20th anniversary of word gets around , rather than release a compilation album . on 27 july 2017 the band announced scream above the sounds as the title for the album and will be released on 27 october 2017 . it became available to pre-order on the same day . the album was released under the new distribution label '' parlophone '' , as the band parted ways with the old label v2 . the band released '' all in one night '' on the same day as the lead single from it . on 4 september 2017 '' caught by the wind '' was released as the second single from the album followed by '' before anyone knew our name '' as the third single on 20 october 2017.they released the album 's fourth and final single , '' what 's all the fuss about ? '' on 4 december 2017 . they will embark on the scream above the sounds tour in 2018 . in january 2019 stereophonics announced two shows as part of forest live , the summer concert series promoted by the forestry commission : thursday 13 june at westonbirt arboretum , near tetbury , gloucestershire and sunday 23 june at thetford forest , near brandon , suffolk . . other projects . on 9 october 2007 , a retrospective dvd was released in the united states , rewind ( video ) . the dvd is a double disc with a runtime of nearly four hours . much of this footage was recorded around the time that the you got ta go there to come back album was being recorded . this is because a similar band history dvd was listed for release shortly after that album but was never released , due to the departure of stuart cable . this explains jones ' hairstyle ( circa 2003/2004 ) in the interview footage and the appearance of stuart and the rest of the band freely talking about their togetherness and solidarity as the original three members . the original footage was updated by adding further footage to the end , bringing it up to date with the band 's fifth album . stuart does not appear on any of the extra footage . availability coincides with the us re-release of the language.sex.violence.other ? dvd , and the worldwide digital debut of their latest studio album , pull the pin . in 2007 , jones released a solo album , titled only the names have been changed , while recording the band 's sixth studio album , pull the pin . the album contains ten tracks ( all named after women ) and features minimal instrumentation . the album also includes the song '' jayne '' , a previously unreleased stereophonics track featured on the live album live from dakota and the rewind dvd . stereophonics also performed the original opening theme tune for the tv series long way round . the song 's lyrics were slightly altered for the follow-up series , long way down and long way up . personnel . ; current members kelly jones – lead vocals , lead guitar , keyboards , piano ( 1992–present ) richard jones – bass , keyboards , harmonica , backing vocals ( 1992–present ) adam zindani – rhythm guitar , backing vocals ( 2007–present ) jamie morrison – drums ( 2012–present ) ; former members stuart cable – drums , percussion ( 1992–2003 ; died 2010 ) javier weyler – drums , percussion , backing vocals ( 2004–2012 ) ; current touring musicians tony kirkham – keyboards , piano , harmonica , acoustic guitar , backing vocals ( 1999–present ) ; former touring musicians scott james – guitar , backing vocals ( 2001–2004 ) aileen mclaughlin – backing vocals ( 2002–2003 ) anna ross – backing vocals ( 2002–2003 ) steve gorman – drums , percussion ( 2003–2004 ; member of the black crowes ) sam yapp – drums , percussion ( 2012 ; member of casino ) . timeline . . discography . word gets around ( 1997 ) performance and cocktails ( 1999 ) just enough education to perform ( 2001 ) you got ta go there to come back ( 2003 ) language . sex . violence . other ? ( 2005 ) pull the pin ( 2007 ) keep calm and carry on ( 2009 ) graffiti on the train ( 2013 ) keep the village alive ( 2015 ) scream above the sounds ( 2017 ) kind ( 2019 ) . awards and nominations . controversies . stereophonics have come in for heavy criticism for allowing their gig at cardiff international arena to go ahead on 15 march 2020 amid fears over the covid-19 pandemic and despite the planned ban on mass gatherings by the government of the united kingdom .