Fixed capital

estimating the value . there are two primary methods for estimating the stock of fixed capital in any nation : direct measurement of the capital stock and perpetual inventory calculations . young , a . , & musgrave , j . c . ( 1980 ) . estimation of capital stock in the united states . the measurement of capital ( pp . 23-82 ) . university of chicago press . attempts have been made to estimate the value of the stock of fixed capital for the whole economy using direct enterprise surveys of '' book value '' , administrative business records , tax assessments , and data on gross fixed capital formation , price inflation and depreciation schedules . a pioneer in this area was the economist simon kuznets . simon kuznets , gross capital formation , 1919-1933 . new york : national bureau of economic research , 1934 . the '' perpetual inventory method '' ( pim ) used to estimate fixed capital stocks was invented by raymond w . goldsmith in 1951 and subsequently used around the world . raymond w . goldsmith , a perpetual inventory of national wealth . studies in income and wealth , vol . 14 . new york : nber , 1951 , pp . 5-74 . the basic idea of the pim method is , that one starts off from a benchmark asset figure , and adds on the net additions to fixed assets year by year ( using gross fixed capital formation data ) , while deducting annual estimates of economic depreciation based upon an explicit service life assumption , all data being adjusted for price inflation using a capital expenditure price index . in this way , one obtains a time series of annual fixed capital stocks . this data series can also be modified further with various other adjustments for prices , economic depreciation , etc . ( several variants of the pim approach are nowadays used by economic historians and statisticians ) . : '' estimates of fixed nonresidential business capital have been prepared in varying detail by the united states bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) since the mid-l950s , and estimates of residential capital have been prepared since 1970 . ( the bureau produces ) . annual estimates for the years since 1925 of gross and net stocks , depreciation , discards , ratios of net to gross stocks , and average ages of gross and net stocks in historical , constant , and current cost valuations by legal form of organization ( financial corporations , nonfinancial corporations , sole proprietorships and partnerships , other private business ) . the fixed nonresidential business capital estimates are also available within each legal form by major industry group ( farm , manufacturing , nonfarm nonmanufacturing ) , and the residential estimates are also available by tenure group ( owner-occupied and tenant-occupied ) . estimates of capital stocks ( capital goods ) and related measures by detailed types of assets are also available . '' . economic depreciation . depreciation as an economic concept distinguishes between '' . the value of the stock of capital assets and the annual value of that asset 's services , distinguishing between depreciation and inflation as sources of the change in asset value , and distinguishing between the depreciation in asset values and deterioration in an asset 's physical productivity . '' hulten , c . r . , & wykoff , f . c . ( 1980 ) . the measurement of economic depreciation . urban institute . accessed at depreciation is the cost of the stock of capital assets allocated over their service lives in proportion to estimates of their service lives , net of maintenance and repair costs . : '' in theory , the service life used in determining the allocation is the physical life-the length of time it is physically possible to use the asset . in some instances , this is longer than the economic life-the length of time it is economically feasible to use the asset . ( the service life estimate does not ) . reflect the effect of obsolescence . ( and ) . charged when the asset is retired . the reason for this treatment is that obsolescence has little if any effect on the time pattern of services provided by the asset before retirement , even though it is a determinant of the timing of retirement . the charge for obsolescence at retirement writes off the remainder of the asset as a component of capital consumption and in effect replaces the physical life with the economic service life . '' economic depreciation , therefore , is '' . the decline in asset price ( or shadow price ) is due to aging and varies with age '' economic depreciation is also characterized by an '' . age-price relationship in which the largest rate of price decline occurs in the early years of asset life . '' the depreciation write-off permitted for tax purposes may also diverge from that of economic depreciation or '' real '' depreciation rates . the key factor is the estimate of '' economic service life '' . economic depreciation can , however , be estimated with '' . sufficient precision to be useful in policy analysis . '' : '' economic analysis of growth and production , as well as the distribution of income , requires accurate estimates of capital stocks and of capital income . the estimation of capital stocks in turn requires an estimate of the quantity of capital used up in production , and the estimation of capital income requires an estimate of the corresponding loss in capital value . thus , even if depreciation policy ignores economic depreciation , we must still try to measure economic depreciation for use in national income and wealth accounting . '' . investment risk . a business executive who invests in or accumulates fixed capital is tying up wealth in a fixed asset , hoping to make a future profit . thus , such investment usually implies a risk . sometimes depreciation write-offs are also viewed partly as compensation for this risk . often leasing or renting a fixed asset ( such as a vehicle ) rather than buying it is preferred by enterprises because the cost of using it is lowered thereby , and the real owner may be able to obtain special tax advantages . sources of funding for fixed capital investment . an owner can obtain funding for the purchase of fixed capital assets from the aptly named capital market , where loans are given on a long-term basis . funding can also come from reserve funds , the selling of shares , and the issuing of debentures , bonds or other promissory notes . factors which influence fixed-capital requirements . the nature of the undertaking- the nature of the business , certainly plays a role in determining fixed capital requirements . a florist , for example , needs less fixed capital than a vehicle-assembly factory . the size of the undertaking- a general rule that states : the bigger the business , the higher the need for fixed capital . the stage of development of the undertaking- the requirement of capital for a new undertaking is usually greater than that needed for an established business that has reached optimum size . see also . capital capital accumulation capital formation consumption of fixed capital fixed investment gross fixed capital formation organic composition of capital stock and flow § listed in the new palgrave dictionary of economics 1st edition , 1987 , ( update search results button ) at . references . reed , s . a . ( 1989 ) . a historical analysis of depreciation accounting—the united states steel experience . accounting historians journal , 16 ( 2 ) , 119-153 . accessed at bureau of economic analysis , ( september 2003 ) fixed assets and consumer durable goods in the united states , 1925-1997 canberra group on capital stock statistics conference , march 1997