Battle of Zama

prelude . crossing the alps , hannibal reached the italian peninsula in 218 & nbsp ; bc and won several major victories against the roman armies . the romans failed to defeat him in the field and he remained in italy , but following scipio 's decisive victory at the battle of ilipa in spain in 206 & nbsp ; bc , iberia had been secured by the romans . in 205 & nbsp ; bc scipio returned to rome , where he was elected consul by unanimous vote . scipio , now powerful enough , proposed to end the war by directly invading the tunisia . livy , 28.40 the senate initially opposed this ambitious design of scipio , persuaded by quintus fabius maximus that the enterprise was far too hazardous . scipio and his supporters eventually convinced the senate to ratify the plan , and scipio was given the requisite authority to attempt the invasion . initially , scipio received no levy troops , and he sailed to sicily with a group of 7,000 heterogeneous volunteers . he was later authorized to employ the regular forces stationed in sicily , which consisted mainly of the remnants of the 5th and 6th legion , exiled to the island as a punishment for the humiliation they suffered at the battle of cannae . scipio continued to reinforce his troops with local defectors . he landed at utica and defeated the carthaginian army at the battle of the great plains in 203 & nbsp ; bc . the panicked carthaginians felt that they had no alternative but to offer peace to scipio , and having the authority to do so , scipio granted peace on generous terms . under the treaty , carthage could keep its african territory but would lose its overseas empire , by that time a fait-accompli . masinissa was to be allowed to expand numidia into parts of africa . also , carthage was to reduce its fleet and pay a war indemnity . the roman senate ratified the treaty . the carthaginian senate recalled hannibal , who was still in italy ( although confined to the south of the peninsula ) when scipio landed in africa , in 203 & nbsp ; bc . meanwhile , the carthaginians breached the armistice agreement by capturing a stranded roman fleet in the gulf of tunis and stripping it of supplies . the carthaginians no longer believed a treaty advantageous , and rebuffed it under much roman protest . . troop deployment . hannibal led an army comprising spanish mercenaries , gauls allies , local citizens and veterans , and numidian cavalry from his italian campaigns . scipio led a pre-marian roman army quincunx , along with a body of numidian cavalry . the battle took place at zama regia , near siliana 130 & nbsp ; km southwest of tunis . hannibal was first to march and reach the plains of zama regia , which were suitable for cavalry maneuvering . this also gave an edge in turn to scipio , who relied greatly on his roman heavy cavalry and numidian light cavalry . hannibal deployed his troops facing northwest , while scipio deployed his troops in front of the carthaginian army facing southeast . hannibal 's army consisted of 36,000 infantry , 4,000 cavalry and 80 war elephants , while scipio had a total of 29,000 infantry and 6,100 cavalry . putting his cavalry on the flanks , with the inexperienced carthaginian cavalry on the right and the numidians on the left , hannibal aligned the rest of his troops in three straight lines behind his elephants . carey , hannibal 's last battle , p.116 the first line consisted of mixed infantry of mercenaries from gaul , liguria and the balearic islands . in his second line he placed the carthaginian and libyan citizen levies , while his veterans from italy , including mercenaries from gaul and hispania , were placed in the third line . hannibal intentionally held back his third infantry line , in order to thwart scipio 's tendency to pin the carthaginian center and envelop his opponent 's lines , as he had done at the battle of ilipa . livy states that hannibal deployed 4,000 macedonians in the second line . their presence is widely discounted as roman propaganda , although t . dorey suggests that there may be a grain of truth here if the carthaginians recruited a trivial and unofficial number of mercenaries from macedonia . scipio deployed his army in three lines : the first was composed of the hastati , the second of principes and the third of the triarii . the stronger right wing was composed of the numidian cavalry and commanded by masinissa , while the left was composed of italian cavalry under the command of laelius . the greatest concern for scipio was the elephants . he came up with an ingenious plan to deal with them . image : young folks ' history of rome illus174.png thumb right 250px meeting of hannibal and scipio at zama ( charlotte mary yonge ) , 1880 . scipio knew that elephants could be ordered to charge forward , but they could only continue their charge in a straight line . he believed that if he opened gaps in his troops , the elephants would simply pass between them without harming any of his soldiers . he created lanes between the regiments across the depth of his forces and hid them with maniples of skirmishers . the plan was that when the elephants charged , these lanes would open , allowing them to pass through the legionaries ' ranks and be dealt with at the rear of the army . hannibal and the carthaginians had relied on cavalry superiority in previous battles such as cannae , but scipio , recognizing their importance , held the cavalry advantage at zama . this was due in part to his raising of a new cavalry regiment in sicily and careful courting of masinissa as an ally . hannibal most likely believed that the combination of the war elephants and the depth of the first two lines would weaken and disorganize the roman advance . this would have allowed him to complete a victory with his reserves in the third line and overlap scipio 's lines . though this formation was well-conceived , it failed to produce a carthaginian victory . the two men are said to have met face-to-face before the battle . hannibal offered a treaty that would give up any claims to overseas territories to ensure the sovereignty of carthage . scipio refused , saying that it was either unconditional surrender or battle . the battle . at the outset of the battle , hannibal unleashed his elephants and skirmishers against the roman army in order to break the cohesion of their lines and exploit the breaches that could be opened . the attack was met by roman skirmishers . in addition , scipio ordered the cavalry to blow loud horns to frighten the beasts , which partly succeeded , and several rampaging elephants turned towards the carthaginian left wing and disordered it completely . seizing this opportunity , masinissa led his numidian cavalry and charged at the carthaginian left wing , which was also composed of numidian cavalry , and was unknowingly lured off the field . meanwhile , the rest of the elephants were carefully lured through the lanes and funneled to the rear of the roman army , where they were dealt with . scipio 's plan to neutralize the threat of the elephants had worked ; his troops then fell back into traditional roman battle formation . laelius , the commander of the roman left wing , charged against the carthaginian right . the carthaginian cavalry , acting on the instructions of hannibal , allowed the roman cavalry to chase them in order to lure them away from the battlefield so that they would n't attack the carthaginian armies in the rear . scipio now marched with his center towards the carthaginian center , which was under the direct command of hannibal . hannibal moved forward with two lines ; the third line of veterans was kept in reserve . after a close contest , his first line was pushed back by the roman hastati . hannibal ordered his second line not to allow the first line in their ranks . the bulk of them managed to escape and position themselves on the wings of the second line on hannibal 's instructions . hannibal now charged with his second line . a furious struggle ensued and the roman hastati were pushed back with heavy losses . scipio reinforced the hastati with the second-line principes . with this reinforcement the roman front renewed their attack and defeated hannibal 's second line . again , it was not allowed to merge with the third line and was forced to the wings , along with the first line . carthaginian cavalry carried out hannibal 's instructions well and there was no sign of roman cavalry on the battlefield . once the carthaginian cavalry was far enough away , they turned and attacked the roman cavalry but were eventually routed . at this point there was a pause in the battle as both sides redeployed their troops . scipio played for time as he redeployed his forces in a single line with the hastati in the middle , the principes in the inner wings and the triarii on the outer wings . hannibal waited for scipio to attack . the resulting clash was fierce and bloody , with neither side achieving superiority . scipio was able to rally his men . the battle finally turned in the romans ' favor when the roman cavalry returned to the battlefield and attacked the carthaginian line from behind . the carthaginian infantry was encircled and annihilated . thousands of carthaginians , including hannibal , managed to escape the slaughter . hannibal experienced a major defeat that put an end to all resistance on the part of carthage . in total , as many as 20,000 of hannibal 's troops were killed at zama , while 20,000 more were taken prisoner . the romans suffered 2,500 dead . adrian goldsworthy , the fall of carthage , the punic wars 265–146 bc , phoenix , 2006 , pp . 305–307 . aftermath . soon after scipio 's victory at zama the war ended , with the carthaginian senate suing for peace . unlike the treaty that ended the first punic war , the terms carthage acceded to were so punishing that it was never able to challenge rome for supremacy of the mediterranean again . the treaty bankrupted carthage and destroyed any chance of its being a military power in the future . scipio returned to rome a hero and was almost immediately granted a triumph by the senate . hannibal initially returned to carthage and went into civilian politics ; under his leadership carthage experienced a rapid post-war economic recovery . this startled the romans , who considered the carthaginian general a great potential threat as long as he lived . hannibal still had many enemies both inside and outside of carthage . due to pressure from both rome and domestic political rivals , hannibal voluntarily stepped down from power and went into exile . for the rest of his life , he traveled across the mediterranean , offering his service to any polity waging war against rome . though many were eager to accept his offer , hannibal ultimately failed to check roman expansion . in 184bc , facing imminent capture , hannibal chose suicide instead . one provision of the treaty ending the second punic war was that the carthaginians were not allowed to make war without roman consent . this allowed the romans to establish a casus belli for the third punic war about 50 years later , after the carthaginians defended themselves from numidian encroachments , against which the romans did not initially intervene . by then , carthaginian power was a shadow of its former self . though they fought with some success early on , the carthaginians simply could not defeat the by-then very aged masinissa once the armies of his roman allies arrived in africa . unable to field a viable force in open combat and abandoned by all of their punic allies , the carthaginians commenced a spirited defense of their home city which , after an extended siege , was captured and completely destroyed in 146 & nbsp ; bc . only 55,000 of the city ’ s inhabitants survived , almost all of whom were sold into slavery by the romans . . notes . references . steven james . '' the army and fleet of publius scipio 's african campaign : 204 bc '' . robert f . pennel ; ancient rome from the earliest times down to 476 a.d ; 1890 polybius ; the general history of polybius , volume 2 ; w . baxter for j . parker , 1823 . external links . the battle of zama battle of zama from unrv history