Tripod

etymology . first attested in english in the early 17th century , the word tripod comes via latin tripodis ( gen of tripus ) , which is the romanization of greek ( tripous ) , '' three-footed '' ( gen , tripodos ) , ultimately from ( tri- ) , '' three times '' . ( from , tria , '' three '' ) . + ( pous ) , '' foot '' . . the earliest attested form of the word is the mycenaean greek , ti-ri-po , written in linear b syllabic script . ti-ri-po is found on the py ta 641 and py ta 709 tablets . , ti-ri-po-de ( found on the py ta 641 tablet ) , is the nom dual form of the word . . cultural use . image : liu ding.jpg thumb a ding from late shang dynasty . many cultures , including the ancient peoples of china and greece , used tripods as ornaments , trophies , sacrificial altars , cooking vessels or cauldrons , and decorative ceramic pottery . tripod pottery have been part of the archaeological assemblage in china since the earliest neolithic cultures of cishan and peiligang in the 7th and 8th millennium bc . sacrificial tripods were found in use in ancient china usually cast in bronze but sometimes appearing in ceramic form . they are often referred to as '' dings '' and usually have three legs , but in some usages have four legs . the chinese use sacrificial tripods symbolically in modern times , such as in 2005 , when a '' national unity tripod '' made of bronze was presented by the central chinese government to the government of northwest china 's xinjiang to mark its fiftieth birthday . it was described as a traditional chinese sacrificial vessel symbolizing unity . in ancient greece , tripods were frequently used to support lebes , or cauldrons , sometimes for cooking and other uses such as supporting vases . firearms . on firearms , tripods are commonly used on machine guns to provide a forward rest and to reduce motion from recoil . machine guns are capable of firing long continuous bursts of fire , but at the cost of increased recoil ( which decreases accuracy ) , and increased weight ( machine guns are heavier in order to absorb the stresses of prolonged fully automatic fire ) . the tripod permits the operator to rest the weapon on the ground and thus the gun feels lighter to the shooter and accuracy is increased . tripods are generally restricted to heavier weapons where the weight would be an encumbrance . for lighter weapons such as rifles , a bipod is more common . photography . usage . tripods are used for both motion and still photography to prevent camera movement and provide stability . they are especially necessary when slow-speed exposures are being made , or when telephoto lenses are used , as any camera shake while the shutter is open will produce a blurred image . in the same vein , they reduce camera shake , and thus are instrumental in achieving maximum sharpness . a tripod is also helpful in achieving precise framing of the image , or when more than one image is being made of the same scene , for example when bracketing the exposure . use of a tripod may also allow for a more thoughtful approach to photography . for these reasons , a tripod of some sort is often necessary for professional photography . in relation to film/video , use of the tripod offers stability within a shot as well as certain desired heights . the use of a tripod within film/video is often a creative choice of the director . construction . for maximum strength and stability , as well as for easy levelling , most photographic tripods are braced around collapsible telescopic legs , with a center post that moves up and down . to further allow extension , the center post can usually extend above the meeting of three legs . at the top of the tripod is the head , which includes the camera mount ( usually a detachable plate with a thumbscrew to hold the camera ) . the head connects to the frame by several joints , allowing the camera to pan , tilt and roll . the head usually attaches to a lever so that adjustments to the orientation can be performed more delicately . some tripods also feature integrated remote controls for a camera , though these are usually proprietary to the company that manufactured the camera . surveying . a surveyor 's tripod is a device used to support any one of a number of surveying instruments , such as theodolites , total stations , levels or transits . usage . the tripod is placed in the location where it is needed . the surveyor will press down on the legs ' platforms to securely anchor the legs in soil or to force the feet to a low position on uneven , pock-marked pavement . leg lengths are adjusted to bring the tripod head to a convenient height and make it roughly level . once the tripod is positioned and secure , the instrument is placed on the head . the mounting screw is pushed up under the instrument to engage the instrument 's base and screwed tight when the instrument is in the correct position . the flat surface of the tripod head is called the foot plate and is used to support the adjustable feet of the instrument . positioning the tripod and instrument precisely over an indicated mark on the ground or benchmark requires techniques that are beyond the scope of this article . construction . many modern tripods are constructed of aluminum , though wood is still used for legs . the feet are either aluminum tipped with a steel point or steel . the mounting screw is often brass or brass and plastic . the mounting screw is hollow to allow the optical plumb to be viewed through the screw . the top is typically threaded with a 5/8 '' x 11 tpi screw thread . the mounting screw is held to the underside of the tripod head by a movable arm . this permits the screw to be moved anywhere within the head 's opening . the legs are attached to the head with adjustable screws that are usually kept tight enough to allow the legs to be moved with a bit of resistance . the legs are two part , with the lower part capable of telescoping to adjust the length of the leg to suit the terrain . aluminum or steel slip joints with a tightening screw are at the bottom of the upper leg to hold the bottom part in place and fix the length . a shoulder strap is often affixed to the tripod to allow for ease of carrying the equipment over areas to be surveyed . astronomy . the astronomical tripod is a sturdy three-leg stand used to support telescopes or binoculars , though they may also be used to support attached cameras or ancillary equipment . the astronomical tripod is normally fitted with an altazimuth or equatorial mount to assist in tracking celestial bodies . . laboratory . laboratory tripod is a portable , three-legged platform equipment , which is usually made of lightweight metal such as stainless steel or aluminium so that it can be moved conveniently within the lab . the main usage is to support or hold the flasks and beakers during experiments .