List of people from Rochester, New York

academics . martin brewer anderson , first president of university of rochester richard n . aslin , developmental psychologist at the university of rochester boris bittker , legal academic harry gideonse ( 1901–1985 ) , president of brooklyn college , and chancellor of the new school for social research hilda conrady kingslake , optics engineer rudolf kingslake , optics engineer michael a . marletta , biochemist , macarthur fellow , former ceo of scripps research institute e . c . mills , educator h . allen orr , evolutionary biologist , winner of the darwin-wallace medal robert putnam , harvard professor richard w . rahn , economist joel seligman , former president of the university of rochester eugene h . spafford , purdue university professor ching w . tang , 2011 recipient of the wolf prize in chemistry robert e . wright , nef family chair of political economy , augustana college , south dakota kenneth rogoff , harvard professor . architects and designers . claude fayette bragdon , architect harvey ellis , architect robert trent jones , golf course architect fletcher steele , landscape designer clarence stein , urban planner , architect and writer who advocated for the garden city movement john rochester thomas , architect andrew jackson warner , architect j . foster warner , architect . athletes . like most cities , rochester has its share of famous ( and not-so-famous ) athletes . among the biggest names are walter hagen in golf , johnny antonelli in baseball , brian gionta and ryan callahan in hockey , thomas bryant in the nba , abby wambach in soccer , and jon jones in mixed martial arts . baseball . johnny antonelli , mlb ross barnes , hit the first recorded home run in professional baseball bernie boland chris bostick , indianapolis indians , pittsburgh pirates cito culver , 2010 first-round draft pick heinie groh , mlb mike jones , mlb bob keegan , mlb andy parrino , mlb charley radbourn , mlb tim redding , mlb george selkirk , mlb . basketball . joe arlauckas thomas bryant , nba al butler , nba marty byrnes , nba al cervi , nba player and coach les harrison , nba player and coach mark jones , nba jack leasure jeff van gundy stan van gundy art long , nba ryan pettinella robert rose , nba and nbl ( australia ) player ; won the nbl mvp award ( 1993 , 2001 ) , nbl champion 1992 bernie voorheis , nbl john wallace , nba . combat sports . carmen basilio , champion boxer gregor gillespie , lightweight fighter in the ufc , also known as '' the gift '' and the best fisherman in the mma desmond green , featherweight fighter in ufc jon jones , ufc light heavyweight champion willie monroe , jr . , middleweight boxer charles murray ( boxer ) , light welterweight boxer frank trigg , welterweight fighter in the ufc felicia zimmerman , fencer , 1996 and 2000 olympics iris zimmerman , fencer , 2000 olympics . wrestling . johnny barend colin delaney , wwe brodie lee , ring names luke harper and brodie lee chyna gorilla monsoon the roadblock . football . branden albert , nfl cris crissy , nfl don davey , nfl quentin gause , nfl tony green , nfl don holleder , college football star and vietnam war hero ernest jackson , cfl t . j . jackson , nfl arthur jones , nfl chandler jones , nfl tony jordan , nfl jim kane , nfl pat kelly , nfl rob konrad , nfl brian kozlowski , nfl leo lyons , founder of the nfl 's rochester jeffersons kevin mcmahan , nfl seth payne , nfl ( victor ) adam podlesh , nfl robert r . thomas , chief justice of the supreme court of illinois and former nfl player david walker , ncaa coach roland williams , nfl marcus wilson , nfl alan zemaitis , nfl . golf . dan conway , eagle vale weekend warrior- part time don allen , championship amateur golfer terry diehl , pga tour danielle downey , lpga player walter hagen , pga legend calvin peete , african-american pga tour pioneer jeff sluman , pga tour and champions tour sam urzetta , 1950 u.s . amateur champion and professional golfer . hockey . phil lane , ahl , euro matt lane , phil lane younger brother , ncaa champ dan conway , floor hockey professional-retired scott bartlett , echl mike battaglia , echl jason bonsignore , nhl ryan callahan , nhl adam clendening , nhl chris collins , ahl rory fitzpatrick , nhl brian gionta , nhl stephen gionta , nhl kim insalaco , olympic medalist connor knapp , nhl matt lane shane prince , nhl marty reasoner , nhl david shields , ahl francis spain , 1936 winter olympic bronze medalist lyndsay wall , olympic medalist derek whitmore , nhl . lacrosse . dan conway , greece athena hs- retired paul cantabene grant catalino , mll pat cougevan , nll sean doyle , mll shawn nadelen , nll and mll brett queener , nll and mll chris schiller , nll and mll tim soudan joe walters , nll and mll . soccer . jordan allen , mls brian bliss , mls dema kovalenko , mls lydia vandenbergh , wps josh bolton , usl daniel lynd , usl abby wambach , two-time olympic gold medalist , women 's world cup champion , all-time highest scoring international player . swimming and diving . kara lynn joyce , olympic medalist ryan lochte , 11-time olympic medalist richard saeger , 1984 olympic gold medalist wendy wyland , 1984 olympic medalist , diving . other athletes . dick buerkle , athlete , former world-record holder , indoor mile paige conners , olympic ice dancer for israel william cox , athlete , 1924 olympic medalist irving crane , billiards , six-time world champion , billiard congress of america hall of famer bill davey , bodybuilder , 1997 aau mr . america louis fox , 1865 national billiards champion doug kent , professional bowler , 2006–07 pba player of the year a.j . kitt , downhill skier , 1988–98 olympics jason mcelwain , basketball personality danny padilla , bodybuilder , '' the giant killer '' stacey pensgen , figure skater and meteorologist pete pfitzinger , marathoner , 1984 and 1988 u.s . olympics frank ritter shumway , figure skater mike sigel , billiards , billiard congress of america hall of famer jenn suhr ( née stuczynski ) , 2012 olympic gold medalist , pole vault maynard troyer , nascar cathy turner , olympic gold medalist , short-track speed skating jason turner , 2008 olympic medalist , air pistol . coaches . joe altobelli , baseball manager richard callaghan , figure skater and coach dave sarachan , soccer player and coach . officials . nick bremigan , mlb umpire jimmy debell , nfl official ken kaiser , mlb baseball umpire bill klem , umpire in baseball hall of fame ; umpired in a record 18 world series silk o'loughlin , mlb baseball umpire . executives . : see sports executives , below . broadcasters . : see sport broadcasters , below . businesspeople . rochester 's history of innovation and progress is reflected in the long list of notable businessmen who founded their companies here . eastman kodak , bausch + lomb , xerox , gannett company , and western union all trace their roots to rochester . charles august , co-founder of monro muffler brake john jacob bausch , co-founder of bausch & lomb thasunda duckett , ceo of teachers insurance and annuity association of america and former jpmorgan chase executive george eastman , eastman kodak founder charles j . folger , lawyer , jurist and statesman frank gannett , founder of gannett newspapers ; presidential candidate malcolm glazer , ceo of first allied ; owner of tampa bay buccaneers and manchester united kate gleason , first female mechanical engineer tom golisano , paychex founder , philanthropist , gubernatorial candidate ; owner of nhl 's buffalo sabres ( 2003–2010 ) martha matilda harper , hair care entrepreneur leonard jerome , financier , '' king of wall street '' ; grandfather of sir winston churchill david t . kearns , xerox ceo and deputy secretary of education henry lomb , co-founder of bausch & lomb ralph peo ( 1897–1966 ) , inventor , founder of frontier industries , ceo & chairman of houdaille industries arthur rock , venture capitalist hiram sibley , western union co-founder henry a . strong , eastman kodak co-founder and president hulbert harrington warner , patent medicine sales don alonzo watson , western union co-founder robert wegman and danny wegman , of wegmans food markets henry wells , founder of american express and co-founder of wells fargo joseph c . wilson , founder of xerox corporation luke wood , president of beats electronics . computing and internet . eric bauman , founder of ebaum 's world paul buchheit , creator of gmail and adsense ; founder of friendfeed burnie burns , co-founder of rooster teeth , an online video production company diane greene , founder of vmware . inventors . william seward burroughs i matthew ewing , carpenter and inventor james caleb jackson , granula daniel myron lefever , gun maker and inventor of the hammerless shotgun c . j . rapp , jolt cola john samuel rowell , agricultural inventor and manufacturing industrialist steve sasson , demonstrated first digital electronic camera george b . selden , automotive pioneer s . donald stookey , inventor of corningware . sports executives . steve donner , hockey kim pegula , co-owner and president , buffalo sabres , buffalo bills , buffalo bandits , buffalo beauts and rochester americans morrie silver , minor-league baseball . criminals ( suspected or convicted ) . alphabet murders , cold case kenneth bianchi , one of the hillside stranglers angelo buono , jr . , one of the hillside stranglers arthur shawcross , serial killer francis tumblety , one of the jack the ripper suspects . entertainers . actors and models . the most acclaimed actor to come out of the rochester area is academy award winner philip seymour hoffman ; prior to him , rochester 's main claim to fame on stage and screen was robert forster . john lithgow was born ( but not raised ) in rochester , and louise brooks died in rochester after many years as a recluse there . other popular rochesterians on the screen include comedian kristen wiig and voice actor vincent martella . tyson beckford , fashion model and television personality john bolton , actor , a christmas story : the musical pandora boxx , drag queen peter breck , actor , '' the big valley '' western series , '' thunder road '' movie , guest starred in many tv shows and acted in theater productions louise brooks , actress of 1920s and 30s burnie burns , voice actor , red vs . blue ; co-founder of rooster teeth donna lynne champlin , broadway actress julie lynn cialini , playboy model jordan clarke , actor , guiding light jennifer cody , dancer and actress taye diggs , actor , rent , private practice pete duel , actor , alias smith and jones winston duke , actor , black panther marilyn erskine , actress dan finnerty , singer and actor nicole fiscella , actress , gossip girl robert forster , oscar-nominated actor , jackie brown susan gibney , actress , crossing jordan rachel hilbert , model , victoria 's secret philip seymour hoffman , oscar-winning actor tom keene , western actor mimi kennedy , actress and activist norman kerry , silent film actor hudson leick , actress , xena : warrior princess kara lindsay , actress , newsies john lithgow , oscar , tony and emmy-nominated actor rick lyon , broadway puppeteer and puppet designer vincent martella , actor , everybody hates chris timothy mitchum , actor , the lion king audrey munson , early 20th-century model paul napier , television and commercial actor , sag leader hugh o'brian , actor , films and wyatt earp television series michael park , actor , as the world turns richard ryder , actor , forever young brennan swain , contestant , the amazing race joy tanner , actress tom villard , actor , we got it made gloria votsis , actress jimmy wallington , actor and radio personality kristen wiig , comedian and actress , saturday night live . comedians . foster brooks jay jason . dancers and choreographers . aesha ash , ballet dancer garth fagan , choreographer , considers rochester home base sybil shearer . musicians . thanks in part to the eastman school of music , rochester has an especially rich musical legacy , most notably as the birthplace of cab calloway and the hometown of jazz great chuck mangione . lou gramm of foreigner is also a native , while gene cornish of the rascals is a more recent transplant . jeff tyzik is one of the great jazz arrangers and pops conductors . a number of nationally known musicians have passed through the halls of the eastman school , either as students or professors ( or both ) . classical music . david diamond , composer renée fleming , soprano adolphus hailstork , composer howard hanson , composer and conductor david hochstein , virtuoso violinist claire huangci , pianist daniel katzen gregory kunde , tenor ward stare , conductor and trombonist jeff tyzik , conductor and jazz trumpeter william warfield , bass-baritone alec wilder , composer zvi zeitlin , violinist and teacher . jazz , big bands , and blues . cab calloway , bandleader chet catallo , guitarist , spyro gyra , chet catallo and the cats , hank d'amico , clarinetist steve gadd , drummer michael hashim , saxophonist son house , bluesman vijay iyer , jazz pianist nancy kelly , jazz singer chuck mangione , smooth jazz flugelhornist gap mangione , bandleader roy mccurdy , drummer mitch miller , bandleader john mooney , bluesiana famoudou don moye , drummer , art ensemble of chicago gerry niewood , saxophonist joe romano , jazz saxophonist frank strazzeri , jazz pianist john viavattine , mambo kings . popular music . lou gramm , lead singer of foreigner , and gene cornish of the rascals might be the best-known pop musicians from rochester . gary lewis ( of gary lewis and the playboys ) came to the area late in life but now calls it home . notable bands whose members are largely or entirely rochesterians include gym class heroes , joywave , rustix , snmnmnm , and the sunstreak . steve alaimo , teen idol pop singer , hosted and co-produced dick clark 's where the action is gene cornish , the rascals rivers cuomo , weezer brann dailor , mastodon steve decker , gym class heroes duke jupiter joe english , drummer for wings and sea level teddy geiger glory kim gordon , sonic youth lou gramm , foreigner dj green lantern , rapper mick guzauski , mixer davey havok , afi and blaqk audio bill kelliher , mastodon gary lewis , gary lewis and the playboys disashi lumumba-kasongo , gym class heroes ( from nearby ithaca , ny ) lydia lunch travis mccoy , gym class heroes ( from nearby geneva , ny ) matt mcginley , gym class heroes ( from nearby geneva , ny ) bob nastanovich , pavement mike piano , the sandpipers don potter bobby orlando , producer emilio rojas , rapper david schuler , the sunstreak nicepeter ( '' nicepeter '' ) joyce sims william tell , something corporate tweet , born charlene keys virus , aka andre karkos , device , big & rich , dope , lords of acid leehom wang , c-pop wendy o . williams , plasmatics tim yeung , divine heresy , morbid angel kill the noise , better known as kill the noise , disk jockey and producer . others . the campbell brothers , instrumental gospel quartet christine lavin , folk singer/songwriter julia nunes , folk ukelelist and singer/songwriter lauren o'connell , folk singer/songwriter lesley riddle , 'human tape recorder ' during a.p . carter 's song collecting excursions ferdinand jay smith iii , composer , promoter , advertising executive robert bernhardt , symphony conductor . other . raul dasilva , author , filmmaker thérèse deprez , production designer andrea nix fine , oscar-winning documentary producer , inocente sean fine , oscar-winning documentarian , inocente jason hawes , founder of the atlantic paranormal society and sci fi channel series ghost hunters jenna mourey , youtube personality , screen name '' jenna marbles '' james sibley watson , grandson of western union founders hiram sibley and don alonzo watson ; doctor and filmmaker andrew rea , creator/host of popular youtube cooking series '' binging with babish '' . government . politicians and leaders . parmenio adams , u.s . representative nathaniel allen , u.s . representative fernando c . beaman , u.s . representative charles billinghurst , u.s . representative from wisconsin harmon p . burroughs , illinois state representative 'official directory of the legislature of illinois 1895 , ' j . l . pickering-editor , ' springfield , illinois : 1895 , biographical sketch of harmon p . burroughs , p . 33-34 angus cameron , u.s . senator from wisconsin sanford e . church , lieutenant governor of new york , new york state comptroller , and chief judge of new york state court of appeals edward colman , wisconsin state senator cornplanter , leader of the seneca robert duffy , former rochester police chief , rochester 's 65th mayor , and nys lieutenant governor , president and ceo of the greater rochester chamber of commerce ; marion b . folsom , secretary of health , education and welfare john rankin gamble , u.s . representative from south dakota john w . gunning , wisconsin state assemblyman 'wisconsin blue book 1889 , ' biographical sketch of john w . gunning , pg . 501 leopold hammel , wisconsin state assemblyman 'wisconsin blue book 1887 , ' biographical sketch of leopold hammel , pg . 504-505 elizur k . hart , u.s . representative and founder of rochester post-express newspaper david j . hayes , deputy secretary of the interior charles h . holmes , u.s . representative kenneth keating , u.s . representative , senator , and ambassador to israel robert l . king , state assemblyman , county executive , and chancellor of the state university of new york brian kolb , minority leader of the new york state assembly charles h . nesbitt , assemblyman and assembly minority leader bill nojay , assemblyman , public authority leader , and radio talk show host william f . quinn , governor of hawaii john raines , state senator eliakim sherrill , politician and brigade commander in union army during civil war louise slaughter , u.s . representative , chairperson of house rules committee ellicott r . stillman , wisconsin state assemblyman 'wisconsin blue book 1895 , ' biographical sketch of ellicott r . stillan , pg . 698 thomas benton stoddard , first mayor of la crosse , wisconsin , and state assemblyman james w . symington , chief of protocol of the united states ( 1966-68 ) and u.s . representative ( 1969-77 ) john todd trowbridge , wisconsin territorial legislator and sea captain 'the trowbridge genealogy : the history of the trowbridge family in america , ' francis bacon trowbridge , tuttle , morehouse and taylor company : 1908 , biographical sketch of john todd trowbridge , pg . 80-81 tom warner , representative in florida state legislature . judges and lawyers . benjamin cunningham , supreme court justice robert khuzami , deputy u.s . attorney donald mark , new york supreme court justice 'donald mark , former state supreme court justice , dies at 91 , ' the rochester democratic & chronicle , laura peace , february 12 , 2018 robert r . thomas , chief justice of the supreme court of illinois and former nfl player . military personnel . military personnel best known as astronauts are listed below under scientists . brigadier general john f . albert , deputy chief of chaplains of the u.s . air force corporal richard brookins , the '' american st . nick '' of world war ii major general mary e . clarke , director of the women 's army corps ; first woman to attain the rank of major general in the us army lieutenant elmer heindl , wwii chaplain general francišak kušal , commander of the byelorussian home defence major general daniel mccallum , head of the united states military railroad major general william augustus mills , served during the defense of the niagara frontier in the war of 1812 colonel patrick o'rorke . media . authors and writers . isabella macdonald alden , author john ashbery , poet natallia arsiennieva , poet nicholson baker , author andrea barrett , short-story writer philip barry , playwright richard brookhiser , biographer marcia brown , caldecott-winning author rob byrnes , writer , lambda literary award winner ron carlivati , head writer of one life to live , general hospital tom chiarella , writer for esquire francis pharcellus church , publisher and editor cornelius eady , poet thomas fenton , screenwriter , saw iv edith willis linn forbes , poet and writer joseph fornieri , historian , political scientist dana fox , screenwriter , the wedding date geoffrey giuliano , biographer virginia haviland , librarian and writer edward d . hoch , mystery writer mary jane holmes , 19th-century author david hudson , lawyer and writer charles r . jackson , author of the lost weekend shirley jackson , author , the lottery david cay johnston , pulitzer prize winner , reporter for new york times garson kanin , playwright and screenwriter mollie katzen , chef and cookbook author stanton davis kirkham , naturalist michael muhammad knight , novelist sonja livingston , author jerre mangione , writer minerva brace norton , educator and author linda sue park , newbery medal winner marjorie kinnan rawlings , author , pulitzer prize winner for the yearling david oliver relin , journalist and author , three cups of tea julia sauer , librarian and author david schickler , author , kissing in manhattan and sweet and vicious emma augusta sharkey , writer mark shulman , children 's author joe simon , comic book writer , co-creator of captain america thomas thackeray swinburne ( 1865–1926 ) , poet chris van etten , tv writer and author . broadcasters and journalists . don alhart , television journalist ralph bown , radio pioneer richard ben cramer , journalist and author , pulitzer prize winner jean giambrone , journalist , first woman credentialed for masters golf sean lahman , sports statistician and newspaper journalist john machacek , pulitzer prize winner ( 1972 , spot reporting ) anne montgomery , wroc sports reporter and espn broadcaster henry jarvis raymond , journalist and founder of new york times neil rogers , radio host martin sargent , professional '' nerd '' and host of twif steve scully , c-span host ; reporter and anchor at whec-tv in rochester jimmy wallington , radio personality irv weinstein , television journalist . sport broadcasters . mike catalana , rochester television executive lanny frattare , pittsburgh pirates hank greenwald , san francisco giants josh lewin , san diego chargers and texas rangers clem mccarthy , sportscaster and newsreel narrator nick nickson , jr . , los angeles kings bill stern , sportscaster in national radio hall of fame jeff van gundy , pro basketball pete van wieren , atlanta braves . photographers and artists . metalwork sculptor albert paley , although originally from philadelphia , has lived and worked in rochester for over four decades ; he 's probably the region 's most prominent artist . like many other artists , he came to rochester because of rit 's school for american crafts . alfred agate , painter frederick styles agate , painter harry bliss , cartoonist wendell castle , wood furniture sculptor arthur dove , abstract painter emil gruppe , impressionist painter nicholas gurewitch , creator of the perry bible fellowship peter hannan , creator of catdog james d . havens , woodcut artist ; early insulin recipient maud humphrey , commercial illustrator , suffragist ; mother of actor humphrey bogart jeannette klute , photographer marilyn leavitt-imblum , needlework designer albert paley , metalwork sculptor manuel rivera-ortiz , photographer . other . larry ashmead , book editor . religion and philosophy . reverend francis bellamy , wrote the pledge of allegiance antoinette brown blackwell , first female minister james callan , former catholic priest fox sisters , spiritualists philip kapleau , brought zen buddhism to western mainstream 1964 ; founded rochester zen center max landsberg ( 1845–1927 ) , rabbi of b'rith kodesh bishop bernard john mcquaid carolyn merchant , philosopher and historian walter rauschenbusch , theologian abraham resnick , rabbi in ashgabat , kokand , moscow , quincy ma , lowell ma and rochester benjamin titus roberts , founder , free methodist church bishop fulton sheen , archbishop and television personality joseph smith , founder of latter day saint movement paul j . swain , roman catholic bishop reverend dr . howard thurman . scientists . pioneering physician elizabeth blackwell , pioneering astronaut pamela melroy , and naturalist henry augustus ward are the most notable scientists to come from the rochester area . acclaimed surgeon seymour i . schwartz also made rochester his home . james c . adamson , astronaut john auer , physiologist and pharmacologist credited with the discovery of auer rods elizabeth blackwell , first woman to become qualified as a medical doctor esther m . conwell , physicist , 1997 recipient of the ieee edison medal f . j . duarte , laser physicist and author grove karl gilbert , geologist david lipman , bioinformaticist edward tsang lu , space shuttle astronaut , international space station resident pamela melroy , astronaut lewis henry morgan , anthropologist john wesley powell , geologist mark rosenzweig , research psychologist seymour i . schwartz , author of schwartz 's principles of surgery , the '' surgeon 's bible '' lewis a . swift , astronomer ching w . tang , chemist , physicist , inventor of oled henry augustus ward , naturalist and geologist , founder of ward 's natural science john ralston williams , medical pioneer herbert york , nuclear physicist . social reformers . no list of notable rochesterians could ever omit susan b . anthony and frederick douglass , but the area has a long history of progressive social reformers . anarchist emma goldman lived there for a time . terry a . anderson , former hostage and humanitarian susan b . anthony , women 's rights leader walter cooper , research scientist , urban education reformer and civil rights activist frederick douglass , abolitionist lavantia densmore douglass ( 1827–1899 ) , social reformer emma goldman , anarchist george w . goler , pioneer in pasteurisation shields green , escaped slave who participated in john brown 's raid on harpers ferry jean brooks greenleaf ( 1832–1918 ) , woman suffragist hester c . jeffrey , suffragist clarissa caldwell lathrop , asylum reform advocate and autobiographer helen barrett montgomery , social reformer and women 's activist helen pitts , abolitionist and feminist joy powell , social reformer , political prisoner and anti-violence activist mabel sine wadsworth , birth control activist lillian wald , public health nurse and social worker samuel ringgold ward , african-american pastor and abolitionist frances willard , suffragist and temperance reformer fannie barrier williams , black social reformer . others . josh arieh , 2005 world series of poker champion timothy blodgett , sergeant at arms of the u.s . house of representatives as of january 2021 douglas brei , sports historian obadiah bush , ancestor of the bush financial and political family elizabeth eden , figure in the dog day afternoon bank heist ed edmondson , chess arbiter jon finkel , magic : the gathering champion jerome fuller , jurist gideon granger , u.s . postmaster general under thomas jefferson seth green , pioneer in fish farming mary jemison , the white lady of the genesee lincoln kirstein , writer , ballet impresario , art connoisseur , and one of the monuments men thomas krens , former director , current senior adviser , at the solomon r . guggenheim museum increase a . lapham , '' father '' of the united states weather service christopher lasch , historian belva ann lockwood , first female attorney to practice before the supreme court shawn rabideau , event planner , tv personality nathaniel rochester , city founder blanche stuart scott , first american woman aviator jane teller , sculptor . fictional rochesterians . luke and joanne collins , and son dennis collins , heroes reborn rosalie hale , vampire , twilight . references . sources .