Al Sharpton

racial comments . on february 13 , 1994 , sharpton told a student audience at kean university in new jersey : '' white folks was in the caves while we was building empires , '' he said . '' we built pyramids before donald trump even knew what architecture was . we taught philosophy and astrology sic and mathematics before socrates and them greek homos ever got around to it . do some cracker come and tell you , 'well my mother and father blood go back to the mayflower , ' you better hold your pocket . that ai n't nothing to be proud of , that means their forefathers was crooks . '' on one occasion in 1992 , he derided moderate black politicians close to the democratic party as '' cocktail sip negroes '' or '' yellow niggers . '' . tawana brawley rape case . on november 28 , 1987 , tawana brawley , a 15-year-old black girl , was found smeared with feces , lying in a garbage bag , her clothing torn and burned and with various slurs and epithets written on her body in charcoal . brawley claimed she had been assaulted and raped by six white men , some of them police officers , in the town of wappinger , new york . attorneys alton h . maddox and c . vernon mason joined sharpton in support of brawley . a grand jury was convened ; after seven months of examining police and medical records , the jury found '' overwhelming evidence '' that brawley had fabricated her story . sharpton , maddox , and mason had accused the dutchess county prosecutor , steven pagones , of racism and of being one of the perpetrators of the alleged abduction and rape . the three were successfully sued for defamation , and were ordered to pay 345,000 in damages , with the jury finding sharpton liable for making seven defamatory statements about pagones , maddox for two , and mason for one . sharpton refused to pay his share of the damages ; it was later paid by a number of black business leaders including johnnie cochran . sharpton said in 2007 that if he had it to do over again , he might have not attacked pagones personally , but would otherwise have handled the brawley case the same way . he added : '' i disagreed with the grand jury on brawley . i believed there was enough evidence to go to trial . grand jury said there was n't . okay , fine . do i have a right to disagree with the grand jury ? many americans believe o.j . simpson was guilty . a jury said he was n't . so i have as much right to question a jury as they do . does it make somebody a racist ? no ! they just disagreed with the jury . so did i . '' interview with al sharpton , david shankbone , wikinews , december 3 , 2007 . . work as fbi informant . sharpton said in 1988 that he informed for the government in order to stem the flow of crack cocaine into black neighborhoods . he denied informing on civil rights leaders . in 2002 , hbo 's real sports with bryant gumbel aired a 19-year-old fbi videotape of an undercover sting operation showing sharpton with an undercover fbi agent posing as a latin american drug lord . during the discussion , the undercover agent offered sharpton a 10 % commission for arranging drug sales . on the videotape , sharpton mostly nods and allows the fbi agent to do most of the talking . no drug deal was ever consummated , and no charges were brought against sharpton as a result of the tape . in april 2014 , the smoking gun obtained documents indicating that sharpton became an fbi informant in 1983 following sharpton 's role in a drug sting involving colombo crime family captain michael franzese . sharpton allegedly recorded incriminating conversations with genovese and gambino family mobsters , contributing to the indictments of several underworld figures . sharpton is referred to in fbi documents as '' ci-7 . '' summarizing the evidence supporting that sharpton was an active fbi informant in the 1980s , william bastone , the smoking gun 's founder , stated : '' if he ( sharpton ) did n't think he was an informant , the 'genovese squad ' of the fbi and nypd officials sure knew him to be an informant . he was paid to be an informant , he carried a briefcase with a recording device in it , and he made surreptitious tape recordings of a gambino crime family member 10 separate times as an informant . he did it at the direction of the fbi , he was prepped by the fbi , was handed the briefcase by the fbi and was debriefed after the meetings . that 's an informant . '' sharpton disputes portions of the allegations . sharpton is alleged to have secretly recorded conversations with black activists in the 1980s regarding joanne chesimard ( assata shakur ) and other underground black militants . veteran activist ahmed obafemi told the new york daily news that he had long suspected sharpton of taping him with the bugged briefcase . . loanmax . in 2005 , sharpton appeared in three television commercials for loanmax , an automobile title loan company . he was criticized for his appearance because loanmax reportedly charges fees which are the equivalent of 300 % apr loans . . tax issues . in 1993 , sharpton pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor for failing to file a state income tax return . later , the authorities discovered that one of mr . sharpton 's for-profit companies , raw talent , which he used as a repository for money from speaking engagements , was also not paying taxes , a failure that continued for years . on may 9 , 2008 , the associated press reported that sharpton and his businesses owed almost 1.5 & nbsp ; million in unpaid taxes and penalties . sharpton owed 931,000 in federal income tax and 366,000 to new york , and his for-profit company , rev . al communications , owed another 176,000 to the state . on june 19 , 2008 , the new york post reported that the internal revenue service had sent subpoenas to several corporations that had donated to sharpton 's national action network . in 2007 new york state attorney general andrew cuomo began investigating the national action network , because it failed to make proper financial reports , as required for non-profits . chuck bennett , '' subpoena blitz puts heat on al '' , new york post , june 19 , 2008 . according to the post , several major corporations , including anheuser-busch and colgate-palmolive , have donated thousands of dollars to the national action network . the post asserted that the donations were made to prevent boycotts or rallies by the national action network . isabel vincent and susan edelman , '' rev . al soaks up boycott bucks : biz giants pay or face race rallies '' , new york post , june 15 , 2008 . sharpton countered the investigative actions with a charge that they reflected a political agenda by united states agencies . on september 29 , 2010 , robert snell of the detroit news reported that the internal revenue service had filed a notice of federal tax lien against sharpton in new york city in the amount of over 538,000 . robert snell , '' sharpton faced with fresh tax woe , '' the detroit news , september 29 , 2010 , at . sharpton 's lawyer asserts that the notice of federal tax lien relates to sharpton 's year 2009 federal income tax return , the due date of which has been extended to october 15 , 2010 , according to the lawyer . however , the snell report states that the lien relates to taxes assessed during 2009 . according to the new york times , sharpton and his for-profit businesses owed 4.5 million in state and federal taxes as of november 2014 . . personal life . in 1971 while touring with james brown , he met future wife kathy jordan , who was a backup singer . sharpton and jordan married in 1980 . the couple separated in 2004 . in july 2013 , the new york daily news reported that sharpton , while still married to his second wife ( marsha tinsley ) , now had a self-described '' girlfriend '' , aisha mcshaw , aged 35 , and that the couple had '' been an item for months . photographed at elegant bashes all over the country . '' mcshaw , the daily news reported , referred to herself professionally as both a '' personal stylist '' and '' personal banker . '' sharpton is an honorary member of phi beta sigma fraternity . . religion . sharpton was licensed and ordained a pentecostal minister by bishop f . d . washington at the age of nine or ten . after bishop washington 's death in the late 1980s , sharpton became a baptist . he was re-baptized as a member of the bethany baptist church in 1994 by the reverend william augustus jones and became a baptist minister . during 2007 , sharpton participated in a public debate with atheism writer christopher hitchens , defending his religious faith and his theism . '' al sharpton and christopher hitchens . '' fora.tv . may 7 , 2007 . retrieved august 6 , 2009 . . assassination attempt . on january 12 , 1991 , sharpton escaped serious injury when he was stabbed in the chest in the schoolyard at p.s . 205 by michael riccardi while sharpton was preparing to lead a protest through bensonhurst in brooklyn , new york . the intoxicated attacker was apprehended by sharpton 's aides and handed over to police , who were present for the planned protest . in 1992 , riccardi was convicted of first-degree assault . sharpton asked the judge for leniency when sentencing riccardi . the judge sentenced riccardi to five to 15 years in jail , daniels , lee a . '' attacker of sharpton is sentenced '' . the new york times , march 17 , 1992 . and he served ten years in prison being released on parole on january 8 , 2001 . sharpton , although forgiving his attacker and pleading for leniency on his behalf , filed suit against new york city alleging that the many police present had failed to protect him from his attacker . in december 2003 , he finally reached a 200,000 settlement with the city just as jury selection was about to start . lueck , thomas . '' city settles sharpton suit over stabbing '' . the new york times , december 9 , 2003 . . indirect biological relation to strom thurmond . in february 2007 , genealogist megan smolenyak discovered that sharpton 's great-grandfather , coleman sharpton , was a slave owned by julia thurmond , whose grandfather was strom thurmond 's great-great-grandfather . fernanda santos , sharpton learns his forebears were thurmonds ' slaves , the new york times , february 26 , 2007 . coleman sharpton was later freed . the sharpton family name originated with coleman sharpton 's previous owner , who was named alexander sharpton . al sharpton jr . , my link to strom thurmond , los angeles times , march 1 , 2007 . . political campaigns . sharpton has run unsuccessfully for elected office on multiple occasions . of his unsuccessful runs , he said that winning office may not have been his goal , saying in an interview : '' much of the media criticism of me assumes their goals and they impose them on me . well , those might not be my goals . so they will say , 'well , sharpton has not won a political office . ' but that might not be my goal ! maybe i ran for political office to change the debate , or to raise the social justice question . '' sharpton ran for a united states senate seat from new york in 1988 , 1992 , and 1994 . in 1997 , he ran for mayor of new york city . during his 1992 bid , he and his wife lived in a home in englewood , new jersey , though he said his residence was an apartment in brooklyn . on december 15 , 2005 , sharpton agreed to repay 100,000 in public funds he received from the federal government for his 2004 presidential campaign . the repayment was required because sharpton had exceeded federal limits on personal expenditures for his campaign . at that time , his most recent federal election commission filings ( from january 1 , 2005 ) stated that sharpton 's campaign still had debts of 479,050 and owed sharpton himself 145,146 for an item listed as '' fundraising letter preparation — kinko 's . '' in 2009 , the federal election commission announced it had levied a fine of 285,000 against sharpton 's 2004 presidential campaign team for breaking campaign finance rules during his bid for president . sharpton said in 2007 that he would not enter the 2008 presidential race . . television appearances . sharpton has made cameo appearances in the movies cold feet , bamboozled , mr . deeds , and malcolm x . he also has appeared in episodes of the television shows new york undercover , law & order : special victims unit , girlfriends , my wife and kids , rescue me and boston legal . he hosted the original spike tv reality television show i hate my job , and an episode of saturday night live . he was a guest on weekends at the dl on comedy central and has been featured in television ads for the fernando ferrer campaign for the new york city mayoral election , 2005 . he also made a cameo appearance by telephone on the food network series , the secret life of . , when host jim o'connor expressed disbelief that a restaurant owner who 'd named a dish after sharpton actually knew him . in 1988 , during an appearance on the morton downey jr . show , sharpton and congress of racial equality national chairman roy innis got into a heated argument about the tawana brawley case and innis shoved sharpton to the floor . in 1999 , sharpton appeared in a documentary about black nationalism hosted by louis theroux , as part of the 'weird weekends ' series . during the 2005 tony awards , sharpton appeared in a number put on by the cast of the 25th annual putnam county spelling bee . in 2009 he hosted wwe raw . . broadcast hosting . in june 2005 , sharpton signed a contract with matrix media to produce and host a live two-hour daily talk program , but it never aired . in november 2005 , sharpton signed with radio one to host a daily national talk radio program , which began airing on january 30 , 2006 , entitled keepin it real with al sharpton . on august 29 , 2011 , sharpton became the host of politicsnation , the msnbc show which originally aired weeknights during the 6:00 & nbsp ; p.m . eastern time hour . in october 2015 the program was moved to sunday mornings , one hour per week . he continues to be a regular contributor to morning joe . books . sharpton has written or co-written four books , go and tell pharaoh , with nick chiles , al on america , the rejected stone : al sharpton and the path to american leadership , and rise up : confronting a country at the crossroads . . see also . list of civil rights leaders abner louima . references . notes bibliography go and tell pharaoh , doubleday , 1996 . al on america , dafina books , 2002 . the rejected stone : al sharpton and the path to american leadership , cash money content , 2013 . further reading . . external links . text of democratic national convention 2004 speech on the issues – al sharpton issue positions and quotes al sharpton 1988 poughkeepsie march photograph by photographer/filmmaker clay walker stories told by al sharpton at the moth