Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon

del martin . phyllis lyon was born on november 10 , 1924 , in tulsa , oklahoma . she held a degree in journalism from the university of california , berkeley , earned in 1946 . during the 1940s , she worked as a reporter for the chico enterprise-record , and during the 1950s , she worked as part of the editorial staff of two seattle magazines . on june 26 , 2015 , when the u.s . supreme court ruled gay marriage legal , the 90-year-old lyon '' laughed and laughed when told the news . 'well how about that ? ' she said . 'for goodness ' sakes . ' '' dolan , maura and lee romney ( june 26 , 2015 ) . '' same-sex marriage rights in trailblazing california now extend to all '' . los angeles times . retrieved february 19 , 2017 . she died on april 9 , 2020 , at the age of 95 . . background/marriage . martin and lyon met in seattle in 1950 when they began working for the same magazine . they became lovers in 1952 and entered into a partnership in 1953 when they moved to san francisco together . many years later , lyon and martin recalled how they learned to live together in 1953 . '' we really only had problems our first year together . del would leave her shoes in the middle of the room , and i 'd throw them out the window '' , said lyon , to which martin responded , '' you 'd have an argument with me and try to storm out the door . i had to teach you to fight back . '' hull , anne . '' just married , after 51 years together ; activist gay couple accepts leading role . '' the washington post . washington , d.c . : february 29 , 2004 . p . a.01 . on february 12 , 2004 , martin and lyon were issued a marriage license by the san francisco , california after mayor gavin newsom ordered that marriage licenses be given to same-sex couples who requested them . the license , along with those of several thousand other same-sex couples , was voided by the california supreme court on august 12 , 2004 . however , they were married again on june 16 , 2008 , after the california supreme court ruled that same-sex marriage was legal . once again they were the first couple married in san francisco , in fact the only couple married that day by the mayor . . activism . daughters of bilitis . in 1955 , martin and lyon and six other lesbian women formed the daughters of bilitis ( dob ) , the first national lesbian organization in the united states . lyon was the first editor of dob 's newsletter , the ladder , beginning in 1956 . martin took over editorship of the newsletter from 1960 to 1962 , and was then replaced by other editors until the newsletter ended its connection with the daughters of bilitis in 1970 . within five years of its origin , the daughters of bilitis had chapters around the country , including chicago , new york , new orleans , san diego , los angeles , detroit , denver , cleveland and philadelphia . there were 500 subscribers to the ladder but far more readers , as copies were circulated among women who were reluctant to put their names to a subscription list . for their pioneering work on the ladder , martin and lyon were among the first inductees into the lgbt journalists hall of fame , which was established in 2005 by the national lesbian & gay journalists association . lyon and martin remained involved in the dob until the late 1960s . the daughters of bilitis , which had taken a conservative approach to helping lesbians deal with society , disbanded in 1970 due to the rise of more radical activism . . national organization for women . martin and lyon were active in the national organization for women ( now ) since 1967 . del martin was the first open lesbian elected to the board of directors of now . in 1970 , she signaled in an essay the split of lesbian feminists from the male-dominated gay rights movement , characterizing the leaders of that movement as '' hollow men of self-proclaimed privilege . they neither speak for us nor to us . '' lyon and martin worked to combat the homophobia they perceived in now , and encouraged the national board of directors of now 's 1971 resolution that lesbian issues were feminist issues . . san francisco commission on the status of women . '' del '' martin was the first openly gay woman to be appointed to the sfcosw by then mayor george r . moscone in 1977 . martin joined forces with other minority sfcosw commissioners , such as kathleen hardiman arnold ( now kathleen rand reed ) , and the first black woman to be elected to the board of supervisors , ella hill hutch , to focus on the nexus of gay women 's rights and racial and ethnic discrimination . in their later work with a health clinic , martin and lyon focused , for instance , on the specific health and issues affecting black and latina gay women . martin was ahead of her time in understanding the cultural aspects of gay health . alice b . toklas democratic club . lyon and martin were both active in san francisco 's first gay political organization , the alice b . toklas democratic club , named after san francisco-born author alice b . toklas . . lyon-martin health services . lyon-martin health services was founded in 1979 by a group of medical providers and health activists as a clinic for lesbians who lacked access to non-judgmental and affordable health care . named after phyllis lyon and del martin , the clinic soon became a model for culturally-sensitive community-based health care . since 1993 , lyon-martin also has provided case management and primary healthcare in programs specifically designed for very low-income and uninsured women with hiv , as well as services for transgender people . . senior activists . in 1989 , martin and lyon joined old lesbians organizing for change . in 1995 they were named delegates to the white house conference on aging , martin by senator dianne feinstein and lyon by congresswoman nancy pelosi . . bibliography . books are written by both martin and lyon except where noted : lesbian/woman ( 1972 ) , about lesbian life in modern america lesbian love and liberation ( 1973 ) , about lesbians and sexual liberty battered wives ( 1979 ) , by martin , blamed american domestic violence on institutionalized misogyny . legacy . documentary films . in 2003 filmmaker jeb ( joan e . biren ) released a documentary film on the couple , no secret anymore : the times of del martin and phyllis lyon , available from frameline . the 1993 documentary last call at maud 's also featured martin and lyon . . honors . in 2014 , martin was one of the inaugural honorees in the rainbow honor walk , a walk of fame in san francisco ’ s castro neighborhood noting lgbtq people who have '' made significant contributions in their fields . '' in june 2019 , martin was one of the inaugural fifty american “ pioneers , trailblazers , and heroes ” inducted on the national lgbtq wall of honor within the stonewall national monument ( snm ) in new york city ’ s stonewall inn . the snm is the first u.s . national monument dedicated to lgbtq rights and history , and the wall 's unveiling was timed to take place during the 50th anniversary of the stonewall riots . in june 2020 , lyon was added to the national lgbtq wall of honor . . popular culture . rosie o'donnell plays martin and maddie corman plays lyon in the miniseries about lgbt rights called when we rise . season 3 , episode 7 of the podcast “ making gay history ” is about martin and lyon . shannon purser plays martin and heather matarazzo plays lyon in the hbo max series equal , formally announced on august 24 , 2020 . archival sources . the extensive records of lyon and martin 's professional and activist pursuits , including the administrative files of the daughters of bilitis , are preserved at the glbt historical society in san francisco . the collection is fully processed and is available for use by researchers . the online archive of california ( a project of the california digital library ) offers the complete finding aid . . see also . lgbt culture in san francisco . references . further reading . bullough , vern l . ( ed . ) before stonewall : activists for gay and lesbian rights in historical context , harrington park press , 2002 . gallo , marcia m . different daughters : a history of the daughters of bilitis and the rise of the lesbian rights movement , carroll & graf , 2006 ; seal press , 2007 . external links . guide to the phyllis lyon and del martin papers ; del martin ; phyllis lyon