World line

usage in physics . in physics , a world line of an object ( approximated as a point in space , e.g . , a particle or observer ) is the sequence of spacetime events corresponding to the history of the object . a world line is a special type of curve in spacetime . below an equivalent definition will be explained : a world line is a time-like curve in spacetime . each point of a world line is an event that can be labeled with the time and the spatial position of the object at that time . for example , the orbit of the earth in space is approximately a circle , a three-dimensional ( closed ) curve in space : the earth returns every year to the same point in space relative to the sun . however , it arrives there at a different ( later ) time . the world line of the earth is helix in spacetime ( a curve in a four-dimensional space ) and does not return to the same point . spacetime is the collection of points called events , together with a continuous and smooth coordinate system identifying the events . each event can be labeled by four numbers : a time coordinate and three space coordinates ; thus spacetime is a four-dimensional space . the mathematical term for spacetime is a four-dimensional manifold . the concept may be applied as well to a higher-dimensional space . for easy visualizations of four dimensions , two space coordinates are often suppressed . the event is then represented by a point in a minkowski diagram , which is a plane usually plotted with the time coordinate , say t , upwards and the space coordinate , say x horizontally . as expressed by f.r . harvey : a curve m in spacetime is called a worldline of a particle if its tangent is future timelike at each point . the arclength parameter is called proper time and usually denoted & tau ; . the length of m is called the proper time of the worldline or particle . if the worldline m is a line segment , then the particle is said to be in free fall . a world line traces out the path of a single point in spacetime . a world sheet is the analogous two-dimensional surface traced out by a one-dimensional line ( like a string ) traveling through spacetime . the world sheet of an open string ( with loose ends ) is a strip ; that of a closed string ( a loop ) resembles a tube . once the object is not approximated as a mere point but has extended volume , it traces out not a world line but rather a world tube . world lines as a tool to describe events . image : brane-wlwswv.png 300px right thumb world line , worldsheet , and world volume , as they are derived from particles , strings , and branes . a one-dimensional line or curve can be represented by the coordinates as a function of one parameter . each value of the parameter corresponds to a point in spacetime and varying the parameter traces out a line . so in mathematical terms a curve is defined by four coordinate functions x^a ( \tau ) , \ ; a 0,1,2,3 ( where x^ , then they share the same simultaneous hyperplane . this hyperplane exists mathematically , but physical relations in relativity involve the movement of information by light . for instance , the traditional electro-static force described by coulomb 's law may be pictured in a simultaneous hyperplane , but relativistic relations of charge and force involve retarded potentials . world lines in general relativity . the use of world lines in general relativity is basically the same as in special relativity , with the difference that spacetime can be curved . a metric exists and its dynamics are determined by the einstein field equations and are dependent on the mass-energy distribution in spacetime . again the metric defines lightlike ( null ) , spacelike and timelike curves . also , in general relativity , world lines are timelike curves in spacetime , where timelike curves fall within the lightcone . however , a lightcone is not necessarily inclined at 45 degrees to the time axis . however , this is an artifact of the chosen coordinate system , and reflects the coordinate freedom ( diffeomorphism invariance ) of general relativity . any timelike curve admits a proper frame whose '' time axis '' corresponds to that curve , and , since no observer is privileged , we can always find a local coordinate system in which lightcones are inclined at 45 degrees to the time axis . see also for example eddington-finkelstein coordinates . world lines of free-falling particles or objects ( such as planets around the sun or an astronaut in space ) are called geodesics . world lines in quantum field theory . quantum field theory , the framework in which all of modern particle physics is described , is usually described as a theory of quantized fields . however , although not widely appreciated , it has been known since feynman that many quantum field theories may equivalently be described in terms of world lines . the path integral formulation quantum field theory has proved particularly fruitful for various calculations in gauge theories and in describing nonlinear effects of electromagnetic fields . . world lines in literature . in 1884 c . h . hinton wrote an essay '' what is the fourth dimension ? '' , which he published as a scientific romance . he wrote : why , then , should not the four-dimensional beings be ourselves , and our successive states the passing of them through the three-dimensional space to which our consciousness is confined . a popular description of human world lines was given by j . c . fields at the university of toronto in the early days of relativity . as described by toronto lawyer norman robertson : : i remember fields lecturing at one of the saturday evening lectures at the royal canadian institute . it was advertised to be a '' mathematical fantasy '' —and it was ! the substance of the exercise was as follows : he postulated that , commencing with his birth , every human being had some kind of spiritual aura with a long filament or thread attached , that traveled behind him throughout his life . he then proceeded in imagination to describe the complicated entanglement every individual became involved in his relationship to other individuals , comparing the simple entanglements of youth to those complicated knots that develop in later life . almost all science-fiction stories which use this concept actively , such as to enable time travel , oversimplify this concept to a one-dimensional timeline to fit a linear structure , which does not fit models of reality . such time machines are often portrayed as being instantaneous , with its contents departing one time and arriving in another—but at the same literal geographic point in space . this is often carried out without note of a reference frame , or with the implicit assumption that the reference frame is local ; as such , this would require either accurate teleportation , as a rotating planet , being under acceleration , is not an inertial frame , or for the time machine to remain in the same place , its contents 'frozen ' . author oliver franklin published a science fiction work in 2008 entitled world lines in which he related a simplified explanation of the hypothesis for laymen . in the short story life-line , author robert a . heinlein describes the world line of a person : : he stepped up to one of the reporters . '' suppose we take you as an example . your name is rogers , is it not ? very well , rogers , you are a space-time event having duration four ways . you are not quite six feet tall , you are about twenty inches wide and perhaps ten inches thick . in time , there stretches behind you more of this space-time event , reaching to perhaps nineteen-sixteen , of which we see a cross-section here at right angles to the time axis , and as thick as the present . at the far end is a baby , smelling of sour milk and drooling its breakfast on its bib . at the other end lies , perhaps , an old man someplace in the nineteen-eighties . : '' imagine this space-time event that we call rogers as a long pink worm , continuous through the years , one end in his mother 's womb , and the other at the grave . '' heinlein 's methuselah 's children uses the term , as does james blish 's the quincunx of time ( expanded from '' beep '' ) . a visual novel named steins ; gate , produced by 5pb . , tells a story based on the shifting of world lines . steins ; gate is a part of the '' science adventure '' series . world lines and other physical concepts like the dirac sea are also used throughout the series . neal stephenson 's novel anathem involves a long discussion of worldlines over dinner in the midst of a philosophical debate between platonic realism and nominalism . absolute choice depicts different world lines as a sub-plot and setting device . a space armada trying to complete a ( nearly ) closed time-like path as a strategic maneuver forms the backdrop and a main plot device of '' singularity sky '' by charles stross . see also . specific types of world lines geodesics closed timelike curves causal structure , curves that represent a variety of different types of world line isotropic line feynman diagram time geography . references . : various english translations on wikisource : space and time ludwik silberstein ( 1914 ) theory of relativity , p 130 , macmillan and company . external links . world lines article on h2g2 . in depth text on world lines and special relativity