Land of the Lost (1974 TV series)

overview . land of the lost details the adventures of the marshall family ( father rick and his children will and holly ) , who are trapped in an alternate universe or time warp inhabited by dinosaurs , a primate-type people called pakuni , and aggressive reptilian humanoids called sleestak . the series opens with a theme song accompanied by a banjo like instrument and a synthesizer . the episode storylines focus on the family 's efforts to survive and find a way back to their own world , but the exploration of the exotic inhabitants of the land of the lost is also an ongoing part of the story . an article on renewed studio interest in feature-film versions of land of the lost and h.r . pufnstuf commented that '' decision-makers in hollywood , and some big-name stars , have personal recollections of plopping down on the family-room wall-to-wall shag sometime between 1969 and 1974 to tune in to multiple reruns of the kroffts ' saturday morning live-action hits , '' and quoting marty krofft as saying that the head of universal studios , ronald meyer , and leaders at sony pictures all had been fans of krofft programs . a number of well-respected writers in the science-fiction field contributed scripts to the series ( mostly in the first and second seasons ) , including larry niven , theodore sturgeon , ben bova , and norman spinrad , and a number of people involved with star trek , such as d.c . fontana , walter koenig , and david gerrold . gerrold , niven , and fontana also contributed commentaries to the dvd of the first season . the prolific krofft team was influential in live-action children 's television , producing many shows that were oddly formatted , highly energetic , and filled with special effects , with most of them following a '' stranger in a strange land '' storyline . most of these shows were comedic in nature , but land of the lost was considerably more serious , especially during its first season , though as the series progressed , the dramatic tone diminished . . plot and format . the marshalls are brought to the mysterious world by means of a dimensional portal , a device used frequently throughout the series and a major part of its internal mythology . this portal opens when they are swept down a gigantic 1,000-foot waterfall . in '' circle '' , which explains the time paradox , this portal is actually opened by rick marshall himself , while in enik 's cave , as a way for the current marshalls to return to earth , resolving the paradox and allowing enik to also return to his time . outfitted only for a short camping trip , the resourceful family from california takes shelter in a natural cave and improvises the provisions and tools that they need to survive . their most common and dangerous encounters are with dinosaurs , particularly a tyrannosaurus rex they nickname '' grumpy '' , which frequents the location of their cave . however , many of the dinosaurs are herbivores , posing no threat to the marshalls , unless unintentionally provoked . one is a particularly tame young brontosaurus that holly nicknames '' dopey '' , and upon which holly looks as a pet . they also encounter the mostly hostile sleestak ( lizard men ) , and the primate-like creatures called pakuni ( one of whom , cha-ka , they befriend ) , as well as a variety of dangerous creatures , strange geography and unfamiliar technology . the main goal of the three is to find a way to return home . they are occasionally aided in this by the altrusian castaway enik . at the start of the third season , rick marshall ( played by spencer milligan ) is explained to have been accidentally returned to earth alone , leaving his children behind . rick is immediately replaced by his brother jack . rick marshall abruptly disappeared while trying to use one of the pylons to get home ; jack stumbled upon his niece and nephew after he embarked on a search of his own to find them . though the term '' time doorway '' is used throughout the series , land of the lost is not meant to portray an era in earth 's history , but rather an enigmatic zone whose place and time are unknown . indeed , within the first few minutes of the pilot , the marshall family father tells his children that he spotted three moons in the sky . the original creators of these time portals were thought to be the ancestors of the sleestak , called altrusians , though later episodes raised some questions about this . many aspects of the land of the lost , including the time doorways and environmental processes , were controlled by the pylons , metallic obelisk-shaped booths that were larger on the inside than the outside and housed matrix tables – stone tables studded with a grid of colored crystals . uncontrolled time doorways result in the arrival of a variety of visitors and castaways in the land . cast . main . rick marshall ( seasons 1 and 2 ) – spencer milligan will marshall – wesley eure holly marshall – kathy coleman uncle jack marshall ( season 3 ) – ron harper cha-ka – phillip paley ( season 3 ; recurring , seasons 1-2 ) . recurring . sa – sharon baird ( seasons 1 and 2 ) ta – joe giamalva ( season 1 ) and scutter mckay ( season 2 ) enik – walker edmiston the zarn – marvin miller ( voice ) and van snowden ( body ) ( season 2 ) malak – richard kiel ( season 3 ) sleestak leader – jon locke ( season 3 ) sleestak – dave greenwood , bill laimbeer , john lambert , cleveland porter , jack tingley , scott fullerton , mike westra , bill boyd , david harris , clarke roberts . production . land of the lost is notable for its epic-scale concept , which suggested an expansive world with many fantastic forms of life and mysterious technology , all created on a children 's series ' limited production budget . to support the internal mythology , linguist victoria fromkin was commissioned to create a special language for the pakuni , which she based on the sounds of west african speech and attempted to build into the show in a gradual way that would allow viewers to learn the language over the course of many episodes . the series ' intention was to create a realistic fantasy world , albeit relying heavily on children 's acceptance of minor inconsistencies . in a 1999 interview , first-season story editor and writer david gerrold claimed that he largely created the show based on photographs of various science-fiction topoi that were bound together in a book and given him by sid krofft and allan foshko . it was a marked departure from the krofft team 's previous work , which mostly featured extremely stylized puppets and sets such as those in h.r . pufnstuf and lidsville . the series for the first two seasons was shot on a modular indoor soundstage at general service studios in hollywood , and made economical use of a small number of sets and scenic props that were rearranged frequently to suggest the ostensibly vast jungles , ancient cities , and cave systems . as is traditional in many effect scenes , miniatures or scale-version settings were used for insertion of live-action scenes . additional locations were often rendered using scale miniatures and chroma key . spencer milligan departed the show at the beginning of its third season for financial reasons . in addition to a salary increase , he believed the rest of the cast and he should receive compensation for using their images on various merchandise . his character , rick marshall , was replaced by his brother , jack marshall , played by actor ron harper . milligan did not return for the brief scene , also shown in the credits of the third season , showing rick marshall being transported out of the land of the lost . one of the show 's crew played the role , instead , wearing a wig resembling milligan 's hair and standing with his back to the camera . nonhuman characters were portrayed by actors in latex rubber suits or heavy creature makeup . dinosaurs in the series were created using a combination of stop motion animation miniatures , rear projection effect , and occasional hand puppets for close-ups of dinosaur heads . wesley eure points out on a commentary track for land of the losts first-season dvd that the grumpy hand puppet has no hole in the back of its throat , though it is often seen opening its mouth wide to roar . the series marked a rare example of matting filmed stop-motion sequences with videotape live action , so as to avoid the telltale blue 'fringe ' produced in matting with less exacting processes . though this occasionally worked very well , the difference in lighting between the video and film sequences sometimes brought inadvertent attention to the limitations of the process . special-effects footage was frequently reused . additional visual effects were achieved using manual film overlay techniques , the low-tech ancestor to later motion-control photography . home media . from 2004 to 2005 , rhino entertainment owned the rights to the show , and released seasons one through three , and a complete series package , with several bonus features , including commentaries , on all of the releases . the dvds of the series earned a saturn nomination for best retro tv series release in 2004 . on may 26 , 2009 , universal studios released two complete series releases , one in original packaging , and the other enclosed in a reproduction of the land of the lost vintage '70s lunchbox ; the only bonus feature was a look at the film starring will ferrell . on october 13 , 2009 , universal released the three seasons individually ; the dvds are identical to universal 's complete series boxes . ( however , the region 4 version of the 2009 box set does include the commentaries and interviews , but not the look at the ferrell film ) . the series is also available in digital media format . remakes . despite a relatively short run , the show continued to be aired extensively through syndication . based on that success , a remake of the series began in 1991 and ran for two seasons . on june 5 , 2009 land of the lost ( film ) opened in u.s . theaters . unlike the original series , which was a serious take on the story , the film was a comedy/parody . it was directed by brad silberling and starred will ferrell , with the krofft brothers serving as co-producers . although the original series was aimed for children , the film 's target audience was adults . in 2015 , sid and marty krofft reportedly were working on a reboot to land of the lost following what they called '' that other movie '' . in a 2018 podcast interview with both sid and marty krofft , they reconfirmed that they are still working on an updated remake to land of the lost and that this time it will be an hour-long series . see also . list of land of the lost episodes land of the lost characters and species land of the lost ( 1991 tv series ) , the remake of the original series land of the lost ( film ) , a 2009 film starring will ferrell based on the 1974 series valley of the dinosaurs , a hanna-barbera cartoon with a somewhat similar premise . references . external links . land of the lost website tavis smiley – sid & marty krofft interview ( transcript and realplayer audio ) jesse thorn/the sound of young america – marty krofft interview ( podcast ) land of the lost episode studies at popapostle