Wolfram von Eschenbach

life . image : abenberg 0008.jpg thumb statue of wolfram at burg abenberg castle in abenberg alt little is known of wolfram 's life . there are no historical documents which mention him , and his works are the sole source of evidence . in parzival , he talks of wir beier ( '' we bavarians '' ) ; the dialect of his works is east franconian . this and a number of geographical references have resulted in the present-day wolframs-eschenbach , until 1917 obereschenbach , near ansbach in present-day bavaria , being officially designated as his birthplace . however , the evidence is circumstantial and not without problems - there are at least four other places named eschenbach in bavaria , and wolframs-eschenbach was not part of the duchy of bavaria ( altbayern ) in wolfram 's time . the arms shown in the codex manesse come from the imagination of a 14th-century artist , drawing on the figure of the red knight in parzival , and have no heraldry connection with wolfram . wolfram 's work indicates a number of possible patrons ( most reliably hermann i of thuringia ) , which suggests that he served at a number of courts during his life . he was presumably not a wealthy man , as he made frequent allusions to his own poverty . in his parzival , wolfram states that he is illiterate ; while the claim is treated with scepticism by some scholars , the truth of the assertion , difficult for some moderns to believe , in the foreword to his translation of wolfram 's parzival , a . t . hatto opines that '' . his claim not to know his a b c must be discounted as one of his tactical jokes . '' parzival , p . vi . is impossible to ascertain . but it has been credited by many commentators . it is noted in thomas mann 's the magic mountain that '' the greatest poet of the middle ages , wolfram von eschenbach , could neither read nor write , '' thomas mann , the magic mountain , trans . h.t . lowe-porter ( new york : alfred a . knopf , 1946 ) , p . 522 ; translation first published in 1927 , the original published in 1924 . and the catholic encyclopedia observes : '' wolfram in his parzival tells us explicitly that he could neither read nor write . his poems were written down from dictation . his knowledge was extensive and varied rather than accurate . he certainly knew french , but only imperfectly ; for his proper names often show a curious misunderstanding of french words and phrases . '' the catholic encyclopedia . ( 1913 ) . . works . parzival . wolfram is best known today for his parzival , sometimes regarded as the greatest of all german courtly romance . based on chrétien de troyes ' perceval , le conte du graal , it is the first extant work in german to have as its subject the holy grail ( in wolfram 's interpretation a gemstone ) . in the poem , wolfram 's narrator expresses disdain for chrétien 's ( unfinished ) version of the tale , and states that his source was a poet from provence called kyot . titurel and willehalm . wolfram is the author of two other narrative works : the fragmentary titurel and the unfinished willehalm . these were both composed after parzival , and titurel mentions the death of hermann i , which dates it firmly after 1217 . titurel consists of two fragments , which tell the story of schionatulander and sigune ( lovers that were already depicted in parzival ) . the first fragment deals with the birth of love between the main characters . the second fragment is quite different . schionatulander and sigune are alone in a forest , when their peace is suddenly disturbed by a mysterious dog , whose leash contains a story written in rubies . sigune is eager to read the story , but the dog runs off . schionatulander sets off to find him , but , as we already know from parzival , he dies in the attempt . willehalm , an unfinished poem based on the old french chanson de geste aliscans , was a significant work , and has been preserved in 78 manuscripts . it is set against the backdrop of the religious wars between the christians and the saracens . the eponymous hero willehalm kidnaps a saracen princess , converts her to christianity and marries her . the saracen king raises an army to rescue his daughter . the poem has many of the distinguishing features of medieval literature : the victory of the christians over a much larger saracen army , the touching death of the young knight vivian , willehalm 's nephew and the works mirror of chivalric courage and spiritual purity . lyric poetry . wolfram 's nine surviving songs , five of which are tagelied , are regarded as masterpieces of minnesang . dawn-songs recount the story of a knight who spends the night with his beloved lady , but at dawn has to slip away unnoticed . mostly it is the lady who wakes the knight up in the morning , but sometimes this mission is made by the watchman . no melodies survived . two melodies are still connected to him , the schwarzer thon , attributed to wolfram in a 14th-century manuscript , and the fragmentary and unfinished epic titurel ( after 1217 ) with a complicated four-line stanza form that was often used in later poems . wolfram von eschenbach at the oxford music online . influence . the 84 surviving manuscripts of parzival , both complete and fragmentary , indicate the immense popularity of wolfram 's major work in the following two centuries . willehalm , with 78 manuscripts , comes not far behind . many of these include a continuation written in the 1240s by ulrich von türheim under the title rennewart . the unfinished titurel was taken up and expanded around 1272 by a poet named albrecht , who is generally presumed to be albrecht von scharfenberg and who adopts the narrative persona of wolfram . this work is referred to as the jüngere titurel ( younger titurel ) . the modern rediscovery of wolfram begins with the publication of a translation of parzival in 1753 by the swiss scholar johann jakob bodmer . parzival was the main source richard wagner used when writing the libretto to his opera , parsifal . wolfram himself appears as a character in another wagner opera , tannhäuser . references . notes . . bibliography . d . h . green , the art of recognition in wolfram 's parzival . cambridge & new york : cambridge university press , 1982 . groos , arthur . romancing the grail : genre , science , and quest in wolfram 's parzival . ithaca : cornell university press , 1995 . james f . poag , wolfram von eschenbach ( twayne 's world authors series ) twayne publishers 1972 . sager , alexander . minne von mæren : on wolfram 's '' titurel . '' göttingen : v & r , 2006 . otto springer . '' wolfram 's parzival '' in arthurian literature in the middle ages , roger s . loomis ( ed . ) . clarendon press : oxford university . 1959 . wolfram von eschenbach , parzival with titurel and the love-lyrics , trans . cyril edwards ( woodbridge , boydell press , 2004 ) . wolfram von eschenbach , parzival , trans . a.t.hatto . penguin 1980 . edwards , cyril , '' wolfram von eschenbach , islam , and the crusades , '' in james hodkinson and jeffrey morrison ( eds ) , encounters with islam in german literature and culture ( woodbridge , camden house , 2009 ) , pp . & nbsp ; 36–54 . external links . wolfram von eschenbach in the literary encyclopedia works ( middle high german ) list of parzival manuscripts ( marburger repertorium ) list of willhalm manuscripts ( marburger repertorium ) two of wolfram 's songs ( middle high german ) el grial , including songs by wolfram von eschenbach performed by capella de ministrers & carlos magraner