War of the First Coalition

background . revolution in france . for the full article , see french revolution as early as 1791 , other monarchies in europe were watching the developments in france with alarm , and considered intervening , either in support of louis xvi or to take advantage of the chaos in france . the key figure , the holy roman emperor leopold ii , brother of the french queen marie antoinette , had initially looked on the revolution calmly . he became increasingly concerned as the revolution grew more radical , although he still hoped to avoid war . on 27 august 1791 , leopold and king frederick william ii of prussia , in consultation with émigré french nobles , issued the declaration of pillnitz , which declared the concern of the monarchs of europe for the well-being of louis and his family , and threatened vague but severe consequences if anything should befall them . although leopold saw the pillnitz declaration as a way of taking action that would enable him to avoid actually doing anything about france , at least for the moment , paris saw the declaration as a serious threat and the revolutionary leaders denounced it . in addition to the ideological differences between france and the monarchical powers of europe , disputes continued over the status of imperial estates in alsace , and the french authorities became concerned about the agitation of émigré nobles abroad , especially in the austrian netherlands and in the minor states of germany . in the end , france declared war on austria first , with the assembly voting for war on 20 april 1792 , after the presentation of a long list of grievances by the newly appointed foreign minister charles françois dumouriez , who sought a war which might restore some popularity and authority to the king . 1792 . dumouriez prepared an invasion of the austrian netherlands , where he expected the local population to rise against austrian rule . however , the revolution had thoroughly disorganized the french army , which had insufficient forces for the invasion . its soldiers fled at the first sign of battle , deserting en masse , in one case murdering general théobald dillon . while the revolutionary government frantically raised fresh troops and reorganized its armies , an allied army under charles william ferdinand , duke of brunswick assembled at koblenz on the rhine . the invasion commenced in july 1792 . brunswick 's army , composed mostly of prussian veterans , took the fortresses of longwy and verdun . the duke then issued a declaration on 25 july 1792 , which had been written by the brothers of louis xvi , that declared his brunswick 's intent to restore the french king to his full powers , and to treat any person or town who opposed him as rebels to be condemned to death by martial law . this motivated the revolutionary army and government to oppose the prussian invaders by any means necessary , and led almost immediately to the overthrow of the king by a crowd which stormed the tuileries palace . the invaders continued on , but at the battle of valmy on 20 september 1792 they came to a stalemate against dumouriez and kellermann in which the highly professional french artillery distinguished itself . although the battle was a tactical draw , it bought time for the revolutionaries and gave a great boost to french morale . furthermore , the prussians , facing a campaign longer and more costly than predicted , decided against the cost and risk of continued fighting , and determined to retreat from france to preserve their army . meanwhile , the french had been successful on several other fronts , occupying the duchy of savoy and the county of nice , while general custine invaded germany , capturing speyer , worms and mainz along the rhine , and reaching as far as frankfurt . dumouriez went on the offensive in belgium once again , winning a great victory over the austrians at jemappes on 6 november 1792 , and occupying the entire country by the beginning of winter . 1793 . on 21 january the revolutionary government executed louis xvi after a trial . this united all european governments , including spain , naples , and the netherlands against the revolution . france declared war against britain and the netherlands on 1 february 1793 and soon afterwards against spain . in the course of the year 1793 the holy roman empire ( on 23 march ) , the kings of portugal and naples , and the grand-duke of tuscany declared war against france . thus the first coalition was formed . france introduced a new levy of hundreds of thousands of men , beginning a french policy of using levee en masse to deploy more of its manpower than the other states could , and remaining on the offensive so that these mass armies could commandeer war material from the territory of their enemies . the french government sent citizen genet to the united states to encourage them into entering the war on france 's side . the newly formed nation refused and remained neutral throughout the conflict . after a victory in the battle of neerwinden in march , the austrians suffered twin defeats at the battles of wattignies and wissembourg . british land forces were defeated at the battle of hondschoote in september . 1794 . 1794 brought increased success to the revolutionary armies . a major victory against combined coalition forces at the battle of fleurus gained all of belgium and the rhineland for france . although the british navy maintained its supremacy at sea , it was unable to support effectively any land operations after the fall of the belgian provinces . the prussians were slowly driven out of the eastern departments and by the end of the year they had retired from any active part in the war . against spain , the french made successful incursions in both catalonia and navarre . action extended into the french colonies in the west indies . a british fleet successfully captured martinique , st . lucia , and guadeloupe , although a french fleet arrived later in the year and recovered the latter . 1795 . after seizing the low countries in a surprise winter attack , france established the batavian republic as a puppet state . even before the close of 1794 the king of prussia retired from any active part in the war , and on 5 april 1795 he concluded with france the peace of basel , which recognized france 's occupation of the left bank of the rhine . the new french-dominated dutch government bought peace by surrendering dutch territory to the south of that river . a treaty of peace between france and spain followed in july . the grand duke of tuscany had been admitted to terms in february . the coalition thus fell into ruin and france proper would be free from invasion for many years . one of more of the preceding sentences text from a publication now in the public domain : britain attempted to reinforce the rebels in the vendée by landing french royalist troops at quiberon , but failed , and 13 vendémiaire were foiled by the military garrison led by napoleon bonaparte , leading to the establishment of the directory . on the rhine frontier , general pichegru , negotiating with the exiled royalists , betrayed his army and forced the evacuation of mannheim and the failure of the siege of mainz by jourdan . 1796 . the french prepared a great advance on three fronts , with jourdan and jean victor marie moreau on the rhine and the newly promoted napoleon bonaparte in italy . the three armies were to link up in tyrol and march on vienna . in the rhine campaign of 1796 , jourdan and moreau crossed the rhine river and advanced into germany . jourdan advanced as far as amberg in late august while moreau reached bavaria and the edge of tyrol by september . however jourdan was defeated by archduke charles , duke of teschen and both armies were forced to retreat back across the rhine . napoleon , on the other hand , was successful in a daring invasion of italy . in the montenotte campaign , he separated the armies of sardinia and austria , defeating each one in turn , and then forced a peace on sardinia . following this , his army captured milan and started the siege of mantua . bonaparte defeated successive austrian armies sent against him under johann peter beaulieu , dagobert sigmund von wurmser and józsef alvinczi while continuing the siege . the war in the vendée was also crushed in 1796 by louis lazare hoche . hoche 's subsequent attempt to land a large invasion force in munster to aid the united irishmen was unsuccessful . 1797 . on 2 february napoleon finally captured mantua , with the austrians surrendering 18,000 men . archduke charles of austria was unable to stop napoleon from invading the tyrol , and the austrian government sued for peace in april . at the same time there was a new french invasion of germany under moreau and hoche . on 22 february , a french invasion force consisting of 1,400 troops from the la legion noire ( the black legion ) under the command of irish american colonel william tate battle of fishguard in wales . they were met by a quickly assembled group of around 500 british reservists , militia and sailors under the command of john campbell , 1st baron cawdor . after brief clashes with the local civilian population and lord cawdor 's forces on 23 february , tate was forced into an unconditional surrender by 24 february . this would be the only battle fought on british soil during the revolutionary wars . austria signed the treaty of campo formio in october , ceding belgium to france and recognizing french control of the rhineland and much of italy . the ancient republic of venice was partitioned between austria and france . this ended the war of the first coalition , although great britain and france remained at war . see also . list of battles of the war of the first coalition war of the second coalition . notes . references . . further reading . clausewitz , carl von . napoleon 's 1796 italian campaign . trans and ed . nicholas murray and christopher pringle . this also includes the notes from j . colin 's french translation as well as extensive commentary on clausewitz 's history and theory . lawrence , kansas : university press of kansas ( 2018 ) . fremont-barnes , gregory . the french revolutionary wars ( 2013 ) gardiner , robert . fleet battle and blockade : the french revolutionary war 1793–1797 ( 2006 ) georges lefebvre . the french revolution volume ii : from 1793 to 1799 ( 1964 ) . ross , steven t . quest for victory ; french military strategy , 1792–1799 ( 1973 ) . external links .