Hand, foot, and mouth disease

signs and symptoms . common constitutional signs and symptoms of the hfmd include fever , nausea , vomiting , fatigue , malaise , loss of appetite , and irritability in infants and toddlers . skin lesions frequently develop in the form of a maculopapular which may be followed by vesicular sores with blisters on palms of the hands , soles of the feet , buttocks , and sometimes on the lips . the rash is rarely itchy for children , but can be extremely itchy for adults . painful facial ulcers , blisters , or lesions may also develop in or around the nose or mouth . hfmd usually resolves on its own after 7–10 days . most cases of the disease are relatively harmless , but complications including encephalitis , meningitis , and paralysis that mimics the neurological symptoms of polio can occur . image : characteristic rash of hand , foot , and mouth disease , on human hands.jpg rash on palms of the hands . file : hand foot mouth disease adult 36years.jpg rash on hand and feet of a 36-year-old man file : hand foot and mouth disease on child feet.jpg rash on the soles of a child 's feet . cause . the viruses that cause the disease are of the picornavirus family . coxsackievirus a16 is the most common cause of hfmd . enterovirus 71 is the second-most common cause . many other strains of coxsackievirus and enterovirus can also be responsible . . transmission . hfmd is highly contagious and is transmitted by oropharynx such as saliva or nasal mucus , by direct contact , or by fecal-oral route . it is possible to be infectious for days to weeks after the symptoms have resolved . child care settings are the most common places for hfmd to be contracted because of the bathroom training , diaper changes , and that children often put their hands into their mouths . children who do not attend a preschool or kindergarten were found to be more susceptible to the disease . hfmd is contracted through nose and throat secretions such as saliva , sputum , nasal mucus and as well as fluid in blisters , and stool . . diagnosis . a diagnosis usually can be made by the presenting signs and symptoms alone . if the diagnosis is unclear , a throat swab or stool specimen may be taken to identify the virus by culture . the common incubation period ( the time between infection and onset of symptoms ) ranges from three to six days . early detection of hfmd is important in preventing an outbreak in the pediatric population . . prevention . preventive measures include avoiding direct contact with infected individuals ( including keeping infected children home from school ) , proper cleaning of shared utensils , disinfecting fomite , and proper hand hygiene . these measures have been shown to be effective in decreasing the transmission of the viruses responsible for hfmd . protective habits include hand washing and disinfecting surfaces in play areas . breast-feeding has also shown to decrease rates of severe hfmd , though does not reduce the risk for the infection of the disease . . vaccine . a vaccine known as the ev71 vaccine is available to prevent hfmd in china . no vaccine is currently available in the united states . . treatment . medications are usually not needed as hand , foot , and mouth disease is a viral disease that typically resolves on its own . currently , there is no specific curative treatment for hand , foot and mouth disease . disease management typically focuses on achieving symptomatic relief . pain from the sores may be eased with the use of analgesic . infection in older children , adolescents , and adults is typically mild and lasts approximately 1 week , but may occasionally run a longer course . antipyretic and lukewarm baths can help decrease body temperature . a minority of individuals with hand , foot and mouth disease may require hospital admission due to complications such as encephalitis , meningitis , or acute flaccid paralysis . non-neurologic complications such as myocarditis , pulmonary edema , or pulmonary hemorrhage may also occur . . complications . complications from the viral infections that cause hfmd are rare , but require immediate medical treatment if present . hfmd infections caused by enterovirus 71 tend to be more severe and are more likely to have neurologic or cardiac complications including death than infections caused by coxsackievirus a16 . viral or aseptic meningitis can occur with hfmd in rare cases and is characterized by fever , headache , stiff neck , or back pain . the condition is usually mild and clears without treatment ; however , hospitalization for a short time may be needed . other serious complications of hfmd include encephalitis ( inflammation of the brain ) , or flaccid paralysis in rare circumstances . onychomadesis have been reported in children 4–8 weeks after having hfmd . the relationship between hfmd and the reported nail loss is unclear ; however , it is temporary and nail growth resumes without treatment . minor complications due to symptoms can occur such as dehydration , due to mouth sores causing discomfort with intake of foods and fluid . . epidemiology . hand , foot and mouth disease most commonly occurs in children under the age of 10 . it tends to occur in outbreaks during the spring , summer , and autumn seasons . this is believed to be due to heat and humidity improving spread . hfmd is more common in rural areas than urban areas ; however , socioeconomic status and hygiene levels need to be considered . poor hygiene is a risk factor for hfmd . outbreaks have occurred in china , japan , hong kong , the south korea , malaysia , singapore , thailand , taiwan , and vietnam . hfmd most commonly affects young children under the age of 10 and more often under the age of 5 , but can also affect adults with varying symptoms . since 1997 there have been 71 large enterovirus outbreaks reported , mostly in east and south east asia , primarily affecting children . from the years 2008 to 2014 , more than 1 million hfmd cases have been reported in china each year . . outbreaks . in 1997 , an outbreak occurred in sarawak of malaysia with 600 cases and over 30 children died . in 1998 , there was an outbreak in taiwan , affecting mainly children . there were 405 severe complications , and 78 children died . the total number of cases in that epidemic is estimated to have been 1.5 & nbsp ; million . in 2008 an outbreak in china , beginning in march in fuyang , anhui , led to 25,000 infections , and 42 deaths , by may 13 . similar outbreaks were reported in singapore ( more than 2,600 cases as of april 20 , 2008 ) , vietnam ( 2,300 cases , 11 deaths ) , viet nam news : hfmd cases prompt tighter health screening at airport ( accessed may 15 , 2008 ) mongolia ( 1,600 cases ) , ev-71 virus continues dramatic rise ( accessed may 23 , 2008 ) and brunei ( 1053 cases from june–august 2008 ) in 2009 17 children died in an outbreak during march and april 2009 in china 's eastern shandong province , and 18 children died in the neighboring henan province . out of 115,000 reported cases in china from january to april , 773 were severe and 50 were fatal . in 2010 in china , an outbreak occurred in southern china 's guangxi autonomous region as well as guangdong , henan , hebei and shandong provinces . until march , 70,756 children were infected and 40 died from the disease . by june , the peak season for the disease , 537 had died . the world health organization reporting between january to october 2011 ( 1,340,259 ) states the number of cases in china had dropped by approx 300,000 from 2010 ( 1,654,866 ) cases , with new cases peaking in june . there were 437 deaths , down from 2010 ( 537 deaths ) . in december 2011 , the california department of public health identified a strong form of the virus , coxsackievirus a6 ( cva6 ) , where nail loss in children is common . in 2012 in alabama , united states there was an outbreak of an unusual type of the disease . it occurred in a season when it is not usually seen and affected teenagers and older adults . there were some hospitalizations due to the disease but no reported deaths . in 2012 in cambodia , 52 of 59 reviewed cases of children reportedly dead due to a mysterious disease were diagnosed to be caused by a virulent form of hfmd . although a significant degree of uncertainty exists with reference to the diagnosis , the who report states , '' based on the latest laboratory results , a significant proportion of the samples tested positive for enterovirus 71 ( ev-71 ) , which causes hand foot and mouth disease ( hfmd ) . the ev-71 virus has been known to generally cause severe complications amongst some patients . '' hfmd infected 1,520,274 people with up to 431 deaths reported at the end of july in 2012 in china . in 2018 , more than 50,000 cases have occurred through a nationwide outbreak in malaysia with two deaths also reported . . history . hfmd cases were first described clinically in canada and new zealand in 1957 . the disease was termed '' hand foot and mouth disease '' , by thomas henry flewett , after a similar outbreak in 1960 . . research . novel antiviral agents to prevent and treat infection with the viruses responsible for hfmd are currently under development . preliminary studies have shown inhibitors of the ev-71 viral capsid to have potent antiviral activity .