Ventricular fibrillation

signs and symptoms . ventricular fibrillation is a cause of cardiac arrest . the ventricular muscle twitches randomly rather than contracting in a co-ordinated fashion ( from the apex of the heart to the outflow of the ventricles ) , and so the ventricles fail to pump blood around the body – because of this , it is classified as a cardiac arrest rhythm , and patients in v-fib should be treated with cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( cpr ) and prompt defibrillation . left untreated , ventricular fibrillation is rapidly fatal as the vital organs of the body , including the heart , are starved of oxygen , and as a result patients in this rhythm will not be conscious or responsive to stimuli . prior to cardiac arrest , patients may complain of varying symptoms depending on the underlying cause . patients may exhibit signs of agonal breathing , which to a layperson can look like normal spontaneous breathing , but is a sign of hypoperfusion of the brainstem . it has an appearance on electrocardiography of irregular electrical activity with no discernable pattern . it may be described as 'coarse ' or 'fine ' depending on its amplitude , or as progressing from coarse to fine v-fib . coarse v-fib may be more responsive to defibrillation , while fine v-fib can mimic the appearance of asystole on a defibrillator or cardiac monitor set to a low gain . some clinicians may attempt to defibrillate fine v-fib in the hope that it can be reverted to a cardiac rhythm compatible with life , whereas others will deliver cpr and sometimes drugs as described in the advanced cardiac life support protocols in an attempt to increase its amplitude and the odds of successful defibrillation . causes . ventricular fibrillation has been described as '' chaotic asynchronous fractionated activity of the heart '' ( moe et al . 1964 ) . a more complete definition is that ventricular fibrillation is a '' turbulent , disorganized electrical activity of the heart in such a way that the recorded electrocardiogramic deflections continuously change in shape , magnitude and direction '' . ventricular fibrillation most commonly occurs within diseased hearts , and , in the vast majority of cases , is a manifestation of underlying ischemic heart disease . ventricular fibrillation is also seen in those with cardiomyopathy , myocarditis , and other heart pathologies . in addition , it is seen with electrolyte imbalance , overdoses of cardiotoxic drugs , and following near drowning or major trauma . it is also notable that ventricular fibrillation occurs where there is no discernible heart pathology or other evident cause , the so-called idiopathic ventricular fibrillation . idiopathic ventricular fibrillation occurs with a reputed incidence of approximately 1 % of all cases of out-of-hospital arrest , as well as 3–9 % of the cases of ventricular fibrillation unrelated to myocardial infarction , and 14 % of all ventricular fibrillation resuscitations in patients under the age of 40 . it follows then that , on the basis of the fact that ventricular fibrillation itself is common , idiopathic ventricular fibrillation accounts for an appreciable mortality . recently described syndromes such as the brugada syndrome may give clues to the underlying mechanism of ventricular arrhythmias . in the brugada syndrome , changes may be found in the resting ecg with evidence of right bundle branch block ( rbbb ) and st elevation in the chest leads v1-v3 , with an underlying propensity to sudden cardiac death . the relevance of this is that theories of the underlying pathophysiology and electrophysiology must account for the occurrence of fibrillation in the apparent '' healthy '' heart . it is evident that there are mechanisms at work that we do not fully appreciate and understand . investigators are exploring new techniques of detecting and understanding the underlying mechanisms of sudden cardiac death in these patients without pathological evidence of underlying heart disease . familial conditions that predispose individuals to developing ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac death are often the result of gene mutations that affect cellular transmembrane ion channels . for example , in brugada syndrome , sodium channels are affected . in certain forms of long qt syndrome , the potassium inward rectifier channel is affected . pathophysiology . file : iec_ts_60479-1_electric_shock_graph.svg thumb 300px log-log graph of the effect of alternating current i of duration t passing from left hand to feet as defined in iec publication 60479-1 . weineng wang , zhiqiang wang , xiao peng , effects of the earth current frequency and distortion on residual current devices , scientific journal of control engineering , dec 2013 , vol 3 issue 6 pp 417-422 ac-1 : imperceptible ac-2 : perceptible but no muscle reaction ac-3 : muscle contraction with reversible effects ac-4 : possible irreversible effects ac-4.1 : up to 5 % probability of ventricular fibrillation ac-4.2 : 5-50 % probability of fibrillation ac-4.3 : over 50 % probability of fibrillation . abnormal automaticity . automaticity is a measure of the propensity of a fiber to initiate an impulse spontaneously . the product of a hypoxic myocardium can be hyperirritable myocardial cells . these may then act as pacemakers . the ventricles are then being stimulated by more than one pacemaker . scar and dying tissue is inexcitable , but around these areas usually lies a penumbra of hypoxic tissue that is excitable . ventricular excitability may generate re-entry ventricular arrhythmia . most myocardial cells with an associated increased propensity to arrhythmia development have an associated loss of membrane potential . that is , the maximum diastolic potential is less negative and therefore exists closer to the threshold potential . cellular depolarisation can be due to a raised external concentration of potassium ions k + , a decreased intracellular concentration of sodium ions na + , increased permeability to na + , or a decreased permeability to k + . the ionic basic automaticity is the net gain of an intracellular positive charge during diastole in the presence of a voltage-dependent channel activated by potentials negative to –50 to –60 & nbsp ; mv . myocardial cells are exposed to different environments . normal cells may be exposed to hyperkalaemia ; abnormal cells may be perfused by normal environment . for example , with a healed myocardial infarction , abnormal cells can be exposed to an abnormal environment such as with a myocardial infarction with myocardial ischaemia . in conditions such as myocardial ischaemia , possible mechanism of arrhythmia generation include the resulting decreased internal k + concentration , the increased external k + concentration , norepinephrine release and acidosis . ho k 1993 when myocardial cell are exposed to hyperkalemia , the maximum diastolic potential is depolarized as a result of the alteration of ik1 potassium current , whose intensity and direction is strictly dependent on intracellular and extracellular potassium concentrations . with ik1 suppressed , an hyperpolarizing effect is lost and therefore there can be activation of funny current even in myocardial cells ( which is normally suppressed by the hyperpolarizing effect of coexisting potassium currents ) . this can lead to the instauration of automaticity in ischemic tissue . re-entry . the role of re-entry or circus motion was demonstrated separately by g . r . mines and w . e . garrey . mines gr 1913 , garrey we 1914 mines created a ring of excitable tissue by cutting the atria out of the ray fish . garrey cut out a similar ring from the turtle ventricle . they were both able to show that , if a ring of excitable tissue was stimulated at a single point , the subsequent waves of depolarisation would pass around the ring . the waves eventually meet and cancel each other out , but , if an area of transient block occurred with a refractory period that blocked one wavefront and subsequently allowed the other to proceed retrogradely over the other path , then a self-sustaining circus movement phenomenon would result . for this to happen , however , it is necessary that there be some form of non-uniformity . in practice , this may be an area of ischemic or infarcted myocardium , or underlying scar tissue . it is possible to think of the advancing wave of depolarisation as a dipole with a head and a tail . the length of the refractory period and the time taken for the dipole to travel a certain distance—the propagation velocity—will determine whether such a circumstance will arise for re-entry to occur . factors that promote re-entry would include a slow-propagation velocity , a short refractory period with a sufficient size of ring of conduction tissue . these would enable a dipole to reach an area that had been refractory and is now able to be depolarised with continuation of the wavefront . in clinical practice , therefore , factors that would lead to the right conditions to favour such re-entry mechanisms include increased heart size through hypertrophy or dilatation , drugs which alter the length of the refractory period and areas of cardiac disease . therefore , the substrate of ventricular fibrillation is transient or permanent conduction block . block due either to areas of damaged or refractory tissue leads to areas of myocardium for initiation and perpetuation of fibrillation through the phenomenon of re-entry . triggered activity . triggered activity can occur due to the presence of afterdepolarization . these are depolarising oscillations in the membrane voltage induced by preceding action potentials . these can occur before or after full repolarisation of the fiber and as such are termed either early ( eads ) or delayed afterdepolarisations ( dads ) . all afterdepolarisations may not reach threshold potential , but , if they do , they can trigger another afterdepolarisation , and thus self-perpetuate . power spectrum . thumb the distribution of frequency and power of a waveform can be expressed as a power spectrum in which the contribution of different waveform frequencies to the waveform under analysis is measured . this can be expressed as either the dominant or peak frequency , i.e . , the frequency with the greatest power or the median frequency , which divides the spectrum in two halves . frequency analysis has many other uses in medicine and in cardiology , including analysis of heart rate variability and assessment of cardiac function , as well as in imaging and acoustics . . histopathology . image : cardiac myofiberbreak-up -- very high mag.jpg thumb right micrograph showing myofibre break-up with squared nuclei , a morphologic correlate of ventricular fibrillation . h & e stain . myofibre break-up , abbreviated mfb , is associated with ventricular fibrillation leading to death . histomorphology , mfb is characterized by fractures of the cardiac muscles perpendicular to their long axis , with squaring of the myofibre nuclei . treatment . defibrillation is the definitive treatment of ventricular fibrillation , whereby an electrical current is applied to the ventricular mass either directly or externally through pads or paddles , with the aim of depolarising enough of the myocardium for coordinated contractions to occur again . the use of this is often dictated around the world by advanced cardiac life support or advanced life support algorithms , which is taught to medical practitioners including doctors , nurses and paramedics and also advocates the use of drugs , predominantly epinephrine , after every second unsuccessful attempt at defibrillation , as well as cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( cpr ) between defibrillation attempts . though als/acls algorithms encourage the use of drugs , they state first and foremost that defibrillation should not be delayed for any other intervention and that adequate cardiopulmonary resuscitation be delivered with minimal interruption . the precordial thump is a manoeuver promoted as a mechanical alternative to defibrillation . some advanced life support algorithms advocate its use once and only in the case of witnessed and monitored v-fib arrests as the likelihood of it successfully cardioversion a patient are small and this diminishes quickly in the first minute of onset . people who survive a '' v-fib arrest '' and who make a good recovery are often considered for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator , which can quickly deliver this same life-saving defibrillation should another episode of ventricular fibrillation occur outside a hospital environment . epidemiology . sudden cardiac arrest is the leading cause of death in the industrialised world . it exacts a significant mortality with approximately 70,000 to 90,000 sudden cardiac deaths each year in the united kingdom , and survival rates are only 2 % . national institute for health and clinical excellence guidelines 2000 the majority of these deaths are due to ventricular fibrillation secondary to myocardial infarction , or '' heart attack '' . myerburg rj et al . 1995 during ventricular fibrillation , cardiac output drops to zero , and , unless remedied promptly , death usually ensues within minutes . history . lyman brewer suggests that the first recorded account of ventricular fibrillation dates as far back as 1500 bc , and can be found in the ebers papyrus of ancient egypt . the extract recorded 3500 years ago may even date from as far back as 3500 bc . it states : '' when the heart is diseased , its work is imperfectly performed : the vessels proceeding from the heart become inactive , so that you can not feel them … if the heart trembles , has little power and sinks , the disease is advanced and death is near . '' a book authored by jo miles suggests that it may even go back farther . tests done on frozen remains found in the himalayas seemed fairly conclusive that the first known case of ventricular fibrillation dates back to at least 2500 bc . whether this is a description of ventricular fibrillation is debatable . the next recorded description occurs 3000 years later and is recorded by vesalius , who described the appearance of '' worm-like '' movements of the heart in animals prior to death . the significance and clinical importance of these observations and descriptions possibly of ventricular fibrillation were not recognised until john erichsen in 1842 described ventricular fibrillation following the ligation of a coronary artery ( erichsen je 1842 ) . subsequent to this in 1850 , fibrillation was described by ludwig and hoffa when they demonstrated the provocation of ventricular fibrillation in an animal by applying a '' faradic '' ( electrical ) current to the heart . hoffa m et al . 1850 in 1874 , alfred vulpian coined the term mouvement fibrillaire , a term that he seems to have used to describe both atrial and ventricular fibrillation . vulpian a 1874 john a . macwilliam , a physiologist who had trained under ludwig and who subsequently became professor of physiology at the university of aberdeen , gave an accurate description of the arrhythmia in 1887 . this definition still holds today , and is interesting in the fact that his studies and description predate the use of electrocardiography . his description is as follows : '' the ventricular muscle is thrown into a state of irregular arrhythmic contraction , whilst there is a great fall in the arterial blood pressure , the ventricles become dilated with blood as the rapid quivering movement of their walls is insufficient to expel their contents ; the muscular action partakes of the nature of a rapid incoordinate twitching of the muscular tissue … the cardiac pump is thrown out of gear , and the last of its vital energy is dissipated in the violent and the prolonged turmoil of fruitless activity in the ventricular walls . '' macwilliam spent many years working on ventricular fibrillation and was one of the first to show that ventricular fibrillation could be terminated by a series of induction shocks through the heart . macwilliam ja 1887 the first electrocardiogram recording of ventricular fibrillation was by august hoffman in a paper published in 1912 . hoffman a 1912 at this time , two other researchers , george ralph mines and garrey , working separately , produced work demonstrating the phenomenon of circus movement and re-entry as possible substrates for the generation of arrhythmias . this work was also accompanied by lewis , who performed further outstanding work into the concept of '' circus movement . '' later milestones include the work by w . j . kerr and w . l . bender in 1922 , who produced an electrocardiogram showing ventricular tachycardia evolving into ventricular fibrillation . kerr , wj et al . 1922 the re-entry mechanism was also advocated by deboer , who showed that ventricular fibrillation could be induced in late systole with a single shock to a frog heart . de boer s 1923 the concept of '' r on t ectopics '' was further brought out by katz in 1928 . katz ln 1928 this was called the “ vulnerable period ” by wiggers and wegria in 1940 , who brought to attention the concept of the danger of premature ventricular beats occurring on a t wave . another definition of vf was produced by wiggers in 1940 . he described ventricular fibrillation as '' an incoordinate type of contraction which , despite a high metabolic rate of the myocardium , produces no useful beats . as a result , the arterial pressure falls abruptly to very low levels , and death results within six to eight minutes from anemia ischemia of the brain and spinal cord '' . wiggers , cj et al . 1940 spontaneous conversion of ventricular fibrillation to a more benign rhythm is rare in all but small animals . defibrillation is the process that converts ventricular fibrillation to a more benign rhythm . this is usually by application of an electric shock to the myocardium and is discussed in detail in the relevant article . see also . atrial fibrillation electric shock flatline osborn wave re-entry ventricular arrhythmia ventricular flutter . references . external links . interactive models and information on ventricular fibrillation and other arrhythmias