Intravenous therapy

uses . medical uses . intravenous ( iv ) access is used to administer medications and fluid replacement which must be distributed throughout the body , especially when rapid distribution is desired . another use of iv administration is the avoidance of first-pass metabolism in the liver . substances that may be infused intravenously include volume expanders , blood-based products , blood substitutes , medications and nutrition . fluid solutions . fluids may be administered as part of '' volume expansion '' , or fluid replacement , through the intravenous route . volume expansion consists of the administration of fluid-based solutions or suspensions designed to target specific areas of the body which need more water . there are two main types of volume expander : crystalloids and colloids . crystalloids are aqueous solutions of mineral salts or other water-soluble molecules . colloids contain larger insoluble molecules , such as gelatin . blood itself is considered a colloid . the most commonly used crystalloid fluid is normal saline , a solution of sodium chloride at 0.9 % concentration , which is isotonic with blood . lactated ringer 's ( also known as ringer 's lactate ) and the closely related ringer 's acetate , are mildly hypotonic solutions often used in those who have significant burns . colloids preserve a high colloid osmotic pressure in the blood , while , on the other hand , this parameter is decreased by crystalloids due to hemodilution . crystalloids generally are much cheaper than colloids . buffer solutions which are used to correct acidosis or alkalosis are also administered through intravenous access . lactated ringer 's solution used as a fluid expander or base solution to which medications are added also has some buffering effect . another solution administered intravenously as a buffering solution is sodium bicarbonate . . medication and treatment . medications may be mixed into the fluids mentioned above , commonly normal saline , or dextrose solutions . compared with other route of administration , such as oral medications , the iv route is the fastest way to deliver fluids and medications throughout the body . for this reason , the iv route is commonly preferred in emergency situations or when a fast onset of action is desirable . in extremely high blood pressure ( termed a hypertensive emergency ) , iv antihypertensives may be given to quickly decrease the blood pressure in a controlled manner to prevent organ damage . in atrial fibrillation , iv amiodarone may be administered to attempt to restore normal heart rhythm . iv medications can also be used for chronic health conditions such as cancer , for which chemotherapy drugs are commonly administered intravenously . in some cases , such as with vancomycin , a loading or bolus dose of medicine is given before beginning a dosing regimen to more quickly increase the concentration of medication in the blood . the bioavailability of an iv medication is by definition 100 % , unlike oral administration where medication may not be fully absorbed , or may be metabolized prior to entering the bloodstream . for some medications , there is virtually zero oral bioavailability . for this reason certain types of medications can only be given intravenously , as there is insufficient uptake by other routes of administration . the unpredictability of oral bioavailability in different people is also a reason for a medication to be administered iv - as with furosemide . oral medications also may be less desirable if a person is nauseous , vomiting , or has severe diarrhea - as these may prevent the medicine from being fully absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract . in these cases , a medication may be given iv only until the patient can tolerate an oral form of the medication . the switch from iv to oral administration is usually performed as soon as viable , as there is generally cost and time savings over iv administration . whether a medication can be potentially switched to an oral form is sometimes considered when choosing appropriate antibiotic therapy for use in a hospital setting , as a person is unlikely to be discharged if they are still requiring iv therapy . some medications , such as aprepitant , are chemically modified to be better suited for iv administration , forming a prodrug such as fosaprepitant . this can be for pharmacokinetic reasons or to delay the effect of the drug until it can be metabolized into the active form . . blood products . a blood product ( or blood-based product ) is any component of blood which is collected from a donor for use in a blood transfusion . blood transfusions can be used in massive blood loss due to trauma , or can be used to replace blood lost during surgery . blood transfusions may also be used to treat a severe anaemia or thrombocytopenia caused by a blood disease . early blood transfusions consisted of whole blood , but modern medical practice commonly uses only components of the blood , such as packed red blood cells , fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate . . nutrition . parenteral nutrition is the act of providing required nutrients to a person through an intravenous line . this is used in people who are unable to get nutrients normally , by eating and digestion food . a person receiving parenteral nutrition will be given an intravenous solution which may contain salts , dextrose , amino acids , lipids and vitamins . the exact formulation of a parenteral nutrition used will depend on the specific nutritional needs of the person it is being given to . if a person is only receiving nutrition intravenously , it is called total parenteral nutrition , whereas if a person is only receiving some of their nutrition intravenously it is called partial parenteral nutrition ( or supplemental parenteral nutrition ) . . imaging . the utility of medical imaging relies on being able to clearly distinguish internal parts of the body from each other - one way this is accomplished is through the administration of a contrast agent into a vein . the specific imaging technique being employed will determine the characteristics of an appropriate contrast agent to increase visibility of blood vessels or other features . common contrast agents are administered into a peripheral vein from which they are distributed throughout the circulation to the imaging site . . other uses . . use in sports . iv rehydration was formerly a common technique for athletes . the world anti-doping agency prohibits intravenous injection of more than 100ml per 12 hours , except under a medical exemption . the united states anti-doping agency notes that , as well as the dangers inherent in iv therapy , '' ivs can be used to change blood test results ( such as hematocrit where epo or blood doping is being used ) , mask urine test results ( by dilution ) or by administering prohibited substances in a way that will more quickly be cleared from the body in order to beat an anti-doping test '' . players suspended after attending '' boutique iv clinics '' which offer this sort of treatment include footballer samir nasri in 2017 and swimmer ryan lochte in 2018 . . use for hangover treatment . in the 1960s , john myers developed the '' myers ' cocktail '' , a non-prescription iv solution of vitamins and minerals marketed as a hangover cure and general wellness remedy . the first '' boutique iv '' clinic , offering similar treatments , opened in tokyo in 2008 . these clinics , whose target market was described by elle as '' health nuts who moonlight as heavy drinkers '' , have been publicized in the 2010s by glamorous celebrity customers . intravenous therapy is also used in people with acute ethanol toxicity to correct electrolyte and vitamin deficiencies which arise from alcohol consumption . . others . in some countries , non-prescription intravenous glucose is used to improve a person 's energy , but is not a part of routine medical care in countries such as the united states where glucose solutions are prescription drugs . improperly administered intravenous glucose ( called '' ringer '' ) , such as that which is administered clandestinely in store-front clinics , poses increased risks due to improper technique and oversight . intravenous access is also sometimes used outside of a medical setting for the self-administration of recreational drugs , such as heroin and fentanyl . . types . bolus . some medications are able to be administered as a bolus dose , which is called an '' iv push '' . a syringe containing the medication is connected to an access port in the primary tubing and the medication is administered through the port . a bolus may be administered rapidly ( with a fast depression of the syringe plunger ) or may be administered slowly , over the course of a few minutes . the exact administration technique depends on the medication and other factors . in some cases , a bolus of plain iv solution ( i.e . without medication added ) is administered immediately after the bolus to further force the medicine into the bloodstream . this procedure is termed an '' iv flush '' . certain medications , such as potassium , are not able to be administered by iv push due to the extremely rapid onset of action and high level of effects . . infusion . an infusion of medication may be used when it is desirable to have a constant blood concentration of a medication over time , such as with some antibiotics including beta-lactams . continuous infusions , where the next infusion is begun immediately following the completion of the prior , may also be used to limit variation in drug concentration in the blood ( i.e . between the peak drug levels and the trough drug levels ) . they may also be used instead of intermittent bolus injections for the same reason , such as with furosemide . infusions can also be intermittent , in which case the medication is administered over a period of time , then stopped , and this is later repeated . intermittent infusion may be used when there are concerns about the stability of medicine in solution for long periods of time ( as is common with continuous infusions ) , or to enable the administration of medicines which would be incompatible if administered at the same time in the same iv line , for example vancomycin . failure to properly calculate and administer an infusion can result in adverse effects , termed infusion reactions . for this reason , many medications have a maximum recommended infusion rate , such as vancomycin and many monoclonal antibodies . these infusion reactions can be severe , such as in the case of vancomycin , where the reaction is termed '' red man syndrome '' . . secondary . any additional medication to be administered intravenously at the same time as an infusion may be connected to the primary tubing ; this is termed a secondary iv , or iv piggyback . this prevents the need to use multiple iv access lines on the same person . when administering a secondary iv medication , the primary bag is held lower than the secondary bag so that the secondary medication can flow into the primary tubing , rather than fluid from the primary bag flowing into the secondary tubing . the fluid from the primary bag is needed to help flush any remaining medication from the secondary iv from the tubing . if a bolus or secondary infusion is intended for administration in the same line as a primary infusion , the molecular compatibility of the solutions must be considered . secondary compatibility is generally referred to as '' y-site compatibility '' , named after the shape of the tubing which has a port for bolus administration . incompatibility of two fluids or medications can arise due to issues of molecular stability , changes in solubility , or degradation of one of the medications . . methods and equipment . access . the simplest form of intravenous access is by passing a hollow needle through the skin directly into a vein . a syringe can be connected directly to this needle , which allows for a '' bolus '' dose to be administered . alternatively , the needle may be placed and then connected to a length of tubing , allowing for an infusion to be administered . the type and location of venous access ( i.e . a central line versus peripheral line , and in which vein the line is placed ) can be affected by the potential for some medications to cause peripheral vasoconstriction , which limits circulation to peripheral veins . a peripheral cannula is the most common intravenous access method utilized in hospitals , pre-hospital care , and outpatient medicine . this may be placed in the arm , commonly either the wrist or the median cubital vein at the elbow . a tourniquet may be used to restrict the venous drainage of the limb and makes the vein bulge , making it easier to locate and place a line in a vein . when used , a tourniquet should be removed before injecting medication to prevent extravasation . the part of the catheter that remains outside the skin is called the connecting hub ; it can be connected to a syringe or an intravenous infusion line , or capped with a or saline lock , a needleless connection filled with a small amount of heparin or saline solution to prevent clotting , between uses of the catheter . ported cannulae have an injection port on the top that is often used to administer medicine . the thickness and size of needles and catheters can be given in birmingham gauge or french gauge . a birmingham gauge of 14 is a very large cannula ( used in resuscitation settings ) and 24-26 is the smallest . the most common sizes are 16-gauge ( midsize line used for blood donation and transfusion ) , 18- and 20-gauge ( all-purpose line for infusions and blood draws ) , and 22-gauge ( all-purpose pediatric line ) . 12- and 14-gauge peripheral lines are capable of delivering large volumes of fluid very fast , accounting for their popularity in emergency medicine . these lines are frequently called '' large bores '' or '' trauma lines '' . . peripheral lines . a peripheral intravenous line is inserted in peripheral veins , such as the veins in the arms , hands , legs and feet . medication administered in this way travels through the veins to the heart , from where it is distributed to the rest of the body through the circulatory system . the size of the peripheral vein limits the amount and rate of medication which can be administered safely . a peripheral line consists of a short catheter inserted through the skin into a peripheral vein . this is usually in the form of a cannula-over-needle device , in which a flexible plastic cannula comes mounted over a metal trocar . once the tip of the needle and cannula are placed , the cannula is advanced inside the vein over the trocar to the appropriate position and secured . the trocar is then withdrawn and discarded . blood samples may also be drawn from the line directly after the initial iv cannula insertion . . central lines . a central line is an access method in which a catheter empties into a larger , more central vein ( a vein within the torso ) , usually the superior vena cava , inferior vena cava or the right atrium of the heart . there are several types of central iv access , categorized based on the route the catheter takes from the outside of the body to the central vein output . . peripherally inserted central catheter . a peripherally inserted central catheter ( also called a picc line ) is a type of central iv access which consists of a cannula is inserted through a sheath into a peripheral vein and then carefully fed towards the heart , terminating at the superior vena cava or the right atrium . these lines are usually placed in peripheral veins in the arm , and may be placed using the seldinger technique under ultrasound guidance . an x-ray is used to verify that the end of the cannula is in the right place if fluoroscopy was not used during the insertion . an ekg can also be used in some cases to determine if the end of the cannula is in the correct location . . tunneled lines . a tunneled line is a type of central access which is inserted under the skin , and then travels a significant distance through surrounding tissue before reaching and penetrating the central vein . using a tunneled line reduces the risk of infection as compared to other forms of access , as bacteria from the skin surface are not able to travel directly into the vein . these catheters are often made of materials that resist infection and clotting . types of tunneled central lines include the hickman line or broviac catheter . a tunnelled line is an option for long term venous access necessary for hemodialysis in people with poor kidney function . . implantable ports . an implanted port is a central line that does not have an external connector protruding from the skin for administration of medication . instead , a port consists of a small reservoir covered with silicone rubber which is implanted under the skin , which then covers the reservoir . medication is administered by injecting medication through the skin and the silicone port cover into the reservoir . when the needle is withdrawn , the reservoir cover reseals itself . a port cover is designed to function for hundreds of needle sticks during its lifetime . ports may be placed in an arm or in the chest area . . infusions . equipment used to place and administer an iv line for infusion consists of a bag , usually hanging above the height of the person , and sterile tubing through which the medicine is administered . in a basic '' gravity '' iv , a bag is simply hung above the height of the person and the solution is pulled via gravity through a tube attached to a needle inserted into a vein . without extra equipment , it is not possible to precisely control the rate of administration . for this reason , a setup may also incorporate a clamp to regulate flow . some iv lines may be placed with '' y-sites '' , devices which enable a secondary solution to be administered through the same line ( known as piggybacking ) . some systems employ a drip chamber , which prevents air from entering the bloodstream ( causing an air embolism ) , and allows visual estimation of flow rate of the solution . alternatively , an infusion pump may be used to allow precise control over the flow rate and total amount delivered . a pump is programmed based on the number and size of infusions being administered to ensure all medicine is fully administered without allowing the access line to run dry . pumps are primarily utilized when a constant flow rate is important , or where changes in rate of administration would have consequences . . techniques . to reduce pain associated with the procedure , medical staff may apply a topical local anaesthetic ( such as emla or ametop ) to the skin of the chosen venipuncture area about 45 minutes beforehand . if the cannula is not inserted correctly , or the vein is particularly fragile and ruptures , blood may extravasate into the surrounding tissues , this situation is known as a blown vein or '' tissuing '' . using this cannula to administer medications causes extravasation of the drug which can lead to edema , causing pain and tissue damage , and even necrosis depending on the medication . the person attempting to obtain the access must find a new access site proximal to the '' blown '' area to prevent extravasation of medications through the damaged vein . for this reason it is advisable to site the first cannula at the most distal appropriate vein . . adverse effects . pain . placement of an intravenous line inherently causes pain when the skin is broken and is considered medically invasive . for this reason , when other forms of administration may suffice , intravenous therapy is usually not preferred . this includes the treatment of mild or moderate dehydration with oral rehydration therapy which is an option , as opposed to parenteral rehydration through an iv line . children in emergency departments being treated for dehydration have better outcomes with oral treatment than intravenous therapy due to the pain and complications of an intravenous line . cold spray may decrease the pain of putting in an iv . certain medications also have specific sensations of pain associated with their administration iv . this includes potassium , which when administered iv can cause a burning or painful sensation . the incidence of side effects specific to a medication can be affected by the type of access ( peripheral versus central ) , the rate of administration , or the quantity of drug administered . when medications are administered too rapidly through an iv line , a set of vague symptoms such as redness or rash , fever , and others may occur - this is termed an '' infusion reaction '' and is prevented by decreasing the rate of administration of the medication . when vancomycin is involved , this is commonly termed '' red man syndrome '' after the rapid flushing which occurs after rapid administration . . infection and inflammation . as placement of an intravenous line requires breaking the skin , there is a risk of infection . skin-dwelling organisms such as coagulase-negative staphylococcus or candida albicans may enter through the insertion site around the catheter , or bacteria may be accidentally introduced inside the catheter from contaminated equipment . infection of an iv access site is usually local , causing easily visible swelling , redness , and fever . however , pathogens may also enter the bloodstream , causing an infection called sepsis which can be sudden and life-threatening . a central iv line poses a higher risk of sepsis , as it can deliver bacteria directly into the central circulation . a line which has been in place for a longer period of time also increases the risk of infection . inflammation of the vein may also occur , called thrombophlebitis or simply phlebitis . this may be caused by infection , the catheter itself , or the specific fluids or medication being given . repeated instances of phlebitis can cause scar tissue to build up along a vein . a peripheral iv line can not be left in the vein indefinitely out of concern for the risk of infection and phlebitis , among other potential complications . however , recent studies have found that there is no increased risk of complications in those whose ivs were replaced only when clinically indicated versus those whose ivs were replaced routinely . if placed with proper aseptic technique , it is not recommended to change a peripheral iv line more frequently than every 72–96 hours . phlebitis is particularly common in intravenous drug users , and those undergoing chemotherapy , whose veins can become sclerotic and difficult to access over time , sometimes forming a hard , painful “ venous cord ” . the presence of a cord is a cause of discomfort and pain associated with iv therapy , and makes it more difficult for an iv line to be placed as a line can not be placed in an area with a cord . . infiltration and extravasation . infiltration occurs when a non-vesicant iv fluid or medication enters the surrounding tissue as opposed to the desired vein . it may occur when the vein itself ruptures , when the vein is damaged during insertion of the intravascular access device , or from increased vein porosity . infiltration may also occur if the puncture of the vein by the needle becomes the path of least resistance - such as a cannula which has been left inserted causing the vein to scar . it can also occur upon insertion of an iv line if a tourniquet is not promptly removed . infiltration is characterized by coolness and pallor to the skin as well as localized swelling or edema . it is treated by removing the intravenous line and elevating the affected limb so the collected fluids drain away . injections of hyaluronidase around the area can be used to speed the dispersal of the fluid/drug . infiltration is one of the most common adverse effects of iv therapy and is usually not serious unless the infiltrated fluid is a medication damaging to the surrounding tissue , most commonly a vesicant or chemotherapeutic agent . in such cases , the infiltration is termed extravasation , and may cause necrosis . . others . if the solutions administered are colder than the temperature of the body , induced hypothermia can occur . if the temperature change to the heart is rapid , ventricular fibrillation may be caused . furthermore , if a solution which is not isoosmolar is administered , a person 's electrolyte balance may become imbalanced . in hospitals , regular blood tests may be used to proactively monitor electrolyte levels . . history . the first recorded attempt at administering a therapeutic substance via iv injection was in 1492 , when pope innocent viii fell ill and was administered blood from healthy individuals . if this occurred , the treatment did not work and resulted in the death of the donors while not healing the pope . this story is disputed by some , who claim that the idea of blood transfusions could not have been considered by the medical professionals at the time , or that a complete description of blood circulation was not published for over 100 years later . the story is attributed to potential errors in translation of documents from the time , as well as potentially an intentional fabrication , whereas others still consider it to be accurate . one of the leading medical history textbooks for medical and nursing students has claimed that the entire story was an anti-semitic fabrication . there was virtually no recorded success with any attempts at injection therapy until the 1800s , when in 1831 thomas latta studied the use of iv fluid replacements for cholera treatment . the first solutions which saw widespread use for iv injections were simple '' saline-like solutions '' , which were followed by experiments with various other liquids , including milk , sugar , honey , and egg yolk . in the 1830s , james blundell , an english obstetrician , used intravenous administration of blood to treat women bleeding profusely during or after delivery . this predated the understanding of blood type , leading to unpredictable results . intravenous therapy was expanded by italian physician guido baccelli in the late 1890s see , for example , the nobel prize nomination database : and further developed in the 1930s by samuel hirschfeld , harold t . hyman and justine johnstone but was not widely available until the 1950s . in the 1960s , the concept of providing a person 's complete nutritional needs through an iv solution began to be seriously considered . the first parenteral nutrition supplementation consisted of hydrolyzed proteins and dextrose . this was followed in 1975 with the introduction of intravenous fat emulsions and vitamins which were added to form '' total parenteral nutrition '' , or that which includes protein , fat , and carbohydrates .