Huygens (spacecraft)

detailed huygens activity timeline . huygens separated from cassini orbiter at 02:00 utc on december 25 , 2004 in spacecraft event time . huygens entered titan 's atmosphere at 10:13 utc on january 14 , 2005 in scet , according to esa . the probe landed on the surface of titan at about 10.6°s , 192.3°w around 12:43 utc in scet ( 2 & nbsp ; hours 30 & nbsp ; minutes after atmospheric entry ) . ( 1 . ) there was a transit of the earth and moon across the sun as seen from saturn/titan just hours before the landing . huygens entered the upper layer of titan 's atmosphere 2.7 & nbsp ; hours after the end of the transit of the earth , or only one or two minutes after the end of the transit of the moon . however , the transit did not interfere with the cassini orbiter or huygens probe , for two reasons . first , although they could not receive any signal from earth because it was in front of the sun , earth could still listen to them . second , huygens did not send any readable data directly to earth . rather , it transmitted data to the cassini orbiter , which later relayed to earth the data received . instrumentation . huygens had six instruments aboard that took in a wide range of scientific data as the probe descended through titan 's atmosphere . the six instruments are : . huygens atmospheric structure instrument ( hasi ) . this instrument contains a suite of sensors that measured the physical and electrical properties of titan 's atmosphere . accelerometers measured forces in all three axes as the probe descended through the atmosphere . with the aerodynamic properties of the probe already known , it was possible to determine the density of titan 's atmosphere and to detect wind gusts . the probe was designed so that in the event of a landing on a liquid surface , its motion due to waves would also have been measurable . temperature and pressure sensors measured the thermal properties of the atmosphere . the permittivity and electromagnetic wave analyzer component measured the electron and ion ( i.e . , positively charged particle ) conductivities of the atmosphere and searched for electromagnetic wave activity . on the surface of titan , the electrical conductivity and permittivity ( i.e . , the ratio of electric displacement field to its electric field ) of the surface material was measured . the hasi subsystem also contains a microphone , which was used to record any acoustic events during probe 's descent and landing ; this was the first time in history that audible sounds from another planetary body had been recorded . doppler wind experiment ( dwe ) . this experiment used an ultra-stable oscillator which provided a precise s-band carrier frequency that allowed the cassini orbiter to accurately determine huygens ' radial velocity with respect to cassini via the doppler effect . the wind-induced horizontal motion from huygens would 've been derived from the measured doppler shift measurements , corrected for all known orbit and propagation effects . the swinging motion of the probe beneath its parachute due to atmospheric properties may also have been detected . failure of ground controllers to turn on the receiver in the cassini orbiter caused the loss of this data . earth-based radio telescopes were able to reconstruct some of it . measurements started above titan 's surface , where huygens was blown eastwards at more than , agreeing with earlier measurements of the winds at altitude , made over the past few years using telescopes . between , huygens was buffeted by rapidly fluctuating winds , which are thought to be vertical wind shear . at ground level , the earth-based doppler shift and vlbi measurements show gentle winds of a few metres per second , roughly in line with expectations . descent imager/spectral radiometer ( disr ) . as huygens was primarily an atmospheric mission , the disr instrument was optimized to study the radiation balance inside titan 's atmosphere . its visible and infrared spectrometers and violet photometers measured the up- and downward radiant flux from an altitude of down to the surface . solar aureole cameras measured how scattering by aerosols varies the intensity directly around the sun . three imagers , sharing the same ccd , periodically imaged a swath of around 30 & nbsp ; degrees wide , ranging from almost nadir to just above the horizon . aided by the slowly spinning probe they would build up a full mosaic of the landing site , which , surprisingly , became clearly visible only below altitude . all measurements were timed by aid of a shadow bar , which would tell disr when the sun had passed through the field of view . unfortunately , this scheme was upset by the fact that huygens rotated in a direction opposite to that expected . just before landing a lamp was switched on to illuminate the surface , which enabled measurements of the surface reflectance at wavelengths which are completely blocked out by atmospheric methane absorption . disr was developed at the lunar and planetary laboratory at the university of arizona under the direction of martin tomasko , with several european institutes contributing to the hardware . '' the scientific objectives of the experiment fall into four areas including ( 1 ) measurement of the solar heating profile for studies of the thermal balance of titan ; ( 2 ) imaging and spectral reflection measurements of the surface for studies of the composition , topography , and physical processes which form the surface as well as for direct measurements of the wind profile during the descent ; ( 3 ) measurements of the brightness and degree of linear polarization of scattered sunlight including the solar aureole together with measurements of the extinction optical depth of the aerosols as a function of wavelength and altitude to study the size , shape , vertical distribution , optical properties , sources and sinks of aerosols in titan ’ s atmosphere ; and ( 4 ) measurements of the spectrum of downward solar flux to study the composition of the atmosphere , especially the mixing ratio profile of methane throughout the descent . '' m g tomasko ; d buchhauser ; m bushroe ; l e dafoe ; l r doose ; a eibl ; c fellows ; e m farlane ; g m prout ; m j pringle . the descent imager/spectral radiometer ( disr ) experiment on the huygens entry probe of titan . space science reviews , 104 , no . 1/2 , ( 2002 ) : 467-549 . . gas chromatograph mass spectrometer ( gc/ms ) . left this instrument is a gas chemical analyzer that was designed to identify and measure chemicals in titan 's atmosphere . it was equipped with samplers that were filled at high altitude for analysis . the mass spectrometer , a high-voltage quadrupole , collected data to build a model of the molecular masses of each gas , and a more powerful separation of molecular and isotopic species was accomplished by the gas chromatograph . during descent , the gc/ms also analyzed pyrolysis products ( i.e . , samples altered by heating ) passed to it from the aerosol collector pyrolyser . finally , the gc/ms measured the composition of titan 's surface . this investigation was made possible by heating the gc/ms instrument just prior to impact in order to vaporize the surface material upon contact . the gc/ms was developed by gsfc and the university of michigan 's space physics research lab . aerosol collector and pyrolyser ( acp ) . the acp experiment drew in aerosol particles from the atmosphere through filters , then heated the trapped samples in ovens ( using the process of pyrolysis ) to vaporize volatiles and decompose the complex organic materials . the products were flushed along a pipe to the gc/ms instrument for analysis . two filters were provided to collect samples at different altitudes . the acp was developed by a ( french ) esa team at the laboratoire inter-universitaire des systèmes atmosphériques ( lisa ) . surface science package ( ssp ) . the ssp contained a number of sensors designed to determine the physical properties of titan 's surface at the point of impact , whether the surface was solid or liquid . an acoustic sonar , activated during the last of the descent , continuously determined the distance to the surface , measuring the rate of descent and the surface roughness ( e.g . , due to waves ) . the instrument was designed so that if the surface were liquid , the sounder would measure the speed of sound in the '' ocean '' and possibly also the subsurface structure ( depth ) . during descent , measurements of the speed of sound gave information on atmospheric composition and temperature , and an accelerometer recorded the deceleration profile at impact , indicating the hardness and structure of the surface . a tilt sensor measured pendulum motion during the descent and was also designed to indicate the probe 's attitude after landing and show any motion due to waves . if the surface had been liquid , other sensors would also have measured its density , temperature , thermal conductivity , heat capacity , electrical properties ( permittivity and conductivity ) and refractive index ( using a critical angle refractometer ) . a penetrometer instrument , that protruded past the bottom of the huygens descent module , was used to create a penetrometer trace as huygens landed on the surface . this was done by measuring the force exerted on the instrument by the body 's surface as it broke through and was pushed down into the body by the landing . the trace shows this force as a function of time over a period of about 400 & nbsp ; ms . the trace has an initial spike which suggests that the instrument hit one of the icy pebbles on the surface photographed by the disr camera . the huygens ssp was developed by the space sciences department of the university of kent and the rutherford appleton laboratory space science department under the direction of professor john zarnecki . the ssp research and responsibility transferred to the open university when john zarnecki transferred in 2000 . spacecraft design . image : huygens thermal multilayer insulation.jpg thumb right 250px application of multi-layer insulation shimmers under bright lighting during final assembly . the gold colour of the mli is due to light reflecting from the aluminium coating on the back of sheets of amber coloured kapton . huygens was built under the prime contractorship of aérospatiale in its cannes mandelieu space center , france , now part of thales alenia space . the heat shield system was built under the responsibility of aérospatiale near bordeaux , now part of airbus defence and space . parachute . martin-baker space systems was responsible for huygens parachute systems and the structural components , mechanisms and pyrotechnics that control the probe 's descent onto titan . irvin-gq was responsible for the definition of the structure of each of huygens ' parachutes . irvin worked on the probe 's descent control sub-system under contract to martin-baker space systems . critical design flaw partially resolved . long after launch , a few persistent engineers discovered that the communication equipment on cassini had a potentially fatal design flaw , which would have caused the loss of all data transmitted by huygens . ( offline as of 2006-10-14 , see internet archive version ) how huygens avoided disaster , james oberg , the space review , january 17 , 2005 . since huygens was too small to transmit directly to earth , it was designed to transmit the telemetry data obtained while descending through titan 's atmosphere to cassini by radio , which would in turn relay it to earth using its large diameter main antenna . some engineers , most notably esa esoc employees claudio sollazzo and boris smeds , felt uneasy about the fact that , in their opinion , this feature had not been tested before launch under sufficiently realistic conditions . smeds managed , with some difficulty , to persuade superiors to perform additional tests while cassini was in flight . in early 2000 , he sent simulated telemetry data at varying power and doppler shift levels from earth to cassini . it turned out that cassini was unable to relay the data correctly . this was because under the original flight plan , when huygens was to descend to titan , it would have accelerated relative to cassini , causing the doppler shift of its signal to vary . consequently , the hardware of cassinis receiver was designed to be able to receive over a range of shifted frequencies . however , the firmware failed to take into account that the doppler shift would have changed not only the carrier frequency , but also the timing of the payload bits , coded by phase-shift keying at 8192 bits per second . reprogramming the firmware was impossible , and as a solution the trajectory had to be changed . huygens detached a month later than originally planned ( december 2004 instead of november ) and approached titan in such a way that its transmissions travelled perpendicular to its direction of motion relative to cassini , greatly reducing the doppler shift . the trajectory change overcame the design flaw for the most part , and data transmission succeeded , although the information from one of the two radio channels was lost due to an unrelated error . channel a data lost . huygens was programmed to transmit telemetry and scientific data to the cassini orbiter for relay to earth using two redundant s-band radio systems , referred to as channel a and b , or chain a and b . channel a was the sole path for an experiment to measure wind speeds by studying tiny frequency changes caused by huygens ' s motion . in one other deliberate departure from full redundancy , pictures from the descent imager were split , with each channel carrying 350 pictures . cassini never listened to channel a because of an error in the sequence of commands sent to the spacecraft . the receiver on the orbiter was never commanded to turn on , according to officials with the european space agency . esa announced that the error was a mistake on their part , the missing command was part of a command sequence developed by esa for the huygens mission , and that it was executed by cassini as delivered . because channel a was not used , only 350 pictures were received instead of the 700 planned . all doppler radio measurements between cassini and huygens were lost as well . doppler radio measurements of huygens from earth were made , although they were not as accurate as the lost measurements that cassini made . the use of accelerometer sensors on huygens and vlbi tracking of the position of the huygens probe from earth allowed reasonably accurate wind speed and direction calculations to be made . landing site . the probe landed on the surface of titan at . image : pia20713-titan-saturnmoon-labeledfeaturesiau-june2015.jpg thumb center 800px the red cross marks the landing site of huygens . the bright region to the right is xanadu region .