1957 in literature

events . january 10 – t . s . eliot marries his secretary valerie eliot , 30 years his junior , in a private church ceremony in london . his first wife , vivienne haigh-wood , died in 1947 . january 15 – the film throne of blood , a reworking of macbeth by akira kurosawa ( 黒澤明 ) , is released in japan . march – the cat in the hat , written and illustrated by theodor geisel as 'dr . seuss ' as a more entertaining alternative to traditional literacy primers for children , is first published in a trade edition in the united states , initially selling an average of 12,000 copies a month , a figure which rises rapidly . march 13 – a 1950 japanese translation of d . h . lawrence 's lady chatterley 's lover by sei itō ( 伊藤整 ) is found on appeal to be obscene . march 15 – élet és irodalom ( life and literature ) is first published in hungary as a literary magazine . march 21 – c . s . lewis marries joy gresham in a christian ceremony at her bedside in the churchill hospital , oxford , england . march 25 – copies of allen ginsberg 's howl and other poems ( first published 1 november 1956 ) printed in england are seized by united states customs service officials in san francisco on grounds of obscenity . on october 3 , in people v . ferlinghetti , a subsequent prosecution of publisher lawrence ferlinghetti in the city , the work is ruled not to be obscene . april – john updike moves to ipswich , massachusetts , the model for the fictional new england town of tarbox in his 1968 novel couples . june 2 – joe orton submits the last days of sodom , a novel jointly written with kenneth halliwell , to a publisher ; it is rejected within three days and they give up working in partnership . july 1 – the opening performance is held at the stratford shakespeare festival 's festival theatre in stratford , ontario , with its thrust stage designed by tanya moiseiwitsch . august 7 – italo calvino 's letter of resignation from the italian communist party appears in l'unità . october – the first american beat generation ( poets allen ginsberg and peter orlovsky ) stay at the '' beat hotel '' ( hotel rachou ) in paris . november 22 – boris pasternak 's novel doctor zhivago is first published , in italian translation , by giangiacomo feltrinelli in milan , having been rejected for publication in the soviet union . unknown dates justine , the first novel in lawrence durrell 's the alexandria quartet , is published . the last will be published in 1960 . dorothy parker begins writing book reviews for esquire . e . e . cummings gains a special citation from the national book award committee in the united states for his poems , 1923–1954 . malcolm muggeridge is replaced by bernard hollowood as editor of the british punch magazine . the harry ransom center for research in the humanities is founded in the university of texas at austin by harry ransom . john sandoe opens a bookshop in chelsea , london . three neo-grotesque sans-serif typefaces are released : folio ( designed by konrad bauer and walter baum ) , helvetica ( max miedinger ) and univers ( adrian frutiger ) , will influence the international typographic style of graphic design . . new books . fiction . abd al-majld ibn jallun – fī al-ṭufūla caridad bravo adams – corazón salvaje lars ahlin – natt i marknadstältet ( night in the market tent ) isaac asimov earth is room enough the naked sun john bingham – murder off the record john braine – room at the top fredric brown – rogue in space pearl s . buck – letter from peking michel butor – la modification john dickson carr – fire , burn ! louis-ferdinand céline – castle to castle ( d'un château l'autre ) john cheever – the wapshot chronicle agatha christie – 4.50 from paddington mark clifton and frank riley – they 'd rather be right ivy compton-burnett – a father and his fate thomas b . costain – below the salt james gould cozzens – by love possessed l . sprague de camp – solomon 's stone daphne du maurier – the scapegoat lawrence durrell – justine shusaku endo ( 遠藤 周作 ) – the sea and poison ( 海と毒薬 ) ian fleming the diamond smugglers from russia , with love janet frame – owls do cry jean giono – the straw man ( le bonheur fou ) josé giovanni – the break ( le trou ) martyn goff – the plaster fabric richard gordon – doctor in love winston graham – greek fire l.p . hartley – the hireling bill hopkins – the divine and the decay aldous huxley – collected short stories james jones – some came running anna kavan – eagle 's nest jack kerouac – on the road frances parkinson keyes – blue camellia christopher landon – ice cold in alex halldór laxness – the fish can sing ( brekkukotsannáll ) chin yang lee – the flower drum song meyer levin – compulsion h . p . lovecraft and august derleth – the survivor and others compton mackenzie – rockets galore józef mackiewicz – kontra alistair maclean the guns of navarone south by java head naguib mahfouz – sugar street bernard malamud – the assistant richard mason – the world of suzie wong james a . michener – rascals in paradise nancy mitford – voltaire in love c . l . moore – doomsday morning elsa morante – l'isola di arturo sławomir mrożek – słoń ( the elephant , short stories ) iris murdoch – the sandcastle vladimir nabokov – pnin björn nyberg and l . sprague de camp – the return of conan marcel pagnol – le château de ma mère boris pasternak – doctor zhivago anthony powell – at lady molly's qu bo ( 曲波 ) – tracks in the snowy forest ( 林海雪原 ) ayn rand – atlas shrugged robert randall ( pseudonym of robert silverberg and randall garrett ) – the shrouded planet alain robbe-grillet – la jalousie nevil shute – on the beach robert paul smith – where did you go ? out . what did you do ? nothing muriel spark – the comforters howard spring – time and the hour john steinbeck – the short reign of pippin iv rex stout three for the chair if death ever slept kay thompson – eloise in paris roger vailland – la loi jack vance – big planet arved viirlaid – seitse kohtupäeva ( seven days of trial ) evelyn waugh – the ordeal of gilbert pinfold patrick white – voss angus wilson – a bit off the map john wyndham – the midwich cuckoos ivan yefremov – andromeda nebula . children and young people . gillian avery – the warden 's niece narain dixit – khar khar mahadev ( serialized ) aileen fisher – a lantern in the window edward gorey – the doubtful guest éva janikovszky – csip-csup ( piffling ) tove jansson – moominland midwinter ( trollvinter ) harold keith – rifles for watie elinor lyon – daughters of aradale william mayne – a grass rope otfried preußler – die kleine hexe ( the little witch ) dr . seuss the cat in the hat how the grinch stole christmas ! pat smythe – jacqueline rides for a fall ( first of the three jays series of seven books ) virginia sorensen – miracles on maple hill elizabeth george speare – calico captive tomi ungerer – the mellops go flying dare wright – the lonely doll . drama . samuel beckett – endgame and act without words i ( first performed ) ; all that fall and from an abandoned work ( first broadcast of both ) emilio carballido – el censo christopher fry – the dark is light enough jean genet – the balcony ( le balcon ) günter grass – flood ( hochwasser ) graham greene – the potting shed william inge – the dark at the top of the stairs errol john – moon on a rainbow shawl john osborne the entertainer epitaph for george dillon harold pinter – the dumb waiter ( written ) n . f . simpson – the resounding tinkle wole soyinka – the invention boris vian – les bâtisseurs d'empire ( the empire builders ) tennessee williams baby doll orpheus descending . poetry . robert e . howard – always comes evening ted hughes – the hawk in the rain pier paolo pasolini – le ceneri di gramsci octavio paz – piedra de sol jibanananda das – rupasi bangla robert penn warren – promises : poems , 1954–1956 . won national book award for poetry – won 1958 pulitzer prize for poetry . non-fiction . b . r . ambedkar ( died 1956 ) – the buddha and his dhamma g . e . m . anscombe – intention catherine drinker bowen – the lion and the throne : the life and times of sir edward coke ( 1552–1634 ) . won 1958 national book award for nonfiction gerald brenan – south from granada m . đilas – the new class will durant – the reformation . nominated for national book award for nonfiction elisabeth elliot – through gates of splendor charles evans – kangchenjunga : the untrodden peak douglas southall freeman – george washington : a biography . won 1958 pulitzer prize for biography . nominated for national book award for nonfiction northrop frye – anatomy of criticism : four essays louis m . hacker – alexander hamilton in the american . nominated for national book award for nonfiction bray hammond – banks and politics in america . won 1958 pulitzer prize for history gilbert highet – poets in a landscape . nominated for 1958 national book award for nonfiction richard hoggart – the uses of literacy eric john holmyard – alchemy stuart holroyd – emergence from chaos ernst kantorowicz – the king 's two bodies henry kissinger – nuclear weapons and foreign policy . nominated for national book award for nonfiction primo levi – if this is a man ( se questo è un uomo ) art linkletter – kids say the darndest things christopher lloyd – the mixed border mary mccarthy – memories of a catholic girlhood . nominated for national book award for nonfiction tom maschler ( ed . ) – declaration ( anthology ) eliot ness and oscar fraley – the untouchables iris origo – the merchant of prato ( life and commercial career of francesco di marco datini ) walt whitman rostow & max f . milliken – a proposal : key to an effective foreign policy . nominated for national book award for nonfiction jean-paul sartre – search for a method ( questions de méthode ) david schoenbrun – as france goes . nominated for national book award for nonfiction rodolfo walsh – operación masacre ian watt – the rise of the novel : studies in defoe , richardson and fielding k . a . wittfogel – oriental despotism . births . january 7 – nicholson baker , american novelist january 16 – stella tillyard , english writer and historian january 22 – francis wheen , english journalist and author january 27 – frank miller , american comic-book cartoonist and scriptwriter february 11 – mitchell symons , english writer and journalist march 3 – nicholas shakespeare , english novelist and biographer march 7 – robert harris , english novelist and current-affairs writer march 23 – ananda devi , mauritian francophone fiction writer and poet march 26 – paul morley , english music journalist march 29 – elizabeth hand , american science fiction and fantasy writer april 3 rainer karlsch , german historian unni lindell , norwegian novelist may 13 – koji suzuki , japanese author and screenwriter may 17 – peter høeg , danish novelist may 23 – craig brown , english satirist june 8 – scott adams , american satirist july 29 – liam davison , australian novelist ( died 2014 in air crash ) august 24 – stephen fry , english comedy performer , broadcast presenter and writer september 22 – nick cave , australian author and musician november 14 – michael j . fitzgerald , american technical writer december 3 – anne b . ragde , norwegian novelist december 11 – william joyce , american children 's author december 12 – robert lepage , canadian playwright unknown dates peter armstrong , english poet and psychotherapist john doyle , irish-born canadian critic ana santos aramburo , spanish national librarian melanie rae thon , american author . deaths . january 10 gabriela mistral , chilean poet ( born 1889 ) laura ingalls wilder , american novelist ( born 1867 ) january 13 – a . e . coppard , english short story writer and poet ( born 1878 ) january 19 – barbu lăzăreanu , romanian literary historian , poet , and communist journalist ( born 1881 ) february 10 – laura ingalls wilder , american author ( born 1867 ) march 9 – rhoda power , english children 's writer and broadcaster ( born 1890 ) march 12 – john middleton murry , english critic ( born 1889 ) march 28 – christopher morley , american journalist , novelist and poet ( born 1890 ) march 29 – joyce cary , irish novelist ( born 1888 ) april 22 – roy campbell , south african poet and satirist ( born 1901 ) june 17 may edginton , english popular novelist ( born 1883 ) dorothy richardson , english novelist and journalist ( born 1873 ) june 27 – malcolm lowry , english novelist and poet ( born 1909 ) july 19 – curzio malaparte , italian novelist , playwright , and journalist ( cancer , born 1898 ) july 21 – kenneth roberts , american historical novelist ( born 1885 ) july 23 – giuseppe tomasi di lampedusa , italian novelist ( born 1896 ) august 25 – leo perutz , austrian-born novelist and mathematician ( born 1882 ) september 2 – william craigie , scottish lexicographer ( born 1867 ) november 8 – ernest elmore ( john bude ) , english crime writer and theatre director ( born 1901 ) november 24 – alfred eckhard zimmern , german-born english historian and political scientist ( born 1879 ) december 15 – mulshankar mulani , gujarati playwright ( born 1867 ) december 17 – dorothy l . sayers , english crime novelist ( born 1893 ) december 24 – arturo barea , spanish journalist , broadcaster and writer ( born 1897 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : william mayne , a grass rope james tait black memorial prize for fiction : anthony powell , at lady molly's james tait black memorial prize for biography : maurice cranston , life of john locke miles franklin award : patrick white , voss newbery medal for children 's literature : virginia sorenson , miracles on maple hill nobel prize for literature : albert camus premio nadal : carmen martín gaite , entre visillos prix goncourt : roger vailland , la loi pulitzer prize for drama : eugene o'neill , long day 's journey into night pulitzer prize for fiction : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : richard wilbur : things of this world queen 's gold medal for poetry : siegfried sassoon . references .