Henry Luce

early life . luce was born in penglai , shandong , shandong , china , on april 3 , 1898 , the son of elizabeth root luce and henry w . luce , who was a presbyterian missionary . he received his education in various chinese and english boarding schools , including the china inland mission chefoo school . career . at 15 , he was sent to the us to attend the hotchkiss school in connecticut , where he edited the hotchkiss literary monthly . there , he first met briton hadden , who would become a lifelong partner . at the time , hadden served as editor-in-chief of the school newspaper , and luce worked as an assistant managing editor . both went on to yale college , where hadden served as chairman and luce as managing editor of the yale daily news . luce was also a member of alpha delta phi and skull and bones . after being voted '' most brilliant '' of his class and graduating in 1920 , he parted ways with hadden to embark for a year on historical studies at oxford university , followed by a stint as a cub reporter for the chicago daily news . in december 1921 , luce rejoined hadden to work at the baltimore news . recalling his relationship with hadden , luce later said , '' somehow , despite the greatest differences in temperaments and even in interests , we had to work together . we were an organization . at the center of our lives & mdash ; our job , our function & mdash ; at that point everything we had belonged to each other . '' . magazines . nightly discussions of the concept of a news magazine led luce and hadden , both age 23 , to quit their jobs in 1922 . later that same year , they partnered with robert livingston johnson and another yale classmate to form time inc . having raised 86,000 of a 100,000 goal , they published the first issue of time on march 3 , 1923 . luce served as business manager while hadden was editor-in-chief . luce and hadden annually alternated year-to-year the titles of president and secretary-treasurer while johnson served as vice president and advertising director . in 1925 , luce decided to move headquarters to cleveland , while hadden was on a trip to europe . cleveland was cheaper , and luce ’ s first wife , lila , wanted to leave new york . when hadden returned , he was horrified and moved time back to new york . upon hadden 's sudden death in 1929 , luce assumed hadden 's position . luce launched the business magazine , fortune , in february 1930 and acquired life in order to relaunch it as a weekly magazine of photojournalism in november 1936 ; he went on to launch house & home in 1952 and sports illustrated in 1954 . he also produced the march of time weekly newsreel . by the mid-1960s , time inc . was the largest and most prestigious magazine publisher in the world . ( dwight macdonald , a fortune staffer during the 1930s , referred to him as '' il luce '' , a play on the italian dictator mussolini , who was called '' il duce '' . ) president franklin d . roosevelt , aware that most publishers were opposed to him , issued a decree in 1943 that blocked all publishers and media executives from visits to combat areas ; he put general george marshall in charge of enforcement . the main target was luce , who had long opposed roosevelt . historian alan brinkley argued the move was '' badly mistaken '' and said had luce been allowed to travel , he would have been an enthusiastic cheerleader for american forces around the globe . however , stranded in new york city , luce 's frustration and anger expressed themselves in blatant partisanship . alan brinkley , the publisher : henry luce and his american century ( 2010 ) pp . 302–03 luce , supported by editor-in-chief t . s . matthews , appointed whittaker chambers as acting foreign news editor in 1944 , despite the feuds that chambers had with reporters in the field . brinkley , the publisher : henry luce and his american century ( 2010 ) pp . 322–93 luce , who remained editor-in-chief of all his publications until 1964 , maintained a position as an influential member of the republican party . '' henry r . luce : end of a pilgrimage '' . time . march 10 , 1967 an instrumental figure behind the so-called '' china lobby '' , he played a large role in steering american foreign policy and popular sentiment in favor of kuomintang leader chiang kai-shek and his wife , soong mei-ling , in their war against the japanese . ( the chiangs appeared in the cover of time eleven times between 1927 and 1955 . ) it has been reported that luce , during the 1960s , tried lsd and reported that he had talked to god under its influence . maisto , stephen a . , galizio , mark , & connors , gerald j . ( 2008 ) . drug use and abuse : fifth edition . belmont : thomson higher education . once ambitious to become secretary of state in a republican administration , luce penned a famous article in life magazine in 1941 , called '' the american century '' , which defined the role of american foreign policy for the remainder of the 20th century ( and perhaps beyond ) . an ardent anti-soviet , he once demanded john kennedy invade cuba , later to remark to his editors that if he did not , his corporation would act like hearst during the spanish–american war . the publisher would advance his concepts of us dominance of the '' american century '' through his periodicals with the ideals shared and guided by members of his social circle , john foster dulles , secretary of state and his brother , director of the cia , allen dulles . family . image : thu luce memorial chapel.jpg thumb right 250px luce memorial chapel , tunghai university , taiwan . luce met his first wife , lila hotz , while he was studying at yale in 1919 . they married in 1923 and had two children , peter paul and henry luce iii , before divorcing in 1935 . in 1935 he married his second wife , clare boothe luce , who had an 11-year-old daughter , ann clare brokaw , whom he raised as his own . he died in phoenix , arizona in 1967 . at his death , he was said to be worth 100 million in time inc . stock . most of his fortune went to the henry luce foundation , where his son henry iii served as chairman and chief executive for many years . during his life , luce supported many philanthropies such as save the children federation , the metropolitan museum of art and united service to china , inc . he is interred at mepkin abbey in south carolina . he was honored by the united states postal service with a 32¢ great americans series ( 1980–2000 ) postage stamp . luce was inducted into the junior achievement u.s . business hall of fame in 1977 . designed by i . m . pei , the luce memorial chapel , on the campus of tunghai university , taiwan , was constructed in memoriam of henry luce 's father . henry r . luce hall at yale university , home to the macmillan center for international and area studies , was erected by the henry r . luce foundation in his honor . references . further reading . baughman , james l . '' henry r . luce and the business of journalism . '' business & economic history on-line 9 ( 2011 ) . online baughman , james l . henry r . luce and the rise of the american news media ( 2001 ) excerpt and text search brinkley , alan . the publisher : henry luce and his american century , alfred a . knopf ( 2010 ) 531 pp . '' a magazine master builder '' book review by janet maslin , the new york times , april 19 , 2010 brinkley , alan . what would henry luce make of the digital age ? , time ( april 19 , 2010 ) excerpt and text search elson , robert t . time inc : the intimate history of a publishing enterprise , 1923–1941 ( 1968 ) ; vol . 2 : the world of time inc . : the intimate history , 1941–1960 ( 1973 ) , official corporate history garside , b . a . within the four seas , frederic c . beil , new york , 1985 . herzstein , robert e . henry r . luce , time , and the american crusade in asia ( 2006 ) excerpt and text search herzstein , robert e . henry r . luce : a political portrait of the man who created the american century ( 1994 ) . sylvia jukes morris . rage for fame : the ascent of clare boothe luce ( 1997 ) . w.a . swanberg , luce and his empire , charles scribner 's sons , new york , 1972 . wilner , isaiah . the man time forgot : a tale of genius , betrayal , and the creation of time magazine , harpercollins , new york , 2006 . external links . john foster dulles and clare boothe luce link ( pdf format ) time biography the henry luce foundation luce center for american art at the brooklyn museum – visible storage and study center whitman , alden . '' henry r . luce , creator of time & ndash ; life magazine empire , dies in phoenix at 68 '' , the new york times , march 1 , 1967 . pbs american masters henry r . luce papers at the new-york historical society