Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

students . in 2018 , rensselaer 's enrollment was 7,442 total resident students , including 6,590 undergraduate and 1,329 graduate . over 71 % of rensselaer 's students are from out of state . more than 20 % of students are international . rensselaer students represent all 50 u.s . states and over 60 countries . the undergraduate student to faculty ratio is 13:1 . among the class of 2020 , 66 % are in the top 5 percent of their high school class , 93 % in the top quarter , and 99 % in the top half . the average unweighted high school gpa for enrolled students was 3.88 on a 4.0 scale , with 65 % having a 3.75 gpa or higher and 99 % having at least a 3.0 . rensselaer 's yield rate for the class of 2021 surpassed 20 percent in the year 2018 with over 20,000 applications received by rensselaer 's office of admissions . the average sat score range was 1330-1500 for the mid-50 % range with a median sat score of 1420 on a scale of 1600 . the average act score range was 29-33 for the mid-50 % range with a median act score of 31 . in 2016 , rensselaer 's freshman retention rate was 94 % and admissions selectivity rating was 35th in the nation according to the us news & world report . since 2000 , undergraduate enrollment grew by over 1,700 students , from 4,867 to 6,590 during calendar year 2018 , and the full-time graduate enrollment declined from 1500 to 1,188 . roughly 12 % of students received the rensselaer medal , a merit scholarship with a cumulative value of 100,000 for exceptional high school students in science and mathematics . 95 % of full-time domestic undergraduate students receive either need-based or merit-based financial aid , averaging 85 % of total financial need met per student . in 2018 , rensselaer invested over 140 million in financial aid and scholarships for students . . gender ratio . rpi became coeducational in 1942 . in 1966 , the male-to-female ratio was 19:1 , in the 1980s it reached as low as 8:1 , and in the early 1990s the ratio was around 5:1 . in 2009 , rpi had a ratio of 2.5:1 ( 72 % male / 28 % female ) , in 2016 , the ratio for the incoming freshman class had fallen to 2.1:1 ( 68 % male / 32 % female ) , the lowest in the history of the institute . in the fall of 2016 , more than 1,000 women enrolled in rensselaer polytechnic institute 's undergraduate engineering programs for the first time in its history . these women represented 30 percent of the student body in engineering at the university , and 32 percent of the university 's total gender composition . shekhar garde , rensselaer 's dean of engineering , claims he wants to increase the female composition of the institute to 50 percent before 2030 . . greek life . image : rensselaer society of engineers clubhouse ( rear view ) . jpg thumb the rse clubhouse from the south side near the '' freshman hill '' dorms rensselaer polytechnic institute has an extensive history of greek community involvement on campus , including past presidents , honorary academic building dedications , and philanthropic achievements . the overall greek system at rensselaer stresses leadership , fortitude , innovation , and evolution . rpi currently has 29 active fraternities as well as 6 sororities , with 32 percent involvement of all males and 18 percent involvement of all females , organized under the interfraternal council and panhellenic council . of those greek organizations , three were founded at rensselaer including the theta xi national engineering fraternity , the sigma delta hispanic-interest local sorority , and the rensselaer society of engineers local engineering fraternity . theta xi fraternity was established by rpi students on 29 april 1864 , the only national fraternity founded during the civil war . the theta xi fraternity chapter house is listed on the national register of historic places . additionally , rensselaer is home to the epsilon zeta chapter of the alpha phi omega , or '' apo , '' national service fraternity , which operates a test-bank and office at the top floor of the student union . the organization also hosts a campus lost & found , universal can tab collection , and a public 3d printing service . in 2017 , chi phi and theta chi at rensselaer co-hosted an event called '' brave a shave for kids with cancer , '' along with several other greek organizations - raising over 22,000 for pediatric cancer research with dozens of participants shaving their heads to spread awareness of pediatric cancers . many fraternities and sororities also engage in adopt-a-highway and host events in the local community . since its inception , all members of greek life have also participated in navigating rensselaer & beyond - rpi 's official continuation of student orientation through hosting annual events open to all students such as beach day/hike with greek life , a day of hiking and team building activities for incoming freshmen , and saratoga therapeutic equine program , a day of service focused on horse rehabilitation programs . greek life organizations also operate greek-affiliated groups including the alumni inter-greek council , greek greeks - a student-run venture which aims to promote sustainability and safe environmental practices in greek chapter houses , greek spectrum - an lgbtqia support and advocacy group , and the undergraduate greek leadership society order of omega . athletics . the rpi engineers are the athletic teams for the university . rpi currently sponsors 23 & nbsp ; sports , 21 of which compete at the ncaa division iii level in the liberty league ; men 's and women 's ice hockey compete at the division i level in ecac hockey . the official nickname of some of the school 's division iii teams was changed in 1995 from the engineers to the red hawks . however , the hockey , football , cross-country , tennis and track and field teams all chose to retain the engineers name . the red hawks name was , at the time , very unpopular among the student body ; a red hawk mascot was frequently taunted with thrown concessions and chants of '' kill the chicken ! '' . in 2009 the nickname for all teams has since been changed back to engineers . in contrast , the official ice hockey mascot , known as puckman , has always been very popular . puckman is an anthropomorphic hockey puck with an engineer 's helmet . during the 1970s and 1980s , one rpi cheer was : : e to the x , dy/dx , e to the x , dx : cosine , secant , tangent , sine :3.14159 : square root , cube root , log of pi : disintegrate them , rpi ! . ice hockey ( men 's ) . rpi has a competitive division & nbsp ; i hockey team who won ncaa national titles in 1954 and 1985 . depending on how the rules are interpreted , the rpi men 's ice hockey team may have the longest winning streak on record for a division & nbsp ; i team ; in the 1984–85 season it was undefeated for 30 & nbsp ; games , but one game was against the university of toronto , a non-ncaa team . continuing into the 1985–86 season , rpi continued undefeated over 38 & nbsp ; games , including two wins over toronto . the streak ended at boston university against the terriers . adam oates and daren puppa , two players during that time , both went on to become stars in the nhl . joé juneau , who played from 1987 to 1991 , and brian pothier , who played from 1996 to 2000 , also spent many years in the nhl . graeme townshend , who also played in the late 1980s , had a brief nhl career . he is the first man of jamaican ancestry to play in the national hockey league . the ice hockey team plays a significant role in the campus 's culture , drawing thousands of fans each week to the houston field house during the season . the team 's popularity even sparked the tradition of the hockey line , where students lined up for season tickets months in advance of the on-sale date . today , the line generally begins a week or more before ticket sales . another tradition since 1978 has been the '' big red freakout ! '' game held close to the first weekend of february . fans usually dress in the schools colors red ( cherry ) and white , and gifts such as t-shirts are distributed en masse . in ice hockey , the rpi 's biggest rival has always been the upstate engineering school clarkson university . in recent years rpi has also developed a spirited rivalry with their conference travel partner union college , with whom they annually play a nonconference game in albany for the mayor 's cup . ice hockey ( women 's ) . the women 's ice hockey team moved to the ncaa division i level in 2005 . during the 2008–09 season the team set the record for most wins in one season ( 19-14-4 ) . on 28 february 2010 , rensselaer made ncaa history . the engineers beat quinnipiac , 2–1 , but it took five overtimes . it is now the longest game in ncaa women 's ice hockey history . senior defenseman laura gersten had the game-winning goal . she registered it at 4:32 of the fifth overtime session to not only clinch the win , but the series victory . women 's hockey headed to ecac hockey semifinals . rpi athletics . retrieved 21 november 2013 . . lacrosse ( men 's ) . the lacrosse team represented the united states in the 1948 olympics in london . it won the wingate memorial trophy as national collegiate champions in 1952 . future nhl head coach ned harkness coached the lacrosse and ice hockey teams , winning national championships in both sports . baseball . the engineers baseball squad is perennially atop the liberty league standings , and has seen 8 players move on to the professional ranks , including 4 players selected in the mlb draft . the team is coached by keith glasser . the engineers play their home games at the historic robison field . american football . american rugby was played on campus in the late 1870s . intercollegiate football begin as late as 1886 when an rpi team first played a union college team on a leased field in west troy ( watervliet ) . since 1903 , rpi and nearby union have been rivals in football , making it the oldest such rivalry in the state . the teams have played for the dutchman 's shoes since 1950 . rpi football had their most successful season in 2003 , when they finished 11-2 and lost to st . johns ( minn . ) in the ncaa division iii semi final game . . athletic facilities . the houston field house is a 4,780‑seat multi-purpose arena located on the rpi campus . it opened in 1949 and is home to the rpi engineers men 's and women 's ice hockey teams . the field house was renovated starting in 2007 as part of the major campus improvement project to build the east campus athletic village . the renovations included locker rooms upgrades , addition of a new weight room , and a new special reception room dedicated to ned harkness . additionally , as part of the renovations through a government grant , solar panels were installed on the roof to supply power to the building . as part of the rensselaer plan , the institute recently completed a major project to improve its athletic facilities with the east campus athletic village . the plan included construction of a new and much larger 4,842‑seat football stadium , a basketball arena with seating for 1,200 , a new 50-meter pool , an indoor track and field complex , new tennis courts , new weight rooms and a new sports medicine center . the institute broke ground on 26 august 2007 , and construction of the first phase is expected to last two years . the estimated cost of the project is 78 & nbsp ; million for phase one and 35– 45 & nbsp ; million for phase two . since the completion of the new stadium , the bleachers on the class of '86 football field on the central campus have been removed and the field has become an open space . in the future the new space could be used for expansions of the academic buildings , but for now members of the campus planning team foresee a '' historic landscape with different paths and access ways for students and vehicles alike '' . . student life . the students of rpi have created and participate in a variety of clubs and organizations funded by the student union . about 170 of these organizations are funded by the student union , while another thirty , which consist mostly of political and religious organizations , are self-supporting . in 2006 the princeton review ranked rpi second for '' more to do on campus . '' the union was the last entirely student-run union at a private university in the united states until september 2017 . phalanx is rpi 's senior honor society . it was founded in 1912 , when edward dion and the student council organized a society to recognize those rpi students who had distinguished themselves among their peers in the areas of leadership , service and devotion to the alma mater . it is a fellowship of the most active in student activities and has inducted more than 1,500 members since its founding . rpi has around twenty intramural sports organizations , many of which are broken down into different divisions based on level of play . greek organizations compete in them as well as independent athletes . there are also thirty-nine club sports . given the university 's proximity to the berkshires , green mountains and adirondacks , the ski club and the outing club are some of the largest groups on campus . the ski club offers weekly trips to local ski areas during the winter months , while the outing club offers trips on a weekly basis for a variety of activities . the rensselaer polytechnic is the student-run weekly newspaper . the poly printed about 7,000 copies each week and distributed them around campus until 2018 when the newspaper switched to online-only distribution due to budget concerns . although it is the union club with the largest budget , the poly receives no subsidy from the union , and obtains all funding through the sale of advertisements . there is also a popular student-run magazine called statler & waldorf which prints on a semesterly basis . rpi has an improvisational comedy group , sheer idiocy , which performs several shows a semester . there are also several music groups ranging from a cappella groups such as the rusty pipes , partial credit , the rensselyrics and duly noted , to several instrumental groups such as the orchestra , the jazz band and a classical choral group , the rensselaer concert choir . another notable organization on campus is wrpi , the campus radio station . wrpi differs from most college radio in that it serves a radius 91.5 wrpi - the upstate underground - rpi college radio - troy , ny . wrpi.org . retrieved 21 november 2013 . including the greater albany area . with 10 & nbsp ; kw of broadcasting power , wrpi maintains a stronger signal than nearly all college radio stations and some commercial stations . wrpi currently broadcasts on 91.5 & nbsp ; fm in the albany area . the rpi players is an on‑campus theater group that was formed in 1929 . the players resided in the old gym until 1965 when they moved to their present location at the 15th & nbsp ; street lounge . this distinctive red shingled building had been a uso hall for the u.s . & nbsp ; army before being purchased by rpi . the players have staged over 275 productions in its history . . rpi songs . there are a number of songs commonly played and sung at rpi events . notable among them are : '' the alma mater ( here 's to old rpi ) '' – sung at formal events such as graduation and convocation , also played and sung by the pep band at hockey and football games , and played daily at noon by the quadrangle bell tower . it was published in the first book of songs of rensselaer printed in 1913 . '' hail , dear old rensselaer '' – used to be the fight song during the 1960s . it is still played today by the pep band at athletic events . '' all we 've learned at rensselaer '' – sung at the rpi commencement ceremonies by the rensselyrics . although the rensselyrics are an a cappella group , this song is accompanied by piano . each verse or section has a different musical style , several of which are closely based on billy joel songs or other popular songs . first year experience and class programs . another notable aspect of student life at rpi is the '' first-year experience '' ( fye ) program . freshman begin their stay at rpi with a week called '' navigating rensselaer and beyond '' or nrb week . the office of the first-year experience provides several programs that extend to not only freshman , but to all students . these include family weekend , community service days , the information and personal assistance center ( ipac ) , and the community advocate program . the fye program was awarded the 2006 naspa excellence gold award , in the category of '' enrollment management , orientation , parents , first-year , other-year and related '' . since 2008 , jackson 's administration has led an effort to form the class initiative ( '' clustered learning advocacy and support for students '' ) , which requires all sophomores to dormitory and to live with special '' residence cluster deans '' . the transition to this program began in early 2010 among some resistance from some fraternities and students who had planned to live off campus . . notable alumni . according to the rensselaer alumni association , there are nearly 100,000 rpi graduates currently living in the united states , and another 4,378 living abroad . in 1995 , the alumni association created the rensselaer alumni hall of fame . several notable 19th & nbsp ; century civil engineers graduated from rpi . these include the visionary of the transcontinental railroad , theodore judah , brooklyn bridge engineer washington roebling , george washington gale ferris jr . ( who designed and built the original ferris wheel ) and leffert l . buck , the chief engineer of the williamsburg bridge in new york city . many rpi graduates have made important inventions , including allen b . dumont ( '24 ) , creator of the first commercial television and radar ; keith millis ( '38 ) , inventor of ductile iron ; ted hoff ( '58 ) , father of the microprocessor ; raymond tomlinson ( '63 ) , often credited with the invention of e-mail ; inventor of the digital camera steven sasson and curtis priem ( '82 ) , designer of the first graphics processor for the pc , and co-founder of nvidia . rpi prof . matthew hunter invented a process to refine titanium in 1910 . h . joseph gerber pioneered computer-automated manufacturing systems for industry . in addition to nvidia , rpi graduates have also gone on to found or co-found major companies such as john wiley and sons , texas instruments , fairchild semiconductor , psinet , mapinfo , adelphia communications , level & nbsp ; 3 communications , garmin , bugle boy and vacasa . several rpi graduates have played a part in the nasa : george low ( b.eng . 1948 , m.s . 1950 ) was manager of the apollo program and served as president of rpi , and astronauts john swigert , richard mastracchio , gregory r . wiseman , and space tourist dennis tito are alumni . political figures who graduated from rpi included federal judge arthur j . gajarsa ( b.s . 1962 ) , and major general thomas farrell of the manhattan project . edward burton hughes , the acting commissioner of new york state department of transportation in 1969 , executive deputy commissioner of new york state department of transportation from 1967–1970 , and deputy superintendent of new york state department of public works from 1952–1967 . bertram dalley tallamy , 7th federal highway administrator under the federal aid highway act of 1956 , in office from february 5 , 1957 – january 20 , 1961 . darpa director tony tether , representative john olver of massachusetts 's 1st congressional district , and senators john barrasso of wyoming , mark shepard of vermont , and george r . dennis of maryland , prime minister hani al-mulki of jordan . notable ice hockey players include nhl hockey hall of famer and 5-time nhl all star adam oates ( 1985 ) , stanley cup winner and former nhl all star mike mcphee ( 1982 ) , two-time calder cup winner neil little ( 1994 ) , former nhl all rookie joé juneau ( 1991 ) , and former nhl all star daren puppa ( 1985 ) . other notable alumni include 1973 nobel prize in physics winner ivar giaever ( ph.d . 1964 ) ; the first african-american woman to become a thoracic surgeon , rosalyn scott ( b.s . 1970 ) ; director of linux international jon hall ( m.s . 1977 ) ; ncaa president myles brand ( b.s . 1964 ) ; lois graham ( b.s.me 1946 ) , who was the first woman to receive a degree in engineering from rpi , and went on to become the first woman in the us to receive a phd in engineering ; adult stem cell pioneer james fallon ; michael d . west , gerontologist and stem cell scientist , founder of geron , now ceo of biotime ( 1976 ) ; director bobby farrelly ( 1981 ) , tracey leibach , '' why is this man smiling ? david ferrucci , lead researcher on ibm 's watson/jeopardy ! project ; 66th aia gold medal winning architect peter q bohlin ; matt patricia , former head coach for the detroit lions ; garrettina lts brown , founder of garrett 's list , king breeders and inventor of freetv ; luis acuña-cedeño , governor of the venezuelan sucre state and former minister of universities ; andrew franks , former placekicker for the miami dolphins of the national football league ; sean conroy , the first openly gay professional baseball player ; prem jain ( father of green buildings in india ) ; keith raniere , an american felon and the founder of nxivm , a multi-level marketing company and cult .