Zog I of Albania

life as king . although born as an aristocrat and hereditary bey , king zog was somewhat ignored by other monarchs in europe because he was a self-proclaimed monarch who had no links to any other european royal families . nonetheless , he did have strong connections with muslim royal families in the arab world , particularly egypt , whose ruling dynasty had albanian origins . as king , he was honoured by the governments of italy , luxembourg , egypt , yugoslavia , france , romania , greece , belgium , bulgaria , hungary , poland , czechoslovakia , and austria . zog had been engaged to the daughter of shefqet verlaci before he became king . soon after he became king , however , he broke off the engagement . according to traditional customs of feud albania prevalent in albania at the time , verlaci had the right to kill zog . the king frequently surrounded himself with a personal guard and avoided public appearances . he also feared that he might be poisoned , so the mother of the king assumed supervision of the royal kitchen . in april 1938 , zog married countess geraldine apponyi de nagy-appony , a roman catholic aristocrat who was half-hungarian and half-american . the ceremony was broadcast throughout tirana via radio tirana that was officially launched by the monarch five months later . their only child , crown prince leka , was born in albania on 5 april 1939 . assassination attempts . about 600 gjakmarrjas reportedly existed against zog , and during his reign he reputedly survived more than 55 assassination attempts . one of these occurred inside the corridors of the albanian parliament premises on 23 february 1924 . beqir valteri , originating from the same area as zog , was waiting for him and opened fire suddenly . zog was shot twice . meanwhile , valteri fled but , surrounded by the militia , took refuge in one of the bathrooms , refusing to surrender and singing patriotic songs . according to the memoirs of ekrem vlora , he surrendered after the intervention of qazim koculi and ali klissura . zog stepped down briefly from political activity , but promised to forgive valteri . valteri , a member of the revolutionary bashkimi ( '' the union '' ) committee led by avni rustemi , was set free by the court of tirana after declaring that it was an individual act . meanwhile , all rumors pointed to the opposition , specifically to rustemi . two weeks later zog and valteri would meet in private . soon after , rustemi would be shot . it was absolutely clear that zog was behind the attack . another attempt occurred on 21 february 1931 , while visiting the vienna state opera house for a performance of pagliacci . the attackers ( aziz çami and ndok gjeloshi ) struck whilst zog was getting into his car . the attempt was organized by '' national union '' , a union of zog opponents in exile which was formed in vienna ( 1925 ) with the initiative of ali këlcyra , sejfi vllamasi , xhemal bushati etc . zog was in the company of minister eqrem libohova who was wounded , while zog 's guard llesh topallaj was mistaken for zog by gjeloshi , who shot him three times in the back of the head . çami 's gun was stuck and did not fire . zog came out of the event unharmed , thanks also to the prompt intervention of albanian consul zef serreqi and local police . the austrian authorities arrested çami , gjeloshi , and later qazim mulleti , rexhep mitrovica , menduh angoni , angjelin suma , luigj shkurti , sejfi vllamasi , etc . all the albanian political émigrés in vienna were subsequently arrested , beside hasan prishtina . most of them were quickly released and expelled from austria . gjeloshi was sentenced to 3 years and 6 months of jail , while çami got 2 years and 6 months . . relations with italy . the fascist government of benito mussolini 's italy had supported zog since early in his presidency ; that support had led to increased italian influence in albanian affairs . the italians compelled zog to refuse to renew the first treaty of tirana ( 1926 ) , although zog still retained british officers in the gendarmerie as a counterbalance against the italians , who had pressured zog to remove them . during the great depression of the early 1930s zog 's government became almost completely dependent on mussolini , to the point that the albanian national bank had its seat in rome . grain had to be imported , many albanians emigrated , and italians were allowed to settle in albania . in 1932 and 1933 , albania was unable to pay the interest on its loans from the society for the economic development of albania , and the italians used this as a pretext for further dominance . they demanded that tirana put italians in charge of the gendarmerie , join italy in a customs union , and grant the italian kingdom control of albania 's sugar , telegraph , and electrical monopolies . finally , italy called for the albanian government to establish teaching of the italian language in all albanian schools , a demand that was swiftly refused by zog . in defiance of italian demands , he ordered the national budget to be slashed by 30 percent , dismissed all italian military advisers , and nationalized italian-run roman catholic schools in the north of albania to decrease italian influence on the population of albania . in 1934 , he tried without success to build ties with france , germany , and the balkan states , and albania drifted back into the italian orbit . two days after the birth of zog 's son and heir apparent , on 7 april 1939 ( good friday ) , mussolini 's italy invaded , facing no significant resistance . the albanian army was ill-equipped to resist , as it was almost entirely dominated by italian advisors and officers and was no match for the italian army . the italians were , however , resisted by small elements in the gendarmerie and general population . the royal family , realising that their lives were in danger , fled into exile , taking with them a considerable amount of gold from the national bank of tirana and durrës . since the royal family had expected an italian invasion , the gathering of gold had started in advance . '' oh god , it was so short '' were king zog 's last words to geraldine on albanian soil . mussolini declared albania a protectorate under italy 's king victor emmanuel iii . while some albanians continued to resist , '' a large part of the population . welcomed the italians with cheers '' , according to one contemporary account . . former heir presumptive . prior to the birth of prince leka , the position of heir presumptive was held by prince of kosova ( kosovo ) tati esad murad kryziu , born 24 december 1923 in tirana , who was the son of the king 's sister , princess nafije . he became honorary general of the royal albanian army in 1928 , at age five . he was made heir presumptive with the style of his highness and title of '' prince of kosova '' ( princ i kosovës ) in 1931 . after the royal house 's exile , he moved to france , where he died in august 1993 , aged 69 . life in exile and death . the royal family fled to greece . zog , speaking a few days after his arrival there , characterized hitler and mussolini as madmen facing '' two fools who sleep '' -- chamberlain and daladier . zog went on to declare , '' we prefer to die , from the littlest child to the oldest man , to show our independence is not for sale . '' the world , aware that zog and his entourage had carried off most of the albanian treasury 's gold , was not impressed . the montreal gazette , 12 april 1939 , p.8 after a short stay in greece , the zog party went to istanbul in turkey , then fled through romania , poland , latvia , sweden , norway , belgium and paris in france . zog and his family lived a time in france and fled when the germans invaded . their escape from france was helped by ian fleming . the royal family then settled in england . their first residence was at the ritz in london . this was followed in 1941 by a brief stay at forest ridge , a house in the south ascot area of sunninghill in berkshire , near where zog 's nieces had been at school in ascot . in 1941 they moved to parmoor house , parmoor , near frieth in buckinghamshire , with some staff of the court living in locations around lane end . in 1946 , zog and most of his family left england and went to live in egypt at the behest of king farouk . in 1951 , zog bought the knollwood estate in muttontown , new york , but the sixty-room estate was never occupied and zog sold the estate in 1955 . farouk revolution of egypt , and the family left for france in 1955 . he made his final home in france , where he died at the foch hospital , suresnes , hauts-de-seine on 9 april 1961 , aged 65 , of an undisclosed condition . zog was said to have regularly smoked 200 cigarettes a day , giving him a possible claim to the dubious title of the world 's heaviest smoker in 1929 , but had been seriously ill for some time . he was survived by his wife and son , and was initially buried at the cimetière parisien de thiais , near paris . on his death , his son leka was pronounced h.m . king leka of the albanians by the exiled albanian community . his widow , geraldine , died of natural causes in 2002 at the age of 87 in a military hospital in tirana , albania . the country 's communist government abolished the monarchy in 1946 , but , even in exile , the royal family insisted that leka zogu was albania 's legitimate ruler until his death on 30 november 2011 . political legacy . during world war ii , three resistance groups were operating in albania : the nationalists , the royalists and the communists . some of the albanian establishment opted for collaboration . the communist partisans refused to co-operate with the other resistance groups and took control of the country . they were able to defeat the nazi remnants and had full control the country in november 1944 . zog attempted to reclaim his throne after the war . however , when the new communist-dominated government seized power , one of its first acts was to bar zog from ever returning to albania . it formally deposed him in 1946 . sponsored by mi6 and the cia , some forces loyal to zog attempted to mount albanian subversion , but most were ambushed due to intelligence sent to the soviet union by spy kim philby . a referendum in 1997—seven years after the end of communist rule—proposed to restore the monarchy in the person of zog 's son leka zogu who , since 1961 , had been styled '' leka i , king of the albanians '' . the official but disputed results stated that about two-thirds of voters favoured a continued republican government . leka , believing the result to be fraudulent , attempted an armed uprising : he was unsuccessful and was forced into exile , although he later returned and lived in tirana until his death on 30 november 2011 . a main street in tirana was later renamed '' boulevard zog i '' by the albanian government . repatriation to albania . in october 2012 , the government of albania decided to bring back the remains of the former king from france , where he died in 1961 . zog 's body was exhumed from the thiais cemetery , paris on 15 november 2012 . remains of king zog repatriated from france to albania . retrieved 2012-11-16 . a guard of honour was provided by the french president , in the form of french legionnaires in ceremonial dress . zog 's remains were returned in a state ceremony on 17 november 2012 , coinciding with celebrations for albania 's independence centennial . the bodies of the king and his family members now lie in the reconstructed royal mausoleum in the capital tirana . albania to bring home exiled king 's remains . retrieved 2012-10-18 . the interment was attended by the government of albania , including the president and prime minister , and senior figures from the romanian , montenegrin , russian and albanian royal families . honours and awards . in albania : sovereign head of the order of bravery & military merit : first class or hero , breast star ( posthumous ) presidenti nishani dekoron naltmadhninë e tij zogun i , mbretin e shqiptarëve ( pas vdekjes ) me '' urdhrin e flamurit kombëtar '' , presidenti.al , 2012-11-17 ( in albananin ) from other countries : , january 1917 ) , 1926 ) ) ( kingdom of italy , 16 december 1928 ) ( kingdom of italy , 16 december 1928 ) ) ) , 1928 ) ) ) , 4 november 1929 ) ) ) ) ) ) , 1938 ) . ancestry . cultural references . zog 's name was in use by 1972 in the english language palaeontological mnemonic for the names of index fossils in part of the carboniferous system of great britain ( namely cleistopora , which geologists decided to call 'zone k ' , zaphrentis , caninia , seminula and dibanophylum ) : '' king zog caught syphilis and died '' . in the james bond novel the man with the golden gun , ian fleming writes of the villainous francisco scaramanga telling his compatriots that the rastafari of jamaica '' believes it owes allegiance '' to the king of ethiopia , this '' king zog or what-have-you . '' fleming had been assigned with the task of escorting zog when in exile after albania was annexed by italy . in the animated series disenchantment ( tv series ) king zøg has a reference in the first and only king of albania . . see also . house of zogu royal albanian army zogist salute legality movement history of albania self-proclaimed monarchy . references . notes . . bibliography . fischer , bernd . king zog and the struggle for stability in albania , ( east european monographs , boulder , 1984 ) pearson , o.s . albania and king zog i.b . tauris . 2005 . robyns , gwen . geraldine of the albanians tomes , jason . king zog , self-made monarch of albania , 2003 rees , neil . a royal exile – king zog & queen geraldine of albania including their wartime exile in the thames valley and chilterns , 2010 patrice najbor . '' la dynastie des zogu '' , 2002 patrice najbor . '' histoire de l'albanie et de sa maison royale 1443–2007 '' , 2008 . further reading . bobev , bobi . '' the dictatorship of ahmed zogou . '' etudes balkaniques 29 , no . 2 ( 1993 ) : 16–33 . fischer , bernd j . '' albanian highland tribal society and family structure in the process of twentieth century transformation . '' east european quarterly 33 , no . 3 ( 1999 ) : 281–301 . tomes , jason . '' the throne of zog . '' history today 51 , no . 9 ( 2001 ) : 45–51 . patrice najbor . '' les réalisations du roi zog '' , '' monarkia shqiptare 1928–1939 '' , 2011 , . external links . albanian royal court official site maison royale d'albanie – site officiel en français histoire de l'albanie et de sa maison royale 1443-2007 l'albanie et le sauvetage des juifs king zog - - - -