Abdication of Edward VIII

political . when edward visited depressed mining villages in wales , his comment that '' something must be done '' the duke of windsor , p . 338 . led to concerns among elected politicians that he would interfere in political matters , traditionally avoided by constitutional monarchs . ramsay macdonald , lord president of the council , wrote of the king 's comments : '' these escapades should be limited . they are an invasion into the field of politics and should be watched constitutionally . '' ramsay macdonald 's diary , quoted in williams , p . 60 . although edward 's comments had made him popular in wales , see , for example , williams , p . 59 . he became extremely unpopular with the public in scotland following his refusal to open a new wing of aberdeen royal infirmary , saying he could not do so because he was in mourning for his father . the day after the opening , he was pictured in newspapers on holiday : he had turned down the public event in favour of meeting simpson . vickers , p . 140 ; ziegler , p . 288 . as prince of wales , edward had publicly referred to labour county councillors as '' cranks '' the duke of windsor , p . 253 . and made speeches counter to government policy . beaverbrook , p . 20 . during his reign as king , his refusal to accept the advice of ministers continued : he opposed the imposition of sanctions on italy after its invasion of ethiopia , refused to receive the deposed haile selassie i , and would not support a strengthening of the league of nations . ziegler , pp . 271–272 . members of the british government became further dismayed by the proposed marriage after being told that wallis simpson was an agent of nazi germany . the foreign office obtained leaked dispatches from the german reich 's ambassador to the united kingdom , joachim von ribbentrop , which revealed his strong view that opposition to the marriage was motivated by the wish '' to defeat those germanophile forces which had been working through mrs simpson '' . howarth , p . 62 . it was rumoured that simpson had access to confidential government papers sent to edward , which he left unguarded at his fort belvedere residence . williams , pp . 196–197 ; ziegler , pp . 273–274 . while edward was abdicating , the personal protection officers guarding simpson in exile in france sent reports to downing street suggesting that she might '' flit to germany '' . . options considered . as a result of these rumours and arguments , the belief strengthened among the british establishment that simpson could not become a royal consort . british prime minister stanley baldwin explicitly advised edward that the majority of people would be opposed to his marrying simpson , indicating that if he did , in direct contravention of his ministers ' advice , the government would resign en masse . the king responded , according to his own account later : '' i intend to marry mrs simpson as soon as she is free to marry & nbsp ; . if the government opposed the marriage , as the prime minister had given me reason to believe it would , then i was prepared to go . '' the duke of windsor , p . 332 . under pressure from the king , and '' startled '' at the suggested abdication , baldwin agreed to take further soundings on three options : edward and simpson marry and she become queen ( a royal marriage ) ; edward and simpson marry , but she not become queen , instead receiving some courtesy title ( a morganatic marriage ) ; or abdication for edward and any potential heirs he might father , allowing him to make any marital decisions without further constitutional implications . the second option had european precedents , including edward 's own great-grandfather , duke alexander of württemberg , but it had no parallel in british constitutional history . the prime ministers of the five dominions ( australia , canada , new zealand , south africa , and the irish free state ) were consulted , and the majority agreed that there was '' no alternative to course ( 3 ) '' . éamon de valera quoted in bradford , p . 188 . william lyon mackenzie king ( prime minister of canada ) , joseph lyons ( prime minister of australia ) , and j . b . m . hertzog ( prime minister of south africa ) opposed options 1 and 2 . mackenzie king told edward to do '' what he believed in his own heart was right '' and the canadian government appealed to the king to put his duty before his feelings for simpson . governor general of canada lord tweedsmuir told buckingham palace and baldwin that canadians held deep affection for the king , but also that canadian public opinion would be outraged if edward married a divorcee . michael joseph savage ( prime minister of new zealand ) rejected option 1 and thought that option 2 '' might be possible & nbsp ; . if some solution along these lines were found to be practicable '' , but '' would be guided by the decision of the home government '' . williams , p . 130 . in communications with the british government , éamon de valera ( president of the executive council of the irish free state ) remarked that as a roman catholic country , the irish free state did not recognise divorce . he supposed that if the british people would not accept wallis simpson then abdication was the only possible solution . williams , pp . 130–131 . on 24 november , baldwin consulted the three leading opposition politicians in britain : leader of the opposition clement attlee , liberal leader sir archibald sinclair , and winston churchill . sinclair and attlee agreed that options 1 and 2 were unacceptable , and churchill pledged to support the government . williams , p . 113 . churchill did not support the government , however . in july , he had advised the king 's legal counsel , walter monckton , against the divorce , but his advice was ignored . williams , p . 173 ; ziegler , p . 291 . as soon as the affair became public knowledge , churchill started to pressure baldwin and the king to delay any decisions until parliament and the people had been consulted . williams , pp . 173–176 . in a private letter to geoffrey dawson , the editor of the times newspaper , churchill suggested that a delay would be beneficial because , given time , the king might fall out of love with simpson . williams , p . 177 . baldwin rejected the request for delay , presumably because he preferred to resolve the crisis quickly . supporters of the king alleged a conspiracy between baldwin , geoffrey dawson , and cosmo gordon lang , the archbishop of canterbury . evans , w . ( 1968 ) , journey to harley street , london : david rendel , p . 219 . the royal physician bertrand dawson was possibly involved in a plan to force the prime minister to retire on the grounds of heart disease , but he eventually accepted , on the evidence of an early electrocardiograph , that baldwin 's heart was sound . evans , p . 221 . political support for the king was scattered and comprised politicians alienated from the mainstream parties such as churchill , oswald mosley , and the communists . williams , pp . 179–181 . former prime minister david lloyd george also supported the king despite disliking simpson . he was , however , unable to take any active role in the crisis because he was on holiday in jamaica with his mistress frances stevenson . williams , pp . 198–199 . in early december , rumours circulated that the king 's supporters would join together in a '' king 's party '' , led by churchill . however , there was no concerted effort to form an organised movement and churchill had no intention of leading one . williams , pp . 181–182 . nevertheless , the rumours damaged the king and churchill severely , as members of parliament were horrified at the idea of the king interfering in politics . williams , pp . 199–200 . the letters and diaries of working-class people and ex-servicemen generally demonstrate support for the king , while those from the middle and upper classes tend to express indignation and distaste . see , for example , williams , pp . 138–144 . the times , the morning post , daily herald , and newspapers owned by lord kemsley , such as the daily telegraph , opposed the marriage . on the other hand , the express and mail , owned by lord beaverbrook and lord rothermere , respectively , appeared to support a morganatic marriage . beaverbrook , p . 68 ; broad , p . 188 ; ziegler , p . 308 . the king estimated that the newspapers in favour had a circulation of 12.5 & nbsp ; million , and those against had 8.5 & nbsp ; million . ziegler , p . 308 ; the duke of windsor , p . 373 . on 3 december , edward had a '' tense '' meeting with baldwin . backed by churchill and beaverbrook , edward proposed to broadcast a speech via the bbc . the proposed text invoked the '' ancient custom '' for a king to '' address his public utterances to his people '' . edward proposed to remind his listeners : '' i am still the same man whose motto was 'ich dien ' , i serve . '' in the proposed speech , edward indicated his desire to remain on the throne or to be recalled to it if forced to abdicate , while marrying simpson morganatically . in one section , edward proposed to say : baldwin blocked the speech , saying that it would shock many people and would be a grave breach of constitutional principles . by modern convention , the sovereign could only act with the advice and counsel of ministers . in seeking the people 's support against the government , edward was opting to oppose binding ministerial advice and instead act as a private individual . edward 's british ministers felt that , in proposing the speech , edward had revealed his disdainful attitude towards constitutional conventions and threatened the political neutrality of the crown . beaverbrook , p . 71 ; williams , p . 156 . cabinet office files released in 2013 show that on or before 5 december 1936 , the home secretary , sir john simon , had ordered the general post office ( which controlled british telephone services ) to intercept '' telephone communications between fort belvedere and buckingham palace on the one hand and the continent of europe on the other '' . on 5 december , having in effect been told that he could not keep the throne and marry simpson , and having had his request to broadcast to the empire to explain '' his side of the story '' blocked on constitutional grounds , the duke of windsor , pp . 378–379 . edward chose the third option . the duke of windsor , pp . 386–387 . . legal manoeuvres . following simpson 's divorce hearing on 27 october 1936 , her solicitor , theodore goddard , became concerned that there would be a '' patriotic '' citizen 's intervention ( a legal device to block the divorce ) , and that such an intervention would be successful . ( subscription required ) . the courts could not grant a collaborative divorce ( a dissolution of marriage consented to by both parties ) , and so the case was being handled as if it were an undefended at-fault divorce brought against ernest simpson , with wallis simpson as the innocent , injured party . the divorce action would fail if the citizen 's intervention showed that the simpsons had colluded by , for example , connivance or staging the appearance of his adultery so that she could marry someone else . on monday 7 december 1936 , the king heard that goddard planned to fly to the south of france to see wallis simpson . the king summoned him and expressly forbade him to make the journey , fearing that the visit might put doubts in simpson 's mind . goddard went straight to downing street to see baldwin , as a result of which he was provided with an aeroplane to take him directly to cannes . upon his arrival , goddard warned his client that a citizen 's intervention , should it arise , was likely to succeed . it was , according to goddard , his duty to advise her to withdraw her divorce petition . simpson refused , but they both telephoned the king to inform him that she was willing to give him up so that he could remain king . it was , however , too late ; the king had already made up his mind to go , even if he could not marry simpson . indeed , as the belief that the abdication was inevitable gathered strength , goddard stated that : '' his client was ready to do anything to ease the situation but the other end of the wicket edward viii was determined '' . goddard had a weak heart and had never flown before , so he asked his doctor , william kirkwood , to accompany him on the trip . as kirkwood was a resident at a maternity hospital , his presence led to false speculation that simpson was pregnant , and even that she was having an abortion . the press excitedly reported that the solicitor had flown to simpson accompanied by a gynaecologist and an anaesthetist ( who was actually the lawyer 's clerk ) . beaverbrook , p . 81 ; williams , p . 217 . . abdication . at fort belvedere , on 10 december , edward signed his written abdication notices , witnessed by his three younger brothers : prince albert , duke of york ( who succeeded edward as george vi ) ; prince henry , duke of gloucester ; and prince george , duke of kent . the following day , it was given effect by act of parliament : his majesty 's declaration of abdication act 1936 . under changes introduced in 1931 by the statute of westminster , a single crown for the entire empire had been replaced by multiple crowns , one for each dominion , worn by a single monarch in an organisation then known as the british commonwealth . though the british government , hoping for expediency and to avoid embarrassment , wished the dominions to accept the actions of the '' home '' government , the dominions held that edward 's abdication required the consent of each commonwealth state . under the statute of westminster , the act passed by the uk parliament could become law in other dominions at their request . this was duly given by the parliament of australia , which was at the time in session , and by the governments of canada , south africa , and new zealand , whose parliaments were in recess . the government of the irish free state , taking the opportunity presented by the crisis and in a major step towards irish head of state from 1936-1949 , passed an amendment to its constitution on 11 december to remove references to the crown and abolish the office of governor-general of the irish free state ; the king 's abdication was recognised a day later in the external relations act . in south africa , his majesty king edward the eighth 's abdication act 1937 declared that the abdication took effect there on 10 december . canada passed the succession to the throne act 1937 to symbolically confirm the abdication . edward 's supporters felt that he had '' been hounded from the throne by that arch humbug baldwin '' , david lloyd george quoted in williams , p . 241 . but many members of the establishment were relieved by edward 's departure . mackenzie king wrote in his diary on 8 december 1936 that edward 's '' sense of right or wrong has been largely obliterated by the jazz of life he has led for years '' and , upon receiving news of edward 's final decision to abdicate , '' if that is the kind of man he is it is better he should not be longer on the throne . '' edward 's own assistant private secretary , alan lascelles , had told baldwin as early as 1927 : '' i ca n't help thinking that the best thing that could happen to him , and to the country , would be for him to break his neck . '' duff hart-davis , ed . ( 1989 ) in royal service : letters & journals of sir alan lascelles from 1920 to 1936 , quoted in vickers , hugo . '' the courtier 's spiky tongue '' . the times , thursday , 26 january 1989 . on 11 december 1936 , edward made a bbc radio broadcast from windsor castle ; having abdicated , he was introduced by sir john reith as '' his royal highness prince edward '' . the duke of windsor , p . 413 ; ziegler , p . 331 . the official address had been polished by churchill and was moderate in tone , speaking about edward 's inability to do his job '' as i would have wished '' without the support of '' the woman i love '' . the duke of windsor , pp . 409–413 . edward 's reign had lasted 327 & nbsp ; days , the shortest of any british monarch since the disputed reign of lady jane grey over 380 & nbsp ; years earlier . the day following the broadcast he left britain for austria . ziegler , p . 336 . . post-abdication . george vi granted his elder brother the title of duke of windsor with the style his royal highness on 12 december 1936 . on 3 may the following year , the simpsons ' divorce was made final . the case was handled quietly and it barely featured in some newspapers . the times printed a single sentence below a separate , and seemingly unconnected , report announcing the duke 's departure from austria . '' mrs ernest simpson 's divorce '' . the times , tuesday , 4 may 1937 , p . 5 , col . c ; '' the duke of windsor : departure from austria '' , the times , tuesday , 4 may 1937 , p . 5 , col . c . edward married wallis in france on 3 june 1937 . she became the duchess of windsor , but , much to edward 's disgust , george vi issued letters patent that denied her the style of her royal highness . ziegler , p . 529 . the couple settled in france , and the duke received a tax-free allowance from his brother , which edward supplemented by writing his memoirs and by illegal currency trading . he also profited from the sale of balmoral castle and sandringham house to george vi . both estates are private property and not part of the royal estate , and were therefore inherited and owned by edward , regardless of the abdication . ziegler , pp . 376–378 . in october 1937 , the duke and duchess visited germany , against the advice of the british government , and met hitler at his obersalzberg retreat . the visit was much publicised by the german media . during the visit the duke gave full nazi salutes . in an article for the new york daily news and chicago tribune of 13 december 1966 the duke wrote that in 1937 hitler persuaded him '' it was in britain 's interest and in europe 's too , that germany be encouraged to strike east and smash communism forever & nbsp ; . i thought the rest of us could be fence-sitters while the nazis and the reds slogged it out . '' '' windsor helpless as world drifts to war '' , chicago tribune , 13 december 1966 , p . 2 after the outbreak of the second world war in september 1939 , edward was assigned to the british military mission in france . colin matthew ( september 2004 ; online edition january 2008 ) '' edward viii , later prince edward , duke of windsor ( 1894–1972 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography , oxford university press , , retrieved 1 may 2010 ( subscription required ) in february 1940 , the german ambassador in the hague , count julius von zech-burkersroda , claimed that edward had leaked the allied war plans for the defence of belgium . documents on german foreign policy 1918–1945 series d , volume viii , quoted in bradford , p . 434 when germany invaded the north of france in may 1940 , the duke and duchess fled to lisbon . bloch , p . 91 under the code name operation willi , nazi agents , principally walter schellenberg , plotted unsuccessfully to persuade the duke to leave portugal , and contemplated kidnapping him . bloch , pp . 86 , 102 ; ziegler , pp . 430–432 lord caldecote warned churchill that the duke '' is well-known to be pro-nazi and he may become a centre of intrigue '' . ziegler , p . 434 churchill threatened the duke with a court-martial if he did not return to british soil . bloch , p . 93 in july 1940 , edward was appointed governor of the bahamas . bloch , pp . 93–94 , 98–103 , 119 edward reportedly told an acquaintance , '' after the war is over and hitler will crush the americans & nbsp ; . we 'll take over & nbsp ; . they the british do n't want me as their king , but i 'll be back as their leader . '' he was reported as saying that '' it would be a tragic thing for the world if hitler was overthrown '' . comments like these reinforced the belief that the duke and duchess held nazi sympathies and the effect of the abdication crisis of 1936 was to force off the throne a man with extreme political opinions . ziegler , pp . 434 ff . claims that edward would have been a threat or that he was removed by a political conspiracy to dethrone him remain speculative and '' persist largely because since 1936 the contemporary public considerations have lost most of their force and so seem , wrongly , to provide insufficient explanation for the king 's departure '' . . notes . sources .