Scholarship

scholarships vs . grants . while the terms are frequently used interchangeably , there is a difference . scholarships may have a financial need component but rely on other criteria as well . academic scholarships typically use a minimum grade point average or standardized test score such as the act or sat to select awardees . athletic scholarships are generally based on athletic performance of a student and used as a tool to recruit high-performing athletes for their school 's athletic teams . merit scholarships can be based on a number of criteria , including performance in a particular school subject or club participation or community service . grants , however , are offered based exclusively on financial need and determined using the applicant 's fafsa information . . types . the most common scholarships may be classified as : merit-based : these awards are based on a student 's academic , artistic , athletic or other abilities , and often factor in an applicant 's extracurricular activities and community service record . the most common merit-based scholarships , awarded by either private organizations or directly by a student 's intended college , recognize academic achievement or high scores on standardized tests . most such merit-based scholarships are paid directly by the institution the student attends , rather than issued directly to the student . need-based : some private need-based awards are confusingly called scholarships , and require the results of a fafsa ( the family 's efc ) . however , scholarships are often merit-based , while grants tend to be need-based . student-specific : these are scholarships for which applicants must initially qualify based upon gender , race , religion , family , and medical history , or many other student-specific factors . minority scholarships are the most common awards in this category . for example , students in canada may qualify for a number of indigenous scholarships , whether they study at home or abroad . the gates millennium scholars program is another minority scholarship funded by bill and melinda gates for excellent african american , american indian , asian pacific islander american and latino students who enroll in college . career-specific : these are scholarships a college or university awards to students who plan to pursue a specific field of study . often , the most generous awards to students who pursue careers in high-need areas such as education or nursing . many schools in the united states give future nurses full scholarships to enter the field , especially if the student intends to work in a high-need community . college-specific : college-specific scholarships are offered by individual colleges and universities to highly qualified applicants . these scholarships are given on the basis of academic and personal achievement . some scholarships have a '' bond '' requirement . recipients may be required to work for a particular employer for a specified period of time or to work in rural or remote areas ; otherwise , they may be required to repay the value of the support they received from the scholarship . this is particularly the case with education and nursing scholarships for people prepared to work in rural and remote areas . the programs offered by the uniformed services of the united states ( army , navy , marine corps , air force , coast guard , noaa corps , and public health service commissioned corps ) sometimes resemble such scholarships . athletic : awarded to students with exceptional skill in a sport . often this is so that the student will be available to attend the school or college and play the sport on their team , although in some countries government-funded sports scholarships are available , allowing scholarship holders to train for international representation . talented athlete scholarship , uk government . retrieved february 25 , 2016 . '' the scholarship '' , winning students . government of scotland . retrieved february 25 , 2016 . school-based athletics scholarships can be controversial , as some believe that awarding scholarship money for athletic rather than academic or intellectual purposes is not in the institution 's best interest . bruenig , matt . ( march 31 , 2014 ) . '' the ncaa ( national collegiate athletics association ) is an example of one . music scholarships : some people receive scholarships for excellence in music , often taking into account their academic capacity . some academic scholarships take into account musical skills , particularly if they are needed in the scholl 's orchestra or marching band . music scholarship recipients may be required to plat in school ensembles . legacy scholarships : at some schools , there are special scholarships set aside for children or grandchildren of people who previously attended the school . ralph nader 's brilliant plan for college sports : no more concussions or exploited labor '' , salon . retrieved february 25 , 2016 . brand scholarships : these scholarships are sponsored by a corporation that is trying to gain attention to their brand , or a cause . sometimes these scholarships are referred to as branded scholarships . the miss america beauty pageant is a famous example of a brand scholarship . creative contest scholarships : these scholarships are awarded to students based on a creative submission . contest scholarships are also called mini project based scholarships where students can submit entries based on unique and innovative ideas . scholarshipfellow ( march 24 , 2017 ) . '' contest scholarships '' , retrieved march 24 , 2017 . '' last dollar '' scholarships can be provided by private and government-based institutions , and are intended to cover the remaining fees charged to a student after the various grants are taken into account . kelchen , robert . ( april 17 , 2014 ) . '' the political attractiveness of '' last-dollar '' scholarships '' , washington monthly . retrieved february 25 , 2016 . to prohibit institutions from taking last dollar scholarships into account , and thereby removing other sources of funding , these scholarships are not offered until after financial aid has been offered in the form of a letter . furthermore , last dollar scholarships may require families to have filed taxes for the most recent year ; received their other sources of financial aid ; and not yet received loans . local . it is typical for people to find scholarships in their home regions . information on these can be found by asking local institutions and organizations . typically , these are less competitive as the eligible population is smaller . guidance counselors : when starting to explore scholarship opportunities , most high school students check with their guidance counselors . they can be a reliable source of information regarding local scholarships . non-profits and charitable trusts : most non-profit organizations have at some point of their history founded scholarships for prospective students . the good schools guide , a guide to schools in the uk , states '' charitable grant-making trusts can help in cases of genuine need , '' and goes on to outline several instances where this may be the case , including an '' unforeseen family disaster '' and a '' need for special education '' . community foundations : many counties and cities and regions have a local foundation dedicated to giving money in the form of grants and scholarships to people and organizations in the area . music teachers : some music teachers offer reduced-cost or free lessons to help low-income children gain access to an arts education . in addition , some local non-profits provide free music classes to youths . foundations : certain foundations in the united states and all over the world offer scholarships for entrepreneurial endeavors . labor/trade unions : major unions often offer scholarships for members and their dependent children . houses of worship : the local house of worship may or may not have any scholarships for their members , but the religious organization or headquarters may have some available . theology study is highly encouraged . foundations reputable foundations formed by different individuals , company or organisation can fund a scholarship as a means of reaching out to people chamber of commerce : many chambers of commerce offer ( usually small ) grants to students in the community , especially those planning on careers in business and public service . even if they do not offer any themselves , one can usually get a listing of members , and many of them may offer small scholarships to local students . other volunteer organizations : many organizations offer scholarships or award grants to students whose background or chosen field overlaps the field of the organization . for example , local chapters of professional societies may help the studies of exceptionally distinguished students of the region . similarly , charity organizations may offer help , especially if the late parent of the student was a member of the organization ( e.g . , a masonic lodge might help the orphan of a lodge brother . ) this kind of scholarship is mostly ad hoc . school : old , well-known schools are often endowed with scholarship funds . university : old , well-established universities may have funds to finance the studies of extremely talented students of little means . eligibility often requires that a student belong to some special category or be among a nation 's best . however , universities provide information on scholarships and grants , possibly even internship opportunities . psat/nmsqt : in the united states , students are offered the opportunity to take the psat/nmsqt test , usually in their junior year of high school . national merit scholarship programs are initially determined by the scores received on the psat/nmsqt test . some private scholarship programs require applicants to take the psat . the test can be used as preparation for the sat . enrichment centres : in certain countries , tuition center have begun to provide scholarships . disabilities : students with disability may be able to apply for awards intended for people with disabilities . those scholarships may be intended for disabled students in general , or in relation to a specific disability . . notable scholarships . chevening scholarship csc scholarship commonwealth scholarship coca-cola scholarship endeavour awards erasmus mundus fulbright program gates cambridge scholarship jardine scholarship marshall scholarship mitchell scholarship foundation scholarship rhodes scholarship schwarzman scholars . see also . bursary free education exhibition fellowship ( financial ) right to education scholarships in korea scholarships in the united states scholarships in taiwan school voucher . references . further reading . difiore , laura , et al . '' tips on finding scholarships . '' fresch ! free scholarship search . 2013 . martin , michel . '' scholarships : who gets them and why ? '' tell me more 17