Collodion process

history . image : theodore roosevelt on broken glass.jpg thumb this deteriorated dry plate portrait of theodore roosevelt is similar to a wet plate image but has substantial differences . the collodion process was invented in 1851 by frederick scott archer and theorized a year earlier by gustave le gray . during the subsequent decades , many photographers and experimenters refined or varied the process . by the end of the 1860s it had almost entirely replaced the first announced photographic process , the daguerreotype . during the 1880s , the collodion process was largely replaced by dry plate—glass plates with a photographic emulsion of silver halides suspended in gelatin . the dry gelatin emulsion was not only more convenient , but it could also be made much more sensitive , greatly reducing exposure times . one collodion process , the tintype , was in limited use for casual portraiture by some itinerant and amusement park photographers as late as the 1930s , and the wet plate collodion process was still in use in the printing industry in the 1960s for line and tone work ( mostly printed material involving black type against a white background ) since it was much cheaper than gelatin film in large volumes . 21st century . the wet plate collodion process has undergone a revival as a historical technique in the twenty-first century . brummm magazine , issue 2 , 2016 there are several practising ambrotype and tintypists who regularly set up and make images , for example at civil war re-enactments and arts festivals . fine art photographers use the process and its handcrafted individuality for gallery showings and personal work . there are several makers of reproduction equipment and many artists work with collodion around the globe . the process is taught in workshops around the world and several workbooks and manuals are in print . modern collodion artists includes sally mann , ben cauchi , '' ben cauchi , '' the arts foundation ( new zealand ) . retrieved 13 february 2019 . , john coffer , joni sternbach , surf site tin type , 2015 , damiani editore , milan david emitt adams , mark osterman , france scully osterman , jack dabaghian , lindsey ross , meg turner , and paul d'orléans/ susan mclaughlin 'the alchemists ' , 1903 magazine , issue 1 , 2016 james walker and luther gerlach . there are many more as well that have contributed to bringing this process forward to a modern age . advantages . thumb the collodion process produced a negative image on a transparent support ( glass ) . this was an improvement over the calotype process , discovered by henry fox talbot , which relied on paper negatives , and the daguerreotype , which produced a one-of-a-kind positive image and could not be replicated . the collodion process , thus combined desirable qualities of the calotype process ( enabling the photographer to make a theoretically unlimited number of prints from a single negative ) and the daguerreotype ( creating a sharpness and clarity that could not be achieved with paper negatives ) . collodion printing was typically done on albumen print . as collodion is a sticky and transparent medium , and can be soaked in a solution of silver nitrate while wet , it is ideal for coating stable surfaces such as glass or metal for photography . when a metal plate is coated with collodion , charged with silver nitrate , exposed , and developed , it produces a direct positive image , although 'backwards ' on the plate . when coated on glass , the image becomes a negative , and can be reproduced easily on photographic paper . this was a huge advantage over the daguerreotype , which was not directly reproducible . wet plate/collodion is also a relatively inexpensive process compared to its predecessor , and does not require polishing equipment or the extremely toxic fuming boxes needed for the daguerreotype . with glass as the medium , the cost per image was also far less than special silver-plated copper plates , and more durable than paper negatives . the process was also very fast for the time , requiring only a few seconds to expose an image in daylight , rather than 30 seconds or more for other forms of photography available in the mid-1800s . disadvantages . the wet collodion process had a major disadvantage . the entire process , from coating to developing , had to be done before the plate dried . this gave the photographer no more than about 10-15 minutes to complete everything . this made it inconvenient for field use , as it required a portable darkroom . the plate dripped silver nitrate solution , causing stains and potentially explosive build-up of nitrate residue in the camera and plate holders . the silver nitrate bath was also a source of problems . it gradually became saturated with alcohol , ether , iodide and bromide salts , dust , and various organic matter . it would lose effectiveness , causing plates to mysteriously fail to reproduce an image . as with all preceding photographic processes , the wet-collodion process was sensitive only to blue and ultraviolet light . warm colours appear dark , cool colours uniformly light . a sky with clouds is quite difficult to render , as the spectrum of white clouds contains about as much blue as the sky . lemons and tomatoes appear a shiny black , and a blue and white tablecloth appears plain white . victorian sitters who in collodion photographs look as if they are in mourning might have been wearing bright yellow or pink . . use . despite its disadvantages , wet plate collodion became enormously popular . it was used for portraiture , landscape work , architectural photography and art photography . the largest collodion glass plate negatives produced in the nineteenth century were made in sydney , australia , in 1875 . they were made by the professional photographer charles bayliss with the help of a wealthy amateur photographer bernhard otto holtermann , who also funded the project . holterman 's photographs . ( 1875 , november 9 ) . evening news ( sydney , nsw : 1869 - 1931 ) , p . 2 . retrieved november 4 , 2018 bayliss and holtermann produced four known glass negatives all of which were taken from holtermann ’ s purpose-built camera in the tower of his mansion in north sydney . the mansion is now part of the sydney church of england grammar school ( commonly known as shore or shore school ) two were 160 x 96.5 cm ( 5.1 ft x 3.08 ft ) and formed a panorama of sydney harbour from garden island to miller ’ s point . the other two were 136 x 95 cm ( 4.4 x 3.1 feet ) and were of the harbour and garden island and longnose point . three of the four are now held by the state library of new south wales . bernard otto holterman . ( 1875 , december 11 ) . illustrated sydney news and new south wales agriculturalist and grazier ( nsw : 1872 - 1881 ) , p . 3 the wet plate process is used by a number of artists and experimenters who prefer its aesthetic qualities to those of the more modern gelatin silver process . world wet plate day is staged annually in may for contemporary practitioners . . search for a dry collodion process . the extreme inconvenience of exposing wet collodion in the field led to many attempts to develop a dry collodion process , which could be exposed and developed some time after coating . a large number of methods were tried , though none was ever found to be truly practical and consistent in operation . well-known scientists such as joseph sidebotham , richard kennett , major russell and frederick charles luther wratten attempted , but never met with good results . typically , methods involved coating or mixing the collodion with a substance that prevented it from drying quickly . as long as the collodion remained at least partially wet , it retained some of its sensitivity . common processes involved chemicals such as glycerin , magnesium nitrate , tannic acid and albumen . others involved more unlikely substances , such as tea , coffee , honey , beer and seemingly unending combinations thereof . many methods worked to an extent ; they allowed the plate to be exposed hours , or even days , after coating . they all possessed the chief disadvantage , that they rendered the plate extremely slow . an image could require anywhere from three to ten times more exposure on a dry plate than on a wet plate . collodion emulsion . image:1860 anonyme un vétéran et sa femme ambrotype.jpg right thumb british veteran of the napoleonic era peninsular war with his wife , c.1860 , hand-tinted ambrotype using the bleached collodion positive process . in 1864 w . b . bolton and b . j . sayce published an idea for a process that would revolutionize photography . they suggested that sensitive silver salts be formed in a liquid collodion , rather than being precipitated , in-situ , on the surface of a plate . a light-sensitive plate could then be prepared by simply flowing this emulsion across the surface of a glass plate ; no silver nitrate bath was required . this idea was soon brought to fruition . first , a printing emulsion was developed using silver chloride . these emulsions were slow , and could not be developed , so they were mostly used for positive printing . shortly later , silver iodide and silver bromide emulsions were produced . these proved to be significantly faster , and the image could be brought out by development . the emulsions also had the advantage that they could be washed . in the wet collodion process , silver nitrate reacted with a halide salt ; potassium iodide , for example . this resulted in a double replacement reaction . the silver and iodine ions in solution reacted , forming silver iodide on the collodion film . however , at the same time , potassium nitrate also formed , from the potassium ions in the iodide and the nitrate ions in the silver . this salt could not be removed in the wet process . however , with the emulsion process , it could be washed out after creation of the emulsion . the speed of the emulsion process was unremarkable . it was not as fast as the ordinary wet process , but was not nearly as slow as the dry plate processes . its chief advantage was that each plate behaved the same way . inconsistencies in the ordinary process were rare . collodion emulsion preparation example . below is an example of the preparation of a collodion emulsion , from the late 19th century . the language has been adapted to be more modern , and the units of measure have been converted to metric . :4.9 & nbsp ; grams of pyroxylin are dissolved in 81.3 ml of ethanol , 148 ml of ether . :13 & nbsp ; grams of zinc bromide are dissolved in 29.6 ml of alcohol . four or five drops of nitric acid are added . this is added to half the collodion made above . :21.4 & nbsp ; grams of silver nitrate are dissolved in 7.4 ml of water . 29.6 ml of alcohol are added . this is then poured into the other half of the collodion ; the bromine collodion dropped in , slowly , while stirring . : the result is an emulsion of silver bromide . it is left to ripen for 10 to 20 hours , until it attains a creamy consistency . it may then be used or washed , as outlined below . : to wash , the emulsion is poured into a dish and the solvents are evaporated until the collodion becomes gelatinous . it is then washed with water , followed by a washing in alcohol . after washing , it is redissolved in a mixture of ether and alcohol and is then ready for use . : emulsions created in this manner could be used wet , but they were often coated on the plate and preserved in similar ways to the dry process . : collodion emulsion plates were developed in an alkaline developer , not unlike those in common use today . an example formula follows . : :part a : pyrogallic acid 96 g , alcohol 1 oz . : :part b : potassium bromide 12 g , distilled water 30 ml : :part c : ammonium carbonate 80 g water 30 ml when needed for use , mix 0.37 ml of a , 2.72 ml of b and 10.9 ml of c . flow this over the plate until developed . if a dry plate is used , first wash the preservative off in running water . see also . albumen print ambrotype august semmendinger calotype collodion daguerreotype excelsior wet plate camera tintype . references . . external links . watch : george eastman house '' the collodion process – photographic processes '' the getty museum : the wet collodion process step by step wet plate photography collodion : material safety data sheet compound w data sheet world wet plate day getting started in wetplate collodion photography old photography process : collodion wet plate