Turbojet

history . the first patent for using a gas turbine to power an aircraft was filed in 1921 by frenchman maxime guillaume . maxime guillaume , '' propulseur par réaction sur l'air , '' french patent ( filed : 3 may 1921 ; issued : 13 january 1922 ) his engine was to be an axial-flow turbojet , but was never constructed , as it would have required considerable advances over the state of the art in compressors . in 1928 , british raf college cranwell cadet frank whittle formally submitted his ideas for a turbojet to his superiors . in october 1929 he developed his ideas further . on 16 january 1930 in england , whittle submitted his first patent ( granted in 1932 ) . frank whittle , improvements relating to the propulsion of aircraft and other vehicles , british patent no . 347,206 ( filed : 16 january 1930 ) . the patent showed a two-stage axial compressor feeding a single-sided centrifugal compressor . practical axial compressors were made possible by ideas from a.a . griffith in a seminal paper in 1926 ( '' an aerodynamic theory of turbine design '' ) . whittle would later concentrate on the simpler centrifugal compressor only , for a variety of practical reasons . whittle had the first turbojet to run , the power jets wu , on 12 april 1937 . it was liquid-fuelled , and included a self-contained fuel pump . whittle 's team experienced near-panic when the engine would not stop , accelerating even after the fuel was switched off . it turned out that fuel had leaked into the engine and accumulated in pools , so the engine would not stop until all the leaked fuel had burned off . whittle was unable to interest the government in his invention , and development continued at a slow pace . in germany , hans von ohain patented a similar engine in 1935 . experimental & prototype us air force jet fighters , jenkins & landis , 2008 on 27 august 1939 the heinkel he 178 became the world 's first aircraft to fly under turbojet power , with test pilot erich warsitz at the controls , warsitz , lutz 2009 the first jet pilot – the story of german test pilot erich warsitz , pen and sword books , england , , p . 125 . thus becoming the first practical jet plane . the gloster e.28/39 , ( also referred to as the '' gloster whittle '' , '' gloster pioneer '' , or '' gloster g.40 '' ) was the first british jet-engined aircraft to fly . it was designed to test the whittle jet engine in flight , leading to the development of the gloster meteor . the first two operational turbojet aircraft , the messerschmitt me 262 and then the gloster meteor , entered service in 1944 , towards the end of world war ii . air is drawn into the rotating compressor via the intake and is compressed to a higher pressure before entering the combustion chamber . fuel is mixed with the compressed air and burns in the combustor . the combustion products leave the combustor and expand through the turbine where power is extracted to drive the compressor . the turbine exit gases still contain considerable energy that is converted in the propelling nozzle to a high speed jet . the first jet engines were turbojets , with either a centrifugal compressor ( as in the heinkel hes 3 ) , or axial compressors ( as in the junkers jumo 004 ) which gave a smaller diameter , although longer , engine . by replacing the propeller used on piston engines with a high speed jet of exhaust , higher aircraft speeds were attainable . one of the last applications for a turbojet engine was concorde which used the olympus 593 engine . during the design the turbojet was found to be the optimum for cruising at twice the speed of sound despite the advantage of turbofans for lower speeds . for concorde less fuel was required to produce a given thrust for a mile at mach 2.0 than a modern high-bypass turbofan such as general electric cf6 at its mach 0.86 optimum speed . turbojet engines had a significant impact on commercial aviation . aside from giving faster flight speeds turbojets had greater reliability than piston engines , with some models demonstrating dispatch reliability rating in excess of 99.9 % . pre-jet commercial aircraft were designed with as many as four engines in part because of concerns over in-flight failures . overseas flight paths were plotted to keep planes within an hour of a landing field , lengthening flights . the increase in reliability that came with the turbojet enabled three- and two-engine designs , and more direct long-distance flights . high-temperature alloys were a reverse salient , a key technology that dragged progress on jet engines . non-uk jet engines built in the 1930s and 1940s had to be overhauled every 10 or 20 hours due to creep failure and other types of damage to blades . british engines , however , utilised nimonic alloys which allowed extended use without overhaul , engines such as the rolls-royce welland and rolls-royce derwent , '' world encyclopedia of aero engines – 5th edition '' by bill gunston , sutton publishing , 2006 , p.192 and by 1949 the de havilland goblin , being type tested for 500 hours without maintenance . sir alec flame tubes marshal sir 1949 0598 flight archive it was not until the 1950s that superalloy technology allowed other countries to produce economically practical engines . sims , c.t . , chester , a history of superalloy metallurgy , proc . 5th symp . on superalloys , 1984 . . early designs . early german turbojets had severe limitations on the amount of running they could do due to the lack of suitable high temperature materials for the turbines . british engines such as the rolls-royce welland used better materials giving improved durability . the welland was type-certified for 80 hours initially , later extended to 150 hours between overhauls , as a result of an extended 500-hour run being achieved in tests . despite their high maintenance , some of the early jet fighters are still operational with their original engines . general electric in the united states was in a good position to enter the jet engine business due to its experience with the high-temperature materials used in their turbosuperchargers during world war ii . robert v . garvin , '' starting something big '' , , p.5 water injection was a common method used to increase thrust , usually during takeoff , in early turbojets that were thrust-limited by their allowable turbine entry temperature . the water increased thrust at the temperature limit , but prevented complete combustion , often leaving a very visible smoke trail . allowable turbine entry temperatures have increased steadily over time both with the introduction of superior alloys and coatings , and with the introduction and progressive effectiveness of blade cooling designs . on early engines , the turbine temperature limit had to be monitored , and avoided , by the pilot , typically during starting and at maximum thrust settings . automatic temperature limiting was introduced to reduce pilot workload and reduce the likelihood of turbine damage due to over-temperature . design . air intake . an intake , or tube , is needed in front of the compressor to help direct the incoming air smoothly into the moving compressor blades . older engines had stationary vanes in front of the moving blades . these vanes also helped to direct the air onto the blades . the air flowing into a turbojet engine is always subsonic , regardless of the speed of the aircraft itself . the intake has to supply air to the engine with an acceptably small variation in pressure ( known as distortion ) and having lost as little energy as possible on the way ( known as pressure recovery ) . the ram pressure rise in the intake is the inlet 's contribution to the propulsion system 's overall pressure ratio and thermal efficiency . the intake gains prominence at high speeds when it generates more compression than the compressor stage . well-known examples are the concorde and lockheed sr-71 blackbird propulsion systems where the intake and engine contributions to the total compression were 63 % /8 % '' test pilot '' brian trubshaw , sutton publishing 1999 , , appendix viiib at mach 2 and 54 % /17 % fig.26 at mach 3+ . intakes have ranged from '' zero-length '' '' trade-offs in jet inlet design '' sobester , journal of aircraft vol.44 , no.3 , may–june 2007 , fig.12 on the pratt & whitney tf33 turbofan installation in the lockheed c-141 starlifter , to the twin , 65 feet-long , intakes on the north american xb-70 valkyrie , each feeding three engines with an intake airflow of about 800 lb/sec . compressor . the compressor is driven by the turbine . it rotates at high speed , adding energy to the airflow and at the same time squeezing ( compressing ) it into a smaller space . compressing the air increases its pressure and temperature . the smaller the compressor , the faster it turns . at the large end of the range , the ge-90-115 fan rotates at about 2,500 rpm , while a small helicopter engine compressor rotates around 50,000 rpm . turbojets supply bleed air from the compressor to the aircraft for the environmental control system , anti-icing , and fuel tank pressurization , for example . the engine itself needs air at various pressures and flow rates to keep it running . this air comes from the compressor , and without it , the turbines would overheat , the lubricating oil would leak from the bearing cavities , the rotor thrust bearings would skid or be overloaded , and ice would form on the nose cone . the air from the compressor , called secondary air , is used for turbine cooling , bearing cavity sealing , anti-icing , and ensuring that the rotor axial load on its thrust bearing will not wear it out prematurely . supplying bleed air to the aircraft decreases the efficiency of the engine because it has been compressed , but then does not contribute to producing thrust . bleed air for aircraft services is no longer needed on the turbofan-powered boeing 787 . compressor types used in turbojets were typically axial or centrifugal . early turbojet compressors had low pressure ratios up to about 5:1 . aerodynamic improvements including splitting the compressor into two separately rotating parts , incorporating variable blade angles for entry guide vanes and stators , and bleeding air from the compressor enabled later turbojets to have overall pressure ratios of 15:1 or more . for comparison , modern civil turbofan engines have overall pressure ratios of 44:1 or more . after leaving the compressor , the air enters the combustion chamber . combustion chamber . the burning process in the combustor is significantly different from that in a piston engine . in a piston engine , the burning gases are confined to a small volume , and as the fuel burns , the pressure increases . in a turbojet , the air and fuel mixture burn in the combustor and pass through to the turbine in a continuous flowing process with no pressure build-up . instead , a small pressure loss occurs in the combustor . the fuel-air mixture can only burn in slow-moving air , so an area of reverse flow is maintained by the fuel nozzles for the approximately stoichiometric burning in the primary zone . further compressed air is introduced which completes the combustion process and reduces the temperature of the combustion products to a level which the turbine can accept . less than 25 % of the air is typically used for combustion , as an overall lean mixture is required to keep within the turbine temperature limits . turbine . hot gases leaving the combustor expand through the turbine . typical materials for turbines include inconel and nimonic . 1960 & 124 ; flight & 124 ; archive the hottest turbine vanes and blades in an engine have internal cooling passages . air from the compressor is passed through these to keep the metal temperature within limits . the remaining stages do not need cooling . in the first stage , the turbine is largely an impulse turbine ( similar to a pelton wheel ) and rotates because of the impact of the hot gas stream . later stages are convergent ducts that accelerate the gas . energy is transferred into the shaft through momentum exchange in the opposite way to energy transfer in the compressor . the power developed by the turbine drives the compressor and accessories , like fuel , oil , and hydraulic pumps that are driven by the accessory gearbox . nozzle . after the turbine , the gases expand through the exhaust nozzle producing a high velocity jet . in a convergent nozzle , the ducting narrows progressively to a throat . the nozzle pressure ratio on a turbojet is high enough at higher thrust settings to cause the nozzle to choke . if , however , a convergent-divergent de laval nozzle is fitted , the divergent ( increasing flow area ) section allows the gases to reach supersonic velocity within the divergent section . additional thrust is generated by the higher resulting exhaust velocity . thrust augmentation . thrust was most commonly increased in turbojets with water injection ( engine ) or afterburner . some engines used both at the same time . liquid injection was tested on the power jets w.1 in 1941 initially using ammonia before changing to water and then water-methanol . a system to trial the technique in the gloster e.28/39 was devised but never fitted . 1947 1359 flight archive . afterburner . an afterburner or '' reheat jetpipe '' is a combustion chamber added to reheat the turbine exhaust gases . the fuel consumption is very high , typically four times that of the main engine . afterburners are used almost exclusively on supersonic aircraft , most being military aircraft . two supersonic airliners , concorde and the tu-144 , also used afterburners as does scaled composites white knight , a carrier aircraft for the experimental spaceshipone suborbital spacecraft . reheat was flight-trialled in 1944 on the w.2/700 engines in a gloster meteor . '' world encyclopedia of aero engines – 5th edition '' by bill gunston , sutton publishing , 2006 , p.160 . net thrust . the net thrust f_n\ ; of a turbojet is given by : f_n ( \dot - v ) the speed of the jet v_j\ ; must exceed the true airspeed of the aircraft v\ ; if there is to be a net forward thrust on the airframe . the speed v_j\ ; can be calculated thermodynamically based on adiabatic expansion . mit.edu unified : thermodynamics and propulsion prof . z . s . spakovszky – turbojet engine . cycle improvements . the operation of a turbojet is modelled approximately by the brayton cycle . the efficiency of a gas turbine is increased by raising the overall pressure ratio , requiring higher-temperature compressor materials , and raising the turbine entry temperature , requiring better turbine materials and/or improved vane/blade cooling . it is also increased by reducing the losses as the flow progresses from the intake to the propelling nozzle . these losses are quantified by compressor and turbine efficiencies and ducting pressure losses . when used in a turbojet application , where the output from the gas turbine is used in a propelling nozzle , raising the turbine temperature increases the jet velocity . at normal subsonic speeds this reduces the propulsive efficiency , giving an overall loss , as reflected by the higher fuel consumption , or sfc . '' gas turbine theory '' cohen , rogers , saravanamuttoo , , p72-73 , fig 3.11 however , for supersonic aircraft this can be beneficial , and is part of the reason why the concorde employed turbojets . turbojet systems are complex systems therefore to secure optimal function of such system , there is a call for the newer models being developed to advance its control systems to implement the newest knowledge from the areas of automation , so increase its safety and effectiveness . sami 2010 • 8th ieee international symposium on applied machine intelligence and informatics • 28–30 january 2010 • herl'any , slovakia ( advanced methods of turbojet engines ' control ) ( r . andoga , , l . főző , , l . madarász and j . judičák technical university of košice , department of cybernetics and artificial intelligence , košice , slovakia technical university of košice , department of environmental studies and information engineering , košice , ) )