Yakov Smirnoff

early life . smirnoff was born yakov naumovich pokhis to a jewish family in odessa , ukraine , then part of the soviet union . he was an art teacher in odessa , as well as a comedian . as a comedian , he entertained occasionally on ships in the black sea , where he came into contact with americans who described life in the united states to him . that was when he first considered leaving the country . yakov smirnoff interview , the comedy couch , 5 february 2007 after two years of attempting to leave , he came to the united states with his parents in 1977 , arriving in new york city . his family was allowed to come to america because of an agreement between the ussr and america to exchange wheat for soviet citizens who wished to defect . at the time , neither he nor his parents spoke any english . on arrival to the united states , he was almost sent back to russia when his translator mistranslated his occupation , comedian , as '' party organizer '' , which immigration authorities thought meant that he was an organizer for the communist party . smirnoff spent a portion of his early days in the united states working as a busboy and bartender at grossingers hotel in the catskill mountains of new york and living in the employee dormitory . . career . smirnoff began doing stand-up comedy in the us in the late 1970s . he chose the last name '' smirnoff '' after trying to think of a name that americans would be familiar with ; he had learned about smirnoff vodka in his bartending days . in the early 1980s , he moved to los angeles to further pursue his stand-up comedy career . there he was roommates with two other aspiring comedians , andrew dice clay and thomas f . wilson . what ’ s what with . tom wilson , philadelphia magazine , 3 december 2008 he appeared often at renowned l.a . club the comedy store . after achieving some level of fame , smirnoff got his first break with a small role in the 1984 film moscow on the hudson ; on the set , he helped star robin williams with his russian dialogue . he subsequently appeared in several other motion pictures , including buckaroo banzai ( 1984 ) , brewster 's millions ( 1985 ) and the money pit ( 1986 ) . among his numerous appearances on television , he was featured many times on the sitcom night court as '' yakov korolenko '' , and appeared as a comedian and guest on the tonight show starring johnny carson . image : yakof.jpg thumb right smirnoff at a hands across america promotional event in 1986 he had a starring role in the 1986–87 television sitcom what a country ! in that show , he played a russian cab driver studying for the u.s . citizenship test . in the late 1980s , smirnoff was commissioned by abc to provide educational bumper segments for saturday morning cartoons , punctuated with a joke and smirnoff 's signature laugh . yakov smirnoff official biography in 1987 , smirnoff was invited to a party hosted by washington times editor-in-chief arnaud de borchgrave which featured president ronald reagan as the guest of honor . reagan and smirnoff immediately hit it off due to reagan 's love of jokes about life in the soviet union . reagan enjoyed telling such jokes in speeches , and smirnoff became one of his sources for new material . an example of a joke reagan later told that originated from smirnoff was '' in russia , if you say , 'henny youngman ' , you come home and she is gone . '' smirnoff was enlisted by dana rohrabacher , who was then a speechwriter for reagan , to help with material for reagan 's speeches , including a speech given in front of soviet leader mikhail gorbachev when reagan visited the soviet union during the moscow summit in 1988 . rohrabacher later stated that smirnoff became '' one of the inner circle '' of speechwriting advisers during reagan 's final years in office , due to the quality of smirnoff 's suggestions . in 1988 , smirnoff was the featured entertainer at the annual white house correspondents ' dinner . from 1993 to 2015 , he performed hundreds of times a year at his own 2,000-seat theater in branson , missouri , featuring comedy acts and russian dance performances . in the late 1990s , prompted by his divorce , he retooled his stand-up act to focus on the differences between men and women , and on solving problems within relationships . he returned to branson for a 2018–2019 season of his show , starting in october 2018 . in 2003 , he appeared on broadway in a one-man show , as long as we both shall laugh . he was a featured writer for aarp magazine and gave readers advice in his column , '' happily ever laughter '' . he guests at the skinny improv in springfield , missouri on occasion . after a successful career in television , movies and broadway , smirnoff turned his mind to understanding the mysteries of happiness . in may 2006 , he received a master 's degree in psychology from the university of pennsylvania . he has taught classes at drury university along with missouri state university on this topic . he also gives seminars and self-help workshops on the topic of improving relationships . smirnoff earned his doctorate in psychology and global leadership at pepperdine university , graduating on 18 may 2019 . comedy style . '' america : what a country ! '' . some of smirnoff 's jokes involved word play based on a limited understanding of american idioms and culture : '' i go to new york and i saw a big sign saying 'america loves smirnoff ' and i said to myself , what a country ! '' upon being offered work as a barman on a '' graveyard shift '' , he remarks , ' a bar in a cemetery ! what a country ! last call ? during happy hour the place must be dead . ' at the grocery store : '' powdered milk , powdered eggs , baby powder & nbsp ; . what a country ! '' at the grocery store after finding '' new freedom '' maxi pads : '' freedom in a box ! what a country ! '' '' the first time i went to a restaurant , they asked me , 'how many in your party ? ' and i said , 'six hundred million ' . '' other jokes involved comparisons between the u.s . and the u.s.s.r : '' i like parades without missiles in them . i 'll take bullwinkle to a tank any day ' '' '' in every country , they make fun of city . in u.s . you make fun of cleveland . in russia , we make fun of cleveland . '' '' why do n't they have baseball in soviet union ? in soviet union , no one is safe . '' here you have american express card : '' do n't leave home without it . '' in russia , we have russian express card : '' do n't leave home ! '' he once told johnny carson , '' i enjoy being in america : it 's fun , you know , because you have , you have so many things we never had in russia—like warning shots '' . . russian reversal . smirnoff is often credited with inventing or popularizing the type of joke known as the '' russian reversal '' , in which life '' in soviet russia '' or '' in russia '' is described through an unexpected flip of a sentence 's subject and object ; a type of chiasmus . in truth , such jokes predated smirnoff 's act , and he rarely told them . one exception was a 1985 miller lite commercial , in which smirnoff stated , '' in america , there is plenty of light beer and you can always find a party . in russia , party always kgb . '' . painting . smirnoff is also a painter and has frequently featured the statue of liberty in his art since receiving his u.s . citizenship . on the night of the september 11 attacks , he started a painting inspired by his feelings about the event , based on an image of the statue of liberty . just prior to the first anniversary of the attacks , he paid us 100,000 for his painting to be transformed into a large mural . its dimensions were 200 & nbsp ; feet by 135 & nbsp ; feet ( 61 & nbsp ; m by 41 & nbsp ; m ) . the mural , titled '' america 's heart , '' is a pointillism-style piece , with one brush-stroke for each victim of the attacks . sixty volunteers from the sheet metal workers union erected the mural on a damaged skyscraper overlooking the ruins of the world trade center . the mural remained there until november 2003 , when it was removed because of storm damage . various pieces of the mural can now be seen on display at his theater in branson , missouri . the only stipulation he put on the hanging of the mural was that his name not be listed as the painter . he signed it : '' the human spirit is not measured by the size of the act , but by the size of the heart . '' . personal life . smirnoff became an american citizen on 4 july 1986 . yakov smirnoff spreading joy of living ‘ happily ever laughter ’ diana nollen , hoopla , 14 march 2013 smirnoff had a wife , linda ; they divorced in 1999 . they have two children : a daughter , natasha , born in 1990 , and a son , alexander , born in 1992 . . filmography . among his film credits , smirnoff has co-starred in movies with robin williams ( moscow on the hudson , 1984 ) , tom hanks ( the money pit , 1986 ) , and jack nicholson and meryl streep ( heartburn , 1986 ) , in addition to single episodes of several tv series . yakov smirnoff imdb moscow on the hudson ( 1984 ) heartburn ( 1986 ) the money pit ( 1986 ) what a country ( tv series , multiple episodes , 1987 ) night court ( tv series , multiple episodes , 1990 ) the adventures of buckaroo banzai across the 8th dimension ( 1984 ) . references . external links . interview .