Frank Costello

early life . costello was born on january 26 , 1891 in lauropoli , a frazione of the town of cassano allo ionio in the province of cosenza in the calabria region , italy . in 1895 , he boarded a ship to the united states with his mother and his brother edward to join their father , who had moved to new york city 's east harlem several years earlier and opened a small neighborhood italian grocery store . while costello was still a boy , his brother introduced him to gang activities . at 13 , he had become a member of a local gang and started using the name frankie . costello committed petty crimes and went to jail for assault and robbery in 1908 , 1912 , and 1917 . in 1918 , he married lauretta geigerman , a jewish woman who was the sister of a close friend . that same year , costello served ten months in jail for carrying a concealed weapon . alliance with luciano . while working for the morello gang , costello met lucky luciano , the sicily leader of manhattan 's lower east side gang . the two italians immediately became friends and partners . several older members of luciano 's family disapproved of this growing partnership . they were mostly mustache pete who were unwilling to work with anyone who was not italian , and skeptical at best about working with non-sicilians . to luciano 's shock , they warned him against working with costello , whom they called '' the dirty calabrian . '' along with italian american associates vito genovese and tommy lucchese , and jewish associates meyer lansky and bugsy siegel , the gang became involved in robbery , theft , extortion , gambling and narcotics . the luciano-costello-lansky-siegel alliance prospered even further with the passage of prohibition in 1920 . the gang went into bootlegging , backed by criminal financier arnold rothstein . stolberg , p . 119 the young italians ' success let them make business deals with the leading jewish and irish mobs of the era , including dutch schultz , owney madden and bill dwyer ( mobster ) . rothstein became a mentor to costello , luciano , lansky and siegel while they conducted bootlegging business with bronx beer baron schultz . in 1922 , costello , luciano , and their closest italian associates joined the sicilian crime family led by joe masseria , a top italian underworld crime boss . by 1924 , costello had become a close associate of hell 's kitchen 's irish crime bosses dwyer and madden . he became involved in their rum-running operations , known as '' the combine '' ; this might have prompted him to change his last name to the irish '' costello . '' in 1925 , costello became a u.s . citizen . on november 19 , 1926 , costello and dwyer were indicted on federal bootlegging charges . they were accused of bribing two u.s . coast guardsmen , presumably so that they would not disturb the unloading of liquor from boats in new york harbor . the largest boat in the combine fleet could carry 20,000 cases of liquor . in january 1927 , the jury deadlocked on the bootlegging charges for dwyer and costello . in 1926 , dwyer was convicted of bribing a coast guard official and sentenced to two years in jail . after dwyer was imprisoned , costello took over the combine 's operations with madden . this caused friction between madden and a top dwyer lieutenant , vannie higgins , who believed he should have been running the combine instead of costello . thus , the '' manhattan beer wars '' began between higgins on one side , and costello , madden , and schultz on the other . at this time , schultz was also having problems with gangsters jack '' legs '' diamond and vincent coll , who had begun to rival schultz and his partners with higgins 's help . eventually , the costello-madden-schultz alliance was destroyed by new york 's underworld . in the late 1920s , johnny torrio helped to organize a loose cartel of east coast bootleggers , the big seven , in which a number of prominent gangsters , including costello , luciano , longy zwillman , joe adonis , and meyer lansky played a part . torrio also supported creation of a national body that would prevent the sort of all-out turf wars between gangs that had broken out in chicago and new york . his idea was well received , howard abadinsky , organized crime , '' cengage learning , 2009 , p.115 and a atlantic city conference by torrio , lansky , luciano and costello in may 1929 ; the national crime syndicate was created . . castellammarese war . in early 1931 , the castellammarese war broke out between masseria and salvatore maranzano . in a secret deal with maranzano , luciano agreed to engineer the death of his boss , masseria , in return for receiving masseria 's rackets and becoming maranzano 's second-in-command . on april 15 , 1931 , luciano had lured masseria to a meeting where he was murdered at a restaurant called nuova villa tammaro on coney island . while they played cards , luciano allegedly excused himself to the bathroom , with the gunmen reportedly being genovese , albert anastasia , joe adonis , and bugsy siegel ; ciro terranova drove the getaway car , but legend has it that he was too shaken up to drive away and had to be shoved out of the driver 's seat by siegel . sifakis , ( 2005 ) . pp . 87–88 luciano took over masseria 's family , with genovese as his underboss . in september 1931 , luciano and genovese planned the murder of maranzano . luciano had received word that maranzano was planning to kill him and genovese , and prepared a hit team to kill maranzano first . on september 10 , 1931 , when maranzano summoned luciano , genovese , and costello to a meeting at his office , they knew maranzano would kill them there . instead , luciano sent to maranzano 's office four jewish gangsters whose faces were unknown to maranzano 's people . they had been secured with the aid of lansky and siegel . '' lucky luciano : criminal mastermind , '' time , dec . 7 , 1998 after assassinating maranzano , luciano subsequently created the commission to serve as the governing body for organized crime . . years as consigliere . in 1931 , after the masseria and maranzano murders , luciano became the leader of the new luciano crime family , with genovese as underboss and costello as consigliere . costello quickly became one of the biggest earners for the luciano family and began to carve his own niche in the underworld . he controlled the slot machine and bookmaking operations for the family with associate philip '' dandy phil '' kastel . costello placed approximately 25,000 slot machines in bars , restaurants , cafes , drugstores , gas stations , and bus stops throughout new york . in 1934 , mayor fiorello la guardia confiscated thousands of costello 's slot machines , loaded them on a barge , and dumped them into the river . costello 's next move was to accept louisiana governor huey long 's proposal to put slot machines throughout louisiana for 10 % of the take . costello made kastel overseer of the louisiana slot operation . kastel had the assistance of new orleans mafioso carlos marcello . costello brought in millions of dollars in profit from slot machines and bookmaking to the luciano family . boss and prison . in 1936 , luciano was convicted of running a prostitution ring and sentenced to 30 to 50 years in state prison . he attempted to rule the crime family from prison with the help of costello and lansky , but found it too difficult . with luciano 's imprisonment , genovese became acting boss of the luciano crime family . in 1937 , genovese was indicted for a 1934 murder and fled to italy to avoid prosecution . luciano then appointed costello as acting boss . his underboss was his cousin willie moretti . from may 1950 to may 1951 , the u.s . senate conducted a large-scale investigation of organized crime , commonly known as the kefauver hearings , chaired by senator estes kefauver of tennessee . costello was convicted of contempt of the senate and sentenced to 18 months in prison . senator kefauver concluded that politician carmine desapio was assisting the activities of costello , and that costello had become influential in decisions made by the tammany hall council . desapio admitted to having met costello several times , but insisted that '' politics was never discussed '' . in 1952 , the government began proceedings to strip costello of his u.s . citizenship , and he was indicted for evasion of 73,417 in income taxes between 1946 and 1949 . he was sentenced to five years in prison and fined 20,000 . in 1954 , costello appealed the conviction and was released on 50,000 bail ; from 1952 to 1961 he was in and out of half a dozen federal and local prisons and jails , his confinement interrupted by periods when he was out on bail pending determination of appeals . . assassination attempt and aftermath . in 1956 , adonis , a powerful costello ally , chose deportation to italy over a long prison sentence . his departure left costello weakened , but genovese still had to neutralize one more powerful costello ally , anastasia , who had taken over the gambino crime family after the disappearance of boss vincent mangano and the murder of brother philip mangano on april 14 , 1951 . in early 1957 , genovese decided to move on costello . genovese ordered vincent gigante to murder costello , and on may 2 , 1957 , gigante shot and wounded costello outside his apartment building . the altercation persuaded costello to relinquish power to genovese and retire . genovese then controlled what is now called the genovese crime family . a doorman identified gigante as the gunman , but in 1958 costello testified that he was unable to recognize his assailant ; gigante was acquitted of attempted murder . vincent gigante , mob boss who feigned incompetence to avoid jail , dies at 77 , by selwyn raab , the new york times , december 19 , 2005 on october 25 , 1957 , anastasia was murdered at the barber shop of the park central hotel at 56th street and 7th avenue in manhattan . carlo gambino was expected to be proclaimed boss of anastasia 's family at the november 14 , 1957 , apalachin meeting genovese called to discuss the future of cosa nostra in light of his takeover . davis , pp . 83-84 when police raided the meeting , to the detriment of genovese 's reputation , gambino 's appointment was postponed to a later meeting in new york city . davis , pp . 88-90 in 1959 , genovese was convicted of selling a large quantity of heroin . on april 17 , 1959 , genovese was sentenced to 15 years in the atlanta federal penitentiary in atlanta , georgia . . retirement and death . during his retirement , costello was still known as '' the prime minister of the underworld '' . he still retained power and influence in new york 's mafia and remained busy throughout his final years . cosa nostra bosses and old associates such as gambino and lucchese still paid visits to costello at his waldorf astoria penthouse , seeking advice on important mafia affairs . costello 's old friend meyer lansky also kept in touch . costello occupied himself with gardening and displayed some of his flowers at local horticultural shows . on february 20 , 1961 , the united states supreme court upheld a lower court order that stripped costello of his us citizenship . but on february 17 , 1964 , the same court set aside a deportation order for costello , citing a legal technicality . in early february 1973 , costello suffered a heart attack at his manhattan home and was rushed to doctors hospital in manhattan , where he died on february 18 . costello 's sedate memorial service at a manhattan funeral home was attended by 50 relatives , friends , and law enforcement agents . costello is interred in a private mausoleum in st . michael 's cemetery in east elmhurst , queens . in 1974 , after his enemy carmine galante was released from prison , he allegedly ordered the bombing of the doors to costello 's mausoleum . . popular culture . costello has been portrayed in several movies , including by actors feodor chaliapin , jr . in my brother anastasia ( 1973 ) , james andronica in gangster wars ( 1981 ) , carmine caridi in bugsy ( 1991 ) , costas mandylor in mobsters ( 1991 ) , and by kirk baltz in the television movie kingfish : a story of huey p . long ( 1995 ) . costello was referenced in the allen ginsberg , '' hadda be playing on the jukebox '' . the line is written : 'it had to be fbi chief j . edgar hoover / and frank costello syndicate mouthpiece / meeting in central park , new york weekends , / reported time magazine ' . the poem was later performed live ( with music ) by the band rage against the machine on the album live & rare . the film the departed features an irish mob boss named frank costello ( played by jack nicholson ) in present-day boston . nicholson 's character is not related to the real-life costello except in name ; the character was based on boston mobster james j . bulger , with the film plot based on infernal affairs , a hong kong thriller film made in 2002 . costello was portrayed by anthony dicarlo in amc 's docudrama series the making of the mob : new york . he was portrayed by paul sorvino in the 2019 television series godfather of harlem . footnotes . references . . external links . frank costello at rotten.com seize the night : frank costello the free information society : frank costello biography