1938 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1938 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . january – mgm announces that judy garland will be cast in the role of dorothy gale in the upcoming the wizard of oz film . ray bolger is cast as the tin woodman and buddy ebsen as the scarecrow . at bolger 's insistence , the roles are switched between the two actors . on july 25 , mgm announces bert lahr has been cast as the cowardly lion . february 24 – the entertainment trade newspaper variety reported that the film studio metro-goldwyn-mayer ( mgm ) had bought the rights to adapt l . frank baum ’ s beloved children ’ s novel the wonderful wizard of oz for the screen april 5 – noel langley completes the first script for the wizard of oz . april 20 – leonard slye appears in his first starring role as roy rogers in under western stars . he became one of the most popular western stars being ranked number one from 1943 to 1952 and would become known as '' king of the cowboys '' . may 7 – lyricist edgar yipsel harburg and composer , harold arlen , begin work on the musical score for the wizard of oz . october 13 – filming starts on the wizard of oz on the sony pictures studios in culver city , california , initially with richard thorpe as director . october 21 – buddy ebsen suffers from a near fatal allergic reaction to the aluminum dust used in his tin woodman make-up on the set of the wizard of oz . ebsen is replaced by jack haley . december 23 – margaret hamilton is severely burned during a mishap on the set of the wizard of oz . hamilton , who was cast in the role of the wicked witch of the west , leaves the film for six weeks . orson welles makes too much johnson , starring joseph cotten . it is never completed and first released only in 2013 . producer george minter establishes renown pictures , a british film distributor . . academy awards . best picture : you ca n't take it with you – columbia best director : frank capra – you ca n't take it with you best actor : spencer tracy – boys town best actress : bette davis – jezebel best supporting actor : walter brennan – kentucky best supporting actress : fay bainter – jezebel . 1938 film releases . january–march . january 1938 january 6 in old chicago march 1938 march 26 jezebel . april–june . april 1938 april 7 the adventures of marco polo april 22 test pilot may 1938 may 14 the adventures of robin hood june 1938 june 2 three comrades . july–september . july 1938 july 8 marie antoinette august 1938 august 5 alexander 's ragtime band august 9 four daughters september 1938 september 1 you ca n't take it with you september 9 boys town . october–december . october 1938 october 14 young dr . kildare november 1938 november 11 if i were king december 1938 december 22 sweethearts . notable films released in 1938 . united states unless stated . a . adiós buenos aires – ( argentina/spain/canada ) the adventures of marco polo , starring gary cooper and basil rathbone the adventures of robin hood , directed by michael curtiz , starring errol flynn , olivia de havilland , basil rathbone the adventures of tom sawyer , directed by norman taurog águila o sol ( heads or tails ) , starring cantinflas – ( mexico ) alexander nevsky , directed by sergei eisenstein , starring nikolai cherkasov – ( u.s.s.r . ) alexander 's ragtime band , starring tyrone power , don ameche , alice faye algiers , starring charles boyer and hedy lamarr the amazing dr . clitterhouse , starring edward g . robinson angels with dirty faces , starring james cagney , pat o'brien , humphrey bogart . b . bank holiday , starring margaret lockwood – ( gb ) la bête humaine ( the human beast ) , directed by jean renoir , starring jean gabin and simone simon – ( france ) the big broadcast of 1938 , starring w.c . fields , martha raye , bob hope , dorothy lamour billy the kid returns , starring stan laurel and oliver hardy block-heads , starring stan laurel and oliver hardy blondie , starring penny singleton bluebeard 's eighth wife , starring gary cooper and claudette colbert boys town , starring spencer tracy and mickey rooney bringing up baby , directed by howard hawks , starring cary grant and katharine hepburn – number 14 on the american film institute list of best comedy films the buccaneer , directed by cecil b . demille , starring fredric march . c . carefree , starring fred astaire and ginger rogers carmen , la de triana ( carmen , the girl from triana ) – ( spain/germany ) charlie chan in honolulu , starring sidney toler a christmas carol , starring reginald owen the citadel , directed by king vidor , starring robert donat and rosalind russell – ( gb ) climbing high , starring michael redgrave and jessie matthews – ( gb ) cocoanut grove , starring fred macmurray college swing , starring george burns , gracie allen , martha raye , bob hope convict 99 , starring will hay – ( gb ) crime school , starring dead end kids and humphrey bogart the crowd roars , starring robert taylor and maureen o'sullivan . d . dangerous to know , starring anna may wong and akim tamiroff the dawn patrol , starring errol flynn diao chan – ( china ) the divorce of lady x , with laurence olivier and merle oberon – ( gb ) the drum , with sabu and raymond massey – ( gb ) ducháček will fix it ( ducháček to zařídí ) – ( czechoslovakia ) . f . la femme du boulanger ( the baker 's wife ) , directed by marcel pagnol , starring raimu – ( france ) ferdinand the bull , a disney animated short fools for scandal , starring carole lombard the four companions , directed by carl froelich , starring ingrid bergman ( germany ) four daughters , starring claude rains four men and a prayer , directed by john ford , starring loretta young , richard greene , david niven four 's a crowd , starring errol flynn , olivia de havilland , rosalind russell , patric knowles . g . the gaunt stranger , starring sonnie hale – ( gb ) the girl of the golden west , starring jeanette macdonald and nelson eddy . h . hard to get , starring olivia de havilland and dick powell having wonderful time , starring ginger rogers and douglas fairbanks jr . her jungle love , starring dorothy lamour and ray milland here 's flash casey , starring eric linden , boots mallory , and cully richards holiday , starring katharine hepburn and cary grant honeysuckle , starring hugo del carril and libertad lamarque ( argentina ) hotel du nord , directed by marcel carné – ( france ) . i . i am the law , starring edward g . robinson if i were king , starring ronald colman in old chicago , starring tyrone power , alice faye , don ameche inspector hornleigh , starring gordon harker and alastair sim – ( gb ) international settlement , starring dolores del río . j . j'accuse ! , directed by abel gance – ( france ) jezebel , starring bette davis and henry fonda judge hardy 's children , starring lewis stone , mickey rooney , cecilia parker , fay holden just around the corner , starring shirley temple . k . kentucky , starring loretta young , richard greene , walter brennan kentucky moonshine , starring the ritz brothers kidnapped , starring warner baxter and freddie bartholomew kilómetro 111 – ( argentina ) king kong appears in edo ( edo ni arawareta kingu kongu ) – ( japan ) . l . the lady vanishes , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring michael redgrave and margaret lockwood – ( gb ) listen , darling , starring judy garland and freddie bartholomew little miss broadway , starring shirley temple , jimmy durante , edna may oliver little tough guy , starring robert wilcox , helen parrish , marjorie main lord jeff , starring freddie bartholomew and mickey rooney love finds andy hardy , starring lewis stone , mickey rooney , judy garland , cecilia parker , fay holden . m . mad about music , starring deanna durbin and herbert marshall the mad miss manton , starring barbara stanwyck and henry fonda a man to remember , starring anne shirley and edward ellis marie antoinette , starring norma shearer and tyrone power men with wings , directed by william wellman , starring fred macmurray and ray milland merrily we live , starring brian aherne , constance bennett , billie burke , patsy kelly mollenard , directed by robert siodmak – ( france ) mother carey 's chickens , starring anne shirley the mountain calls ( der berg ruft ) – ( germany ) mr . moto 's gamble , starring peter lorre and keye luke mr . wong , detective , starring boris karloff my bill , starring kay francis , dickie moore . o . of human hearts , starring walter huston , james stewart , beulah bondi old bones of the river , starring will hay , moore marriott , graham moffatt – ( gb ) olympia , a documentary by leni riefenstahl – ( germany ) out west with the hardys , starring lewis stone , mickey rooney , cecilia parker , fay holden . p . paradise for three , starring frank morgan , robert young , mary astor paweł i gaweł ( pawel and gawel ) – ( poland ) port of seven seas , directed by james whale , starring wallace beery and maureen o'sullivan port of shadows ( le quai des brumes ) , directed by marcel carné , starring jean gabin and michel simon – ( france ) prison break , starring barton maclane and glenda farrell professor beware , starring harold lloyd professor mamlock – ( u.s.s.r . ) pygmalion , directed by anthony asquith , starring leslie howard and wendy hiller – ( gb ) . r . radio city revels , starring jack oakie rawhide , starring lou gehrig , smith ballew , and evalyn knapp rebecca of sunnybrook farm , starring shirley temple red river range , starring john wayne room service , starring the marx brothers and lucille ball . s . the saint in new york , starring louis hayward save a little sunshine , starring patricia kirkwood and tommy trinder – ( gb ) the shopworn angel , starring james stewart and margaret sullavan sidewalks of london , starring charles laughton , vivien leigh , rex harrison – ( gb ) the sisters , starring errol flynn and bette davis sixty glorious years , starring anna neagle – ( gb ) škola základ života – ( czechoslovakia ) a slight case of murder , starring edward g . robinson suez , starring tyrone power and loretta young sweethearts , starring jeanette macdonald and nelson eddy . t . the terror of tiny town , starring billy curtis test pilot , starring clark gable and myrna loy that certain age , starring deanna durbin and melvyn douglas there goes my heart , starring fredric march , virginia bruce and patsy kelly they drive by night , starring emlyn williams and ernest thesiger – ( gb ) three comrades , starring robert taylor , margaret sullavan , franchot tone tom sawyer , detective , starring donald o'connor too hot to handle , starring clark gable and myrna loy . u-v . urlaub auf ehrenwort ( leave on parole ) – ( germany ) valley of the giants , starring wayne morris and claire trevor young fugitives , starring harry davenport vivacious lady , starring ginger rogers and james stewart volga-volga – ( u.s.s.r . ) . w . we 're going to be rich – starring gracie fields , victor mclaglen and brian donlevy – ( gb ) white banners , starring claude rains and fay bainter a woman 's face ( en kvinnas ansikte ) , starring ingrid bergman – ( sweden ) woman against woman , starring herbert marshall and virginia bruce . y-z . a yank at oxford , starring robert taylor , lionel barrymore , vivien leigh – ( gb ) you ca n't take it with you , directed by frank capra , starring james stewart , jean arthur , lionel barrymore – oscars for best picture and director young dr . kildare , starring lew ayres and lionel barrymore the young in heart , starring janet gaynor , douglas fairbanks , jr . , paulette goddard la zandunga , starring lupe vélez and arturo de córdova – ( mexico ) . serials . dick tracy returns , starring ralph byrd the fighting devil dogs , starring lee powell and herman brix flaming frontiers flash gordon 's trip to mars , starring buster crabbe the great adventures of wild bill hickok hawk of the wilderness , starring herman brix the lone ranger the secret of treasure island the spider 's web red barry . comedy film series . harold lloyd ( 1913–1938 ) charlie chaplin ( 1914–1940 ) lupino lane ( 1915–1939 ) buster keaton ( 1917–1944 ) laurel and hardy ( 1921–1945 ) our gang ( 1922–1944 ) marx brothers ( 1929–1937 ) the three stooges ( 1933–1962 ) . animated short film series . krazy kat ( 1925–1940 ) oswald the lucky rabbit ( 1927-1938 ) mickey mouse ( 1928–1953 ) silly symphonies the moth and the flame wynken , blynken and nod farmyard symphony merbabies mother goose goes hollywood screen songs ( 1929-1938 ) looney tunes ( 1930–1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930–1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931–1969 ) scrappy ( 1931–1941 ) betty boop ( 1932–1939 ) popeye ( 1933–1957 ) happy harmonies ( 1934-1938 ) color rhapsodies ( 1934–1949 ) donald duck ( 1937–1956 ) walter lantz cartunes ( also known as new universal cartoons or cartune comedies ) ( 1938–1942 ) the captain and the kids ( 1938–1939 ) . births . january 1 – frank langella , american actor january 6 – larisa shepitko , soviet director ( died 1979 ) january 12 – lewis fiander , australian actor ( died 2016 ) january 14 – jack jones , american singer , actor january 26 – henry jaglom , english-born director and playwright january 29 – aminah cendrakasih , indonesian actress february 12 – oliver reed , english actor ( died 1999 ) february 17 – yvonne romain , english actress february 19 – rené muñoz , cuban-born actor , mexico-based screenwriter ( died 2000 ) february 23 jiří menzel , czech director ( died 2020 ) diane varsi , american actress ( died 1992 ) february 24 – james farentino , american actor ( died 2012 ) march 4 – paula prentiss , american actress march 5 – fred williamson , american actor march 18 – shashi kapoor , indian actor ( died 2017 ) march 25 – hoyt axton , american country music singer-songwriter , actor ( died 1999 ) april 15 – claudia cardinale , italian actress may 12 luana anders , american actress ( died 1996 ) millie perkins , american actress may 22 – richard benjamin , american actor , director may 24 - tommy chong , canadian-american actor , writer , director , musician , cannabis rights activist and comedian . june 12 – tom oliver , australian actor june 16 – michael culver , english actor june 18 – michael sheard , scottish actor ( died 2005 ) june 21 – celia rodriguez , filipina actress june 25 – giampiero littera , italian actor july 6 – luana patten , american actress ( died 1996 ) july 8 – andrey myagkov , soviet/russian actor ( died 2021 ) july 9 – brian dennehy , american actor ( died 2020 ) july 11 – jiří krampol , czech actor july 18 – paul verhoeven , dutch director july 20 diana rigg , english actress ( died 2020 ) natalie wood , american actress ( died 1981 ) july 23 – ronny cox , american actor , singer-songwriter august 6 – paul bartel , american actor , writer and director ( died 2000 ) august 8 – connie stevens , american actress , singer august 26 – susan harrison , american actress august 29 – elliott gould , american actor september 2 clarence felder , american actor giuliano gemma , italian actor ( died 2013 ) mary jo catlett , american actress september 8 – philip l . clarke , american voice actor ( died 2013 ) september 28 – ben e . king , american soul singer ( died 2015 ) october 1 tunç başaran , turkish screenwriter , film director , film producer and actor ( died 2019 ) stella stevens , american actress october 10 – steve gordon , american filmmaker ( died 1982 ) october 22 – christopher lloyd , american actor november 13 – jean seberg , american actress ( died 1979 ) december 12 – connie francis , american singer , actress december 16 – liv ullmann , norwegian actress december 29 – jon voight , american actor . deaths . january 20 – émile cohl , 81 , french film pioneer january 21 – georges méliès , 76 , french film pioneer , the impossible voyage , a trip to the moon , the merry frolics of satan , the conquest of the pole january 26 – matthew betz , 56 , american actor , the wedding march , the patent leather kid , the big house , the hurricane express august 4 – pearl white , 49 , american silent film star , the perils of pauline , the exploits of elaine august 6 – warner oland , 58 , swedish-born actor , the jazz singer , shanghai express , charlie chan in london , charlie chan at the opera september 19 – pauline frederick , 55 , american stage & film actress , thank you , mr . moto , smouldering fires , this modern age , devil 's island october 1 – conway tearle , 60 , american stage & film actor , the hurricane express , romeo and juliet , stella maris , the lost zeppelin december 25 – harry myers , 56 , american film actor and director , city lights , baby december 28 – florence lawrence , 48 , canadian actress , hollywood 's first '' star '' , lady helen 's escapade , the taming of the shrew , the mended lute , betrayed by a handprint . debuts . eddie albert – brother rat peter finch – dad and dave come to town john garfield – swingtime in the movies william holden – prison farm lena horne – the duke is tops glynis johns – south riding june lockhart – a christmas carol maureen o'hara – kicking the moon around vincent price – service de luxe michael redgrave – the lady vanishes