Manchester Ship Canal

manchester ship canal railway . during construction , a year after the death of walker , the directors of the canal company and walker 's trustees came to an agreement for the canal company to take ownership of the construction assets . these included the more than of temporary rail track , 180 & nbsp ; locomotives and more than 6,000 trucks and wagons . these formed the basis of the manchester ship canal railway , which became the largest private railway in the united kingdom . the construction railway followed the route of the former river irwell . to bring in construction materials , the construction railway had a connection to the cheshire lines committee east of irlam railway station . every month this allowed more than 10,000 tons of coal and 8,000 tons of cement to be delivered to sites along the canal excavation . all existing railway companies with lines along the route had been given notice that their lines had to either be abandoned by a given date or raised to give a minimum of clearance with all deviation construction costs to be paid by the msc . the clc glazebrook to woodley mainline passed over the river mersey at cadishead and so they decided to build a deviation . construction of the cadishead viaduct began in 1892 , approached via earth banks , with two brick arches accessing a multi-lattice iron girder centre span of in length . it opened to freight on 27 february 1893 and to passenger traffic on 29 may 1893 . following the withdrawal of passenger services in 1964 , the reshaping of british railways by dr richard beeching , 1963 . the line became freight only . when expensive repairs to the viaduct were needed in the early 1980s british rail opted to close it , together with the line to glazebrook . at the end of construction , the canal company left in place the original construction railway route , and eventually developed track along of the canal 's length , mainly to its north bank . built and operated mainly as a single-track line , the busiest section from weaste junction through barton and irlam , to partington was all double-tracked . the railway 's access to trafford park was over the double-tracked detroit swing bridge , which after closure of the msc railway in 1988 was floated down the canal to be placed in salford quays . manchester ship canal railway - detroit bridge , salford , heritage locations the only major deviation was to allow construction of the cws irlam soap works and the adjacent partington steel & iron co . works at partington ( both of which had their own private railways and locomotives ) , with the msc railway 's deviation route pushed south to run alongside the canal 's north bank and under the irlam viaduct . the canal company also developed large complexes of sidings along the route , built to service freight to and from the canal 's docks and nearby industrial estates , especially at : salford docks ; trafford park ; partington north coaling basin ( both sides of the canal ) ; glazebrook sidings ; and a small but busy marshalling yard east of irlam locks . unlike most other railway companies in the uk it was not nationalised in 1948 , and at its peak it had 790 employees , 75 locomotives , 2,700 wagons and more than of track . the msc railway was able to receive and despatch goods trains to and from all the uk 's mainline railway systems , using connecting junctions at three points in the terminal docks . two were to the north of the canal , operated by the lancashire and yorkshire railway and the london and north western railway . the third was to the south , operated by the cheshire lines committee ( clc ) , whereby the msc railway had taken over the old and abandoned route of the clc , giving them a monopoly on traffic to the new soap works and steel mill . the msc railway 's steam locomotives were designed to negotiate the tight curves of the sidings and industrial tracks on which they ran . originally specifying 0-4-0 wheel arrangements , later 0-6-0 locomotives - purchased to cope with increasing traffic and loads - had flangeless centre axles , whilst the coupling rods had a hinged central section that permitted several inches of lateral play . a long term user of hudswell clarke , from their steam through to diesel locomotives , like many industrial railways later motive power was often provided by the purchase of refurbished former '' big-four '' operated types , with the advantage that crew were readily available to operate them . post-wwii purchases included several war-surplus hunslet 'austerity ' 0-6-0 saddle tanks ; the last steam locomotive types purchased for the msc railway . a fleet of diesel locomotives was bought between 1959 and 1966 , including 18 0-4-0 diesels from the rolls-royce-owned sentinel waggon works from 1964 to 1966 . colin girle , dh16 sentinel 0-4-0 these enabled the msc railways to complete its conversion from steam on 6 july 1966 , more than two years before british railways . however , as transshipment costs increased , and unprocessed bulk cargoes decreased in volume , the economics of road transport resulted in a gradual dwindling of traffic on the msc railway system , and hence contraction in the msc railway itself . traffic reduction was added to by the 1969 closure of the cws irlam soap works ; post nationalisation british steel corporation building their own line to glazebrook to junction with br ; and severe reductions in traffic of ici 's soda ash trains , british tar products and reduced domestic coal consumption . with the remaining engines stationed at ellesmere port and stanlow , maintenance on the line from irlam through to partington was halted in late summer 1977 , and all through traffic except engineering trains stopped on 21 december 1977 . the through-line was officially closed to all traffic in 1978 , but many of the sidings complexes remained ; the last operational section of the msc railway , at trafford park , closed on 30 april 2009 . . other features on the banks . at ellesmere port the canal is joined by the shropshire union canal , at a site now occupied by the national waterways museum . the area formerly consisted of a canal port linking the shropshire union canal to the river mersey . designed by thomas telford , it remained operational until the 1950s . it was a '' marvellously self-contained world '' with locks , docks , warehouses , a blacksmith 's forge , stables , and cottages for the workers . its island warehouse was built in 1871 to store grain . a few miles from ellesmere port , at weston , near runcorn , the ship canal also connects with the weaver navigation . crossings . significant crossings of the canal include : mersey gateway bridge m6 motorway warburton toll bridge hulme bridge ferry between irlam and flixton trafford messenger , m60 motorway barton swing aqueduct and barton road swing bridge latchford viaduct which carried the warrington and stockport railway over the canal until 1985 . since then has been closed but the viaduct including the lines remain in situ . ecology . the quality of water in the ship canal is adversely affected by several factors . the high population density of the mersey basin has , historically , placed heavy demands on sewage treatment and disposal . industrial and agricultural discharges into the irwell , medlock , and irk rivers are responsible for industrial contaminants found in the canal . matters have improved since 1990 when the national rivers authority found the area between trafford road bridge and mode wheel locks to be '' grossly polluted '' . the water was anoxic waters , which in the latter half of the 20th century often resulted in toxic sediments normally present at the bottom of the turning basin in what is now salford quays rising to the surface during the summer months , giving the impression of solid ground . previously , only roach and sticklebacks could be found in the canal 's upper levels , and then only during the colder parts of the year , but an oxygenation project implemented at salford quays from 2001 , together with the gradual reduction of industrial pollutants from the mersey 's tributaries , has encouraged the migration into the canal of fish populations from further upstream . the canal 's water quality remains low , with mercury and cadmium in particular present at '' extremely high levels '' . episodic pollution and a lack of habitat remain problems for wildlife , although in 2005 , for the first time in living memory , salmon were observed breeding in the river goyt ( a part of the mersey 's catchment ) . in 2010 the environment agency issued a report concluding that the canal '' does not pose a significant barrier to salmon movement or impact on migratory behaviours '' . despite the canal 's poor water quality there are several nature reserves along its banks . wigg island , a former brownfield site east of runcorn , contains a network of public footpaths through newly planted woodlands and meadows . wildlife includes multiple butterfly and dragonfly species , kestrels , swallows and house martins . further upstream the moore nature reserve , which is bisected by the de-watered runcorn to latchford canal , comprises lakes , woodland and meadows . the reserve is open to the public and contains a number of bird hides , from which native owls and woodpeckers may be viewed . near thelwall , woolston eyes ( a corruption of the saxon ees ) , is a site of special scientific interest . it is used as a deposit for canal dredge and is a habitat for many species of bird , including black-necked grebes , grasshopper warblers , blackcaps and common whitethroats . great crested newts and adders are present , and local flora includes orchids and broad-leaved helleborines . diving ducks are regular visitors to salford quays , where species such as pochard and tufted ducks feed on winter nights . . see also . canals of the united kingdom history of the british canal system waterways in the united kingdom