Lady of the Lake

later appearances . walter scott wrote an influential poem , the lady of the lake , in 1810 , drawing on the romance of the legend , but with an entirely different story set around loch katrine in the trossachs of scotland . scott 's material furnished subject matter for la donna del lago , an 1819 opera by gioachino rossini . franz schubert set seven songs from walter scott 's lady of the lake , including the three '' ellen songs '' ( '' ellens gesang i '' , '' ellens gesang ii '' , and '' ellens gesang iii '' ) , although schubert 's music to ellen 's third song has become far more famous in its later adaptation , known as '' ave maria '' . the full french name of the university of notre dame , founded in 1842 , is notre dame du lac . this is translated as '' our lady of the lake '' , making reference to mary , mother of jesus as the lady of the lake , evidencing fusion between arthurian legend and middle-christian history . alfred , lord tennyson adapted several stories of the lady of the lake for his 1859–1885 poetic cycle idylls of the king . he too splits her into two characters ; viviane is a deceitful villain who ensnares merlin , while the lady of the lake is a benevolent figure who raises lancelot and gives arthur his sword . some other authors choose to emphasize a single character . 20th–21st century . modern authors of arthurian fiction adapt the lady of the lake legend in various ways , often using two or more bearers of the title . versions of the lady ( or ladies ) of the lake appear in many other works of arthurian fiction , including novels , films , television series , stage musicals , comics , and games . though her identity may change , her role as a significant figure in the lives of both arthur and merlin remains consistent . some examples of such 20th and 21st century works are listed below . nineue ferch afallach , '' tennyson 's vivien '' , '' the characters of the novel '' in the various editions of the novel , including london : macdonald , 1951 , p . xvii . is a fairy enchantress in john cowper powys 's novel porius : a romance of the dark ages ( 1951 ) . in welsh mythology , modron ( '' divine mother '' ) was a daughter of afallach ; she was derived from the gaulish goddess matrona and may have been the prototype of morgan le fay . the novel ends with the protagonist porius saving the wizard myrddin ( merlin figure ) from his entombment by nineue on the summit of snowdon , wales ' highest mountain . nimue appears in t . h . white 's 1958 novel the once and future king as a water nymph and merlin 's enchantress . true to the legend she traps merlin in a cave , but merlin does not convey it as negative , and even refers to it as a holiday . the 1960 musical camelot includes the character nimue who has a song called '' follow me '' performed in act i . in the play ( and the later camelot ( film ) ) , arthur '' tells guinevere the story of how he pulled the sword from the stone and became king , and she finally agrees to marry him . the wizard merlyn is amused by this development , but his joy turns to sorrow as his memories of the future begin to fade . he realizes that nimue , a beautiful water nymph , has come to draw him into her cave for an eternal sleep . he begs nimue for answers , as he has forgotten if he has warned arthur about two important individuals , lancelot and mordred . his memories fade permanently , though , and he is led away . '' the lady of the lake is satirized in the 1975 film monty python and the holy grail , in which late 20th century notions are inserted into a mythic tale for comic effect . a peasant named dennis says , '' strange women lying in ponds distributing swords is no basis for a system of government . supreme executive power derives from a mandate from the masses , not from some farcical aquatic ceremony . '' in the dc comics universe , vivienne is the lady of the lake while nimue is madame xanadu ( introduced in 1978 ) , her youngest sister , and their middle sister is morgaine le fey ( given name morgana ) ; their surname is inwudu . the lady of the lake has appeared in hellblazer , aquaman , and her sister 's own series . in the 1983 dc comics series camelot 3000 , an unrelated lady of the lake is referred to as nyneve , depicted as a woman with a beautiful body wearing a golden sun-shaped mask . morgan le fay sends her to confront the heroes of camelot . when nyneve removes the mask , merlin , upon seeing her face , is unable to resist her and departs , thus removing him from morgan 's path . later , when he escapes her control , it is revealed that her only facial feature is a gigantic mouth with a long serpentine tongue , which merlin turns against her . mary stewart 's 1979 novel the last enchantment radically recasts the story of merlin and niniane , completely removing the aspect of malicious seduction and treachery dominant in the traditional version . in this depiction merlin takes niniane on as an apprentice , with her at first disguised as a boy , and willingly teaches her his magic . when her identity as a woman is discovered , they fall in love despite their age difference . as he gives her the secrets of his psychic abilities and how to control them , he seems to lose them himself & ndash ; which merlin does not mind . in a depleted , weakened condition , he takes ill and falls into a coma , and is believed to be dead . niniane has him buried within his '' crystal cave '' , where he awakes some time later . he escapes after a few weeks , through a combination of chance luck and ingenious planning , and travels incognito to let arthur know he is still alive . niniane takes merlin 's place as the court wizard-seer , while merlin retires to the crystal cave and lives a quiet and happy life as a hermit . in john boorman 1981 film excalibur , an uncredited actress plays the lady of lake , twice holding up the fabled sword , once for merlin ( played by nicol williamson ) to give to uther pendragon , and once to return to arthur . separately , the morgana la fay character ( played by helen mirren ) takes on other parts of the traditional lady of the lake story , learning the occult arts from merlin and ultimately trapping him with his own powerful '' charm of making '' . marion zimmer bradley 's 1983 novel the mists of avalon takes the tradition of multiple ladies one step further . in bradley 's works , both the 'lady of the lake ' and the 'merlin ' are names of offices in the pagan hierarchy . the lady of the lake is the title of the ruling priestess of avalon , and the merlin is a druid who has pledged his life to the protection of britain . various characters assume the title of the lady , including viviane , niniane , morgaine ( morgan le fay ) , and nimue , a sympathetic and tragic young priestess who falls in love with the merlin but is duty bound to seduce and lure him to his death & ndash ; following which she drowns herself . even more ladies of the lake appear in bradley 's extended avalon prequels . in the pendragon cycle , stephen lawhead takes up the figure of the lady of the lake under a different name : charis , daughter of the king of avalon . married to the breton prince taliesin , she gives birth to merlin . after taliesin 's death , charis takes care of merlin at lake logres , hence her name '' lady of the lake '' . in bernard cornwell 's 1990s novel series the warlord chronicles , nimue is an irish orphan adopted by the british druid merlin . she becomes merlin 's most adept priestess and lover , but she eventually turns against him and imprisons him , torturing him to reveal the last of his magical secrets in her desperate obsession to bring back the old gods of britain at any price . she is a prominent character in the books , being a childhood friend of , a major love interest for , and finally an adversary to the series ' main protagonist , arthur 's warrior derfel cadarn . eventually , she brings merlin to total madness before ultimately sacrificing him to their lost gods , whose return she believes would rid the island of the saxons and the christians alike . as nimue believes the key to her goal is to sacrifice king arthur 's family using excalibur , derfel 's final act of casting the sword away is not to return it to her but to hide it from her forever . in the 1995–1996 animated series princess gwenevere and the jewel riders , the name of the first season 's antagonist lady kale , here too a former student of merlin who magically imprisons him , was created as an anagram of lady of the lake . however , a good lady of the lake herself briefly appears in the eponymous episode '' lady of the lake '' to give the heroine guinevere the staff of avalon with enough magic power to finally defeat lady kale and free merlin , who then uses the same magic against the evil queen morgana . in the 1998 miniseries merlin , the characters of the lady of the lake ( miranda richardson ) and nimue ( isabella rossellini ) are separated , with the former being a goddess-like fae who is the sister of queen mab ( also richardson in a dual role ) , and the latter being a noblewoman who is the object of merlin 's affections . in the 2006 pseudo-sequel merlin 's apprentice , richardson reprises her role as the lady of the lake , though she portrays a much different characterization . in this depiction , the lady is the main antagonist who serves as an enchanter to an army of barbarians who seek to destroy camelot . the lady herself wishes to punish camelot for the way they poisoned her streams and drained her lakes . this miniseries also depicts merlin 's sleep in the cave ; as he slept , the lady used her magic to conceive a son with merlin ( sam neill also reprising his role from the 1998 miniseries ) , and then enchanted him to sleep for 50 years . in french television series kaamelott , the lady of the lake , played by audrey fleurot , is an angel sent to help king arthur progress in the quest for the grail . the bbc 2008–2012 drama series merlin also features two characters based on the lady of the lake . nimueh serves as the primary antagonist of the series 1 . the character has no connection to merlin beyond his opposition to her plans , and her only connection to a lake is her use of a location called the isle of the blessed . the ninth episode of the series 2 is titled '' the lady of the lake '' , wherein a sorceress named freya dies and vows to repay merlin for his kindness to her . in the series 3 finale , freya , now a water spirit , gives excalibur to merlin so that he can give it to prince arthur pendragon . in the series 5 finale , which features the battle of camlann , a despondent merlin casts the sword back into lake avalon , where a hand ( presumably freya 's ) catches it . nimue appears as one of the primary antagonists in the hellboy comic book series , where she was introduced in 2008 . she is driven mad after the powers she acquired from merlin give her knowledge of the ogdru jahad , prompting the witches of britain to dismember her and seal her away underground . resurrected in the present day , she assumes the mantle of the irish triple war goddess the morrígan and assembles an army of legendary and folkloric beings to eradicate mankind . she is portrayed by milla jovovich in the 2019 film adaptation hellboy . the 2010s anime series seven deadly sins features vivian as a supporting antagonist , taking her name without her position as lady of the lake . vivian is a minion of holy knight grand master hendrickson , and works toward his goals of unleashing the demon clan , mostly due to her obsession with gilthunder , a handsome young holy knight . in the first season , vivian is eventually defeated by her former master , a female merlin who is one of the titular seven deadly sins , after a surprise appearance by king arthur . in the second season , merlin berates vivian for her stupidity , explaining that she and hendrickson really did not know anything about how horrible demons are , and puts a geas on her so she will leave gilthunder alone . nimue is featured in the abc 2010s fantasy series once upon a time . she appears as the main antagonist in the first half of season 5 , portrayed by caroline ford . while fleeing from vortigan , who sacked and burned her village , she meets merlin and they fall in love . with merlin being immortal , nimue drinks from the holy grail so they can be together forever . afterward , she kills vortigan , which darkens her magic and turns her into the very first dark one . nimue breaks excalibur and merlin uses one of the pieces to make the dark one dagger in order to control her . at some point , nimue is killed and her power is taken . however , she manages to live on in all of the following dark ones , appearing to them as a vision . she forms an alliance with captain hook , manipulating him into casting the dark curse and reviving her and the dark ones . she then leads a dark one invasion in storybrooke , which ultimately leads to her demise at the hands of hook , who betrays her to redeem himself . the lady of the lake is referenced several times as lancelot 's mother , but she never appears ; the episode titled '' the lady of the lake '' does not feature her and instead refers to prince charming 's mother . in bbc radio 4 's 2013 afternoon drama pilgrim , the antagonist birdie ( or mrs pleasance ) is gradually revealed to be responsible for trapping merlin ( '' the drowned mage '' ) beneath a lake . her story draws on that of nimue . the 2017 film king arthur : legend of the sword features the lady of the lake played by jacqui ainsley in a few scenes . she first appears in the flashbacks of the film as bedivere tells arthur how she bound excalibur to the pendragon bloodline after merlin used it to destroy the mage tower . she reappears in a later scene when she catches the sword underwater after arthur throws it into the lake in shame at his failures ; she pulls him underwater , shows him a vision of what his uncle vortigan would do to england if he did not accept the sword , and tells him that only he can prevent it . she then tells him that vortigan must be met where sword meets tower and advises him to trust the mage before returning the sword to arthur . in the novel and netflix series cursed , a re-imagining of the arthurian legend set as a prequel with katherine langford portraying nimue in the adaptation . before becoming the lady of the lake , nimue is a young woman coming into her fey abilities , but whilst her home was ravaged by the christian fanatics called the red paladins she is sent on a mission by her dying mother to deliver excalibur to merlin . the lady 's lake . a number of locations are traditionally associated with the lady of the lake 's abode . such places within great britain include the lakes dozmary pool and the loe in cornwall , the lakes llyn llydaw and llyn ogwen in snowdonia , river brue 's area of pomparles bridge in somerset , and the lake loch arthur in scotland . in france , viviane is also connected with brittany 's paimpont forest , often identified as the arthurian enchanted forest of brocéliande , where her lake ( that is , the lake of diana ) is said to be located at the castle château de comper . the oldest localization of the lake is in the lancelot en prose , written around 1230 . the place where lancelot is raised is described there as to the north of trèves-cunault , on the loire , in the middle of the ( now extinct ) forest of beaufort-en-vallée ( the '' bois en val '' of the book ) .