1987 in music

specific locations . 1987 in british music 1987 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1987 in country music 1987 in heavy metal music 1987 in hip hop music 1987 in jazz . events . january–february . january 3 – aretha franklin becomes the first woman inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame . the other inductees this year consist of the coasters , eddie cochran , bo diddley , marvin gaye , bill haley , clyde mcphatter , ricky nelson , roy orbison , carl perkins , smokey robinson and jackie wilson . january 5 – elton john , after several months of voice problems , undergoes throat surgery in an australian hospital . the outcome would hinder his voice permanently and he would soon start singing in a deep register . january 16 – beastie boys become the first act to be censored by american bandstand . january 24 – steve hurley 's innovative '' jack your body '' becomes the first house music record to top the uk singles chart . february 6 – sonny bono announces his candidacy for mayor of palm springs , california . february 14 bon jovi 's '' livin ' on a prayer '' reaches 1 in the usa . it would be 1987 's biggest hit song worldwide . los angeles radio station kmet signs off after nineteen years on the air . the station had been a pioneer of underground progressive rock programming . february 15 – video hits premieres on australian television . february 24 – the 29th annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by billy crystal . paul simon 's graceland wins album of the year , steve winwood 's '' higher love '' wins record of the year and dionne warwick 's cover of '' that 's what friends are for '' , featuring elton john , gladys knight and stevie wonder , wins song of the year . bruce hornsby win best new artist . february 26 – the first four beatles albums , please please me , with the beatles , a hard day 's night and beatles for sale are released on compact disc . capitol records decides to release the original uk mixes of the beatles albums , which means that the first four cds are released in mono . this marks the first time that many of these mono mixes are available in the us . march–april . march 9 u2 releases the joshua tree , an album that launches them into superstar status in the music world . the album would sell over 14 million copies worldwide in 1987 alone and would win the grammy for '' album of the year '' ( at the 1988 ceremony ) . u2 have two 1 hit songs from this album on the u.s . billboard hot 100 charts . carole king is inducted into the songwriters hall of fame in new york city . the career that would end in the klf retirement and the burning of a million pounds began in britain , as the justified ancients of mu mu release their debut single , '' all you need is love '' . march 13 bob seger and the silver bullet band receive a star on the hollywood walk of fame . in the us , bryan adams ' '' heat of the night '' becomes the first single to be commercially released on cassette . cassette singles become known as cassingles . march 27 – inspired by the beatles ' 1969 rooftop concert , u2 shoots a music video for the song '' where the streets have no name '' on a rooftop in los angeles . april 23 – carole king sues the owner of her record company , lou adler , claiming that she is owed more than 400,000 in royalties . king also asks for rights to her old recordings . may–august . may 9 – ireland 's johnny logan wins the eurovision song contest , held in brussels , belgium , with the song '' hold me now '' , making him the first artist to win the contest twice . the song tops the charts in ireland , and peaks at no . 2 in the uk . june 14 – madonna starts her who 's that girl tour in osaka , japan . june 27 – whitney houston 's second album whitney becomes the first album by a female artist to debut at 1 on the billboard 200 . july 4 kylie minogue 's recording career begins with the release of her cover version of the little eva hit the loco-motion ; the single spends seven weeks at number one in her native australia and leads to a contract with uk-based record producers stock aitken waterman . the first joint rock concert between the united states and the soviet union is held in moscow to promote peace . the doobie brothers , james taylor , santana and bonnie raitt share the bill with soviet rock group autograph . july 21 – american rock group guns n ' roses release appetite for destruction which , after initial slow sales will become the best selling debut album of all time with more than 18 million copies sold in the us alone to date august 1 dave stewart of eurythmics and siobhan fahey of bananarama are married in normandy , france . mtv europe is launched . the first video played is '' money for nothing '' by dire straits . august 3 – def leppard releases hysteria , the longest rock album ever released as a single lp or cassette . august 27 – the jello biafra criminal trial is dismissed after ending in a hung jury in los angeles court . biafra and his manager had been charged with distributing harmful material to minors due to a poster included in the dead kennedys ' frankenchrist album of a painting depicting rows of sexual organs . august 31 – michael jackson releases bad , his first studio album since thriller , the best-selling album of all time . the album would produce five number one singles in the us , a record which has not been broken . september–october . september 3 – fugazi plays their first live show ( as a three-piece ; guy picciotto had not joined the band yet ) at the wilson center in washington dc . september 6 – madonna ends her who 's that girl tour in florence , italy . september 7 – pink floyd release a momentary lapse of reason , their first album after the departure of , and legal battle with , bassist roger waters . the subsequent tour grossed around 135 million worldwide , a sum that was only equaled by the earnings of michael jackson and u2 combined . september 11 – reggae musician peter tosh is murdered during a robbery in his home . september 12 – michael jackson starts the bad world tour , supporting his bad album . september 25 – cbs launches an american version of the long-running uk television show top of the pops . it lasts one year . october 4 – electronic data gathering completely replaces the old sales diary technique in compiling the uk singles and albums chart . the publication day of new charts is moved from tuesday to sunday . october 8 – chuck berry receives a star on the hollywood walk of fame . october 19 – mötley crüe release the song '' you 're all i need '' as a single . mtv refuse to play its video because of the level of violence . october 19 – inxs releases kick . october 30 – george michael releases his first solo studio album , faith , which would win the grammy award for album of the year and sell 11 million copies in the usa alone . october 31 – the zorros headline on halloween for the last-ever show at the crystal ballroom , melbourne 's premier punk/new wave venue . the crystal ballroom has seen almost ten years of intense musical evolution . the venue has chandeliers , stained glass windows , paisley wallpaper and a tiled foyer . november–december . november 2 – dokken release back for the attack november 13 – sonny and cher reunite for a performance on late night with david letterman . november 18 – cbs records is sold to the sony in a deal worth about 2 billion ; the company was renamed sony music entertainment in 1991 . november 19 – cher returns to the music after five years of absence -time that she took to dedicate herself to the filmmaking business- with the lead single of her cher ( 1987 album ) album ( and eighteenth overall ) , i found someone , which peaked at number five in uk and number ten in us . november 24 – abc airs rolling stone magazine 's 20 years of rock ' n ' roll television special , chronicling the music and the people of the past twenty years to commemorate the 20th anniversary of rolling stone magazine . the special includes new interviews as well as vintage performance footage of many rock legends such as jimi hendrix , the doors , the rolling stones , david bowie , sex pistols , bruce springsteen and many more . december 16 – john mellencamp performs two free shows in the small town of chillicothe , ohio after one-fifth of the population signs a petition asking him to play . december 23 nikki sixx of the rock band mötley crüe suffers a heroin overdose , but is revived shortly thereafter . roger waters finalizes his departure from british progressive rock band pink floyd , after a two-year-long legal dispute over the rights to the band 's name and assets . december 31 – the sixteenth annual new year 's rockin ' eve special airs on abc , with appearances by lisa lisa & cult jam , los lobos , barry manilow , restless heart and the temptations . also in 1987 . andreas kisser replaces jairo guedes in sepultura . prince cancels the black album just before its release . it becomes officially available in 1994 . naxos records is established as a budget classical music cd label by klaus heymann , a german-born resident of hong kong . bands formed . see musical groups established in 1987 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 1987 . bands reformed . the doobie brothers lynyrd skynyrd prism . albums released . january–march . . other notable singles ( worldwide ) . '' ¿a quién le importa ? '' – alaska y dinarama ( spain ) '' bring him back home '' – hugh masekela ( south africa ) '' beds are burning '' – midnight oil ( australia ) '' hey , matthew '' – karel fialka ( india ) '' in the dutch mountains '' – the nits ( netherlands ) '' je ne veux pas '' – céline dion ( canada ) jeg ved en lærkerede '' – kim larsen ( denmark ) '' keine sterne in athen '' – stephan remmler ( germany ) '' the irish rover '' – the pogues & the dubliners ( ireland ) '' pour en arriver là '' – dalida ( france ) '' premier baiser '' – emmanuelle mottaz ( france ) '' the return of the juju king '' – king sunny ade ( nigeria ) . published popular music . '' last midnight '' w.m . stephen sondheim '' children will listen '' w.m . stephen sondheim '' rhythm is gon na get you '' w.m . gloria estefan & e . e . garcia '' ( i 've had ) the time of my life '' w.m . franke previte , donald markowitz & john denicola . classical music . pascal bentoiu – symphony no . 8 ( '' imagini '' ) , op . 30 john cage – as slow as possible mario davidovsky – quartet for flute , violin , viola and violoncello joël-françois durand – lichtung philip feeney – mémoire imaginaire ( ballet ) lorenzo ferrero ostinato non parto , non resto malcolm forsyth – songs from the qu'appelle valley karel goeyvaerts – aanloop en kreet ( run and cry ) , for symphony orchestra and chorus francisco llácer pla – ricercare concertante nicholas maw – odyssey henri pousseur – traverser la forêt ahmed adnan saygun – cello concerto byambasuren sharav – symphony no . 2 juan maria solare – doce variaciones 1987 ( for piano ) joan tower – fanfare for the uncommon woman no . 1 . opera . john adams – nixon in china friedrich cerha – der rattenfänger ( the pied piper ) michael nyman – facing goya judith weir – a night at the chinese opera , 8 july , everyman theatre , cheltenham , england . jazz . musical theater . abyssinia , with music by ted kociolek and lyrics by james racheff – new york production at the csc repertory theater up on the roof by simon moore and jane prowse—portsmouth , uk production roza , with music by gilbert bécaud and lyrics and book by julian more based on romain gary 's novel la vie devant soi – broadway production opened at the royale theatre and closed after only 10 days anything goes – broadway revival bless the bride – west end revival cabaret ( kander and ebb ) – broadway revival dreamgirls – broadway revival into the woods – broadway production opened at the martin beck theatre and ran for 765 performances les misérables – broadway production opened at the broadway theatre and ran for a total of 6680 performances , the second-longest run of any broadway musical after cats oil city symphony – off-broadway production ran for 626 performances stardust musical by mitchell parish opens at biltmore theater nyc for 102 performances starlight express ( andrew lloyd webber and richard stilgoe ) – broadway production opened at the gershwin theatre and ran for 761 performances . musical films . aria dirty dancing hail ! hail ! rock ' n ' roll hearts of fire la bamba mr . india rock ' n ' roll nightmare sign o ' the times testimony . births . january 2 – syesha mercado , american singer and actress january 7 – sirusho , armenian singer january 9 – paolo nutini , british singer january 12 sunday ( jin bo-ra ) , korean pop singer ( tszx the grace ) naya rivera , american actress and singer ( d . 2020 ) january 16 – jake epstein , canadian actor and singer january 18 – stefan filipović , montenegrin pop singer january 22 – angel olsen , american folk and indie rock singer january 27 – katy rose , american singer , songwriter , producer , musician and actress ashley grace , american singer-songwriter ( ha ash ) january 31 – marcus mumford , british singer , songwriter , musician and producer february 1 – heather morris , american actress , dancer , singer and model february 2 heather bright , american pop singer , songwriter , dj and record producer . victoria song , chinese pop singer ( f ( x ) ) february 3 – elvana gjata , albanian singer february 5 – darren criss , american actor , singer and songwriter february 7 kerli , estonian singer and songwriter monika brodka , polish singer february 10 choi si won , korean actor and pop singer poli genova , bulgarian singer and tv presenter february 12 – o'ryan ( browner ) , american r & b singer february 17 – lee bo-ram , k-pop singer ( seeya ) february 23 & ndash ; ab-soul , american rapper ( black hippy ) february 24 – kim kyu-jong , korean pop singer ( ss501 ) february 25 – eva avila , canadian singer-songwriter march 1 – kesha , american singer-songwriter , author , activist , musician march 4 – aja volkman , american singer , songwriter , and musician , march 9 – bow wow , american hip-hop artist , actor march 10 – emeli sandé , scottish singer and songwriter mod sun , american rapper march 20 – jonas rivanno , indonesian actor , model and singer march 26 – yui , japanese pop singer march 27 – polina gagarina , russian singer , songwriter , actress , and model march 31 – jeff montalvo ( seven lions ) , american electronic music producer april 3 – park jung-min , korean pop singer ( ss501 ) rachel bloom , american actress , comedian , singer , writer , producer , songwriter , and mental health activist april 9 jesse mccartney , american singer , songwriter , musician , voice actor and actor jazmine sullivan , american singer april 10 – hayley westenra , new zealand soprano singer april 11 lights ( musician ) , canadian singer and songwriter joss stone , english soul singer-songwriter april 12 – brendon urie , american vocalist and musician april 15 – iyaz , british virgin islands singer april 17 – jacqueline macinnes wood , canadian actress , disc jockey , singer and television host april 18 – samantha jade , australian singer and actress april 20 − anna rossinelli , swiss singer-songwriter april 21 − anastasia prikhodko , ukrainian folk rock and traditional pop singer april 23 – laura mvula , british recording artist , songwriter and pianist . april 30 – nikki webster , australian pop singer/businesswoman/actress may 2 – nana kitade , japanese singer may 4 – anjeza shahini , albanian singer may 7 – asami konno , japanese singer may 13 hunter parrish , american actor and singer candice king , american actress and singer charlotte wessels , dutch singer-songwriter ( delain , phantasma , kamelot ) may 15 ammo ( musician ) , american record producer and songwriter jennylyn mercado , filipina actress , singer , television personality may 16 – can bonomo , turkish-jewish singer may 18 – luisana lopilato , an argentine actress , singer and model ( michael buble ) may 21 – hit-boy , american record producer , rapper , singer and songwriter may 24 – jimena barón , argentine actress and singer may 29 – ak'sent , american rapper june 2 – matthew koma , american songwriter-singer , dj , record producer ( married to hilary duff ) june 8 – ty segall , american multi-instrumentalist , singer-songwriter and record producer june 16 – diana degarmo , american idol contestant , singer ali stroker , american musician , singer , actress and advocate june 17 – kendrick lamar , american rapper and songwriter ( black hippy ) june 19 – miho fukuhara , japanese singer and actress ( sweetbox ) june 21 khatia buniatishvili , georgian pianist kim ryeowook , korean pop singer ( super junior ) june 23 – caitlin rose , american country singer july 1 – yoga lin , taiwanese pop singer , one million star , season 1 winner july 4 – jah prayzah , zimbabwean musician july 6 – kate nash , english pop singer-songwriter and musician july 9 – rebecca sugar , american animator , director , screenwriter , producer , and songwriter july 11 – shigeaki kato , japanese singer and actor ( news and k.k.kity ) july 13 – eva rivas , russian-armenian singer july 14 – drew fortier , american musician , songwriter , filmmaker , and actor dan reynolds , american singer-songwriter , activist ( imagine dragons and egyptian ) peter vives , spanish actor , singer and classical pianist july 17 chloe ( american singer ) , american singer-songwriter jeremih , american recording artist and producer july 19 – nicola benedetti , scottish violinist july 23 – felipe dylon , brazilian singer july 25 alan dawa dolma ( better known as '' alan '' ) , chinese singer jax jones , english singer , producer and dj gor sujyan , armenian rock singer , lead singer of dorians july 26 – evelina sašenko-statulevičienė , lithuanian jazz singer of polish-ukrainian descent july 30 – elise estrada , canadian singer august 2 nayer , american pop singer jessie daniels , american actress , songwriter , and musician august 3 – kim hyung-jun , south korean singer and dj august 6 – aditya narayan , bollywood actor and singer august 21 – kim kibum , korean actor and pop singer september 1 – dann hume , new zealand musician , music producer , mix engineer and songwriter ( amy shark ) sevdaliza , irish dutch singer-songwriter and record producer september 7 – evan rachel wood , american singer and actress september 16 – sarah hay , american ballerina and actress september 23 – skylar astin , american actor and singer september 26 – rosie munter , swedish vocalist and dancer september 28 hilary duff , american singer , songwriter , author and actress ( married to matthew koma , sister of haylie duff , sutton foster ) chloë hanslip , english violinist september 29 – gryffin , american musician , dj , record producer . october 3 – starley ( singer ) , australian singer and songwriter october 7 – lauren mayberry , scottish singer , songwriter , writer and journalist ( chvrches ) october 17 – stephanie ( kim bo-kyung ) , american-born korean pop singer ( tszx the grace ) october 18 – zac efron , american actor , dancer , singer , musical star october 28 – frank ocean , american singer-songwriter october 29 – tove lo , swedish singer-songwriter , dancer and activist november 3 – courtney barnett , australian singer/songwriter/musician november 4 tim douwsma , dutch singer t.o.p , korean rapper november 5 – kevin jonas , american musician ( jonas brothers ) november 10 – charles hamilton , american rapper and producer november 24 – sermstyle , english singer-songwriter , remixer , record producer and dj november 29 – cashmere cat , norwegian dj , record producer , musician and turntablist ( ariana grande ) november 30 – dougie poynter , english bass guitarist ( mcfly ) december 1 – vance joy , australian musician december 2 – teairra mari , american r & b singer-songwriter , dancer , model and actress december 7 – aaron carter , american pop singer december 18 – ayaka , japanese pop singer december 20 – barrie-james o'neill , scottish singer-songwriter december 27 – yui okada , japanese pop singer . deaths . january 6 – jaidev , bollywood composer , 67 january 10 – marion hutton , singer and actress , 67 january 15 – ray bolger , wizard of oz actor , 83 ( cancer ) january 30 – harold loeffelmacher , musician and bandleader ( six fat dutchmen ) , 81 february 2 spike hughes , jazz double bass player , composer and journalist , 78 alfred lion , record executive and co-founder of blue note records , 78 february 4 – liberace , us pianist , 67 ( aids-related ) february 8 – tony destra , glam metal drummer , 32 ( car accident ) february 18 – dmitri kabalevsky , composer february 23 – zeca afonso , folk musician february 24 – jim connors , radio dj , 46 ( car crash ) march 3 – danny kaye , actor , singer , dancer and comedian , 76 march 6 – eddie durham , jazz musician , 80 march 7 – evelyn dove , singer , 85 march 15 – don gant , singer/songwriter , record producer , 44 ( complications following boating accident ) march 18 – elizabeth poston , composer , 82 march 20 – rita streich , coloratura soprano , 66 march 21 dean paul martin , singer and actor , 35 ( plane crash ) robert preston , actor and singer , 68 march 28 – maria von trapp , subject of the sound of music , 82 march 29 – felix prohaska , conductor april 2 – buddy rich , jazz drummer , 69 ( brain tumor ) april 7 – carlton barrett , reggae drummer ( the wailers ) , 36 ( murdered ) april 14 – karl höller , composer , 79 may 2 – larry clinton , us bandleader and songwriter , 75 may 3 – dalida , singer , actress and miss egypt , 54 ( suicide ) dalida 's official website , biography , retrieved december 29 , 2009 may 4 – paul butterfield , blues vocalist and harmonica player , 44 ( drug overdose ) may 5 – allen jones , record producer ( heart attack ) bar-kays : bio . accessed 22 july 2014 may 13 signe amundsen , operatic soprano , 87 ismael rivera , salsa composer and singer , 55 ( heart attack ) may 14 – rita hayworth , dancer and film star , 68 may 24 – hermione gingold , actress and singer may 26 – robert wilkins , blues guitarist and singer , 91 may 29 – phyllis tate , avant-garde composer , 76 june 3 – andrés segovia , guitar virtuoso , 94 june 18 – kid thomas valentine , jazz trumpeter & bandleader , 91 june 21 – abram chasins , pianist and composer , 84 june 22 fred astaire , dancer , actor and singer , 88 frank rehak , jazz trombonist june 25 – boudleaux bryant , hall of fame songwriter , 67 june 26 henk badings , composer , 80 gábor rejtő , cellist , 70 july 1 – snakefinger , guitarist , 38 ( heart attack ) july 7 tibor frešo , composer , 69 germaine thyssens-valentin , pianist , 85 july 10 – john hammond , producer and musician , 76 july 15 – pete king , drummer ( after the fire , bap ) , 28 ( testicular cancer ) july 25 – alex sadkin , saxophonist and record producer , 37 or 38 ( motor accident ) july 26 – joe liggins , r & b , jazz and blues pianist , 72 august 2 – david martin , bassist ( sam the sham ) , 50 ( heart attack ) august 12 – sally long , ziegfeld follies star , 85 august 14 – vincent persichetti , composer , 72 august 27 bruce holder , violinist , conductor and composer , 82 scott la rock , hip-hop dj and producer , 25 ( shot ) september 3 – morton feldman , composer , 51 ( pancreatic cancer ) september 11 – peter tosh , reggae musician , 42 ( shot and killed in a house invasion/robbery ) september 21 – jaco pastorius , jazz bassist , 35 ( brain damage resulting from fight ) september 23 – bob fosse , dancer , choreographer and director of musicals , 60 ( heart attack ) september 29 – sebastian peschko , pianist , 77 october 3 – hans gál , composer , 97 october 13 – kishore kumar , singer , actor , filmmaker , writer , musician and composer , 58 october 14 – rodolfo halffter , composer , 86 october 19 – jacqueline du pré , english cellist , 42 ( multiple sclerosis ) october 28 – woody herman , us jazz clarinetist and bandleader , 74 november 12 – cornelis vreeswijk , swedish singer-songwriter , 50 ( liver cancer ) november 16 – zubir said , composer , 80 november 22 – verna arvey , librettist and pianist november 23 – joseph beer , composer , 79 december 5 – pappy daily , country music entrepreneur and record producer , 85 december 8 – annelies kupper , operatic soprano , 81 december 10 – jascha heifetz , violinist december 12 – clifton chenier , zydeco singer and accordionist , 62 december 18 – conny plank , record producer , 47 december 21 – john spence , ska musician , 18 ( suicide ) december 22 – luca prodan , rock musician , 34 ( cirrhosis of the liver ) unknown – emani sankara sastry , veena player and composer , 65 . awards . the following artists are inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame : the coasters , eddie cochran , bo diddley , aretha franklin , marvin gaye , bill haley , b . b . king , clyde mcphatter , ricky nelson , roy orbison , carl perkins , smokey robinson , big joe turner , muddy waters , and jackie wilson . grammy awards . grammy awards of 1987 . country music association awards . gary p . blueyes walker – cma air personality of the year / kykx . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1987 . glenn gould prize . r . murray schafer ( laureate ) . charts . list of hot 100 number-one singles of 1987 ( u.s . ) . see also . record labels established in 1987 . references .