1949 in literature

events . january 11 – bertolt brecht 's play mother courage and her children ( mutter courage und ihre kinder ) , 1939 , is first performed in germany , at the deutsches theater in east berlin , with his wife helene weigel in the title role and staged with his verfremdungseffekt ( '' distancing effect '' ) . this marks the origin of the berliner ensemble . january 31 – the radio series book at bedtime begins on the u.k . bbc light programme with a reading of john buchan 's novel the three hostages . february 10 – arthur miller 's tragedy death of a salesman opens at the morosco theatre on broadway in new york city with lee j . cobb in the title rôle of willy loman . it will run for 742 performances . march – poet pablo neruda flees chile over the lilpela pass through the andes to argentina on horseback carrying a manuscript of his canto general . april 14 roy campbell punches stephen spender on the nose at a poetry reading in london . n'ko alphabet devised by solomana kante as a writing system and literary language for the manding languages of west africa . may – welsh poet dylan thomas and his wife caitlin settle at the boat house , laugharne , in south wales . june 8 – george orwell 's dystopian novel nineteen eighty-four is published in london by secker & warburg . june – oxford university dramatic society production of shakespeare 's the tempest beside worcester college lake , directed by nevill coghill . summer the first cheltenham literature festival is held in england , so making it the longest-running event of its kind in the world . street & smith ceases to publish its pulp magazines in the united states . october 5 – american writer helene hanff writes her first letter from new york city to the london antiquarian book dealers marks & co , a correspondence eventually collected as 84 , charing cross road . october 13 – george orwell marries sonia brownell while confined in university college hospital , london , where he will die three months later . unknown dates arthur c . clarke becomes an assistant editor of science abstracts . radclyffe hall 's lesbian novel the well of loneliness , convicted of obscenity in the united kingdom on first publication in 1928 , is republished in the uk posthumously by falcon press , with no legal challenge made against it . jean-paul sartre completes his les chemins de la liberté ( the roads to freedom ) trilogy . the théâtre du rideau vert is founded in montreal by yvette brind'amour and mercedes palominohere , as the first professional french language theatre in canada . a statue of the folk poet larin paraske is erected in helsinki . enid blyton 's children 's books – little noddy goes to toyland , the first to introduce the title character , and the secret seven , first in the eponymous series – are published in the uk . . new books . fiction . ilse aichinger – '' spiegelgeschichte '' ( mirror story , serialized short story ) nelson algren – the man with the golden arm miguel ángel asturias – men of maize ( hombres de maíz ) nigel balchin – a sort of traitors antoine blondin – l'europe buissonnière ( europe playing truant ) heinrich böll – the train was on time ( der zug war pünktlich ) jorge luis borges – the aleph ( el aleph ) , short stories paul bowles – the sheltering sky fredric brown – the screaming mimi pearl s . buck – the angry wife dorothy bussy ( anonymous ) – olivia taylor caldwell – let love come last italo calvino – the crow comes last ( ultimo viene il corvo ) , short stories victor canning – the golden salamander alejo carpentier – the kingdom of this world ( el reino de este mundo ) john dickson carr below suspicion a graveyard to let ( as carter dickson ) agatha christie – crooked house r.f . delderfield – seven men of gascony h . f . ellis – the papers of a . j . wentworth b . a . foster fitzsimmons – bright leaf winston graham – cordelia graham greene – the third man a . b . guthrie , jr . – the way west knut hamsun – on overgrown paths ( paa gjengrodde stier ) l.p . hartley – the boat john hawkes – cannibal alfred hayes – the girl on the via flaminia william heinesen – the black cauldron ( den sorte gryde ) marguerite henry – king of the wind georgette heyer – arabella hammond innes – the white south shirley jackson – the lottery and other stories alaric jacob – scenes from a bourgeois life dagmar lange – mördaren ljuger inte ensam ( the murderer is not the only liar ) marghanita laski – little boy lost h . p . lovecraft – something about cats and other pieces ana maría matute – luciérnagas robert merle – week-end at zuydcoote ( week-end à zuydcoote ) yukio mishima ( 三島 由紀夫 ) – confessions of a mask ( 仮面の告白 ) nancy mitford – love in a cold climate c . l . moore – beyond earth 's gates stratis myrivilis – η παναγιά η γοργόνα ( e panayia e yoryona , the mermaid madonna ) máirtín ó cadhain – cré na cille ( graveyard clay ) john o'hara – a rage to live george orwell – nineteen eighty-four karel poláček – there were five of us ( bylo nás pět ) samuel putnam ( translator ) – don quixote ellery queen – cat of many tails harold robbins – the dream merchants jack schaefer – shane anna seghers – the dead stay young ( die toten bleiben jung ) nevil shute – a town like alice emma smith – the far cry rex stout the second confession trouble in triplicate edward streeter – father of the bride gwyn thomas – all things betray thee arved viirlaid – tormiaasta ( the year of storms ) mika waltari – the wanderer ( mikael hakim ) jiří weil – life with a star ( život s hvězdou ) s . fowler wright – the throne of saturn ( short stories ) frank yerby – pride 's castle . children and young people . marguerite de angeli – the door in the wall enid blyton noddy goes to toyland the secret seven the rockingdown mystery ruby ferguson – jill 's gymkhana ( first in jill series of nine books ) janet and john ( first in the series of early readers ) astrid lindgren – most beloved sister ( allrakäraste syster ) ( in nils karlsson-pyssling : sagor ) clare mallory – juliet overseas ruth park – poor man 's orange willard price – amazon adventure ( first in the adventure series ) h . e . todd – bobby brewster and the winkers ' club ( first in the bobby brewster series of 24 books ) geoffrey trease – no boats on bannermere ( first in a series of five set in cumberland ) meriol trevor – the forest and the kingdom ( first in world dionysius trilogy ) . drama . ugo betti – corruzione al palazzo di giustizia ( corruption in the palace of justice , written 1944 , first performed ) maurice clavel – la terrasse de midi t . s . eliot – the cocktail party christopher fry – the lady 's not for burning jean genet – deathwatch ( haute surveillance ) sidney kingsley – detective story arthur miller – death of a salesman pablo picasso – the four little girls ( les quatre petites filles ) , first published version lynn riggs – out of dust nelson rodrigues – dorotéia . poetry . carlos de oliveira – descida aos infernos robert frost – complete poems of robert frost máirtín ó direáin – rogha dánta octavio paz – libertad bajo palabra . non-fiction . marc bloch – apologie pour l'histoire , ou , métier d'historien ( translated as the historian 's craft , 1953 ) fernand braudel – la méditerranée et le monde méditerranéen à l'époque de philippe ii ( the mediterranean and the mediterranean world in the age of philip ii ) herbert butterfield christianity and history origins of modern science joseph campbell – the hero with a thousand faces john dickson carr – the life of sir arthur conan doyle thomas b . costain – the conquering family ( also the conquerors , first book in plantagenet series ) simone de beauvoir – the second sex ( le deuxième sexe ) dion fortune ( died 1946 ) – the cosmic doctrine benjamin graham – the intelligent investor john gunther – death be not proud jean hugard and frederick braue – the royal road to card magic john maynard keynes ( died 1946 ) – two memoirs osbert lancaster – drayneflete revealed ( architectural satire ) aldo leopold – a sand county almanac margaret mead – male and female robert michels – political parties ( zür soziologie des parteiwesens in der modernen demokratie , 2nd ed . , 1925 ) audie murphy – to hell and back p . d . ouspensky – in search of the miraculous amber reeves – ethics for unbelievers finn ronne – antarctic conquest gilbert ryle – the concept of mind robert lewis taylor – w . c . fields : his follies and fortunes max weber – the methodology of the social sciences . births . january 1 olivia goldsmith , american author ( died 2004 ) radu țuculescu , romanian novelist , dramatist and theater director january 12 – haruki murakami ( 村上 春樹 ) , japanese novelist january 16 – john guy , australian-born british historian and biographer january 26 – jonathan carroll , american author of fantasy fiction january 27 – ethan mordden , american author february 4 – mark d . devlin , american memoirist ( died 2005 ) february 23 – césar aira , argentinian writer march 22 – brian hanrahan , english journalist ( died 2010 ) march 26 – patrick süskind , german novelist april 11 – dorothy allison , american novelist and campaigner april 25 – james fenton , english journalist , poet , critic and academic may 25 – jamaica kincaid , antiguan-born novelist june 5 – ken follett , english novelist june 14 – harry turtledove , american novelist july 1 – denis johnson , american poet , novelist – tree of smoke – and short story writer – '' jesus ' son '' – ( died 2017 ) . june 21 – john agard , guyanese poet july 5 – jill murphy , english children 's writer and illustrator july 15 – richard russo , american pulitzer prize-winning novelist august 3 – peter gutmann , american journalist august 25 – martin amis , english novelist and critic september – jimmy mcgovern , english screenwriter september 10 – bill o'reilly , american journalist and author september 13 – linda colley , english historian september 26 – jane smiley , american novelist october 4 – luis sepúlveda , chilean author and journalist ( died 2020 ) october 5 – peter ackroyd , english biographer , novelist and critic november 2 – lois mcmaster bujold , american author of science fiction and fantasy november 24 – erwin neutzsky-wulff , danish philosopher december 6 – élmer mendoza , mexican fiction writer december 9 – eileen myles , american poet december 22 – david gilmour , canadian novelist december 24 – alberto pérez-gómez , mexican-born architectural historian . deaths . january 21 – william price drury , english novelist , playwright and officer ( born 1861 ) february 1 – n . d . cocea , romanian novelist , critic and journalist ( born 1880 ) february 11 – axel munthe , swedish autobiographer and psychiatrist ( born 1857 ) march 2 – sarojini naidu , indian poet and politician ( born 1879 ) may 6 – maurice maeterlinck , belgian poet , playwright and nobel laureate ( born 1862 ) may 21 – klaus mann , german-born american novelist ( overdose , born 1906 ) june 10 – sigrid undset , norwegian author and nobel laureate ( born 1882 ) june 11 – oton župančič , slovene poet , translator and dramatist ( born 1878 ) june 14 – russell doubleday , american author and publisher ( born 1872 ) july 2 – elsa bernstein ( ernst rosmer ) , german dramatist ( born 1866 ) august 2 – hermann grab , bohemian german-language novelist ( born 1903 ) august 8 – e . h . young , english novelist ( born 1880 ) august 16 – margaret mitchell , american novelist ( road accident , born 1900 ) ) september 4 – herbert eulenberg , german poet and dramatist ( born 1876 ) september 6 – lucien descaves , french novelist ( born 1861 ) september 19 will cuppy , american humorist ( born 1884 ) george shiels , irish dramatist ( born 1881 ) september 21 – jorge cáceres , chilean poet and artist ( born 1923 ) october 20 – jacques copeau , french actor and dramatist ( born 1879 ) october 24 thomas rowland hughes , welsh-language novelist , dramatist and poet ( multiple sclerosis , born 1903 ) yaroslav halan , ukrainian playwright , translator , and publicist ( homicide , born 1902 ) december 7 – rex beach , american author ( born 1877 ) december 28 – hervey allen , american novelist ( heart attack , born 1889 ) unknown date – henric streitman , romanian essayist and journalist ( born 1873 ) nicolae scurtu , '' mareșalul alexandru averescu și scriitorii ( 1 ) '' , in lumea militară , issue 1/2006 , pp . & nbsp ; 57–59 . . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : agnes allen , the story of your home james tait black memorial prize for fiction : emma smith , the far cry james tait black memorial prize for biography : john connell , w . e . henley newbery medal for children 's literature : marguerite henry , king of the wind nobel prize for literature : william faulkner order of merit : bertrand russell premio nadal : jose suárez carreño , las últimas horas pulitzer prize for drama : arthur miller , death of a salesman pulitzer prize for fiction : james gould cozzens , guard of honor pulitzer prize for poetry : peter viereck , terror and decorum . references .