Mississauga

provincial electoral districts . mississauga—malton ( provincial electoral district ) mississauga—brampton south ( provincial electoral district ) mississauga east—cooksville ( provincial electoral district ) mississauga—erindale ( provincial electoral district ) mississauga south ( provincial electoral district ) mississauga—streetsville ( provincial electoral district ) . federal electoral districts . mississauga centre mississauga east—cooksville mississauga—erin mills mississauga-lakeshore mississauga—malton mississauga—streetsville . infrastructure . transportation . . rail . mississauga is on three major railway lines ( one each owned by the canadian national railway , the canadian pacific railway , and metrolinx ) . toronto–sarnia via rail trains on the quebec city-windsor corridor pass through mississauga and make request stops at malton go station in the northeast of the city . other via rail services stop in the neighbouring cities of brampton , oakville , and toronto . public transit . ; commuter rail commuter rail service is provided by go transit , a division of metrolinx , on the lakeshore west , kitchener , and milton lines . all-day service is provided along the lakeshore west line , while the kitchener and milton lines serve commuters going to and from toronto 's union station during rush hours . ; bus the city 's public transit service , miway ( formerly mississauga transit ) , provides bus service along more than 90 routes across the city , and connects to commuter rail with go transit as well as with brampton transit , oakville transit , and the toronto transit commission ( ttc ) . miway operates routes for both local service ( branded as '' milocal '' ) and limited-stop service ( branded as '' miexpress '' ) . intercity buses operated by go transit stop at go train stations throughout the city and the square one bus terminal . ; mississauga transitway a 12-station busway similar to ottawa 's transitway was built parallel to highway 403 from winston churchill boulevard to renforth avenue , via the mississauga city centre transit terminal . opened in stages , the mississauga transitway was completed on 22 november 2017 with the opening of the final station : renforth . the service also connects to kipling ( ttc ) in toronto , via mixed lane traffic after renforth station . ; hurontario lrt there are plans for the construction of an lrt line along hurontario street stretching from port credit to southern brampton , and possibly to brampton 's downtown . the project went through the transit project assessment process ( tpap ) which includes environmental assessment . the line will be fully funded by the provincial government , with construction set to begin in 2018 . rapid transit lines could possibly be built on some other main thoroughfares , namely dundas street and lakeshore road , but no definite dates have been set . ; toronto subway in addition to the 19 & nbsp ; km light rail line , there are plans to extend line 5 eglinton to renforth gateway and toronto pearson international airport though eastern mississauga by 2030-2031 bringing the toronto subway into mississauga . there will be 4 stops in the city at renforth gateway connecting with the mississauga transitway and serving the airport corporate centre , convair serving the gtaa headquarters and airfield and aircraft maintenance areas , silver dart serving rental car facilities and airport hotels , and pearson airport serving the airport at a future transit hub . . highways . highway 401 ( or the macdonald-cartier freeway , connecting windsor to the quebec border ) passes through the city 's north end . the eastern part uses the collector/express lane system and feeds into highway 403 , the main freeway in the city , which runs through the city centre and erin mills areas . the queen elizabeth way , the city 's first freeway , runs through the southern half of the city . these three freeways each run east–west , with the exception of the 403 from the 401 to cawthra road , and from the 407 to qew . north of the 401 , the collector lanes of the 403 become highway 410 , which goes to brampton . part of highway 409 is within the city of mississauga , and it provides access to pearson airport . two other freeways run along or close to mississauga 's municipal borders . highway 407 runs metres from the northern city limits in a power transmission corridor and forms the city 's boundary with milton between highways 401 and 403 . highway 427 forms the toronto-mississauga boundary in the northeast , and is always within 2 & nbsp ; kilometres of the boundary further south , with the exception of the area around centennial park . air . toronto pearson international airport ( yyz ) , operated by the greater toronto airports authority in the northeastern part of the city , is the largest and busiest airport in canada . in 2015 , it handled 41,036,847 passengers and 443,958 aircraft movements . it is a major north american global gateway , handling more international passengers than any airport in north america other than john f . kennedy international airport . pearson is the main hub for air canada , and a hub for passenger airline westjet and cargo airline fedex express . it is served by over 75 airlines , having over 180 destinations . . bicycle . in 2010 , the city of mississauga approved a cycling master plan outlining a strategy to develop over of on and off-road cycling routes in the city over the next 20 years . over 1,000 mississauga citizens and stakeholders contributed their thoughts and ideas to help develop this plan . the plan focuses on fostering cycling as a way of life in the city , building an integrated network of cycling routes and aims to adopt a safety first approach to cycling . . emergency services . peel regional police provide policing within the city of mississauga and airport . in addition , the ontario provincial police have a port credit detachment in the city for patrolling provincial highways . mississauga fire and emergency services provide fire fighting services and peel regional paramedic services provides emergency medical services . toronto pearson also has its own fire department with two halls that service calls within the airport grounds . healthcare . the city 's two main hospitals—credit valley hospital and mississauga hospital—were amalgamated into the trillium health partners hospital group in december 2011 . the health system and the administration for students in mississauga was the property of the peel district school board health centre and the health support for citizens in mississauga was the property of peel health centre . the eastern part of mississauga was the property of pearson health ( greater toronto area health department ) . . library . the mississauga library system is a municipally owned network of 18 libraries . education . mississauga is the home to the university of toronto mississauga , one of three campuses of the university of toronto . utm has an enrollment of approximately 13,200 students . it is growing at a rate of about 1,000 students per year since 2002 , following a major expansion . u of t mississauga has 15 academic departments , 143 programs and 87 areas of study , and includes institutes for management and innovation , and communication , culture , information and technology . the mississauga academy of medicine is located on campus in the terrence donnelly health sciences complex . the campus employs over 2,000 full- and part-time employees ( including 800 permanent faculty and staff ) , and has more than 47,000 alumni , including astronaut roberta bondar , filmmaker richie mehta , actor zaib shaikh and writer/poet dionne brand . the 35-million innovation complex , which opened in september 2014 , houses the institute for management and innovation , a new model for business education combining management studies with key industry sectors , and the first phase of the multi-phase north building reconstruction , known as deerfield hall , opened in september 2014 . sheridan college opened a new 46 million facility in mississauga in 2011 . the school has two main concentrations : business education , and programs to accelerate the movement of new canadians into the workforce . the campus will be located on an parcel of land in city centre just north of the living arts centre . the campus accommodated 1,700 students upon completion of phase one of construction in fall 2011 . phase two of construction after 2011 increased capacity by 3,740 students to a combined total of 5,000 ; it also included construction of a 10-level municipal parking garage . mississauga is served by the peel district school board , which operates the secular anglophone public schools , the dufferin-peel catholic district school board , which operates catholic anglophone public schools , the conseil scolaire viamonde , which operates secular francophone schools , and the conseil scolaire de district catholique centre-sud , which operates catholic francophone schools . within the city , the four boards run a total of more than 150 schools . multiple schools in mississauga also offer specialized programs : french immersion schools in multiple locations across the city such as applewood heights secondary school , clarkson secondary school and streetsville secondary school extended french program at st . thomas more school , lorne park secondary school , philip pocock catholic secondary school and st . aloysius gonzaga secondary school regional arts program at queen elizabeth senior public school , cawthra park secondary school and iona catholic secondary school international business and technology program at allan a . martin senior public school and gordon graydon memorial secondary school international baccalaureate program at st . francis xavier secondary school , glenforest secondary school , bronte college and erindale secondary school . sci tech program at tomken road middle school and port credit secondary school regional enhanced program at glenforest secondary school , the woodlands school and lorne park secondary school . regional sports program at applewood heights secondary school international and executive leadership academy at tl kennedy secondary school . media . mississauga is part of the toronto media market and is served by media based in toronto , with markets in the greater toronto area ( gta ) that cover most of the news in the gta . examples of this being the majority of radio stations transmitting from the nearby cn tower in toronto . however , mississauga also has the mississauga news , a regional newspaper that is published two days a week in print and daily online . there is also the sunday times , a community newspaper for the south asian community that is published weekly in print and also available online , as well as modern mississauga , a bi-monthly general-interest print and digital magazine . the city also has three local radio stations : am 960 cknt , local news/talk radio am 1650 cina , multicultural station mainly targeted to indian and pakistani audiences . fm 91.9 cfre , the campus radio station of the university of toronto mississauga . the following national cable television stations also broadcast from mississauga : rogers television , community channel the shopping channel , broadcasts nationally from mississauga the weather network , broadcast nationally from mississauga 1998–2005 bite tv , canada 's first interactive television station . sister cities . mississauga has one sister city : kariya , aichi , japan . notable people . freedom of the city . the freedom of the city is the highest honour that a canadian municipality can bestow on an individual or military unit . the following people and military units have received the freedom of the city of mississauga . individuals . hazel mccallion : 12 april 2017 . bianca andreescu : 15 september 2019 . mohamad fakih : 15 november 2019 . members of the band triumph ( rik emmett , mike levine and gil moore ) : 25 november 2019 . . military units . the lorne scots regiment : 2 july 2014 . the toronto scottish regiment : 20 september 2014 . . see also . list of tallest buildings in mississauga list of cities in ontario list of tallest buildings in ontario greater toronto area regional municipality of peel . references . external links . city of mississauga – official site