Johnson City, Tennessee

private schools . ashley academy ( prek-8 ) st . mary 's ( k-8 ) providence academy ( k-12 ) tri-cities christian schools ( prek-12 ) university school ] ( k-12 ) . infrastructure . transportation . thumb johnson city is served by tri-cities regional airport ( iata code tri ) and johnson city airport ( 0a4 ) in watauga . interstate highways . 20px interstate 26 johnson city is bisected by interstate 26 , which connects the city to kingsport to the north and asheville , north carolina , and spartanburg , south carolina , to the south . interstate 81 intersects i-26 a northwest of the city center and carries drivers to knoxville to the southwest and bristol to the northeast . major federal and state routes . u.s . route 19w runs through the city , signed partially on i-26 , before joining 19e near bluff city en route to bristol . u.s . route 11e connects johnson city to jonesborough and greeneville to the southwest , and reunites with 11w to the northeast in bristol before continuing on to roanoke , virginia . in johnson city , route 11e forms a concurrency with north roan street , a major artery in the city . u.s . route 321 , also partially on the 11e route , connects johnson city to elizabethton ( forming a high-speed , limited-access freeway ) before continuing on to hickory and gastonia , north carolina . u.s . route 23 is concurrent with i-26 from north carolina , through johnson city , and north to the i-26 terminus in kingsport . public transport . johnson city transit ( jct ) operates a system of buses inside the city limits , including a route every fifteen minutes along roan street . main transit routes operate 6:15 & nbsp ; a.m . to 6:15 & nbsp ; p.m . monday through friday , and 8:15 & nbsp ; a.m . to 5:15 & nbsp ; p.m . on saturdays . jct also has an evening route that operates weeknights between 6:15 & nbsp ; p.m . and 11:00 & nbsp ; p.m . the johnson city transit center , downtown on west market street , also serves as the transfer point for greyhound lines running through the city . jct operates the bucshot , a system serving the greater etsu campus . the southern railway used to serve johnson city with several trains : the birmingham special ( ended , 1970 ) , the pelican ( ended , 1970 ) and the tennessean ( ended , 1968 ) . southern timetable , 1966 , p . 6 . hospitals . johnson city serves as a regional medical center for northeast tennessee and southwest virginia , along with parts of western north carolina and southeastern kentucky . the johnson city medical center , designated a level 1 trauma center by the state of tennessee , is one of ballad health 's three tertiary hospitals . also affiliated with the center are the niswonger children 's hospital , a domestic affiliate of st . jude children 's research hospital , and woodridge hospital , a mental health and chemical dependency facility . franklin woods community hospital is a leed-certified facility in north johnson city . the '' green '' hospital ( opened july 12 , 2010 ) encloses approximately on a lot adjacent to the wellness center inside medtech park . the hospital has 80 licensed beds and a 22-room emergency department . of the licensed beds , 20 are dedicated to women 's and children 's services . the james h . & cecile c . quillen rehabilitation hospital , also in north johnson city , serves patients who have suffered debilitating trauma , including stroke and brain-spine injuries . additionally , the jimmy quillen veterans affairs medical center , in the mountain home community in johnson city 's southside , serves veterans in the four-state region . the center is closely involved with the east tennessee state university james h . quillen college of medicine . notable people . bill bain , management consultant , one of the founders of the management consultancy bain & company sam bettens , lead singer of rock band k 's choice ; johnson city firefighter for a year '' johnson city fire department welcomes rookie firefighters '' , johnson city news and neighbor , june 23 , 2012 , p1 . jerry blevins , major league baseball pitcher ( new york mets ) ernie bowman , major league baseball ( san francisco giants , 1961–63 ) joe bowman , bootmaker and marksman ; guardian of western culture william grimes , '' joe bowman , sharpshooter , dies at 84 '' , the new york times , july 6 , 2009 . mike brown , american motorcyclist association rider jo carson , playwright and author george lafayette carter , entrepreneur kid kash , professional wrestler david cole , founding member of c+c music factory patrick j . cronin , television and film actor , a professor in english and theater at etsu matt czuchry , actor ( gilmore girls ) , attended science hill high school david davis , tennessee state senator ; u.s . congressman 2007-2009 lindsay ellis , american film critic , youtuber , cinematographer , and author ray flynn , miler with 89 sub-four-minute miles ; graduated etsu , president/ceo of flynn sports management aubrayo franklin , defensive tackle , san francisco 49ers wyck godfrey , film producer and studio executive jake grove , born in johnson city ; played center for virginia tech , won the rimington trophy , played for the miami dolphins del harris , nba coach , attended milligan college holly herndon , electronic musician mark herring , attorney general of virginia steven james , novelist , attended etsu drew johnson , political commentator and columnist , and founder of the beacon center of tennessee catherine marshall , author , born in johnson city , later worked on her novel christy while staying with relatives in town john alan maxwell , artist and illustrator , raised in johnson city , illustrated for pearl s . buck , john steinbeck , and sir arthur conan doyle , spent his last 18 years in johnson city ; permanent collection housed at carroll reece museum at etsu johnny miller , nascar driver daniel norris , major league baseball , debuted with the toronto blue jays in 2014 mike potter , nascar driver eureka o'hara , drag queen and television personality david phil roe , mayor of johnson city and representative for tennessee 's 1st congressional district in 2008 mo sabri , alternative hip hop artist bryan lewis saunders , artist and writer , etsu alumnus connie saylor , nascar driver and johnson city business owner constance shulman , actress , singer , producer steve spurrier , heisman trophy-winning quarterback and college football hall of fame coach , spent most of his childhood in johnson city and attended science hill high school . the school 's football field is named steve spurrier field . robert love taylor and alfred a . taylor , brothers who were both governor of tennessee ; each owned and resided in robins ' roost , historic house on south roan street brad teague , nascar driver ed whitson , mlb pitcher known for a brief but colorful stint with the yankees in the 1980s samuel cole williams , historian , jurist , first dean of the emory university school of law van williams , nfl running back and kick returner for buffalo bills , all-american at carson-newman , attended science hill high school . sister cities . johnson city 's sister cities are : guaranda , ecuador ronneby , sweden rybinsk , russia