Lentil

botanical description . name . many different names in different parts of the world are used for the crop lentil . the first use of the word lens to designate a specific genus was in the 16th century by the botanist tournefort . the word '' lens '' for the lentil is of classical roman/latin origin : mcgee points out that a prominent roman family took the name '' lentulus '' , just as the family name '' cicero '' was derived from the chickpea , chickpea , or '' fabia '' ( as in quintus fabius maximus ) from the fava bean ( vicia faba ) . harold mcgee , '' on food and cooking '' , 2004 edition , scribners . pg . 483 . . systematics . the genus lens is part of the subfamily faboideae which is contained in the flowering plant family fabaceae or commonly known as legume or bean family , of the order fabales in the kingdom plantae . lens is a small genus which consists of the cultivated l . culinaris and six related wild taxa . among the different taxa of wild lentils , l . orientalis is considered to be the progenitor of the cultivated lentil and is now generally classified as l . culinaris subsp . orientalis . therefore , the genus lens comprises seven taxa in six species : lens culinaris subsp . culinaris ( and l . culinaris subsp . orientalis ) lens odemensis lens ervoides lens nigricans lens lamottei lens tomentosus lentil is hypogeal , which means the cotyledons of the germinating seed stay in the ground and inside the seed coat . therefore , it is less vulnerable to frost , wind erosion , or insect attack . the plant is a diploid , annual , bushy herb of erect , semierect , or spreading and compact growth and normally varies from in height . it has many hairy branches and its stem is slender and angular . the rachis bears 10 to 15 leaflets in five to eight pairs . the leaves are alternate , of oblong-linear and obtuse shape and from yellowish green to dark bluish green in colour . in general , the upper leaves are converted into tendrils , whereas the lower leaves are mucronate . if stipules are present , they are small . the flowers , one to four in number , are small , white , pink , purple , pale purple , or pale blue in colour . they arise from the axils of the leaves , on a slender footstalk almost as long as the leaves . the pods are oblong , slightly inflated , and about long . normally , each of them contains two seeds , about in diameter , in the characteristic lens shape . the seeds can also be mottled and speckled . the several cultivated varieties of lentil differ in size , hairiness , and colour of the leaves , flowers , and seeds . lentils are self-pollinating . the flowering begins from the lowermost buds and gradually moves upward , so-called acropetal flowering . about two weeks are needed for all the flowers to open on the single branch . at the end of the second day and on the third day after the opening of the flowers , they close completely and the colour begins to fade . after three to four days , the setting of the pods takes place . . types . types can be classified according to their size , whether they are split or whole , or shelled or unshelled . seed coats can range from light green to deep purple , as well as being tan , grey , brown , black or mottled . shelled lentils show the colour of the cotyledon which can be yellow , orange , red , or green . red-cotyledon types : nipper ( australia ) northfield ( australia ) cobber ( australia ) digger ( australia ) nugget ( australia ) aldinga ( australia ) masoor daal ( unshelled lentils with a brown seed coat and an orange-red cotyledon ) petite crimson ( shelled masoor lentils ) red chief ( light tan seed coat and red cotyledon ) small green/brown-seed coat types : eston green pardina ( spain ) verdina ( spain ) medium green/brown-seed coat types avondale ( usa ) matilda ( australia ) richlea large green/brown-seed coat types : boomer ( australia ) brewer 's : a large brown lentil which is often considered the '' regular '' lentil in the united states castellana ( spanish ) laird : the commercial standard for large green lentils in western canada mason merrit mosa ( spain ) naslada ( bulgaria ) pennell ( usa ) riveland ( usa ) other types : beluga : black , bead-like , lens-shaped , almost spherical , named for resemblance to beluga caviar . called indianhead in canada . macachiados : big yellow mexican lentils puy lentils : lens esculenta puyensis ( small dark speckled blue-green lentil from france ) with a protected designation of origin name alb-leisa three traditional genotypes of lentils native to the swabian jura protected by the producers ' association öko-erzeugergemeinschaft alb-leisa ( engl . '' eco-producer association alb-leisa '' ) . production . use by humans . processing . a combination of gravity , screens and air flow is used to clean and sort lentils based on shape and density . after destoning , they may be sorted by a color sorter and then packaged . a major part of the world 's red lentil production undergoes a secondary processing step . these lentils are husk , split and polished . in the indian subcontinent , this process is called dhal milling . the moisture content of the lentils prior dehulling is crucial to guarantee a good dehulling efficiency . the hull of lentils usually accounts for 6 to 7 percent of the total seed weight , which is lower than most legumes . lentil flour can be produced by milling the seeds , like cereals . culinary use . lentils can be eaten soaked , germinated , fried , baked or boiled & ndash ; the most common preparation method . the seeds require a cooking time of 10 to 40 minutes , depending on the variety ; small varieties with the husk removed , such as the common red lentil , require shorter cooking times . most varieties have a distinctive , earthy flavor . lentils with husks remain whole with moderate cooking , while those without husks tend to disintegrate into a thick purée , which may enable various dishes . the composition of lentils leads to a high emulsion capacity which can be even increased by dough fermentation in bread making . . lentil dishes . lentils are used worldwide to cook many different dishes . lentil dishes are most widespread throughout south asia , the mediterranean regions and west asia . in the indian subcontinent , lentil curry is part of the everyday diet , eaten with both rice and roti . boiled lentils and lentil stock are used to thicken most vegetarian curries . they are also used as stuffing in dal parathas and puri for breakfast or snacks . lentils are also used in many regional varieties of sweets . lentil flour is used to prepare several different bread varieties , such as papadum . they are frequently combined with rice , which has a similar cooking time . a lentil and rice dish is referred to in levantine countries as mujaddara or mejadra . in iran , rice and lentil is served with fried raisin ; this dish is called adas polo . rice and lentils are also cooked together in khichdi , a popular dish in the indian subcontinent ( india and pakistan ) ; a similar dish , kushari , made in egypt , is considered one of two national dishes . lentils are used to prepare an inexpensive and nutritious soup throughout europe and americas , sometimes combined with chicken or pork . in western countries , cooked lentils are often used in salads . in italy , the traditional dish for new year 's eve is cotechino served with lentils . lentils are commonly eaten in ethiopia in a stew-like dish called kik , or kik wot , one of the dishes people eat with ethiopia 's national food , injera flatbread . yellow lentils are used to make a non-spicy stew , which is one of the first solid foods ethiopian women feed their babies . lentils were a chief part of the diet of ancient iranians , who consumed lentils daily in the form of a stew poured over rice . nutritional value . . composition . according to the usda national nutrient database , of raw lentils ( variety unspecified ) provide of food energy ; the same weight of cooked lentils provides . raw lentils are 8 % water , 63 % carbohydrates including 11 % dietary fiber , 25 % protein , and 1 % fat ( table ) . cooked lentils ( when boiled ) are a rich source ( 20 % or more of the daily value , dv ) of numerous essential nutrients , including folate ( 45 % dv ) , iron ( 25 % dv ) , manganese ( 24 % dv ) , and phosphorus ( 26 % dv ) . they are a good source ( 10 % or more of the daily value ) of several nutrients including thiamine ( 15 % dv ) , pantothenic acid ( 13 % dv ) , vitamin b6 ( 14 % dv ) , magnesium ( 10 % dv ) , copper ( 13 % dv ) , and zinc ( 13 % ) ( see table ) . when lentils are cooked by boiling , protein content declines to 9 % of total composition , and b vitamins and minerals decrease due to the overall water content increasing ( protein itself is not lost ) . lentils have the second-highest ratio of protein to food energy of any legume , after soybeans . lentils contain the carotenoids , lutein and zeaxanthin , and polyunsaturated fatty acids . . digestive effects . the low levels of readily digestible starch ( 5 percent ) and high levels of slowly digested starch make lentils of potential value to people with diabetes . the remaining 65 % of the starch is a resistant starch classified as rs1 . kawaljit singh sandhu , seung-taik lim digestibility of legume starches as influenced by their physical and structural properties elsevier , 16 march 2007 a minimum of 10 % in starch from lentils escapes digestion and absorption in the small intestine ( therefore called '' resistant starch '' ) . additional resistant starch is synthesized from gelatinized starch , during cooling , after lentils are cooked . lentils also have antinutrient factors , such as trypsin inhibitors and a relatively high phytate content . trypsin is an enzyme involved in digestion , and phytates reduce the bioavailability of dietary minerals . the phytates can be reduced by prolonged soaking and fermentation or sprouting . . breeding . although lentils have been an important crop for centuries , lentil breeding and genetic research have a relatively short history compared to that of many other crops . since the inception of the international center for agriculture research in the dry areas ( icarda ) breeding programme in 1977 significant gains have been made . it supplies landraces and breeding lines for countries around the world , supplemented by other programmes in both developing ( e.g . india ) and developed ( e.g . australia and canada ) countries . in recent years , such collaborations among breeders and agronomists are becoming increasingly important . the focus lies on high yielding and stable cultivars for diverse environments to match the demand of a growing population . in particular , progress in quantity and quality as well as in the resistance to disease and abiotic stresses are the major breeding aims . several varieties have been developed applying conventional breeding methodologies . serious genetic improvement for yield has been made , however , the full potential of production and productivity could not yet be tapped due to several biotic and abiotic stresses . wild lens species are a significant source of genetic variation for improving the relatively narrow genetic base of this crop . the wild species possess many diverse traits including disease resistances and abiotic stress tolerances . the above-mentioned l . nigricans and l . orientalis possess morphological similarities to the cultivated l . culinaris . but only l . culinaris and l . culinaris subsp . orientalis are crossable and produce fully fertile seed . between the different related species hybridisation barriers exist . according to their inter-crossability lens species can be divided into three gene pools : primary gene pool : l . culinaris ( and l . culinaris subsp . orientalis ) and l . odemensis secondary gene pool : l . ervoides and l . nigricans tertiary gene pool : l . lamottei and l . tomentosus crosses generally fail between members of different gene pools . however , plant hormone and/or embryo rescue allows the growth of viable hybrids between groups . even if crosses are successful , many undesired genes may be introduced as well in addition to the desired ones . this can be resolved by using a backcrossing programme . thus , mutagenesis is crucial to create new and desirable varieties . according to yadav et al . other biotechnology techniques which may impact on lentil breeding are micropropagation using meristamatic explants , callus culture and regeneration , protoplast culture and doubled haploid production .