1970 in film

highest-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1970 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : cannes film festival ( palme d'or ) : : m a s h , directed by robert altman , united states . notable films released in 1970 . united states unless stated . . 7 plus seven , a tv documentary directed by michael apted - ( u.k . ) . a . the act of the heart , starring geneviève bujold and donald sutherland - ( canada ) the adventurers , starring candice bergen , bekim fehmiu , olivia de havilland , ernest borgnine the adventures of gerard , starring peter mcenery , claudia cardinale , eli wallach , jack hawkins airport , directed by george seaton , starring burt lancaster , dean martin , jean seberg , jacqueline bisset , van heflin , george kennedy , helen hayes alex in wonderland , directed by paul mazursky , starring donald sutherland the american soldier ( der amerikanische soldat ) , directed by rainer werner fassbinder - ( west germany ) and soon the darkness , starring pamela franklin - ( u.k . ) ann and eve , starring gio petré , marie liljedahl and francisco rabal the angel levine , starring zero mostel and harry belafonte the aristocats - an animated disney film . directed by wolfgang reitherman , starring phil harris , eva gabor , hermione baddeley , gary dubin , dean clark , sterling holloway , roddy maude-roxby , and liz english awakening of the beast ( o ritual dos sádicos ) - ( brazil ) . b . the baby maker , starring barbara hershey and sam groom the ballad of cable hogue , directed by sam peckinpah , starring jason robards and stella stevens bartleby , starring paul scofield – ( u.k . ) the bear and the doll ( l'ours et la poupée ) , starring brigitte bardot and jean-pierre cassel - ( france ) bed and board ( domicile conjugal ) , directed by françois truffaut , starring jean-pierre léaud - ( france ) behold homolka ( ecce homo homolka ) - ( czechoslovakia ) the beloved , starring raquel welch - ( u.k . ) beneath the planet of the apes , starring james franciscus , kim hunter , maurice evans beyond the valley of the dolls , directed by russ meyer , starring dolly read the bird with the crystal plumage ( l'uccello dalle piume di cristallo ) , directed by dario argento - ( italy ) black brigade , starring stephen boyd and richard pryor bloody mama , directed by roger corman , starring shelley winters , pat hingle , don stroud , robert de niro the boatniks , starring robert morse , stefanie powers and phil silvers the body , a documentary narrated by frank finlay and vanessa redgrave - ( u.k . ) borsalino , starring jean-paul belmondo and alain delon - ( france ) el bosque del lobo ( a.k.a . the ancines woods ) - ( spain ) the boys in the band , directed by william friedkin brancaleone at the crusades ( brancaleone alle crociate ) , starring vittorio gassman and adolfo celi - ( italy ) the breach , directed by claude chabrol - ( france/italy/belgium ) brewster mccloud , directed by robert altman , starring bud cort , sally kellerman , michael murphy , shelley duvall the brotherhood of the bell , starring glenn ford , rosemary forsyth and maurice evans the butcher ( le boucher ) , directed by claude chabrol , starring stéphane audran and jean yanne - ( france ) . c . cannon for cordoba , starring george peppard carry on up the jungle , starring sid james , kenneth connor , frankie howerd - ( u.k . ) case for a rookie hangman catch-22 , directed by mike nichols , starring alan arkin , jon voight , richard benjamin , bob newhart , charles grodin , orson welles , art garfunkel c.c . and company , starring joe namath , ann-margret and william smith le cercle rouge ( the red circle ) , directed by jean-pierre melville , starring alain delon , bourvil , yves montand , gian maria volonté - ( france ) chariots of the gods ( erinnerungen an die zukunft ) , documentary - ( west germany ) the cheyenne social club , directed by gene kelly , starring james stewart and henry fonda chisum , starring john wayne , ben johnson , forrest tucker , christopher george , glenn corbett claire 's knee ( le genou de claire ) , directed by éric rohmer - ( france ) cockeyed cowboys of calico county , starring dan blocker and nanette fabray colossus : the forbin project , starring eric braeden and susan clark compañeros , starring franco nero and jack palance - ( italy ) the confession ( l'aveu ) , directed by costa-gavras , starring yves montand and simone signoret - ( france/italy ) the conformist ( il conformista ) , directed by bernardo bertolucci , starring jean-louis trintignant and stefania sandrelli - ( italy/france ) connecting rooms , starring bette davis and michael redgrave - ( u.k . ) cotton comes to harlem , starring godfrey cambridge , raymond st . jacques , calvin lockhart , redd foxx count dracula , starring christopher lee , klaus kinski and herbert lom- ( italy ) country dance , starring peter o'toole crescendo , starring stefanie powers crime and punishment ( prestuplenie i nakazanie ) - ( u.s.s.r . ) crimes of the future , directed by david cronenberg - ( canada ) cromwell , directed by ken hughes , starring richard harris and alec guinness - ( u.k . ) the cross and the switchblade , starring pat boone and erik estrada . d . darker than amber , starring rod taylor and jane russell darling lili , directed by blake edwards , starring julie andrews and rock hudson days and nights in the forest ( aranyer din ratri ) , directed by satyajit ray - ( india ) deep end , directed by jerzy skolimowski , starring jane asher - ( u.k./west germany ) the delta factor , starring yvette mimieux and christopher george the demise of father mouret , directed by georges franju - ( france ) diary of a mad housewife , directed by frank perry , starring carrie snodgress ( golden globe winner ) , richard benjamin , frank langella dionysus in '69 , directed by brian de palma dirty dingus magee , starring frank sinatra dodes'ka-den , directed by akira kurosawa - ( japan ) the dunwich horror , starring dean stockwell and sandra dee . e . eden and after ( l'eden et après / eden a potom ) , directed by alain robbe-grillet - ( france/czechoslovakia ) el condor , starring jim brown and lee van cleef el topo ( the mole ) - ( mexico ) elise , or real life ( élise ou la vraie vie ) - ( france ) end of the road , starring stacy keach , harris yulin , james earl jones entertaining mr sloane , starring beryl reid and harry andrews - ( u.k . ) equinox , starring frank bonner eugenie… the story of her journey into perversion , starring marie liljedahl , maria rohm and christopher lee - ( spain ) even dwarfs started small ( auch zwerge haben klein angefangen ) , directed by werner herzog - ( west germany ) . f . figures in a landscape , directed by joseph losey , starring robert shaw - ( u.k . ) five easy pieces , directed by bob rafelson , starring jack nicholson , susan anspach and karen black the flight ( beg ) - ( u.s.s.r . ) four murders are enough , darling ( čtyři vraždy stačí , drahoušku ) - ( czechoslovakia ) fragment of fear , starring david hemmings and gayle hunnicutt - ( u.k . ) fruit of paradise ( ovoce stromů rajských jíme ) - ( czechoslovakia ) . g . gamera vs . jiger - ( japan ) the games , directed by michael winner , starring michael crawford , ryan o'neal , charles aznavour - ( u.k . ) the garden of the finzi-continis , directed by vittorio de sica - academy award for best foreign language film 1971 and golden bear winner - ( italy ) getting straight , starring elliott gould and candice bergen gim me shelter , a documentary featuring the rolling stones gods of the plague ( götter der pest ) , directed by rainer werner fassbinder - ( west germany ) goodbye gemini , starring judy geeson , martin potter , michael redgrave and alexis kanner- ( u.k . ) goin ' down the road - ( canada ) the great white hope ( film ) , directed by martin ritt , starring james earl jones and jane alexander the green wall ( la muralla verde ) - ( peru ) . h . halls of anger , starring calvin lockhart and jeff bridges the hawaiians , starring charlton heston hello-goodbye , starring michael crawford hercules in new york , starring arnold schwarzenegger hi , mom ! , directed by brian de palma , starring robert de niro history of postwar japan as told by a bar hostess ( nippon sengoshi – , directed by shohei imamura - ( japan ) hoffman , starring peter sellers and sinéad cusack - ( u.k . ) hornets ’ nest , starring rock hudson the horror of frankenstein , starring ralph bates , kate o'mara and veronica carlson- ( u.k . ) horton hears a who ! , tv animated film house of dark shadows , directed by dan curtis , starring jonathan frid and grayson hall how do i love thee ? , starring jackie gleason and maureen o'hara husbands , directed by and starring john cassavetes , with ben gazzara and peter falk . i . i love my wife , directed by mel stuart , starring elliott gould , brenda vaccaro , angel tompkins i never sang for my father , directed by gilbert cates , starring gene hackman , estelle parsons , melvyn douglas the intruders , starring don murray , john saxon and anne francis investigation of a citizen above suspicion , directed by elio petri , starring gian maria volonté - academy award for best foreign language film 1970 - ( italy ) the invincible six , directed by jean negulesco , starring stuart whitman and elke sommer i walk the line , directed by john frankenheimer , starring gregory peck and tuesday weld . j . el jardín de las delicias ( the garden of delights ) , directed by carlos saura - ( spain ) jenny , starring marlo thomas and alan alda joe , directed by john g . avildsen , starring peter boyle and susan sarandon julius caesar , directed by stuart burge , starring charlton heston , jason robards , john gielgud - ( u.k . ) . k . kati patang , starring rajesh khanna - ( india ) kazoku - ( japan ) kelly 's heroes , starring clint eastwood , telly savalas , carroll o'connor , donald sutherland , don rickles khilona ( toy ) - ( india ) king : a filmed record . montgomery to memphis , a documentary about martin luther king jr . , directed by sidney lumet the kremlin letter , directed by john huston , starring patrick o'neal , barbara parkins , bibi andersson , nigel green , orson welles . l . the landlord , directed by hal ashby , starring beau bridges , lee grant , diana sands , pearl bailey , louis gossett , jr . landscape after the battle ( krajobraz po bitwie ) , directed by andrzej wajda - ( poland ) the last grenade , directed by gordon flemyng , starring stanley baker , honor blackman , richard attenborough , alex cord last of the mobile hot shots , starring james coburn the last warrior , aka flap , starring anthony quinn , shelley winters , tony bill leo the last , directed by john boorman , starring marcello mastroianni and billie whitelaw - ( u.k . ) let it be - documentary film directed by michael lindsay-hogg and featuring the beatles - ( u.k . ) the liberation of l.b . jones , directed by william wyler , starring roscoe lee browne , anthony zerbe , lee j . cobb , lola falana , barbara hershey little big man , directed by arthur penn , starring dustin hoffman , faye dunaway , chief dan george little fauss and big halsy , starring robert redford and michael j . pollard the little theatre of jean renoir , a tv film - ( france/italy/west germany ) loot , directed by silvio narizzano , starring richard attenborough , lee remick , hywel bennett - ( u.k . ) lost in the desert ( a.k.a . dirkie ) , directed by jamie uys - ( south africa ) love story , directed by arthur hiller , starring ali macgraw and ryan o'neal - winner of 5 golden globes including best picture and best director lovers and other strangers , starring cloris leachman , beatrice arthur , richard castellano , diane keaton loving , starring george segal and eva marie saint . m . m a s h , directed by robert altman , starring donald sutherland , elliott gould , tom skerritt , robert duvall , michael murphy , sally kellerman , jo ann pflug macho callahan , starring jean seberg , david janssen , lee j . cobb maidstone , written , directed by and starring norman mailer a man called horse , starring richard harris the man who haunted himself , starring roger moore , anton rodgers and hildegarde neil - ( u.k . ) metello - ( italy ) michael the brave ( mihai viteazul ) - ( romania ) the molly maguires , directed by martin ritt , starring sean connery and richard harris monte walsh , starring lee marvin , jack palance , jeanne moreau the moonshine war , starring alan alda , richard widmark , patrick mcgoohan move , starring paula prentiss and elliott gould the music lovers , directed by ken russell , starring richard chamberlain and glenda jackson - ( u.k . ) mumsy , nanny , sonny and girly , starring michael bryant , ursula howells , pat heywood and vanessa howard- ( u.k . ) myra breckinridge , starring raquel welch , mae west , john huston , farrah fawcett , rex reed . n . the nameless knight - ( turkey ) ned kelly , starring mick jagger - ( u.k . ) norwood , starring glen campbell , kim darby , joe namath . o . o.k . , directed by michael verhoeven - ( west germany ) of gods and the undead ( os deuses e os mortos ) - ( brazil ) on a clear day you can see forever , directed by vincente minnelli , starring barbra streisand and yves montand , songs by alan jay lerner one day in the life of ivan denisovich , starring tom courtenay - ( u.k./norway ) one more time , directed by jerry lewis , starring sammy davis , jr . and peter lawford one song a day takes mischief away ( tko pjeva zlo ne misli ) - ( yugoslavia ) on the comet the out-of-towners , directed by arthur hiller , starring jack lemmon and sandy dennis the over-the-hill gang rides again , starring walter brennan , chill wills , fred astaire the owl and the pussycat , directed by herbert ross , starring barbra streisand and george segal . p . the palace of angels ( o palácio dos anjos ) - ( brazil ) the past-master ( bash maystorat ) , directed by petar b . vasilev , starring kiril gospodinov and yuriy yakovlev - ( bulgaria ) patton , directed by franklin j . schaffner , starring george c . scott - winner of 7 academy awards for 1971 including best picture , director and actor peace in the fields ( paix sur les champs ) - ( belgium ) peau d'âne ( donkey skin ) , directed by jacques demy , starring catherine deneuve and jean marais - ( france ) the people next door , starring eli wallach and julie harris perfect friday , starring ursula andress and stanley baker performance ( filmed in 1968 ) , directed by donald cammell and nicolas roeg , starring james fox and mick jagger - ( u.k . ) the phantom tollbooth the pizza triangle ( dramma della gelosia ) , directed by ettore scola , starring marcello mastroianni and monica vitti - ( italy ) the private life of sherlock holmes , directed by billy wilder , starring robert stephens , geneviève page , colin blakely - ( u.k . ) pufnstuf ( aka pufnstuf zaps the world ) starring van snowden and jack wild purab aur paschim ( east and west ) , starring ashok kumar - ( india ) puzzle of a downfall child , starring faye dunaway . q . quackser fortune has a cousin in the bronx , starring gene wilder and margot kidder - ( ireland ) ¡qué hacer ! ( what to do ? ) - ( chile ) . r . rabbit , run , directed by jack smight , starring james caan the railway children , directed by lionel jeffries , starring jenny agutter - ( u.k . ) the rebel rousers , starring jack nicholson the revolutionary , starring jon voight rio lobo , directed by howard hawks , starring john wayne , jorge rivero , jennifer o'neill , jack elam , sherry lansing the rise and rise of michael rimmer , starring peter cook , denholm elliott , arthur lowe - ( u.k . ) r . p . m . , directed by stanley kramer , starring anthony quinn and ann-margret reza motorcyclist ( reza motori ) ( 1970 ) - directed by masoud kimiai ( iran ) ryan 's daughter , directed by david lean , starring robert mitchum , sarah miles , john mills ( oscar winner ) - ( u.k . ) . s . salt of the black earth ( sól ziemi czarnej ) - ( poland ) scars of dracula , starring christopher lee , dennis waterman and jenny hanley - ( u.k . ) scream and scream again , starring vincent price , alfred marks and christopher lee- ( u.k . ) scrooge , directed by ronald neame , with albert finney , alec guinness , edith evans - ( u.k . ) skullduggery , starring burt reynolds and susan clark soldier blue , directed by ralph nelson , starring candice bergen and peter strauss something for everyone , directed by harold prince , starring angela lansbury and michael york space amoeba , directed by ishirō honda - ( japan ) the spider 's stratagem ( strategia del ragno ) , directed by bernardo bertolucci - ( italy ) spring and port wine , starring james mason and susan george - ( u.k . ) start the revolution without me , directed by bud yorkin , starring gene wilder , donald sutherland , hugh griffith strange holiday the strawberry statement , starring bruce davison , kim darby , bud cort street scenes , directed by martin scorsese ( documentary ) strogoff sunflower ( i girasoli ) , directed by vittorio de sica , starring marcello mastroianni and sophia loren - ( italy ) suppose they gave a war and nobody came , starring brian keith , don ameche , tony curtis , suzanne pleshette a swedish love story ( en kärlekshistoria ) - ( sweden ) . t . taking tiger mountain by strategy ( zhi qu wei hu shan ) - ( china ) taste the blood of dracula , starring christopher lee - ( u.k . ) tell me that you love me , junie moon , directed by otto preminger , starring liza minnelli there 's a girl in my soup , starring peter sellers and goldie hawn - ( u.k . ) there was a crooked man . , starring kirk douglas and henry fonda they call me trinity ( lo chiamavano trinità ) , starring terence hill and bud spencer - ( italy ) the things of life ( les choses de la vie ) - ( france ) three sisters , by laurence olivier , starring joan plowright and olivier - ( u.k . ) . tick.tick.tick . , starring jim brown and george kennedy too late the hero , directed by robert aldrich , starring michael caine , cliff robertson , henry fonda - ( u.k./u.s . ) tora ! tora ! tora ! , co-directed by richard fleischer and kinji fukasaku , starring martin balsam and takahiro tamura - ( u.s./japan ) trash , produced by andy warhol , directed by paul morrissey the traveling executioner , starring stacy keach , bud cort tristana , directed by luis buñuel , starring catherine deneuve , fernando rey , franco nero - ( spain/france/italy ) the twelve chairs , directed by mel brooks , starring frank langella , ron moody , dom deluise two mules for sister sara , directed by don siegel , starring shirley maclaine and clint eastwood . u . ucho ( the ear ) - ( czechoslovakia ) la última aventura del zorro up in the cellar , starring joan collins and larry hagman . v . valerie and her week of wonders ( valerie a týden divů ) - ( czechoslovakia ) the vampire lovers , starring peter cushing - ( u.k . ) vengeance ( bao chou ) - ( hong kong ) . w . a walk in the spring rain , starring anthony quinn and ingrid bergman the wandering swordsman ( you xia er ) , directed by chang cheh - ( hong kong ) waterloo , directed by sergei bondarchuk , starring rod steiger , christopher plummer , orson welles - ( u.s.s.r./italy ) weekend with the babysitter starring george e carey and susan romen where 's poppa ? , directed by carl reiner , starring george segal , ruth gordon , ron leibman which way to the front ? , directed by and starring jerry lewis white sun of the desert ( beloye solntse pustyni ) - ( ussr ) whale ( kit ) , directed by petar b . vasilev , starring georgi kaloyanchev , dimitar panov , georgi partsalev - ( bulgaria ) the window - starring behrouz vossoughi and googoosh - iran why does herr r . run amok ? ( warum läuft herr r . amok ? ) , directed by rainer werner fassbinder - ( west germany ) the wild child ( l'enfant sauvage ) , directed by françois truffaut - ( france ) wood pigeon ( toghi ) - directed by ali hatami ( iran ) woodstock , a musical documentary featuring jimi hendrix , the who , janis joplin , santana , jefferson airplane and others wusa , starring paul newman and joanne woodward . z . zabriskie point , directed by michelangelo antonioni zig zag , starring george kennedy , eli wallach , anne jackson . 1970 wide-release movies . january–march . january 1970 scream and scream again 2 january jenny 6 january the adventures of gerard 9 january . tick.tick.tick . 14 january last of the mobile hot shots the dunwich horror 16 january aranyer din ratri ( india ) 21 january the only game in town rider on the rain ( france ) 25 january m a s h 27 january carter 's army 28 january the molly maguires february 1970 1 february the kremlin letter 4 february the honeymoon killers start the revolution without me 5 february patton 9 february zabriskie point 10 february end of the road the party at kitty and stud's 11 february king of the grizzlies 12 february mumsy , nanny , sonny and girly 19 february the bird with the crystal plumage ( italy ) 25 february hercules in new york 27 february le boucher ( france ) march 1970 4 march loving 5 march airport 6 march skullduggery 17 march the boys in the band 18 march the ballad of cable hogue the liberation of l.b . jones 20 march carry on up the jungle ( united kingdom ) 21 march gamera vs . jiger ( japan ) 24 march bloody mama king : a filmed record . montgomery to memphis 25 march the adventurers 26 march woodstock 31 march waterloo . april–june . april 1970 3 april count dracula ( italy ) 4 april gods of the plague ( west germany ) 8 april colossus : the forbin project the cockeyed cowboys of calico county 9 april halls of anger 22 april country dance 26 april chariots of the gods ( west germany ) a swedish love story ( sweden ) 27 april hi , mom ! zig zag 28 april a man called horse 29 april the confession ( france ) / ( italy ) may 1970 the grasshopper 6 may 'equinox 7 may taste the blood of dracula 11 may leo the last tell me that you love me , junie moon 13 may connecting rooms ( united kingdom ) getting straight let it be my lover , my son 20 may borsalino ( france ) the landlord one more time suppose they gave a war and nobody came too late the hero 21 may norwood 26 may beneath the planet of the apes cotton comes to harlem the magic garden of stanley sweetheart pufnstuf 27 may the out-of-towners watermelon man 28 may two mules for sister sara june 1970 3 june the executioner 4 june julius caesar 10 june crimes of the future the invincible six 12 june the cheyenne social club 15 june the strawberry statement 17 june beyond the valley of the dolls the hawaiians on a clear day you can see forever a walk in the spring rain 19 june a bullet for pretty boy 21 june catch-22 23 june kelly 's heroes 24 june myra breckinridge darling lili . july–september . july 1970 1 july the boatniks lost flight 2 july goin ' down the road the moonshine war 4 july and soon the darkness ( united kingdom ) 9 july the games which way to the front ? 12 july hello-goodbye 13 july quackser fortune has a cousin in the bronx 15 july joe the revolutionary 16 july cromwell ( united kingdom ) 18 july the man who haunted himself 22 july something for everyone 29 july chisum 31 july move august 1970 1 august the rebel rousers space amoeba ( japan ) 3 august ann and eve ( sweden ) case for a rookie hangman ( czechoslovakia ) performance 6 august goodbye gemini 10 august diary of a mad housewife 12 august lovers and other strangers soldier blue 12 august wusa 24 august house of dark shadows 26 august the breach ( france ) / ( italy ) the people next door september 1970 1 september deep end ( united kingdom ) / ( west germany ) 3 september fragment of fear 9 september bed and board ( france ) 12 september five easy pieces 16 september r . p . m . 17 september the brotherhood of the bell 21 september crime and punishment ( u.s.s.r ) 22 september adam at 6 a.m . 23 september tora ! tora ! tora ! . october–december . october 1970 1 october the baby maker cover me babe how do i love thee ? the traveling executioner 4 october trash the vampire lovers 7 october monte walsh 9 october the american soldier ( west germany ) 11 october the great white hope 12 october the mind of mr . soames 14 october c.c . and company 18 october i never sang for my father 20 october le cercle rouge ( france ) rabbit , run 21 october little fauss and big halsy 22 october the conformist ( italy ) / ( france ) / ( west germany ) 23 october no blade of grass 24 october trog 28 october house of dark shadows the private life of sherlock holmes the twelve chairs 31 october dodes'ka-den ( japan ) november 1970 2 november three sisters 3 november the owl and the pussycat 5 november scrooge 7 november the phantom tollbooth 8 november scars of dracula the horror of frankenstein 9 november ryan 's daughter 10 november perfect friday where 's poppa ? 17 november the over-the-hill gang rides again 18 november bartleby ( united kingdom ) dirty dingus magee i walk the line 24 november the act of the heart december 1970 4 december the garden of the finzi-continis ( italy ) 5 december brewster mccloud 6 december gim me shelter 8 december husbands 11 december the aristocats claire 's knee ( france ) 15 december compañeros ( italy ) there 's a girl in my soup the wild country 16 december puzzle of a downfall child love story 17 december alex in wonderland rio lobo 20 december donkey skin ( france ) 21 december i love my wife 23 december little big man 25 december there was a crooked man . 31 december loot . short film series . the ant and the aardvark ( 1969–71 ) roland and rattfink ( 1968–71 ) tijuana toads ( 1969–72 ) woody woodpecker ( 1941–49 , 1951–72 ) chilly willy ( 1955–72 ) the beary family ( 1962–72 ) . births . january 24 – matthew lillard , american actor , voice actor , director and producer january 29 - heather graham , american actress january 31 - minnie driver , english actress february 3 - warwick davis , english actor february 14 - simon pegg , english actor february 18 - susan egan , american actress , voice actress , singer and dancer march 3 - julie bowen , american actress march 4 - sergio basáñez , mexican actor march 5 - rimantė valiukaitė , lithuanian actress march 6 - dan põldroos , estonian actor ( d . 2007 ) march 7 - rachel weisz , english actress march 18 - queen latifah , american actress and rapper march 20 - linda larkin , american actress and voice actress march 24 - taizo harada , japanese actor and comedian march 28 - vince vaughn , american actor , writer and producer april 13 - ricky schroder , american actor april 20 - shemar moore , american actor april 21 rob riggle , american actor , comedian , and marine nicole sullivan , american actress , voice artist and comedian april 25 - jason lee , american actor , comedian , and professional skateboarder april 29 - uma thurman , american actress may 4 - will arnett , canadian actor may 9 - helen hill , american animator may 12 - samantha mathis , american actress may 18 - tina fey , american actress and comedian may 22 - naomi campbell , english model and actress may 23 - nanette burstein , american director , producer , and screenwriter may 25 - octavia spencer , american actress may 26 - john hamburg , american writer and director may 27 - joseph fiennes , english actor may 28 - glenn quinn , irish actor ( d . 2002 ) june 15 - justin fletcher , english comedian , children 's television presenter june 24 - andres raag , estonian actor june 15 - leah remini , american actress , author and activist june 26 sean hayes , american actor and comedian chris o'donnell , american actor nick offerman , american actor , writer , comedian , producer and woodworker july 4 - lewis macleod , scottish actor and voice actor july 14 - mike mcfarland , american voice actor july 16 - apichatpong weerasethakul , thai film director july 30 - christopher nolan , english-american film director , producer and writer august 6 - m . night shyamalan , american film director , writer , producer and actor august 15 anthony anderson , american actor maddie corman , american actress august 16 saif ali khan , indian actor kaili närep , estonian actress august 17 - rupert degas , british-australian actor august 18 - malcolm-jamal warner , american actor august 23 jay mohr , american actor and comedian river phoenix , american actor ( d . 1993 ) august 24 - jonathan ward , american actor august 26 - melissa mccarthy , american actress , comedian and film producer september 3 - maria bamford , american stand-up comedian , actress and voice actress september 4 - ione skye , british-born american actress september 7 - tom everett scott , american actor september 11 - taraji p . henson , american actress september 29 - emily lloyd , english actress september 30 - tony hale , american actor october 2 kelly ripa , american actress and television host maribel verdú , spanish actress october 8 - matt damon , american actor october 12 - kirk cameron , american actor october 19 - chris kattan , american actor and comedian october 24 - raul esparza , american actor october 30 - nia long , american actress october 31 - nolan north , american actor and voice actor november 1 - merle palmiste , estonian actress november 6 - ethan hawke , american actor november 10 - vince vieluf , american actor november 12 - aitor iturrioz , mexican actor november 13 - josé maría yazpik , mexican actor november 16 - martha plimpton , american actress december 1 - sarah silverman , american stand-up comedian , actress , singer and writer december 12 jennifer connelly , american actress regina hall , american actress december 17 - sean patrick thomas , american actor . deaths . january 7 - jack natteford , 75 , american screenwriter , 1,000 dollars a minute , black bart january 19 - hal march , 49 , american actor , hear me good , send me no flowers january 23 - nell shipman , 77 , canadian actress , writer , producer , back to god 's country , the grub-stake january 25 - eiji tsuburaya , 68 , japanese film director and special effects designer , godzilla , godzilla , king of the monsters ! january 27 - rocco d'assunta , 65 , italian actor , comedian and playwright february 6 - roscoe karns , 76 , american actor , it happened one night , alibi ike february 19 - jules munshin , 54 , american actor , on the town , take me out to the ball game february 24 - conrad nagel , 72 , american actor , all that heaven allows , the divorcee march 4 - peter godfrey , 70 , british director , christmas in connecticut , the two mrs . carrolls march 6 - william hopper , 55 , american actor , rebel without a cause , track of the cat march 23 - del lord , 75 , canadian pioneer hollywood director , a plumbing we will go , all the world 's a stooge march 25 - virginia van upp , 68 , american producer and screenwriter , gilda , cover girl march 26 - patricia ellis , 51 , american actress , a night at the ritz , rhythm in the clouds april 9 - cobina wright , 82 , american singer and actress , the razor 's edge , footlight serenade april 11 - cathy o'donnell , 46 , american actress , ben-hur , the best years of our lives april 18 - glenn tryon , 71 , american actor and director , lonesome , miss mink of 1949 april 19 - george blair , 64 , american director , duke of chicago , streets of san francisco april 25 - anita louise , 55 , american actress , the little princess , the story of louis pasteur april 26 - gypsy rose lee , 59 , american burlesque performer and actress , screaming mimi , belle of the yukon april 28 - ed begley , 69 , american actor , 12 angry men , patterns april 30 - inger stevens , 35 , swedish actress , hang 'em high , a guide for the married man may 10 - mari blanchard , 43 , american actress , destry , she-devil may 14 - billie burke , 85 , american actress , the wizard of oz , father 's little dividend may 17 - nigel balchin , 61 , british screenwriter , the man who never was , 23 paces to baker street may 23 - nydia westman , 68 , american actress , ladies should listen , dressed to thrill june 4 - sonny tufts , 58 , american actor , the virginian , government girl june 14 - william daniels , 68 , american cinematographer , camille , ninotchka july 6 - marjorie rambeau , 80 , american actress , a man called peter , tobacco road july 9 - sigrid holmquist , 71 , swedish actress , just around the corner , meddling women july 14 - preston foster , 69 , american actor , the informer , i am a fugitive from a chain gang july 22 - fritz kortner , 78 , german director , pandora 's box , the razor 's edge july 24 - frank silvera , 55 , jamaican actor , viva zapata ! , hombre august 1 - frances farmer , 56 , american actress , come and get it , the toast of new york september 3 - vasil gendov , 78 , bulgarian film director , actor and screenwriter , bulgaran is gallant september 11 - chester morris , 69 , american actor , meet boston blackie , five came back september 18 - jimi hendrix , 27 , american musician , almost famous , wayne 's world september 29 - edward everett horton , 84 , american actor , arsenic and old lace , top hat october 4 - janis joplin , 27 , american singer , watchmen , three kings october 10 - grethe weiser , 67 , german actress , my friend barbara , lemke 's widow october 17 - vola vale , 73 , american actress , the phantom of the opera october 20 - patrick wymark , 44 , british actor , battle of britain , where eagles dare october 21 - ernest haller , 74 , american cinematographer , gone with the wind , mildred pierce november 2 - fernand gravey , 64 , french actor , the king and the chorus girl , the great waltz november 17 - naunton wayne , 69 , british actor , crook 's tour , dead of night november 25 - louise glaum , 82 , american actress , greater than love , sex december 12 carolyn craig , 36 , american actress , house on haunted hill , portland exposé george terwilliger , 88 , american director and screenwriter , the fatal hour , bride 's play december 23 - charles ruggles , 84 , american actor , bringing up baby , the parent trap december 30 - lenore ulric , 78 , american actress , notorious , camille december 31 - suzanne dalbert , 43 , french actress , mark of the gorilla , the 49th man . film debuts . jane alexander - the great white hope linda blair - the way we live now brian blessed - country dance danny devito - dreams of glass robert downey , jr . - pound shelley duvall - brewster mccloud pam grier - beyond the valley of the dolls dan hedaya - myra breckinridge don johnson - the magic garden of stanley sweetheart jeffrey jones - the revolutionary tommy lee jones - love story diane keaton - lovers and other strangers frank langella - diary of a mad housewife anne meara - the out-of-towners ornella muti - the most beautiful wife stephen rea - cry of the banshee susan sarandon - joe tom selleck - myra breckinridge paul sorvino - where 's poppa ? sissy spacek - trash sylvester stallone - the party at kitty and stud's burt young - carnival of blood . references .