Brigade

origin . '' the brigade as a military unit came about starting in the 15th century when the british army and militia developed a unit to control more than one infantry regiment or cavalry squadron '' . the brigade : a history : its organization and employment in the us army , chapter 1 , brigades in the continental army , colonial background , p . 1 . retrieved 21 december 2016 . previously each regiment , battalion , cavalry squadron , or artillery battery operated somewhat independently , with its own field officer ( i.e . , colonel , lieutenant colonel , or major ) or battery commander ( usually a captain ) reporting directly to the field force or '' army '' commander . as such a '' field army '' became larger , the number of subordinate commanders became unmanageable for the officer in general command of said army , usually a major general , to effectively command . in order to streamline command relationships , as well as effect some modicum of tactical control , especially in regard to combined arms operations ( i.e . , those involving a coordination of infantry with cavalry and/or artillery forces ) , an intermediate level of command came into existence . '' the term 's origin is found in two french roots , which together , meant roughly 'those who fight ' '' . the brigade : a history : its organization and employment in the us army , introduction , p . xi . retrieved 21 december 2016 . another theory for derivation of the term brigade derives from italian , as used for example in the introduction to the decameron , where it refers only to a group of ten , or old french meaning '' company '' of an undefined size , which in turn derives from a celtic root , which means '' strife '' . the so-called '' brigada '' was a well-mixed unit , comprising infantry , cavalry and normally also artillery , designated for a special task . the size of such '' brigada '' ranged from a reinforced '' company '' of up to two regiments . the '' brigada '' was the forerunner of the modern task force , '' battle group '' , or '' brigade '' . the swedish king gustavus adolphus improved the brigade as a tactical unit , introducing it in 1631 during a reorganization of the swedish army in the course of the thirty years ' war . the invention of the brigade overcame the lack of coordination inherent in the traditional army structure consisting of independent regiments of infantry and units of supporting arms ( viz . , cavalry and artillery ) acting separately under their individual commanding officers . gustavus adolphus accomplished this battlefield coordination by combining battalions of infantry with cavalry troops and artillery batteries into a '' battle group '' , viz . , brigada or '' brigade '' commanded by a senior colonel , or lieutenant colonel , appointed as a brigadier-general . in france , marshal turenne ( 1611-1675 ) copied the brigade organization ; he made it a permanent standing unit , requiring the creation in 1667 of a permanent rank of ( literally translating to '' brigadier of the armies of the king '' ) . unlike the swedish brigades , french brigades at that time comprised two to five regiments of the same branch etc . ) . the rank , intermediate between colonel and disappeared in 1788 and should not be confused with that of which is equivalent to a brigadier general . ( a modern is referred to occasionally as . ) . individual armies . argentina . in the argentinian army , the typical brigade is composed of an hq company , two or three battalions ( called '' regiments '' for historical reasons ) of the brigade´s main branch ( infantry or armoured cavalry ) , which give the brigade its denomination ( mechanized , armoured , airborne , mountain or jungle ) , plus one battalion of the other branch , plus one or two artillery groups , an engineers battalion or company , a signals company , and intelligence company , an army aviation section and a logistics battalion . mountain brigades have also a special forces ( called '' mountain rangers '' ) company . the brigade is usually commanded by a brigadier general or a senior colonel , who may be promoted to general during his tenure as brigade commander . australia . in the australian army , the brigade has always been the smallest tactical formation , since regiments are either administrative groupings of battalions ( in the infantry ) or battalion-sized units ( in the cavalry ) . a typical brigade may consist of approximately 5,500 personnel between two mechanised infantry battalions , an armoured regiment , an armoured artillery regiment , and other logistic and engineering units . the brigade is usually commanded by an officer holding the rank of brigadier , who is referred to as the '' brigade commander '' . india . in indian army , brigade consists of three battalions along with supporting troops . brigade is commanded by an army officer of the rank of brigadier ( single star commander ) . . pakistan . a brigade is under the command of a brigadier and comprises three or more battalions of different units depending on its functionality . an independent brigade would be one that primarily consists of an artillery unit , an infantry unit , an armour unit and logistics to support its actions . such a brigade is not part of any division and is under direct command of a corps . there are 7 independent armoured brigades , seven engineering brigades and eight air defense brigades . independent armoured and infantry brigades are capable of extended operations without necessarily being reliant on a higher hq for short-term logistic or intimate support . they can be used in counter-attack , exploitation of an advance , or rapid movement to reinforce formations under pressure . norway . the main core of the norwegian army is the brigade nord , consisting of eight battalions of which four are combat battalions ( one infantry , one mechanized infantry , one artillery and one armored ) and the rest are various types of support battalions . the brigade is intended to be combat ready at all times . the combat battalions have a significant portion of professional soldiers ( specialists ) . the fairly large size of the combat ready support contingent is also intended to complement the heimevernet ( translates as '' home defense '' ) which is a large reserve infantry force , as well as act in a support capacity for an international cooperation force ( e.g . nato ) in case of an invasion . france . france replaced its divisions with brigades in 1999 ( so for example the 2nd armored division became the 2nd armored brigade ) . it was decided in 2016 to again form two divisions ( 1st and 3rd ) made up of four and three brigades for a total of seven brigades : two armored , two '' intermediate '' , two light brigades ( alpine and parachute ) and the franco-german brigade . there is also an airmobile brigade subordinated to the army aviation command . in peacetime , brigades serve primarily as force providers . the units deployed ( battlegroups and task-forces ) are battalion-size units provided by the regiments composing the brigades . united kingdom . brigades , with a field not a regional administrative role , have usually been of a named type and numbered since the 19th century ( e.g . cavalry brigade or infantry brigade ) . since the end of world war ii , brigade numbers have been unique and not by type . brigades in divisions do not usually command their combat support and combat service support units . these remain under divisional command , although they may be permanently affiliated with a particular brigade ( as a '' brigade group '' ) . historically , infantry or cavalry/armoured brigades have usually comprised three or four combat-arm battalions , but currently larger brigades are normal , made larger still when their affiliated artillery and engineer regiments are added . until 1918 , the chief of staff of a brigade was known as a brigade major . before 1922 , british army brigades were normally commanded by general officers holding the rank of brigadier-general ( equivalent to a '' one-star '' rank in the us army ) ; after that date , the brigade commander was an appointment for officers with the rank of brigadier , which were then classified as field officers not general officers . this is universally the case today . from 1859 to 1938 , '' brigade '' ( '' brigade-division '' 1885–1903 ) was also the term used for a battalion-sized unit of the royal artillery . this was because , unlike infantry battalions and cavalry regiments , which were organic , artillery units consisted of individually numbered batteries that were '' brigaded '' together . the commanding officer of such a brigade was a lieutenant colonel . in 1938 , the royal artillery adopted the term '' regiment '' for this size of unit , and '' brigade '' became used in its normal sense , particularly for groups of anti-aircraft artillery regiments commanded by a brigadier . maj-gen sir john headlam , the history of the royal artillery , vol ii ( 1899–1914 ) , woolwich : royal artillery institution , 1937 . in the second world war , a tank brigade comprised three tank regiments and was equipped with infantry tanks for supporting the infantry divisions . armoured brigades were equipped with cruiser tanks or ( us lend-lease ) medium tanks and a motorised infantry battalion . the armoured divisions included one or more armored brigades . canada . the canadian army currently has three regular force brigade groups , designated as canadian mechanized brigade groups ( cmbg ) : 1 cmbg , 2 cmbg , which contain the regular army 's anglophone units , and 5 cmbg , the regular francophone formation . these cmbgs are each composed of : two mechanized infantry battalions one light infantry battalion one armoured regiment one mechanized artillery regiment one engineer regiment one combat service and support ( css ) battalion . co-located with each cmbg is a field ambulance , and a tactical helicopter squadron , and a military police platoon . regular force cmbg strengths are 5,000 personnel . canada also has ten primary reserve brigades ( canadian brigade group , cbg ) , 31 cbg through 39 cbg , and 41 cbg . the cbg formations are for administrative purposes . republic of china . an nra brigade , , was a military formation of the chinese republic 's national revolutionary army . infantry and cavalry brigades were composed of two infantry regiments . after the 1938 reforms , the brigade was dispensed with within the infantry division in favor of the regiment to simplify the command structure . hsu long-hsuen and chang ming-kai , history of the sino-japanese war ( 1937–1945 ) 2nd ed . ,1971 . translated by wen ha-hsiung , chung wu publishing ; 33 , 140th lane , tung-hwa street , taipei , taiwan republic of china . . united states . . army . in the united states army , a brigade is smaller than a division and roughly equal to or a little larger than a regiment . during the american civil war infantry brigades contained two to five regiments with the idea being to maintain a unit with a strength of 2,000 soldiers p . 17 the brigade : a history , its organization and employment in the us army diane publishing and were usually commanded by a brigadier general or a senior colonel . during world war i the division consisted of four regiments divided into two brigades of two regiments each . more recently , the u.s . army has moved to a new generic brigade combat team ( bct ) in which each brigade contains combat elements and their support units . after the 2013 reform , bct personnel strength typically ranges from 4,400 personnel for infantry bcts , to 4,500 personnel for stryker bcts , to 4,700 personnel for armored bcts . this formation is standard across the active u.s . army , u.s . army reserve , and the army national guard . the brigade commander is usually a colonel , although a lieutenant colonel can be selected for brigade command in lieu of an available colonel . a typical tour of duty for this assignment is 24 to 36 months . separate brigades , viz . , brigades not permanently assigned to a division , were commanded by brigadier generals the brigade : a history : its organization and employment in the us army , chapter 6 , the early modern brigade , 1958-1972 , road brigades and airmobile brigades , p . 63 and appendix 1 , divisional versus separate brigades , p . 159 . retrieved 21 december 2016 . a brigade commander enjoys a headquarters and staff to assist them in commanding the brigade and its subordinate battalion units . the typical staff includes : a brigade executive officer , usually a lieutenant colonel ( if commanded by a colonel ) a brigade command sergeant major a personnel officer ( s1 ) , usually a major an intelligence officer ( s2 ) , usually a major an operations officer ( s3 ) , usually a lieutenant colonel a logistics officer ( s4 ) , usually a major a plans officer ( s5 ) , usually a major a communications officer ( s6 ) , usually a major a medical officer , usually a major a legal officer ( jag ) , usually a major a brigade chaplain , usually a major in addition , the headquarters includes additional junior staff officers , non-commissioned officers , and enlisted support personnel in the occupational specialties of the staff sections ; these personnel are ordinarily assigned to the brigade 's headquarters and headquarters company . marine corps . in the united states marine corps , brigades are designated as marine expeditionary brigades ( meb ) , and are usually commanded by a brigadier general . the meb is a mid-level marine air-ground task force ( magtf ) essentially forming a '' demi-division '' . the meb organizational structure consists of a minimum of three regimental-equivalent sized units and a command element ( a regimental combat team , a composite marine aircraft group , a marine logistics regiment , and a meb headquarters group ) . each marine expeditionary force ( mef ) contains a meb , available for deployment on expeditionary duty . the meb is the intermediate magtf between the mef and the marine expeditionary unit ( meu ) . along with the marine infantry regiments , the meu , ( while smaller than an army brigade ) , are the usmc organizational equivalents of army brigades . the meu consists of three battalion-equivalent sized units and a command element ( a battalion landing team , a marine medium tilt-rotor squadron ( reinforced ) , a combat logistics battalion , and a meu headquarters group ) . the marine infantry regiments , combined with the marine artillery regiments , comprise the bulk of the marine divisions . an example of a meb is task force tarawa ( 2nd marine expeditionary brigade ) during the iraq conflict campaign . see also . artillery brigade mixed brigade international brigades military organization . notes . references . bibliography . nouveau larousse illustré , undated ( early 20th century )