New Found Glory

return to pop punk sound and line-up change ( 2010–2013 ) . a special edition re-release to celebrate the tenth anniversary of their self-titled album was released on january 26 , 2010 through geffen records . the additional material included new liner notes , demos , b-sides , the story so far dvd and a remix of debut single '' hit or miss '' by the late jerry finn . a full tour was also confirmed where the band would play the record in its entirety , with support from saves the day , hellogoodbye and fireworks . on the 29th and 30 may , the band headlined the pop-punk festival slamdunk festival held in hatfield and leeds . shortly before the start of the band 's commemorative tour , gilbert visited his doctor for pneumonia . after suspicious cells were discovered in his thyroid , he underwent surgery which caused him to miss the first three dates of the new tour . anthony raneri of bayside replaced him for this period . the surgery was a success . later that year , the band headlined the slam dunk festival along with alkaline trio and capdown . new found glory began the new year by participating in the 2011 soundwave festival , and were later confirmed for the reading and leeds festivals in august . the band also played a full tribute set to the ramones with marky ramone on drums at the bamboozle 2011 festival . they returned to the studio in april to record their seventh album , titled radiosurgery with neal avron the producer having also produced their second , third and fourth albums . chad gilbert has said that radiosurgery '' is the most upbeat , fun record we 've ever recorded . catchy but not in a fake pop sounding way . i wanted to go back to more of the roots of punk rock and pop punk and put a whole new nfg spin on it . the record goes from song to song never letting up the energy . '' the lead single and title track , '' radiosurgery '' was released on august 2 . in march 2012 , new found glory had announced via their website that they would be a part of the vans warped tour lineup . new found glory will celebrate the 10th anniversary of sticks and stones by going on a small club tour in the fall , all around the country . in november pundik said that the band will take a break and wo n't release a new album until 2014 . absolutepunk confirmed that the band would be releasing a very new found glory christmas via cassette tape on december 1 , as well as a live album some time in 2013 . the band recorded three new songs which are on their upcoming live album kill it live released on october 7 . also announced in this period was the departure of founding member and rhythm guitarist steve klein , due to him being charged with multiple counts of inappropriate contact with a minor . on their facebook page the band noted that there had been some disparity in the intended direction progressing forward , and that steve and the remaining members had experienced insurmountable differences '' over the years . '' . post-klein activities ( 2014–present ) . on february 25 , 2014 , the band announced an 11 date uk tour with main support by the story so far , stopping in cities around the country including london , manchester , birmingham , liverpool , cardiff and leeds . on may 18 , the band announced on their facebook page that they would release a new album in the fall of 2014 . they also mentioned that it would be released by hopeless records . on may 27 , the band announced that they had left epitaph records and would be signing to hopeless records , where their new album will be released in the fall of 2014 . on august 5 , they released a new single '' selfless '' from the upcoming album resurrection . the band also filmed a music video to release with the single . on september 9 , they released a new single '' ready and willing '' from the upcoming album resurrection . the band also filmed a music video to release with the single . on october 7 , 2014 , they released resurrection . on july 22 , 2015 , the band announced they would reissue the album on october 8 , retitled resurrection : ascension . it features two brand new studio tracks , two reworked songs and three acoustic tracks . on the day of announcement , they also rereleased '' vicious love '' featuring hayley williams on vocals . on september 28 , 2016 , new found glory announced via facebook that pre-production had officially began for a new album and have since been posting pictures showing the progress of the writing process . on january 25 , 2017 , the band 's next album , makes me sick was announced for release on april 28 . the first single '' happy being miserable '' , along with its music video , was released on february 15 , 2017 . the influence for the music video came from the pie eating scene from the movie stand by me . in january 2019 , new found glory announced the third instalment of their cover series , the from the screen to your stereo 3 ep , for release in may . on february 20 , 2019 , the band released the first song/video off their new cover series ep from the screen to your stereo 3 . they covered '' the power of love '' by huey lewis and the news , which comes from the back to the future movies . it was also revealed they 'll be covering songs from frozen , rocky and twilight on the new release . on february 10 , 2020 , the band announced their tenth studio album forever + ever x infinity , slated for release for may 29 , 2020 . the album features 15 songs , as the band did not want to cut any of the recorded material for the album . the first single , '' greatest of all time , '' released the same day . on april 16 , 2020 , the band confirmed that they had delayed the release of forever + ever x infinity to june 19 , 2020 , because it would initially be sold exclusively at target and the band did n't want fans to have to go to the store during the covid-19 pandemic . . side projects and collaborations . the international superheroes of hardcore is a side project of all members of the band and features gilbert on vocals and pundik on guitar , with the remaining members playing the same instruments they play in new found glory . all the members use pseudonyms for their '' characters '' in the band ( e.g . gilbert is known as '' captain straightedge '' ) . the band also recorded an internet-only music video for '' dig my own grave '' with director joseph pattisall . in april 2008 a compilation from the punk goes . series , called punk goes crunk , was released , and features new found glory covering '' tennessee '' , originally by arrested development . new found glory had previously released another cover song , '' heaven '' , on punk goes metal . during '' not without a fight '' tour , a split ep with shai hulud titled not without a heart once nourished by sticks and stones within blood ill-tempered misanthropy pure gold can stay was exclusively released . there were two colors limited to a total of only 500 copies and only for sale from either shai hulud or new found glory at these shows . dashboard confessional were to be main support for new found glory 's headline american tour in 2010 . however , shortly before the tour was due to commence , dashboard withdrew due to personal reasons and the tour was subsequently cancelled . a split ep , titled swiss army bro-mance had initially been due for sale on the previously cancelled tour , but was later made available online on a limited pressing of 2,500 copies . the two bands played several acoustic dates in december 2010 . on december 10 , 2011 , new found glory performed a live set for '' guitar center sessions '' on directv . the episode included an interview with program host , nic harcourt . . style , influences and legacy . new found glory are widely recognized for their fast and energetic pop punk music . the band temporarily moved to an alternative rock style with their album coming home in 2006 , and is sometimes described as such in general . the aforementioned coming home was viewed as a change in direction for the band with its more layered and mid-tempo sound and has been described as a '' somber , honest , polished and alternative record . '' they have also been described as melodic hardcore . the band 's traditional sound has been described as '' chunky and melodic '' , with rolling stone noting their penchant for '' catchy , riffy punk-rock . '' consequence of sound writer megan ritt called the band '' paragons '' of the pop punk genre and noted how '' the seasoned floridian rockers are renowned for their heartfelt guitar anthems . '' the band 's music typically builds upon verse-chorus song structures , combining pop-influenced melodies with fast punk rock tempos , hardcore-tinged breakdowns , and often gang vocals . their fusion of pop punk with hardcore breakdowns has been labeled as easycore , a genre they are considered to have helped pioneer and named with one of their tours . critics have praised the band for their ability to write infectious hooks and the sincerity of their lyrics , often about growing up and relationships . chad gilbert has noted that , '' if the delivery is honest and real , that 's what keeps it from being the corniest thing you 've ever heard before . new found glory is a band that people enjoy listening to not because we give off this harsh message . we write about who we are and what affects us in life and those are our relationships '' . bassist ian grushka has stated that '' all of the lyrics are based on real life experiences . a song can be created from something one of us is going through or a conversation we 've had . '' while also adding , '' we only really talk about personal things that have affected us first-hand , our songs are about emotions rather than some political agenda . '' rhythm guitarist steve klein was the band 's primary lyricist , while lead guitarist chad gilbert is the main composer of the songs . although since the recording of coming home , klein , pundik and gilbert all worked on lyrics together . they have recorded covers of the ramones , shelter , lifetime , gorilla biscuits , bing crosby , nat king cole , the wonders , limahl , aerosmith , cyndi lauper , peter cetera , bryan adams , celine dion , sixpence none the richer , bob dylan , when in rome , go west , lisa loeb , the cardigans , goo goo dolls , simple minds , yann tiersen , madonna , tears for fears and survivor . new found glory 's influences include green day , texas is the reason , björk , silverchair , they might be giants , the get up kids , earth crisis , discount , the promise ring , blink-182 , unwritten law , britney spears , the beatles , pennywise , nofx , bad religion , superchunk , dinosaur jr . , nirvana , sparklehorse , rocket from the crypt , descendents , my bloody valentine , and sugar . in recent years the band have been cited for their long lasting influence on contemporary pop punk music . josh martin , bassist for band the wonder years , has claimed that '' influentially , when you think about the top three pop-punk bands of all time.it ’ s blink-182 , new found glory and green day . at least in my brain , they ’ re on that level eternally . '' in 2009 , alternative press included nothing gold can stay in their '' classic albums of '99 '' feature . brendan manley wrote , '' like its title implies , nothing gold can stay is the sonic transcript of a glorious , fleeting time for nfg - and for pop-punk . but just as gold never loses its luster , it 's only fitting that 10 years later , nothing gold can stay still shines '' . likewise , jason heller of the a.v . club reflected how their debut '' snuck beneath the radar to become a massive influence on the new millennium ’ s eruption of pop-punk . '' . band members . current members jordan pundik – lead vocals ( 1997–present ) ; occasional rhythm guitar ( 2014–present ) ian grushka – bass ( 1997–present ) ; backing vocals ( 2013–present ) chad gilbert – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1997–present ) , rhythm guitar ( 2013–present ) cyrus bolooki – drums , percussion ( 1997–present ) ; occasional acoustic guitar ( 2014-present ) current touring musicians will pugh – rhythm and lead guitar , keyboards , backing vocals ( 2020–present ) former members steve klein – rhythm guitar , backing vocals ( 1997–2013 ) joe marino – drums , percussion ( 1997 ) former touring musicians james dewees – keyboards , synthesizer ( 2003–2005 ) michael bethancourt – keyboards , synthesizer , backing vocals ( 2007–2012 ) ryan key – rhythm and lead guitar , keyboards , backing vocals ( 2018–2020 ) touring substitutes chris tsagakis – drums , percussion ( 2001 ) mike ambrose – drums , percussion ( 2015 ) touring guests nash nardone – drums ( 2010 ) hayley williams – bass guitar ( 2010 ) ; vocals ( 2014 , 2015 ) marky ramone – drums ( 2011 ) timeline . discography . studio albums nothing gold can stay ( 1999 ) new found glory ( 2000 ) sticks and stones ( 2002 ) catalyst ( 2004 ) coming home ( 2006 ) not without a fight ( 2009 ) radiosurgery ( 2011 ) resurrection ( 2014 ) makes me sick ( 2017 ) forever + ever x infinity ( 2020 ) . references . external links .