Oedipus at Colonus

plot . led by antigone , oedipus enters the village of colonus and sits down on a stone . they are approached by a villager , who demands that they leave , because that ground is sacred to the furies , or erinyes . oedipus recognizes this as a sign , for when he received the prophecy that he would kill his father and marry his mother , apollo also revealed to him that at the end of his life he would die at a place sacred to the furies and be a blessing for the land in which he is buried . the chorus , consisting of old men from the village , enters and persuades oedipus to leave the holy ground . they then question him about his identity and are horrified to learn that he is the son of laius . although they promised not to harm oedipus , they wish to expel him from their city , fearing that he will curse it . oedipus answers by explaining that he is not morally responsible for his crimes , since he killed his father in self-defense . furthermore , he asks to see their king , theseus , saying , '' i come as someone sacred , someone filled with piety and power , bearing a great gift for all your people . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 300 the chorus is amazed and decides to reserve their judgment of oedipus until theseus , king of athens , arrives . ismene arrives on horseback , rejoicing to see her father and sister . she brings the news that eteocles has seized the throne of thebes from his elder brother , polynices , while polynices is gathering support from the argives to attack the city . both sons have heard from an oracle that the outcome of the conflict will depend on where their father is buried . ismene tells her father that it is creon 's plan to come for him and bury him at the border of thebes , without proper burial rites , so that the power which the oracle says his grave will have will not be granted to any other land . hearing this , oedipus curses both of his sons for not treating him well , contrasting them with his devoted daughters . he pledges allegiance with neither of his feuding sons , but with the people of colonus , who thus far have treated him well , and further asks them for protection from creon . because oedipus trespassed on the holy ground of the eumenides , the villagers tell him that he must perform certain rites to appease them . ismene volunteers to go perform them for him and departs , while antigone remains with oedipus . meanwhile , the chorus questions oedipus once more , desiring to know the details of his incest and patricide . after he relates his sorrowful story to them , theseus enters , and in contrast to the prying chorus states , '' i know all about you , son of laius . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 318 he sympathizes with oedipus and offers him unconditional aid , causing oedipus to praise theseus and offer him the gift of his burial site , which will ensure victory in a future conflict with thebes . theseus protests , saying that the two cities are friendly , and oedipus responds with what is perhaps the most famous speech in the play . '' oh theseus , dear friend , only the gods can never age , the gods can never die . all else in the world almighty time obliterates , crushes all to nothing . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 322 theseus makes oedipus a citizen of athens and leaves the chorus to guard him as he departs . the chorus sings about the glory and beauty of athens . creon , who is the representative of thebes , comes to oedipus and feigns pity for him and his children , telling him that he should return to thebes . oedipus is disgusted by creon 's duplicity and recounts all of the harms creon has inflicted on him . creon becomes angry and reveals that he has already captured ismene ; he then instructs his guards to forcibly seize antigone . his men begin to carry them off toward thebes , perhaps planning to use them as blackmail to get oedipus to follow , out of a desire to return thebans to thebes , or simply out of anger . the chorus attempts to stop him , but creon threatens to use force to bring oedipus back to thebes . the chorus then calls for theseus , who comes from sacrificing to poseidon to condemn creon , telling him , '' you have come to a city that practices justice , that sanctions nothing without law . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 341 creon replies by condemning oedipus , saying '' i knew your city would never harbor a father-killer.worse , a creature so corrupt , exposed as the mate , the unholy husband of his own mother . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 343 oedipus , infuriated , declares once more that he is not morally responsible for what he did . theseus leads creon away to retake the two girls . the athenians overpower the thebans and return both girls to oedipus . oedipus moves to kiss theseus in gratitude , then draws back , acknowledging that he is still polluted . theseus then informs oedipus that a suppliant has come to the temple of poseidon and wishes to speak with him ; it is oedipus 's son polynices , who has been banished from thebes by his brother eteocles . oedipus does not want to talk to him , saying that he loathes the sound of his voice , but antigone persuades him to listen , saying , '' many other men have rebellious children , quick tempers too.but they listen to reason , they relent . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 357 oedipus gives in to her , and polynices enters , lamenting oedipus 's miserable condition and begging his father to speak to him . he tells oedipus that he has been driven out of thebes unjustly by his brother and that he is preparing to attack the city . he knows that this is the result of oedipus 's curse on his sons and begs his father to relent , even going so far as to say to his father , '' we share the same fate . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 363 oedipus tells him that he deserves his fate , for he cast his father out . he foretells that his two sons will kill each other in the coming battle . '' die ! die by your own blood brother 's hand—die ! —killing the very man who drove you out ! so i curse your life out ! '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 365 antigone tries to restrain her brother , telling him that he should refrain from attacking thebes and avoid dying at his brother 's hand . refusing to be dissuaded , polynices exits . following their conversation , there is a fierce thunderstorm , which oedipus interprets as a sign from zeus of his impending death . calling for theseus , he tells him that it is time for him to give the gift he promised to athens . filled with strength , the blind oedipus stands and walks , calling for his children and theseus to follow him . a messenger enters and tells the chorus that oedipus is dead . he led his children and theseus away , then bathed himself and poured libations while his daughters grieved . he told them that their burden of caring for him was lifted and asked theseus to swear not to forsake his daughters . then he sent his children away , for only theseus could know the place of his death and pass it on to his heir . when the messenger turned back to look at the spot where oedipus last stood , he says , '' we could n't see the man—he was gone—nowhere ! and the king , alone , shielding his eyes , both hands spread out against his face as if some terrible wonder flashed before his eyes and he , he could not bear to look . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 381 theseus enters with antigone and ismene , who are weeping and mourning their father . antigone longs to see her father 's tomb , even to be buried there with him rather than live without him . the women beg theseus to take them , but he reminds them that the place is a secret and that no one may go there . '' and he said that if i kept my pledge , i 'd keep my country free of harm forever . '' sophocles . the three theban plays . trans . robert fagles . new york : penguin books , 1984 , p . 388 antigone agrees and asks for passage back to thebes , where she hopes to stop the seven against thebes from marching . everyone exits toward athens . analysis and themes . there is less action in this play than in oedipus rex , and more philosophical discussion . here , oedipus discusses his fate as related by the oracle , and claims that he is not fully guilty because his crimes of murder and incest were committed in ignorance . despite being blinded and exiled and facing violence from creon and his sons , in the end oedipus is accepted and absolved by zeus . historical context . in the years between the play 's composition and its first performance , athens underwent many changes . defeated by the spartans , the city was placed under the rule of the thirty tyrants , and the citizens who opposed their rule were exiled or executed . this certainly affected the way that early audiences reacted to the play , just as the invasion of athens and its diminished power surely affected sophocles as he wrote it . the play contrasts the cities of athens and thebes quite sharply . thebes is often used in athenian dramas as a city in which proper boundaries and identities are not maintained , allowing the playwright to explore themes like incest , murder , and hubris in a safe setting . fate . while the two other plays about oedipus often bring up the theme of a person 's moral responsibility for their destiny , and whether it is possible to rebel against destiny , oedipus at colonus shows oedipus 's resolution of the problem . in '' oedipus rex , '' he was told by tiresias , '' you bear your fate and i will bear mine , '' a message repeated by the chorus , but scorned by oedipus , who like his father has believed he can escape his fate . in '' oedipus at colonus , '' he declares that even though fate , which literally means '' necessity '' in ancient greek , is something we must suffer as beyond our choice in its power of necessity and is not a person 's creation , we must also find a way to work with it . the key line in the play is when oedipus declares , '' let us not fight necessity , '' and antigone adds , '' for you will never see in all the world a man whom god has let escape his destiny ! '' . guilt . oedipus at colonus suggests that , in breaking divine law , a ruler 's limited understanding may lead him to believe himself fully innocent ; however , his lack of awareness does not change the objective fact of his guilt . nevertheless , determination of guilt is far more complex than this , as illustrated by the dichotomy between the blessing and the curse upon oedipus . he has committed two crimes which render him a sort of monster and outcast among men : incest and patricide . his physical suffering , including his self-inflicted blindness , and lonely wandering , are his punishment . however , in death , he will be favored ; the place in which he dies will be blessed . this suggests that willful action is in some part of guilt ; the fact that oedipus is '' rationally innocent '' – that he sinned unknowingly – decreases his guilt , allowing his earthly sufferings to serve as sufficient expiation for his sins . . a possible heroic interpretation of oedipus . darice birge has argued that oedipus at colonus can be interpreted as a heroic narrative of oedipus rather than a tragic one . it can be viewed as a transitional piece from the oedipus of oedipus rex whose acts were abominable to the oedipus we see at the end of oedipus at colonus , who is so powerful that he is sought after by two separate major cities . the major image used to show this transition from beggar to hero is oedipus ' relationship with the sacred grove of the erinyes . at the beginning of the play , oedipus has to be led through the grove by antigone and is only allowed to go through it because as a holy place it is an asylum for beggars . he recognizes the grove as the location once described to him in a prophecy as his final resting place . when elders come looking for him , oedipus enters the grove . this act , according to birge , is his first act as a hero . he has given up his habit of trying to fight divine will ( as was his wont in oedipus rex ) and now is no longer fighting prophecies , but is accepting this grove as the place of his death . oedipus then hints at his supernatural power , an ability to bring success to those who accept him and suffering to those who turned him away . oedipus ' daughter ismene then arrives , bringing news that thebes , the city that once exiled oedipus for his sins , wants him back for his hero status . ismene furthers oedipus ' status as a hero when she performs a libation to the erinyes , but his status is fully cemented when he chooses a hidden part of the sacred grove as his final resting place , which even his daughters ca n't know . . . english-language translations . george adams , 1729 - prose thomas francklin , 1759 - verse richard c . jebb , 1904 - prose : full text francis storr , 1912 - verse : full text w . b . yeats , 1934 - mixed prose and verse robert fitzgerald , 1940 - verse e . f . watling , 1947 - verse gilbert murray , 1948 - verse : full text theodore howard banks , 1953 - verse paul roche , 1958 - verse robert fagles , 1984 - verse don taylor , 1986 - prose carl r . mueller and anna krajewska wieczorek , 2000 - verse ruby blondell , 2002 - verse eamon grennan and rachel kitzinger , 2004 - verse david r . slavitt , 2007 - verse george theodoridis , 2009 - prose : full text ian c . johnston , 2015 - verse full text frank nisetich , 2016 - verse . adaptations . ioannis gryparis broadway adaptation , 1976 , with alexis minotis as oedipus don taylor 's 1986 television adaptation starring anthony quayle and juliet stevenson lee breuer and bob telson , the gospel at colonus , 1986 patrick stewart and tim philip-smith , bbc radio 4 play justin fleming , child of the dark sun , 2016 . footnotes . references . bibliography . andreas markantonatos . tragic narrative : a narratological study of sophocles ' oedipus at colonus . walter de gruyter , 2002 . kaggelaris , n . ( 2016 ) , '' sophocles ' oedipus in mentis bostantzoglou 's medea '' in greek in mastrapas , a . n . - stergioulis , m . m . ( eds . ) seminar 42 : sophocles the great classic of tragedy , athens : koralli , pp . & nbsp ; 74– 81 . further reading . bowman , l . m . 2007 . '' the curse of oedipus in oedipus at colonus . '' scholia : studies in classical antiquity 16:15–25 . compton-engle , gwendolyn . 2013 . '' the blind leading : aristophanes ' 'wealth ' and 'oedipus at colonus ' . '' classical world 106.2 : 155–170 . easterling , p . e . 1997 . '' the language of the polis in oedipus at colonus . '' in acta : first panhellenic and international conference on ancient greek literature ( 23–26 may 1994 ) . edited by j . -t . a . papademetriou , 273–283 . hellenic society for humanistic studies international centre for humanistic research studies and researches 38 . athens : hellenic society for humanistic studies . hesk , j . 2012 . '' oedipus at colonus . '' in brill ’ s companion to sophocles . edited by a . markantonatos , 167–189 . leiden , the netherlands , and boston : brill . kelly , a . 2009 . sophocles . oedipus at colonus . london : duckworth . linforth , i . m . 1951 . religion and drama in oedipus at colonus . univ . of california publications in classical philology 14/4 . berkeley : univ . of california press . markantonatos , a . 2007 . oedipus at colonus : sophocles , athens , and the world . untersuchungen zur antiken literatur und geschichte 87 . berlin and new york : de gruyter . rosenmeyer , t . g . 1952 . '' the wrath of oedipus . '' phoenix 6:92–112 . saïd , s . 2012 . '' athens and athenian space in oedipus at colonus . '' in crisis on stage : tragedy and comedy in late fifth-century athens . edited by a . markantonatos and b . zimmermann , 81–100 . trends in classics supplement 13 . berlin and new york : de gruyter . scharffenberger , e . w . 2017 . '' oedipus at colonus . '' in brill ’ s companion to the reception of sophocles . edited by r . lauriola and k . demetriou , 326–388 . brill 's companion to classical reception 10 . leiden , the netherlands , and boston : brill . external links . oedipus at colonus at perseus digital library