Gabriel

gabriel 's horn . the trope of gabriel blowing a trumpet blast to indicate the lord 's return to earth is especially familiar in spirituals . however , though the bible mentions a trumpet blast preceding the resurrection of the dead , it never specifies gabriel as the trumpeter . different passages state different things : the angels of the son of man ( matthew 24:31 ) ; the voice of the son of god ( john 5:25-29 ) ; god 's trumpet ( i thessalonians 4:16 ) ; seven angels sounding a series of blasts ( revelation 8-11 ) ; or simply '' a trumpet will sound '' ( i corinthians 15:52 ) . s . vernon mccasland , '' gabriel 's trumpet '' , journal of bible and religion 9:3:159–161 ( august 1941 ) in related traditions , gabriel is again not identified as the trumpeter . in judaism , trumpets are prominent , and they seem to be blown by god himself , or sometimes michael . in zoroastrianism , there is no trumpeter at the last judgment . in islamic tradition , it is israfil who blows the trumpet , though he is not named in the qur'an . the christian church fathers do not mention gabriel as the trumpeter ; early english literature similarly does not . the earliest known identification of gabriel as the trumpeter comes in john wycliffe 's 1382 tract , de ecclesiæ dominio . in the year 1455 , in armenian art , there is an illustration in an armenian manuscript showing gabriel sounding his trumpet as the dead climb out of their graves . walters ms 543 , fol . 14 . two centuries later , gabriel is identified as the trumpeter , in john milton 's paradise lost ( 1667 ) : milton , paradise lost , xi.72ff betwixt these rockie pillars gabriel sat chief of the angelic guards ( iv.545f ) . he ended , and the son gave signal high to the bright minister that watch 'd , he blew his trumpet , heard in oreb since perhaps when god descended , and perhaps once more to sound at general doom . ( xi.72ff ) . later , gabriel 's horn is omnipresent in negro spirituals , but it is unclear how the byzantine conception inspired milton and the spirituals , though they presumably have a common source . gabriel 's horn also makes an appearance in the eyes of texas ( 1903 ) in which it signifies the rapture . in marc connelly 's play based on spirituals , the green pastures ( 1930 ) , gabriel has his beloved trumpet constantly with him , and the lord has to warn him not to blow it too soon . four years later '' blow , gabriel , blow '' was introduced by ethel merman in cole porter 's anything goes ( 1934 ) . feast days . saint gabriel the archangel 's festival day was exclusively celebrated on 18 march according to many sources dating between 1588 and 1921 ; unusually , a source published in 1856 has the feast celebrated on 7 april for unknown reasons ( a note in parentheses states that the day is normally celebrated on 18 march ) . writer elizabeth drayson mentions the feast being celebrated on 18 march 1588 in her 2013 book '' the lead books of granada '' . one of the oldest out of print sources placing the feast on 18 march , first published in 1608 , is '' flos sanctorum : historia general de la vida y hechos de jesu-christo.y de los santos de que reza y haze fiesta la iglesia catholica . '' by the spain writer alonso de villegas ; a newer edition of this book was published in 1794 . another source published in ireland in 1886 the irish ecclesiastical record also mentions 18 march . there is a painting from 1886 by the italian artist diodore rahoult , on which 18 march also appears . the feast of saint gabriel was included by pope benedict xv in the general roman calendar in 1921 , for celebration on 24 march . butler 's lives of the saints , vol . 1 , edited by herbert thurston and donald attwater , christian classics , 1981 in 1969 the day was officially transferred to 29 september for celebration in conjunction with the feast of the archangels st . michael and st . raphael . calendarium romanum ( libreria editrice vaticana , 1969 ) , p . 119 the church of england has also adopted the 29 september date , known as michaelmas . the eastern orthodox church and those eastern catholic churches which follow the byzantine rite celebrate his feast day on 8 november ( for those churches that follow the traditional julian calendar , 8 november currently falls on 21 november of the modern gregorian calendar , a difference of 13 days ) . eastern orthodox commemorate him , not only on his november feast , but also on two other days : 26 march is the '' synaxis of the archangel gabriel '' and celebrates his role in the annunciation . 13 july is also known as the '' synaxis of the archangel gabriel '' , and celebrates all the appearances and miracles attributed to gabriel throughout history . the feast was first established on mount athos when , in the 9th century , during the reign of emperor basil ii and the empress constantina porphyrogenitus and while nicholas chrysoverges was patriarch of constantinople , the archangel appeared in a cell near karyes , where he wrote with his finger on a stone tablet the hymn to the theotokos , '' axion estin '' . the coptic orthodox church celebrates his feast on 13 paoni , 22 koiak and 26 paoni . the ethiopian church celebrates his feast on 28 december , with a sizeable number of its believers making a pilgrimage to a church dedicated to '' saint gabriel '' in kulubi on that day . nega mezlekia , notes from the hyena 's belly : an ethiopian childhood ( new york : picador , 2000 ) , p . 266 . additionally , gabriel is the patron saint of messengers , those who work for broadcasting and telecommunications such as radio and television , postal workers , clerics , diplomats , and stamp collectors . . latter-day saint teachings . in latter-day saint theology , gabriel is believed to have lived a mortal life as the prophet noah . the two are regarded as the same individual ; noah being his mortal name and gabriel being his heavenly name . . . islam . gabriel , or jibril , jibrāʾīl , or , jibrīl ) , nader , m . '' the holy spirit in the quran . '' submission.org . retrieved 11 august 2009 . christoph luxenberg . 2007 . the syro-aramaic reading of the koran . verlag hans schiler . p . 39 is venerated as one of the primary archangels and as the angel of revelation in islam . exegesis narrates that muhammad saw gabriel in his full angelic splendor only twice , the first time being when he received his first revelation . encyclopedia of islam , djabrail as the bible portrays gabriel as a celestial messenger sent to daniel , daniel 8.16 , 9.21 . mary , luke 1.26 . and zechariah , luke 1.19 . so too islamic tradition holds that gabriel was sent to numerous pre-islamic prophets with revelation and divine injunctions , including adam , whom muslims believe was consoled by gabriel some time after the fall . he is known by many names in islam , such as '' keeper of holiness . '' von hammer-purgstall , josef . 1852 2010 . die geisterlehre der moslimen the doctrine of spirits of muslims . bayerische staatsbibliothek . though alternate theories exist , whether the occurrence of the holy spirit in the quran refers to gabriel or not , remains an issue of scholarly debate . in the quran , gabriel appears named in and , as well as in , where he is mentioned along with michael ( mika'il ) . muslims also revere gabriel for a number of historical events predating the first revelation , found in the quran . muslims believe that gabriel was the angel who informed zachariah of john 's birth , as well as mary of the future nativity of jesus ; ibn kathir . '' story of zechariah '' and '' story of jesus '' in stories of the prophets and that gabriel was one of three angels who had earlier informed abraham ( ibrahim ) of the birth of isaac ( surah zaariyaat ) . stories of the prophets , ibn kathir , story of ishmael gabriel also makes a famous appearance in the hadith of gabriel , in which he questions muhammad on the core tenets of islam . islamic texts and other apocryphal works of literature outside the bible depict the angel gabriel 's role as a celestial warrior . burge , stephen . 2015 . angels in islam : jalal al-din al-suyuti 's al-haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik . routledge . p . 204 . however , a clear distinction between enochian and qur'anic references to the angel gabriel is that the former does not designate the angel gabriel as the holy spirit in 1 enoch , which has the angel gabriel defeating the nephilim . reynolds , gabriel said . 2014 . '' gabriel . '' encyclopaedia of islam 3 , edited by k . fleet , g . krämer , d . matringe , j . nawas , and e . rowson . retrieved 9 january 2020 . accordingly , in islam , gabriel helped muhammad overcome his adversaries significantly during the battle of badr and against a ifrit during the mi'raj . al-qadi 'iyad al-yahsubi . 2013 . ash - shifa- healing through defining the rights of prophet muhammad : الشفا بتعريف حقوق المصطفى ( ص ) عربي/انكليزي ترجمة . dar al kotob al ilmiyah . issa , islam . 2016 . milton in the arab-muslim world . taylor & francis . p . 111 he further encouraged muhammad wage war and attack the jewish tribe of banu qurayza . . art , entertainment , and media . angels are described as pure spirits . gorgievski , sandra . face to face with angels : images in medieval art and in film , mcfarland ( 2010 ) the lack of a defined form allows artists wide latitude in depicting them . amelia r . brown draws comparisons in byzantine iconography between portrayals of angels and the conventions used to depict court eunuchs . mainly from the caucasus , they tended to have light eyes , hair , and skin ; and those '' castrated in childhood developed a distinctive skeletal structure , lacked full masculine musculature , body hair and beards . '' as officials , they would wear a white tunic decorated with gold . brown suggests that '' byzantine artists drew , consciously or not , on this iconography of the court eunuch . '' some recent popular works on angels consider gabriel to be female or androgynous . . gabriel sculptures . file : gabor arkangyal.jpg archangel gabriel millennium monument at hősök tere in budapest file : bermatingen st georg heiligenfigur.jpg archangel gabriel in the church of st . georg in bermatingen file : waldburg pfarrkirche verkündigung engel.jpg archangel gabriel in the church of st . magnus in waldburg file : annonciation portail reims.jpg archangel gabriel at the facade of the cathedral of reims file : to the victims of the german occupation.jpg archangel gabriel at the liberty square , budapest . festivals . baltimore 's '' little italy '' has for over 80 years hosted an annual '' end of summer '' st . gabriel festival that features a procession with a statue of the saint carried through the streets . . film . in liliom ( 1930 ) , gabriel is portrayed by harvey clark . in the green pastures ( 1936 ) , gabriel is portrayed by oscar polk . in heaven only knows ( 1947 ) , gabriel was portrayed by william farnum . in the littlest angel ( 1969 ; television film ) , gabriel is portrayed by cab calloway . in horror film the prophecy ( 1995 ) , gabriel ( portrayed by christopher walken ) searches for an evil soul on earth during an apocalypse angelic civil war . he is also a character in the prophecy ii ( 1998 ) and the prophecy 3 : the ascent ( 2000 ) . in jesus ( 1999 ; television film ) , gabriel is portrayed by john light . in the fantasy/horror film constantine ( 2005 ) , tilda swinton portrays an androgynous archangel gabriel , the film 's main antagonist on the brink of the apocalypse . in the action/horror film gabriel ( 2007 ) , the eponymous character ( portrayed by andy whitfield ) fights to save the souls in purgatory by defeating the evil fallen angels . in the apocalyptic supernatural action film legion ( 2010 ) , kevin durand plays the role of archangel gabriel , the leader of the angel army , and the main antagonist . the story was continued in the tv series dominion . games . 2005 : spanish role-playing game anima : beyond fantasy - gabriel is as the humans know one of the seven '' beryls '' ( godlike beings of light ) and is identified with the archangel of the same name . she has associated love , friendship , arts , and peace . in the japanese role-playing game shin megami tensei - gabriel is one of the demons the player can summon to assist in battle . in the video game el shaddai : ascension of the metatron , based on the book of enoch , gabriel is featured alongside michael , raphael and uriel as a guide for enoch on his quest . all four archangels take the form of swans while on earth . gabriel is depicted as female in this interpretation , and implied to be an angel of wisdom . she is associated with the veil weapon enoch uses . literature . in his epic poem paradise lost , john milton made gabriel chief of the angelic guards placed over paradise the hebrew poem '' elifelet '' ( אליפלט ) by nathan alterman , put to music and often heard on the kol yisrael , tells of a heroic , self-sacrificing israeli soldier being killed in battle . upon the protagonist 's death , the angel gabriel descends to earth , in order to comfort the spirit of the fallen hero and take him up to heaven the main character of salman rushdie 's the satanic verses ( 1988 ) believes that he is the modern incarnation of gabriel . in japanese light novel series no game no life ( 2012 ) , jibril is a member of the flügel race and was a member of the council of 18 wings , a prominent section in the government . she is depicted as loving knowledge and books . in volume 3 of the japanese light novel series the devil is a part-timer ! , an archangel named gabriel appeared and is the guardian of the sephirah yesod . in the japanese light novel high school dxd features gabriel , alongside the rest of the seraph . in the novel , gabriel is depicted as a female and is given the titles of '' the strongest woman in heaven '' and '' the most beautiful woman in heaven . '' in august wilson 's fences ( 1985 ) , the mentally handicapped character gabriel believes with every fibre of his soul that he is the archangel gabriel . he carries around a trumpet on him always , and strives to chase away the '' hellhounds . '' in the last scene of the play , he calls for saint peter to open up the gates . music . the eccentric english hagiography and antiquarian , sabine baring-gould ( 1834–1924 ) wrote '' gabriel 's message '' , the english translation of the basque christmas carol birjina gaztetto bat zegoen . the original charol is likely related to the 13th or 14th-century latin chant angelus ad virginem , which itself is based on the biblical account of the annunciation in the gospel of luke . in '' my own prison '' by creed , gabriel is mentioned as deciphering the visions to the main character in the song . '' sugar baby '' , the last track on bob dylan 's love and theft album , contains this reference : . visual art . : see also commons : gabriel . daniel 8:15 describes gabriel as appearing in the '' likeness of man '' and in daniel 9:21 he is referred to as '' the man gabriel . '' david everson observes that '' such anthropomorphic descriptions of an angel are consistent with previous.descriptions of angels , '' as in genesis 19:5 . gabriel is most often portrayed in the context of scenes of the annunciation . in 2008 a 16th-century drawing by lucas van leyden of the netherlands was discovered . george r . goldner , chairman of the department of prints and drawings at new york 's metropolitan museum of art , suggested that the sketch was for a stained glass window . '' the fact that the archangel is an ordinary-looking person and not an idealized boy is typical of the artist '' , said goldner . vogel , carol . 25 july 2008 . '' angels appear , and museums rejoice . '' new york times . in chronological order ( to see each item , follow the link in the footnote ) : archangel gabriel ( triptych ) , early 10th century , benaki museum the archangel gabriel , pisan , c . 1325/50 , national gallery of art the archangel gabriel , masolino da panicale , c . 1420/30 , national gallery of art justice between the archangels michael and gabriel , jacobello del fiore , 1421 merode altarpiece ( triptych ) , robert campin , c . 1425 , metropolitan museum of art the angel gabriel , agostino di duccio , c . 1450 annunciation , leonardo da vinci , c . 1475 the angel gabriel , neroccio d'landi , c . 1490 the angel gabriel , late 15th or early 16th century , flemish , national gallery of art the angel gabriel , ferrari gaudenzio , 1511 , national gallery , london gabriel delivering the annunciation el greco , 1575 ( pictured above ) go down death , aaron douglas , 1934 the military order of saint gabriel was established to recognize '' individuals who have made significant contributions to the u.s . army public affairs community and practice . '' the medallion depicts st . gabriel sounding a trumpet , while the obverse displays the army public affairs emblem . military order of saint gabriel . television . the twilight zone ( 1960 ) episode , '' a passage for trumpet '' – the down-and-out musician joey crown ( jack klugman ) meets an enigmatic trumpet player named '' gabe '' ( played by john anderson ) , in what has been described as rod serling 's version of it 's a wonderful life . supernatural ( 2005 ) – gabriel , portrayed by richard speight jr . , is a runaway archangel who kills people he deems evil , also interacting with other angels , including his siblings michael , raphael , and lucifer . dominion ( 2014 ) – gabriel , portrayed by carl beukes , is the series antagonist , who plans to kill the archangel michael and annihilate humanity . now apocalypse ( 2019 ) – gabriel , portrayed by tyler posey , is an enigmatic trumpet player who has a passionate tryst with series protagonist ulysses zane before warning him about an impending apocalypse . amazon prime miniseries good omens ( 2019 ) – gabriel is portrayed by jon hamm . the show is based on the novel by terry pratchett and neil gaiman .