New Zealand literature

history . early works : pre-1870 . polynesia settlers began arriving in new zealand in the late 13th or early 14th centuries , and became known as māori as they developed a distinct culture , including the development of māori myths , legends , poetry , songs ( waiata ) and prayers . public speaking on the marae was ( and remains ) a particularly important part of māori culture , and performance was a key part of the oral tradition ; for example , maori women perform karanga ( a ceremonial call ) as part of the pōwhiri ( welcoming ceremony ) . māori did not have a written language until early christian missionaries worked with māori in the early 19th century to develop a written form of the language . as european settlers arrived , they collected many māori oral stories and poems , which were translated into english and published , for example maori fairy tales ( 1908 ) by johannes andersen . these stories , such as those about the god māui , became widely known among the non-māori population of new zealand as well as the māori people . a foundation was also laid for future māori literature through māori newspapers , māori histories and the literature associated with māori religions such as the rātana and pai mārire movements . in the 19th century most pākehā new zealanders saw themselves as british , and most publications were written by british authors for a british audience . it took time for a distinctly new zealand literature to develop . the first printing press arrived in new zealand in 1834 , and the first book printed was a māori translation of a catechism , ko te katikihama iii , by william yate in 1830 . early new zealand books were generally narratives of visits and travel to new zealand , such as a narrative of a nine months ' residence in new zealand in 1827 ( 1832 ) by augustus earle or station life in new zealand ( 1870 ) by mary anne barker , or scientific works such as the new zealanders illustrated , a rare book by natural history artist george french angas ( 1847 ) and a history of the birds of new zealand ( 1872 ) by ornithologist walter buller . early expressions of new zealand identity in literature included , notably , old new zealand by '' a pākehā māori '' ( frederick edward maning ) and erewhon by samuel butler , which drew on the author 's experiences of living in canterbury for five years . . māoriland movement : 1870–1914 . in the late 19th and early 20th century , new zealand nationalism began to emerge , with pākehā writers adopting māori stories and mythology . the term '' māoriland '' , proposed and often used as an alternative name for new zealand around this time , became the centre of a literary movement , in which colonialist writers were inspired by and adopted māori traditions and legends . they were encouraged by a widespread belief among settlers that māori were a dying race who would not survive contact with europeans . for example , thomas bracken 's book musings in maoriland included the poem '' new zealand hymn '' , which later became the new zealand national anthem under the title '' god defend new zealand '' . bracken and other poets such as jessie mackay and arthur henry adams published poems about the māori rangatira ( chief ) te rauparaha , while alfred grace , jessie weston and others wrote fictional short stories and novels with māori themes . new zealand 's fourth premier , alfred domett , wrote an epic poem , ranolf and amohia : a south-sea day-dream ( 1872 ) , which was over 100,000 words long and described a romance between a shipwrecked european man and a māori woman . in 1901 william satchell launched a magazine called the maorilander , and the leftwing labour journal maoriland worker ran from 1910 to 1924 . the new zealand wars were a popular subject in fiction , typified by the rebel chief : a romance of new zealand ( 1896 ) , by hume nisbet , as were colonial romances in the works of louisa baker , ellen ellis , edith searle grossmann and others . māoriland culture was artificial and grounded in romance rather than reality ; as academics jane stafford and mark williams have said , '' maoriland signifies an effort to deny the real presence of maori in new zealand in favour of a mythologised or decorative presence '' . for this reason the term is now seen as archaic and colonial . by the time of the first world war , apart from a few individuals such as james cowan and rudall hayward , the movement had largely ended . . early 20th century : 1914–1949 . new zealand literature continued to develop in the early 20th century , with notable writers including the poet blanche edith baughan and novelist jane mander . new zealand 's most famous and influential writer in these years was the short-story writer katherine mansfield , who left new zealand in 1908 and became one of the founders of literary modernism . she published three collections of stories in her lifetime : in a german pension ( 1911 ) , bliss and other stories ( 1920 ) and the garden party and other stories ( 1922 ) . she died in 1923 , having ( in the words of c.k . stead ) '' laid the foundations for a reputation that has gone on to grow and influence the development of new zealand literature ever since '' . another notable early writer was ursula bethell , whose first poetry collection was published in 1929 ; her poetry is ascribed by the oxford companion to twentieth-century literature in english as having '' a plainness and spareness ( as well as freshness of image ) which distinguishes it from the more ornamented verse the country had previously produced '' . edith joan lyttleton , who wrote as g.b . lancaster , was new zealand 's most commercially successful writer in this period , known for her epic colonial romances . by the 1930s , new zealand writing was starting to become established , assisted by the growth of universities and small publishers . notable works included man alone ( 1939 ) by john mulgan , an influential classic describing an isolated and alienated new zealand man ( which has itself become a cultural stereotype ) , influenced by the great depression , show down ( 1936 ) by margaret escott , and frank sargeson 's short story collection , a man and his wife ( 1940 ) . it was common at this time for writers , like mansfield , to leave new zealand and establish careers overseas : such as mulgan , dan davin , who joined the oxford university press , and journalist geoffrey cox . ngaio marsh , who divided her time between new zealand and england , wrote detective fiction in the 1930s and was known as one of the '' queens of crime '' . after the depression , foreign theatre companies stopped touring new zealand , which led to the establishment of a thriving amateur dramatic scene and playwrights such as isobel andrews achieving success through competitions held by the new zealand branch of the british drama league . writing was still largely a pākehā endeavour at this time ; many māori were living in rural areas and recovering from the loss of their land and language , depopulation , and educational challenges . te rangi hīroa and apirana ngata wrote non-fiction and collected māori songs and chants for publication , but there were limited opportunities for māori in literature . from 1941 , new zealand writing gained an international audience through john lehmann 's periodical , new writing . a local version was produced between 1942 and 1945 . in 1945 , sargeson edited an anthology of short stories by new zealand writers , called speaking for ourselves , published both by caxton press in new zealand and by reed & harris in melbourne , australia . it received favourable reviews , and writer janet frame later remembered how the stories in the collection '' overwhelmed me by the fact of their belonging '' . in 1945 , allen curnow published the anthology a book of new zealand verse 1923–45 , which marked the beginning of new zealand literature 's post-colonial and nationalist phase ; charles brasch compared it to '' a hard frost '' that '' killed off weeds , and promoted sound growth '' , and said it '' set a standard not for poetry alone but for all the arts '' . curnow and brasch were just two of the generation of poets who began their careers with caxton press in the 1930s , and had a major influence on new zealand poetry ; others in the group were a . r . d . fairburn , r . a . k . mason and denis glover . their poems can be contrasted with the work of south african-born robin hyde , who was excluded from this nationalist group , but whose novel the godwits fly ( 1938 ) was considered a new zealand classic and continuously in print until the 1980s . in 1946 , the new zealand literary fund was set up to provide subsidies and scholarships for local publishing and writing . . modern literature . it was in the 1950s that , as historian and poet keith sinclair said , '' new zealand intellect and imagination came alive '' . by the 1950s there were a wide range of outlets for local literature , such as the influential journal landfall ( established in 1947 ) , and the bilingual quarterly te ao hou / the new world , which from 1952 to 1975 was a vehicle for māori writers . . māori and pasifika writing . after the second world war , māori began to move into urban areas and had more educational opportunities available , which led to the emergence of māori writing . in 1964 , hone tuwhare , the first māori poet to be distinguished for english poetry , published his first book , no ordinary sun , and in 1966 jacquie sturm became the first māori writer to appear in a major anthology of new zealand short stories . authors like sturm , arapera blank , rowley habib and patricia grace were published for the first time in te ao hou and became widely known and respected . witi ihimaera was the first māori writer to publish a collection of short stories ( pounamu , pounamu in 1972 ) and the first to publish a novel ( tangi in 1973 ) . his novel whale rider ( 1987 ) was adapted into an whale rider in 2002 . grace was the first māori woman writer to publish a short story collection ( waiariki in 1975 ) and has since received international awards and acclaim for her books for adults and children . keri hulme and alan duff were the best-known māori writers to follow grace and ihimaera . duff is known for the widely acclaimed once were warriors ( 1990 ) , which became a successful 1994 film and has never been out of print . notable pasifika writers include albert wendt , alastair campbell , john pule and selina tusitala marsh . wendt is known for sons for the return home ( 1973 ) , which describes the experiences of a young samoan man in new zealand , and his later novels and short-story collections have formed the foundations for a pasifika literature in english . . fiction . janet frame 's first novel , owls do cry , was published in 1957 , and she became the most acclaimed and well-known new zealand novelist of the 20th century . her work often drew on her experiences in psychiatric hospitals and feature stylistic experimentation and exploration of social conditions . other notable writers in the post-second world war period included ronald hugh morrieson , bill pearson , sylvia ashton-warner and essie summers . in the 1960s two young novelists , maurice shadbolt and maurice gee , both became well-known for their traditional , socially realistic novels featuring new zealand politics and history . gee 's plumb trilogy continues to be widely read , and the first novel , plumb ( 1979 ) , was voted by literary experts in 2018 to be the best new zealand novel of the last fifty years . keri hulme gained prominence when her novel , the bone people , won the booker prize in 1985 . she was the first new zealander and the first debut novelist to win the prestigious award . in 2013 , eleanor catton became the second new zealand winner ( as well as the youngest winner ) of the award for her novel the luminaries . . children 's and young adult literature . margaret mahy and joy cowley both had their first children 's books published in 1969 . both became prolific and beloved authors , and have made a significant contribution to new zealand children 's literature . mahy won the carnegie medal twice in the 1980s and in 2001 won the hans christian andersen award , the world 's most prestigious children 's literature award . cowley is internationally known for her children 's educational books for children learning to read , as well as for her picture books , children 's fiction and young adult novels . other well-known authors for young children include lynley dodd ( known for her picture books featuring small dog hairy maclary ) , patricia grace , kāterina mataira ( a leading māori language author ) and gavin bishop ( known particularly for illustration ) . new zealand has a strong tradition of fantasy and social realism in novels for children and young adults . maurice gee became well-known for his science fiction and fantasy books , notably under the mountain ( 1979 ) and the halfmen of o ( 1982 ) . other internationally well-known fantasy writers for children and young adults include sherryl jordan , gaelyn gordon , elizabeth knox , barbara else and david hair . from the 1980s , young adult literature emerged in new zealand , with authors like gee , jack lasenby , paula boock , kate de goldi , fleur beale and david hill tackling serious and controversial topics for teenage readers . tessa duder 's alex quartet ( 1987–1992 ) explored issues of sexism , racism and personal trauma in 1950s and 1960s new zealand . bernard beckett and mandy hager became well-known in the 2000s for socially realistic and dystopian young adult fiction . . poetry . a new generation of young new zealand poets emerged in the 1950s and 1960s , in particular the '' wellington group '' , which rejected the nationalism of curnow and the other caxton poets . they argued that new zealand poets could now focus on universal themes , rather than the new zealand identity . james k . baxter was the most famous and prolific of these poets , and is widely regarded today as the definitive new zealand poet . he was a controversial figure , known for his incorporation of european myths into his new zealand poems , his interest in māori culture and language , and his religious experiences and establishment of a commune at jerusalem , new zealand . other members of the wellington group included alastair campbell and fleur adcock , and the scholars c . k . stead and vincent o'sullivan also became well-known for their poetry around this time . the 1970s and 1980s saw the rise of confident young poets , often influenced by american writing and counterculture and writing about personal relationships , such as ian wedde , bill manhire , cilla mcqueen , elizabeth smither , sam hunt and murray edmond . mcqueen and hunt are both well-known for their performance poetry . the national library of new zealand appoints a new zealand poet laureate every two years . pasifika poet selina tusitala marsh was the poet laureate from 2017 to 2019 . david eggleton is the poet laureate from 2019 to 2021 . other notable contemporary poets include robert sullivan , known for his first collection jazz waiata ( 1990 ) and more recent work including the collection shout ha ! to the sky ( 2010 ) , hera lindsay bird and karlo mila . playwriting . the 1960s saw significant developments in new zealand playwriting , and the country 's first professional theatre , the downstage theatre , opened in wellington in 1964 . playmarket was also founded in 1973 to represent and market new zealand playwrights and their work . bruce mason was the country 's first professional playwright . his one-man show the end of the golden weather ( 1962 ) , about a boy 's loss of innocence in depression-era new zealand , was performed widely throughout new zealand , and he explored māori themes and the disintegration of māori identity in the pohutakawa tree ( 1960 ) and awatea ( 1969 ) . mervyn thompson , a controversial playwright , wrote plays with autobiographical and political elements such as o temperance ! ( 1974 ) . in 1976 , a group of downstage actors left to found the circa theatre , and produced glide time by roger hall as one of their first productions . hall became new zealand 's most commercially successful playwright , and glide time became a new zealand icon and was turned into a tv sitcom . greg mcgee 's foreskin 's lament ( 1981 ) , about small-town rugby culture in new zealand , likewise achieved iconic status . drama further developed in the 1980s and 1990s with new playwrights finding success , including renée , stuart hoar , hone kouka and briar grace-smith . jean betts 's feminist play ophelia thinks harder ( 1993 ) was still widely performed in new zealand and overseas as of 2014 , and may be the most widely performed new zealand play . the collective pacific underground developed the groundbreaking play fresh off the boat ( 1993 ) , written by oscar kightley and simon small , which was praised for its portrayal of samoan life in new zealand . new zealand also has a tradition of independent theatre with companies creating original plays and collective works ; for example , the red mole theatre group ( 1970s–2002 ) , barbarian productions in wellington ( led by jo randerson ) , the christchurch free theatre , the work of poet murray edmond with the living theatre troupe , and the early work of paul maunder with the amamus theatre . . see also . māori poetry list of new zealand literary awards list of new zealand writers . notes . references . . external links . new zealand electronic text centre new zealand literature at the new zealand electronic text centre new zealand electronic poetry centre read nz te pou muramura