Beard

biology . the beard develops during puberty . beard growth is linked to stimulation of hair follicles in the area by dihydrotestosterone , which continues to affect beard growth after puberty . dihydrotestosterone also promotes balding . dihydrotestosterone is produced from testosterone , the levels of which vary with season . beard growth rate is also genetic . . evolution . biologists characterize beards as a secondary sexual characteristic because they are unique to one sex , yet do not play a direct role in reproduction . charles darwin first suggested a possible evolutionary explanation of beards in his work the descent of man , which hypothesized that the process of sexual selection may have led to beards . modern biologists have reaffirmed the role of sexual selection in the evolution of beards , concluding that there is evidence that a majority of women find men with beards more attractive than men without beards . evolutionary psychology explanations for the existence of beards include signalling sexual maturity and signalling dominance by the increasing perceived size of jaws ; clean-shaved faces are rated less dominant than bearded . some scholars assert that it is not yet established whether the sexual selection leading to beards is rooted in attractiveness ( inter-sexual selection ) or dominance ( intra-sexual selection ) . a beard can be explained as an indicator of a male 's overall condition . the rate of facial hairiness appears to influence male attractiveness . the presence of a beard makes the male vulnerable in hand-to-hand fights ( it provides an easy way to grab and hold the opponent 's head ) , which is costly , so biologists have speculated that there must be other evolutionary benefits that outweigh that drawback . excess testosterone evidenced by the beard may indicate mild immunosuppression , which may support spermatogenesis . folstad and skarsein cited by . history . ancient and classical world . . lebanon . the ancient semitic civilization situated on the western , coastal part of the fertile crescent and centered on the coastline of modern lebanon gave great attention to the hair and beard . where the beard has mostly a strong resemblance to that affected by the assyrians , and familiar to us from their sculptures . it is arranged in three , four , or five rows of small tight curls , and extends from ear to ear around the cheeks and chin . sometimes , however , in lieu of the many rows , we find one row only , the beard falling in tresses , which are curled at the extremity . there is no indication of the phoenicians having cultivated mustachios . the 2013 boston red sox featured at least 12 players with varying degrees of facial hair , ranging from the closely trimmed beard of slugger david ortiz to the long shaggy looks of jonny gomes and mike napoli . the red sox used their beards as a marketing tool , offering a dollar beard night , where all fans with beards ( real or fake ) could buy a ticket for 1.00 ; and also as means of fostering team camaraderie . beards have also become a source of competition between athletes . examples of athlete '' beard-offs '' include nba players deshawn stevenson and drew gooden in 2008 , and wwe wrestler daniel bryan and oakland athletics outfielder josh reddick in 2013 . . armed forces . depending on the country and period , facial hair was either prohibited in the army or an integral part of the uniform . styles . beard hair is most commonly removed by shaving or by trimming with the use of a beard trimmer . if only the area above the upper lip is left unshaven , the resulting facial hairstyle is known as a moustache ; if hair is left only on the chin , the style is a goatee . full : downward flowing beard with either a styled or integrated moustache garibaldi : wide , full beard with rounded bottom and integrated moustache old dutch : a large , long beard , connected by sideburns , that flares outward in width at the bottom , without a mustache . sideburns : hair grown from the temples down the cheeks toward the jawline . worn by isaac asimov and carlos menem . jawline beard : a beard that is grown from the chin along the jawline . chinstrap , chin curtain and brett are all variations of a jawline beard with distinctions being chin coverage and sideburn length . chinstrap : a beard with long sideburns that comes forward and ends under the chin . chin curtain : similar to the chinstrap beard but covers the entire chin . also called a lincoln , shenandoah , or spade . brett : similar to the chin curtain beard , but does not connect to the sideburns . neckbeard ( a.k.a . neard , a portmanteau of '' neck '' and '' beard '' ) : similar to the chinstrap , but with the chin and jawline shaven , leaving hair to grow only on the neck . while never as popular as other beard styles , a few noted historical figures have worn this type of beard , such as nero , horace greeley , henry david thoreau , william empson , peter cooper , moses mendelssohn , richard wagner , and michael costa . circle beard : commonly mistaken for the goatee , the circle beard is a small chin beard that connects around the mouth to a moustache . also called a doorknocker . designer stubble : a short growth of the male beard that was popular in the west in the 1980s , and experienced a resurgence in popularity in the 2010s . sea captain : a rounded , bottom-heavy beard of medium length with short sides that is often paired with a longer mustache . goatee : a tuft of hair grown on the chin , sometimes resembling a billy goat 's . junco : a goatee that extends upward and connects to the corners of the mouth but does not include a mustache , like the circle beard . meg : a goatee that extends upward and connects to the mustache , this word is commonly used in the south east of ireland . van dyke : a goatee accompanied by a moustache . monkey tail : a van dyke as viewed from one side , and a lincoln plus moustache as viewed from the other , giving the impression that a monkey 's tail stretches from an ear down to the chin and around one 's mouth . hollywoodian : a beard with an integrated mustache that is worn on the lower part of the chin and jaw area , without connecting sideburns . reed : a beard with an integrated mustache that is worn on the lower part of the chin and jaw area that tapers towards the ears without connecting sideburns . royale : a narrow pointed beard extending from the chin . the style was popular in france during the period of the second empire , from which it gets its alternative name , the imperial or impériale . verdi : a short beard with a rounded bottom and slightly shaven cheeks with a prominent moustache muslim beard : full beard with the moustache trimmed soul patch : a small beard just below the lower lip and above the chin glitter beard : beard dipped in glitter . hulihee : clean-shaven chin with fat chops connected at the moustache . friendly mutton chops : long mutton chop-type sideburns connected to a mustache , but with a shaved chin . stashburns or the lemmy : sideburns that drop down the jaw but jut upwards across the mustache , leaving the chin exposed . similar to friendly mutton chops . often found in southern and southwestern american culture ( see , for example , the yosemite sam caricature ) . closed or tied beard : mostly seen among modern sikh youth , this is a kind of full beard tied by using a sticky liquid or gel and stiffens below the chin . oakley beard : described by indian makeup artist banu as '' neither a french beard nor a full beard '' . she used the look for rajinikanth in enthiran ( 2010 ) . . maintenance . for appearance and cleanliness , some people maintain their beards by exfoliating the skin , using soap or shampoo and sometimes conditioner , and afterward applying oils for softness . in animals . the term '' beard '' is also used for a collection of stiff , hairlike feathers on the centre of the breast of turkeys . normally , the turkey 's beard remains flat and may be hidden under other feathers , but when the bird is displaying , the beard becomes erect and protrudes several centimetres from the breast . many goats possess a beard . several animals are termed '' bearded '' as part of their common name . sometimes a beard of hair on the chin or face is prominent but for some others , '' beard '' may refer to a pattern or colouring of the pelage reminiscent of a beard . bearded barbet bearded collie pogona bearded pig bearded reedling bearded saki bearded seal bearded vulture bearded woodpecker . see also . barbatus ( disambiguation ) , a common latin name , meaning '' bearded '' joseph palmer ( communard ) defended himself from being forcibly shaved in 1830 the beards ( australian band ) world beard and moustache championships . notes . references . . further reading . reginald reynolds : beards : their social standing , religious involvements , decorative possibilities , and value in offence and defence through the ages ( doubleday , 1949 ) helen bunkin , randall williams : beards , beards , beards ( hunter & cyr , 2000 ) allan peterkin : one thousand beards . a cultural history of facial hair ( arsenal pulp press , 2001 ) a dictionary of early christian beliefs , david w . bercot , editor , pg 66–67 . thomas s . gowing : the philosophy of beards ( j . haddock , 1854 ) ; reprinted 2014 by the british library , . external links .