Takbir

exegesis . the arabic word means great from the semitic root . the arabic word is the elative form ( greatest ) of the adjective kabīr . when used in the it is usually translated as greatest , but some authors translate it as greater . e . w . lane , arabic english lexicon , 1893 , gives for kabir : '' greater , and greatest , in body , or corporeal substance , and in estimation or rank or dignity , and more , or most , advanced in age , older , and oldest '' ( p . 2587 ) . '' the formula , as the briefest expression of the absolute superiority of the one god , is used in muslim life in different circumstances , in which the idea of god , his greatness and goodness is suggested . '' wensinck , a . j . the encyclopaedia of islam , 2nd edition . brill , 2000 . volume 10 , t-u , p . 119 , takbir . the term itself is the stem ii verbal noun of the triliteral root , meaning '' great '' , from which akbar '' greater '' is derived . the form is the nominative of allah , meaning 'god' . böwering , gerhard , god and his attributes , encyclopaedia of the qurʼān , brill , 2007 . macdonald , d . b . the encyclopaedia of islam , 2nd edition . brill , 1971 . volume 3 , h-iram , p . 1093 , ilah . . usage in islamic rituals . this phrase is recited by muslims in many different situations . for example , when they are very happy , to express approval , to prevent a muslim from becoming prideful by reminding them that allah is their source of success , as a battle cry , or during times of extreme stress . the phrase is not found in the quran , which does not refer to god as akbar , but uses the name al-kabīr '' the great '' or kabīr '' great '' , commonly translated as '' most great '' ( 13:9 , 31:30 , 22:62 , 34:23 , 40:12 , 4:34 ) . in prayer . the phrase is said during each stage of both salah ( obligatory prayers , performed five times a day ) , and nafl ( supererogatory prayers , performed at will ) . the muslim call to prayer ( adhan ) by the muezzin and to commence prayer ( iqama ) also contains the phrase . while there are many short prayers like it , the usage of takbir is more frequent than any other short prayer . . following births and deaths . the phrase is used after the birth of a child as a means of praising god . it is also part islamic funeral and burial customs . . during the eid festival and the hajj . during the festival of eid al-adha and the days preceding it , muslims recite the takbīr . this is particularly the case on the day of arafah . . during the halal slaughter of animals . the process of pronouncing the name of allah while performing dhabihah one must say '' bismillah allahu akbar '' . . other social usage . the expression '' allah akbar '' can be used in a variety of situations , from celebrations to times of grief . in a historical account by someone who was present both at the birth of abd allah ibn al-zubayr and at his funeral , the author observes that '' allahu akbar '' was said on both occasions . . in times of distress . the phrase is sometimes used during distress . just before garuda indonesia flight 152 crashed into the jungle near medan , indonesia , the pilot screamed '' aaaaaaah ! allāhu akbar '' into his radio . according to a radio communication transcript , the pilot 's conversation with the air controller had been in english , but his last words were the takbir as the plane crashed on september 26 , 1997 , killing all 234 people aboard in indonesia 's deadliest crash . it was suspected that the crash may have been due to either disorientation or turbine engine failure caused by local dense smog resulting from forest fires . . in times of joy and gratitude . takbir can be used to express joy or surprise . it is also used as applause in religious contexts , such as after a quran recital , as other forms of applause are considered less appropriate . when reshma begum was discovered alive 17 days after the 2013 savar building collapse in bangladesh which killed 1129 people , crowds jubilantly cried '' allāhu akbar '' to express their joy and gratitude that she had survived . as a multi-purpose phrase , it is sometimes used by arab football commentators as an expression of amazement , or even as a football chant . . in battles . it has been used historically as a battle cry during war . ludwig w . adamec , historical dictionary of islam , scarecrow press , 2nd ed . 2009 , pg . 32 ibn ishaq 's life of mohammed narrates at least two incidents in which the phrase was used . '' when the apostle raided a people he waited until the morning . if he heard a call to prayer ' he held back ; if he did not hear it he attacked . we came to khaybar by night , and the apostle passed the night there ; and when morning came he did not hear the call to prayer , ' so he rode and we rode with him , and i rode behind abii talba with my foot touching the apostle 's foot . we met the workers of khaybar coming out in the morning with their spades and baskets . when they saw the apostle and the army they cried , ` muhammad with his force , ' and turned tail and fled . the apostle said , 'allah akbar ! khaybar is destroyed . when we arrive in a people 's square it is a bad morning for those who have been warned . ' '' ( page 511 ) '' so he got off his horse and came at him and 'ali advanced with his shield . ` amr aimed a blow which cut deeply into the shield so that the sword stuck in it and struck his head . but 'ali gave him a blow on the vein at the base of the neck and he fell to the ground . the dust rose and the apostle heard the cry , 'allah akbar ' and knew that 'ali had killed him . '' ( page 456 ) life of mohammed سيرة رسول الله by ibn ishaq , translated by alfred guillaume , oxford university press , 1955 , 17th printing , karachi , 2004 . protest . during the iranian revolution of 1979 , it was shouted from rooftops in iran during the evenings as a form of protest . this practice returned in the 2009 iranian presidential election protests , yahoo news which protested the election results . . usage by extremists . the phrase has sometimes been used as a battle cry by muslim extremism . this usage has been denounced by other ( majority of ) muslims . professor khaled a . beydoun writes that the association of the phrase '' allah akbar '' with terrorism has been exacerbated by mass media and television pundits . he points out that fictional films and shows also utilize it as a cinematic trope further cementing the association . . usage by christians . the phrase is also used by arabic speaking christians ; '' god '' being translated '' allah '' in arabic christian bibles . the phrase is also used in liturgical contexts among palestinian orthodox christians , and has been defended by palestinian orthodox archbishop , sebastia theodosios . . on flags . the phrase allāhu akbar is written on the center of the flag of iraq , 22 times along the borders of the central white stripe on the flag of iran , and beneath the shahada in the flag of afghanistan in white script on the central red background as determined by the 2004 draft constitution . iraq . during the gulf war in january 1991 , saddam hussein held a meeting with top military commanders , where it was decided to add the words allāhu akbar ( described as the islamic battle cry ) to iraq 's flag to boost his secular regime 's religious credentials , casting himself as the leader of an islamic army . hussein described the flag as '' the banner of jihad and monotheism '' . in 2004 , the us-picked iraqi governing council approved a new flag for iraq that abandoned symbols of hussein 's regime , such as the words allāhu akbar . in january 2008 , however , iraq 's parliament passed a law to change the flag by leaving in the phrase , but changing the calligraphy of the words allāhu akbar , which had been a copy of hussein 's handwriting , to a kufic script . abdul-zahra , qassim , '' iraqi lawmakers vote to change flag , '' usa today , january 22 , 2008 , accessed february 9 , 2010 the iraqi flag under hussein had each of the two words of the phrase written in one of the spaces between the stars on the central band ; the 2008 flag , while leaving the phrase in , removes the stars . iran . the phrase allāhu akbar is written on the flag of iran , as called for by article 18 of the constitution of the islamic republic of iran . the phrase appears 22 times on the flag . jacoby , jeff , '' is israel a jewish state ? '' , the boston globe , november 14 , 2007 , accessed february 11 , 2010 . afghanistan . the afghan constitution that came into force on january 4 , 2004 , required that allāhu akbar be inscribed on afghanistan 's national flag . mccarthy , andrew c . , '' cold comfort on islam and apostasy ; no one who ’ s actually read the afghan constitution should be surprised by the abdul rahman case '' , national review , march 27 , 2006 , accessed february 11 , 2010 . waziristan . a resistance movement that fought british rule in waziristan , pakistan , in the 1930s used a red flag bearing allāhu akbar in white letters . image : flag of afghanistan.svg flag of afghanistan , with the phrase beneath the shahada image : flag of iraq.svg flag of iraq , with stylized kufic script , introduced in 2008 image : flag of iran.svg flag of iran , introduced in 1980 image : flag of waziristan resistance ( 1930s ) . svg flag of 1930s waziristan resistance movement . see also . dhikr tasbih tahmid tahlil basmala salawat hallelujah hallel alláh-u-abhá deo optimo maximo . notes . references . books . . external links . essay on takbir at slate