Vivian Stanshall

early life and education . stanshall was born on 21 march 1943 at the radcliffe maternity home shillingford , oxfordshire , and christened victor anthony . he lived with his mother eileen ( née wadeson ) while his father , victor ( 1909–1990 ; born vivian ) served in the raf during world war ii . stanshall described this early period as the happiest time of his childhood . when the war ended , his father returned , but the young victor found him difficult and comparatively stern after having been alone with his mother . vivian stanshall , the early years , aka crank . , 1991 bbc two , 1991 the family moved to the father 's hometown of walthamstow , essex , where stanshall 's younger brother mark was born in 1949 . with six years between them , the brothers were never close . vivian stanshall : essex teenager to renaissance man ( 1994 ) , bbc radio 4 despite growing up in the east end , his father made him speak with a '' plummy '' accent for which he later became known . stanshall studied at walthamstow college of art , where he met fellow students ian dury and peter greenaway . about this time , the stanshall family moved to the essex coastal town of leigh-on-sea . he attended southend high school for boys until 1959 . as a young man , stanshall ( known as vic ) earned money doing various odd jobs at the kursaal fun fair in nearby southend-on-sea . these included working as a bingo caller and spending the winter painting the fairground attractions . to set aside enough money to get through art school ( his father having refused to fund this ) , stanshall spent a year in the merchant navy . he said he was a very bad waiter , but became a great teller of tall tales . stanshall enrolled at the central school of art and design in london . he joined fellow students in forming a band ( including rodney slater , roger ruskin spear and neil innes , who was studying art at goldsmiths college ) . innes said of their first meeting : 'we first met in a big irish pub in south london , the new cross arms . he was quite plump in those days , and he was wearing billy bunter check trousers , a victorian frock coat , black coat tails , horrible little oval , violet-tinted pince-nez glasses , he had a euphonium under his arm , and large rubber false ears . and i thought , well , this is an interesting character . ' stephen fry 's bbc radio 4 tribute . about this time , stanshall changed his first name to 'vivian ' , the name his father had abandoned . this was not made his legal name until 1977 . '' interview with ki longfellow-stanshall '' , the bristolian , may 1988 those who knew him from his student days continued to call him vic . later friends and collaborators knew him as viv . bonzo years . the bonzo dog doo-dah band were named after a word game that stanshall played with co-founder slater , in which they cut up sentences and juxtaposed fragments to form new ones . 'bonzo dog/dada ' was one result which they liked . the band initially performed under this name , but grew tired of explaining what dada meant and so it became the bonzo dog doo-dah band , 'doo-dah ' being a placeholder name that both slater 's mother and stanshall himself used to describe everyday objects ; later the name was shortened to the bonzo dog band , or just the bonzos . much of the band 's original repertoire was based on comedic re-workings of songs from the 1920s and '30s , found on 78 records , bought for penny from local flea markets . for a while , the band operated semi-professionally , playing local pubs and the college circuit . after acquiring a manager , they went full-time and were booked on the working men 's club circuit , mainly in the north of england . the band dominated their lives , as they frequently travelled to low-paying gigs in an old van crammed with any number of musical instruments , an assortment of props , and prop robots . in 1967 , they appeared in the beatles ' television film magical mystery tour , where they played stanshall 's '' death cab for cutie '' during the strip club scene . the appearance led to a spot as the house band on do not adjust your set , a weekly children 's television revue series that was also notable for early appearances by half of what became the monty python team . according to their manager/agent gerry bron , after a perhaps ill-advised agreement that the band should be left to their own artistic devices , stanshall was allowed several weeks in a hired rehearsal space to write songs for the new bonzo dog band album . when bron arrived at the location to check the progress of these endeavours , he found that stanshall had not written anything at all and had instead built a variety of hutches for his pet rabbits . originals – vivian stanshall : the canyons of his mind , bbc/october films , bbc4 , 2004 bron mentioned in a television documentary that this occurred in may 1968 in a hall in acton , london . the actual location is askew road church hall , at the start of bassein park road in shepherd 's bush . the date would suggest that these were rehearsals for the album the doughnut in granny 's greenhouse . during recordings for the album proper at morgan studios , stanshall , wearing just a rabbit 's head and underpants , interviewed members of the public in willesden high road . on the album track '' we are normal '' , one interviewee can be heard to remark , 'he 's got a head on him like a rabbit . ' later in 1968 , the bonzos scored a surprise top-ten hit with '' i 'm the urban spaceman '' co-produced by paul mccartney and gus dudgeon under the alias 'apollo c . vermouth' . meanwhile , the band toured incessantly and recorded a multitude of radio sessions for the bbc , alongside several albums . they also embarked upon two poorly organised but well-received tours of the united states . ( neil innes remembers that the band were reportedly stopped by a local sheriff and asked if they were carrying any firearms or drugs . when they denied both , the officer asked how they were going to defend themselves . stanshall piped up from the back of the minibus , 'with good manners ! ' ) it was during the particularly disastrously organised second tour that the bonzos decided to break up , partly because of stanshall 's growing stage fright—combined with increasing use of valium to help this , but also because of anger with their management , after spear 's wife suffered a miscarriage while he was away , and no-one informed him . the band subsequently decided to split whilst they were still friends . in march 1970 , they played their last show at loughborough university . after the bonzos . stanshall formed a number of short-lived groups during 1970 alone , including big grunt ( formed while the bonzos were still on their farewell tour , and including fellow bonzos roger ruskin spear and dennis cowan , and with anthony 'bubs ' white on guitar ) , the sean head showband ( again featuring cowan and white ) , gargantuan chums , and the slightly longer-lived bonzo dog freaks , with innes and the ever-faithful cowan and white ( this conglomerate was also known simply as 'freaks ' ) . early that year , big grunt recorded a well-received session for bbc radio 1 disc jockey john peel , and shortly afterwards made a memorable appearance on bbc television . despite this promising start , big grunt dissolved during their first uk tour when stanshall became incapacitated by the onset of an anxiety disorder that caused a nervous breakdown and would continue to plague him for the rest of his life . however , he soon recovered sufficiently to record and release , on the liberty label , his first solo single '' labio-dental fricative/paper round '' , credited to vivian stanshall and the sean head showband ( an oblique reference to stanshall having shaved off all of his hair during his breakdown ) , and featuring eric clapton on guitar . later in the year , his single version of terry stafford 's song '' suspicion '' , credited to vivian stanshall and gargantuan chums and featuring keith moon and john entwistle of the who , was released . featured on the b-side was '' blind date '' , the only officially released track by big grunt . ( however , all of stanshall 's backing bands of 1970 featured the same core personnel , so it could be argued that they were essentially the same band , masquerading under a variety of names . ) in early 1971 , stanshall returned to touring with a new band , freaks . this group soon recorded a bbc radio session for peel that featured solo numbers by stanshall and innes alongside tracks from let 's make up and be friendly , the bonzos ' yet-to-be recorded contractual obligation/reunion album of 1972 . the session is also notable for marking the first appearance in any medium of an episode of stanshall 's magnum opus , rawlinson end . stanshall also found time during this period to be a founder member of the performance/poetry/music group grimms , alongside innes , the scaffold and associated poets and musicians . although stanshall left grimms before they made any recordings , he did continue to perform live with them on occasion . throughout this period , still suffering badly with anxiety and now drinking heavily to self-medicate , stanshall nonetheless continued to write , record and tour with freaks and then grimms . he was also a regular guest , broadcaster and presenter on numerous series on bbc radio . despite his ongoing personal difficulties , stanshall never lost his sense of humour . his exploits with long-time drinking buddy keith moon , who would become stanshall 's regular partner in crime for much of the 1970s after producing and appearing on stanshall 's single '' suspicion '' , are legendary . in one example , stanshall visited a tailor 's shop where he admired a pair of trousers . moon then arrived , posing as another customer , and admired the same trousers , demanding to buy them . when stanshall protested , the two men fought and split the trousers in two , so that they ended up with one leg each . the tailor was understandably beside himself . then , a one-legged actor—hired by stanshall and moon—would enter the scene , see the split trousers and proclaim : 'ah ! just what i was looking for ! i 'll buy them ! ' william donaldson , brewer 's rogues , villains & eccentrics , 2002 . thanks to his association with peel , stanshall was asked to fill in for the disc jockey while he was on a month 's holiday . the resulting short series , entitled vivian stanshall 's radio flashes , was recorded under the supervision of peel 's regular producer john walters and broadcast on bbc radio one in august 1971 . the series of four two-hour programmes were a mix of music and specially written and recorded comedic sketches . out of the original four episodes , only episodes 2 , 3 and 4 remain in the bbc archives , and these were re-broadcast on bbc radio 4 extra in 2014 and again in 2016 . however , since the 1970s , all four episodes and a christmas 1971 compilation special have circulated among collectors as low-quality , edited off-air recordings . contributors to the sketches in radio flashes included moon , traffic 's jim capaldi and actress chris bowler . the sketches included a four-part serial adventure titled '' breath from the pit '' , featuring the surreal exploits of a dick barton or bulldog drummond-style gentleman adventurer , colonel knutt ( played by stanshall ) and his working-class sidekick , the 'likeable cheeky cockney , lemmy ' . the serial was also partly a parody of charles chilton 's journey into space , with moon playing the role of lemmy . rawlinson end . stanshall had developed what many consider to be his seminal work , rawlinson end , as a spoken word performance piece during the first few years of the 1970s , recording an early version as part of the bonzo dog band 's reunion project let 's make up and be friendly . beginning in 1975 , he expanded upon the concept as an episodic surrealist radio serial for bbc radio 1 's john peel slot , elaborating further upon the weird and wonderful adventures of the inebriated and blimpish sir henry rawlinson , his dotty wife great aunt florrie , his '' unusual '' brother hubert , old scrotum 'the wrinkled retainer ' , the rambling and unhygienic cook mrs e . ; and many other inhabitants of the crumbling rawlinson end and its environs . stanshall had been playing around with the rawlinson characters for some time , and they were first referred to on the bonzos ' 1967 number , '' the intro and the outro '' : 'great to hear the rawlinsons on trombone . ' in 1978 , stanshall released an album , sir henry at rawlinson end , which reworked some material from the peel sessions . this in turn was adapted into a film version in 1980 , which was produced in a sepia-tinted black and white . it starred trevor howard as sir henry , and stanshall as hubert . some of the film 's music was provided in collaboration with stanshall 's friend steve winwood . a book of the same title - by stanshall , illustrated with stills from the film - was published by eel pie publishing in 1980 . nominally a film novelisation , it was distilled from the various versions and included considerable material that did not make it to the film . a projected second book , the eating at rawlinson end , was never completed . a second rawlinson album , sir henry at n'didi ’ s kraal ( 1984 ) , recounts sir henry 's disastrous african expedition , omitting the rest of the rawlinson clan . at the time , stanshall was living on the searchlight , a house boat he had bought from denny laine and kept moored near shepperton on the river thames . he lived on the searchlight from 1977 to 1983 , and recorded and produced the second 'sir henry ' album on it during a period of debilitating physical illness . the album was disowned by stanshall after its release , as he claimed it was both unfinished and unsatisfactory , and that the record label had rush-released it without his permission in an attempt to profit from his potentially imminent demise . however , the noticeably superior bbc radio broadcasts continued sporadically until late 1991 . in the same year , a temporarily rejuvenated stanshall embarked upon a nationwide concert tour , entitled 'rawlinson dog ends ' , with support from former bonzos and centred around a performance of new rawlinson end material . 'sir henry ' was last seen in a television commercial for ruddles brewery ( c . 1994 ) , where he was portrayed by a transvestism dawn french , presiding over a family banquet at a long table ; shortly afterwards , stanshall himself reprised the role of hubert , reciting a poem loosely based on edward lear 's '' the owl and the pussycat . '' during this same period , stanshall embarked upon the recording of a proposed new rawlinson end album , but this activity was curtailed in its early stages by its creator 's untimely death in march 1995 . after this , bbc radio 4 retrieved some of the original peel show recordings from the vaults for late-night repeat during christmas 1996 . 1970s . stanshall regularly performed live with grimms , as well as occasionally working with the alberts and the temperance seven during the first few years of the decade . he was also a frequent contributor to bbc radio at this time , appearing weekly on start the week and jack de manio precisely , and also on the bbc television satire series up sunday . in 1973 , stanshall recorded tracks for the soundtrack album of the movie that 'll be the day backed by moon , ronnie wood , graham bond and jack bruce , and collaborated on numerous musical projects , making a memorable appearance as the master of ceremonies on mike oldfield 's 1973 album tubular bells . ( he reprised the role for tubular bells ii in 1992 , but the final release featured alan rickman instead . ) stanshall made guest appearances on a number of other artists ' recordings including john entwistle 's smash your head against the wall in 1971 , mike hart 's basher , chalky , pongo and me in 1972 , pete brown 's the not forgotten association in 1973 , and robert calvert 's 1974 concept album captain lockheed and the starfighters . in early 1974 , stanshall wrote , arranged , and quickly recorded his first solo album , men opening umbrellas ahead . a rather more serious work than many would have expected , its darkly comic lyrics detailed stanshall 's alcoholism and troubled emotional state , laced with surreal poetic imagery and literary reference . other lyrics included implicit references to other musicians and the music business , and a rather more explicit satire of the author 's relationship with his own penis . musically , while certain tracks display stanshall 's usual keen sense of rock and roll parody , most of the album has a 'tribal ' or 'fusion ' flavour . prominently featuring the nigerian musician gasper lawal and with many tracks infused with richly textured african percussion and chorus vocal stylings , the album ( and its contemporary single '' lakonga '' ) can justifiably lay claim to being an early , unheralded example of a crossover between world music and rock music . stanshall 's long-standing friends and colleagues innes , white , traffic 's steve winwood , jim capaldi , ric grech and rebop kwaku baah , doris troy and madeline bell also made notable guest appearances . deleted after its first pressing and out of print for many years , the album was finally re-released on cd in 2012 . the bbc documentary one man 's week , broadcast on 9 april 1975 , documented a week in stanshall 's life and included footage of him at the manor recording studio during the sessions for men opening umbrellas ahead , where he played with white , lawal , mongezi feza , and derek ( or deryk ) quinn . in 1975 , stanshall provided the narration for a rock music version of peter and the wolf , produced by robin lumley and jack lancaster and featuring , among others , gary moore , manfred mann , phil collins , bill bruford , stéphane grappelli , alvin lee , cozy powell , brian eno and jon hiseman . 1976 saw the release of his single '' the young ones '' , where the old cliff richard standard was delivered in the style of boris karloff . in 1977 , stanshall and his companion , pamela 'ki ' longfellow , moved into a house-boat , the searchlight , moored on the thames between chertsey and shepperton . during this period , stanshall compiled and re-recorded material from his popular bbc radio 1 broadcasts for peel , which was released as sir henry at rawlinson end in 1978 . he also wrote the script for the film adaptation of the same name , later produced for tony stratton-smith 's charisma records company in 1980 . 1980s . following 'sir henry ' , stanshall wrote the songs for his third album teddy boys do n't knit ( 1981 ) , which included three songs about his family , and contributed a lyric to winwood 's arc of a diver . he and longfellow married in 1980 , and together they wrote some of the songs they later used for a musical comedy , stinkfoot , a comic opera . the houseboat the searchlight eventually sank . in 1982 , stanshall provided a spoken word segment on '' lovely money '' , a single by the damned . the stanshalls lived and worked on the thekla , a baltic trader , which ki sailed 732 nautical miles ( 1,356 & nbsp ; km ) from sunderland to be moored in the bristol docks . ki had bought the vessel and converted her into a floating theatre called 'the old profanity showboat ' . stanshall joined her on it in 1983 , when they opened the doors of the theatre . by this time , he was already suffering from alcohol and drug abuse , having become addicted to valium while trying to control his anxiety . in december 1985 , the old profanity showboat produced the debut of their work stinkfoot , a comic opera . stanshall wrote 27 original songs for the opera , sharing book and lyric writing with his wife . it has proved popular over the years , and was revived in london some years later , with peter moss as musical director . it was also produced in concert form in bristol , in july 2010 . having returned to london alone in 1986 while his wife recovered from an illness , stanshall saw stinkfoot briefly , but unsuccessfully , revived at the bloomsbury theatre . after this , he returned to the stage again , touring in a solo show , 'rawlinson dog-ends ' , initially with support from musicians including jack bruce . when bruce quit , over a lack of adequate rehearsals , moss stepped in to provide bass . . marriage and family . in 1968 , stanshall married fellow art student monica peiser , and their son rupert was born that year . they divorced in 1975 . on 9 september 1980 , stanshall married ki longfellow , an american writer who had a daughter from an earlier relationship . the stanshalls had a daughter , silky , born on 16 august 1979 , before they married ; she was named after silky sullivan , a racehorse that was a childhood favourite of her mother . stanshall celebrated silky 's birth in '' the tube '' , and his marriage to ki in '' bewilderbeeste '' , both songs being included on his album teddy boys do n't knit . he later gave his wife the name of 'ki ' from a dream . even though their comic opera stinkfoot was a success in late 1985 , stanshall returned alone to london after the turn of the year , while longfellow recuperated from an illness brought on by overwork and stress . once ki was well again , the stanshalls lived out the rest of their tumultuous marriage until his sudden death in march 1995 . at this point , they were both planning on living together in hampstead , london . years later , longfellow wrote the illustrated vivian stanshall : a fairytale of grimm art , detailing stanshall 's life and work from 1977 to 1995 . . memoirs . in 1991 , stanshall made a 15-minute autobiographical piece called vivian stanshall : the early years , a.k.a . crank , for bbc2 's the late show . he confessed to having been terrified of his father , who he said had always disapproved of him . his last television appearance , on the late show , was broadcast on 27 november that year . a programme for bbc radio 4 , vivian stanshall : essex teenager to renaissance man ( 1994 ) included an interview with his mother . she insisted his father had loved him . stanshall said on the same programme that his father had never shown it , not even on his deathbed . death . stanshall was found dead on the morning of 6 march 1995 , after an electrical fire had broken out as he slept in his top floor flat in muswell hill , north london . his private funeral service was held at the golders green crematorium , north london . a few days later his memorial service was held at st patrick 's church , soho square . a memorial plaque was unveiled in the poets ' corner of golders green crematorium on 13 december 2015 , opposite that of his friend keith moon , by his widow ki and his daughter silky . others attending included actor tony slattery , singer linda thompson and actress cherri gilham . the cost of the plaque was met by many of his fans and friends via online crowdfunding . . legacy and honours . writing in the independent after stanshall 's death , chris welch wrote : '' seen by some as a wild eccentric , and a powerful personality who could be both charming and intimidating , stanshall was perhaps too large a figure even for the music business to handle . he needed a producer to channel his energies , but always wanted to remain his own boss , having suffered too many perceived indignities in his early experience of the music business . '' he was described by neil innes as '' a national treasure '' . in 2001 , welch and lucian randall wrote a biography entitled ginger geezer : the life of vivian stanshall . also in 2001 jeremy pascall and stephen fry produced a documentary about stanshall for bbc radio 4 . fry knew stanshall quite well and , along with his personal thoughts , introduced a series of reminiscences . the show featured many clips from stanshall 's work . the recording includes one of stanshall 's last poems , entitled '' with my mouth turned down for the night '' . in 2003 , sea urchin editions published the script of the stanshalls ' stinkfoot : an english comic opera , with an introduction by his widow , ki . in june 2010 , the 1978 album sir henry at rawlinson end was re-imagined by michael livesley as a one-man show , in which he starred as the narrator and all characters , backed by a six-piece band replicating the instrumentation of the original . the production won rave reviews , then premiered in london on 14 october 2011 . it also drew praise from innes and adrian edmondson who were in the audience . on 25 march 2013 , to celebrate the 70th anniversary of stanshall 's birth , livesley was joined by innes , rick wakeman , danny thompson , rodney slater , sam spoons , vernon dudley bowhay-nowell , 'legs ' larry smith and john otway , to perform sir henry at rawlinson end at the bloomsbury theatre . the event was organised by livesley and stanshall 's son rupert . on 11 october 2011 , the blackpool comedy carpet , a large public artwork by gordon young , was unveiled in blackpool on the town 's seaside promenade . it is made of 300 slabs of granite that cover about 2200 square meters . featuring catchphrases , jokes and names , it commemorates more than 1000 selected '' influential '' comics , most of whom have played blackpool in the last hundred years . the project was commissioned by the blackpool council as part of its redevelopment plan , and it is one of the largest pieces of public art in the united kingdom . gordon young and blackpool council , '' the comedy carpet '' , design boom , 11 october 2011 stanshall is represented in the work by two quotes and his name . in 2012 , poppydisc records reissued both a vinyl and cd version of stanshall 's men opening umbrellas ahead , remastered with new liner notes from his widow and daughter . on 26 january 2018 , longfellow 's biography/memoir/free-form art book detailing stanshall 's life was published . filled with stanshall 's paintings , sketches , notes , letters , and private photographs , the illustrated vivian stanshall , a fairytale of grimm art ( illustrated by the young illustrator and animator ben wickey ) contains not only longfellow 's impressions of the life and work of her husband of 18 years , but also the remembrances of many of his closest friends , as well as vivian 's private journals . . solo discography . singles . '' labio dental fricative '' b/w '' paper round '' – vivian stanshall and the sean head showband ( liberty : lbf 15309 , 1970 ) '' suspicion '' – vivian stanshall & gargantuan chums b/w '' blind date '' – vivian stanshall & big grunt ( fly records : bug4 , 1970 ) '' lakonga '' b/w '' baba tunde '' ( warner bros . records : k 16424 , 1974 ) '' the young ones '' b/w '' are you having any fun ? '' / '' the question '' ( harvest records : har 5114 , 1976 ) '' terry keeps his clips on '' b/w '' king cripple '' ( charisma records ; cb 373 , 1980 ) '' calypso to colapso '' b/w '' smoke signals at night '' ( charisma records ; cb 382 , 1981 ) '' blind date '' , '' 11 moustachioed daughters '' b/w '' the strain '' , '' cyborg signal '' ( mega dodo ; mep4 , 2016 ) . albums . men opening umbrellas ahead ( 1974 ) sir henry at rawlinson end ( 1978 ) teddy boys do n't knit ( 1981 ) sir henry at n'didi ’ s kraal ( 1984 ) . other appearances . that 'll be the day ( 1973 , soundtrack : two tracks ) the roughler presents the warwick sessions volume 1 ( 1987 , compilation : one track '' holiday home '' ) '' the last temptation of elvis '' ( 1989 , compilation : one track '' ( there 's ) no room to rhumba in a sports car '' ) the famous charisma box ( 1993 , compilation : nine tracks ) the charisma poser ( 1993 , compilation : one track '' eulogy '' ) . further reading . randall , l and welch , c . ( 2001 ) , ginger geezer – the life of vivian stanshall , harpercollins , longfellow , ki ( 2018 ) , the illustrated vivian stanshall , a fairytale of grimm art , eio books ( worldwide ) . references . bibliography . sir henry at rawlinson end : and other spots . london : eel pie , 1980 . stinkfoot : an english comic opera . rotterdam : sea urchin , 2003 . , a celebration of vivian and ki 's comic opera ( publisher 's page ) . external links . gingergeezer bbc audio interviews by british pathé