1971 in literature

events . march 25–december 14 – the 1971 killing of bengali intellectuals reaches a peak . april 21 – the 13th-century codex regius manuscript is returned by denmark to iceland under naval escort . july 4 – michael s . hart posts the first e-book , a copy of the united states declaration of independence , on the university of illinois at urbana–champaign 's mainframe computer , as the origin of project gutenberg . . july 14 – simon gray 's play butley has its first performance at the criterion theatre in london , produced by michael codron and directed by harold pinter , with alan bates in the lead . october 20 – the destiny waltz by gerda charles wins the u.k . 's first whitbread novel of the year award . geoffrey hill wins the poetry prize for mercian hymns and michael meyer the biography category for henrik ibsen . november – hunter s . thompson 's roman à clef fear and loathing in las vegas is first published in rolling stone , as a two-part article illustrated by ralph steadman . november 29 – yuri lyubimov 's production of hamlet is seen first at the taganka theatre in moscow , with singer-songwriter and poet vladimir vysotsky in the lead . december 24 – the dutch writer and broadcaster godfried bomans is buried in the sint-adelbertskerkhof ( st . adelbert cemetery ) in bloemendaal , the netherlands , two days after he dies from a heart attack . unknown date – powell 's books opens its first bookstore in portland , oregon . . new books . fiction . kingsley amis – girl , 20 hiroshi aramata ( 荒俣 宏 ) – teito monogatari ( tale of the capitol ) kofi awoonor – this earth , my brother denys val baker – the face in the mirror nanni balestrini – vogliamo tutto ( we want everything ) john bingham – vulture in the sun william peter blatty – the exorcist richard brautigan – revenge of the lawn charles bukowski – post office albert camus ( died 1960 ) – a happy death ( la mort heureuse ) john dickson carr – deadly hall agatha christie nemesis the golden ball and other stories brian cleeve – cry of morning miloš crnjanski – roman o londonu ( a novel about london ) gwen davis – touching l . sprague de camp – the clocks of iraz l . sprague de camp and lin carter – conan the buccaneer walter de la mare – eight tales august derleth , editor – dark things e . l . doctorow – the book of daniel hubert fichte – detlevs imitationen » grünspan « ( detlev 's imitations , '' verdigris '' ) e . m . forster ( died 1970 ) – maurice ( originally completed 1914 ) frederick forsyth – the day of the jackal dick francis – bonecrack ernest j . gaines – the autobiography of miss jane pittman george garrett – death of the fox john gardner – grendel william golding – the scorpion god richard gordon – the medical witness arthur hailey – wheels l.p . hartley – the harness room bohumil hrabal – i served the king of england ( obsluhoval jsem anglického krále ) david ireland – the unknown industrial prisoner ismail kadare – chronicle in stone ( kronikë në gur ) anna kavan – a scarcity of love thomas keneally – the chant of jimmie blacksmith jerzy kosinski – being there jacques laurent – les bêtises john le carré – the naive and sentimental lover ursula k . le guin – the lathe of heaven stanisław lem the star diaries ( dzienniki gwiazdowe ) the futurological congress ( kongres futurologiczny ) brian lumley – the caller of the black john d . macdonald – a tan and sandy silence antonine maillet – la sagouine ruth manning-sanders – a choice of magic james a . michener – the drifters nicholas mosley – natalie natalia alice munro – lives of girls and women iris murdoch – an accidental man v . s . naipaul – in a free state william f . nolan – space for hire walker percy – love in the ruins rosamunde pilcher – the end of summer anthony powell – books do furnish a room terry pratchett – the carpet people otfried preußler – krabat joao ubaldo ribeiro – sergeant getulio mordecai richler – st . urbain 's horseman harold robbins – the betsy leonardo sciascia – il contesto paul scott – the towers of silence ( third part of the raj quartet ) hubert selby jr . – the room cynthia propper seton – the sea change of angela lewes tom sharpe – riotous assembly alexander solzhenitsyn – august 1914 wallace stegner – angle of repose irving stone – the passions of the mind francis stuart – black list , section h gay talese – honor thy father tom tryon – the other fred uhlman – reunion john updike – rabbit redux joseph wambaugh – the new centurions herman wouk – the winds of war roger zelazny the doors of his face , the lamps of his mouth , and other stories jack of shadows . children and young people . jack bickham – the apple dumpling gang virginia hamilton – the planet of junior brown roger hargreaves – mr . men ( first six of a series of 49 books ) judith kerr – when hitler stole pink rabbit ( first of the out of the hitler time trilogy ) bill peet the caboose who got loose how droofus the dragon lost his head otfried preußler – krabat ( novel ) dr . seuss – the lorax marjorie w . sharmat – getting something on maggie marmelstein . drama . simon gray – butley peter handke – der ritt über den bodensee ( the ride across lake constance ) franz xaver kroetz hartnäckig ( persistent ) heimarbeit ( housework ) michis blut : ein requiem auf bairisch ( michi 's blood : a requiem in bavarian ) stallerhof wildwechsel mustapha matura – as time goes by john mortimer – a voyage round my father ( stage version ) martin walser – ein kinderspiel . poetry . maya angelou – just give me a cool drink of water 'fore i diiie kofi awoonor – night of my blood donald s . fryer – songs and sonnets atlantean alan llwyd – y march hud ( the magic horse ) clark ashton smith – selected poems . non-fiction . g . e . m . anscombe – causality and determination pierre berton – the last spike carlos castaneda – a separate reality : further conversations with don juan dharampal – indian science and technology in the eighteenth century : some contemporary european accounts robert coles migrants , sharecroppers , mountaineers , vol . 2 of children of crisis the south goes north , vol 3 . of children of crisis carl n . degler – neither black nor white brian j . ford – nonscience robert foster – the complete guide to middle-earth eduardo galeano – open veins of latin america ( las venas abiertas de américa latina ) joan garrity – the sensuous woman graham greene – a sort of life xaviera hollander – the happy hooker h . p . lovecraft – selected letters iii ( 1929–1931 ) roger manvell and heinrich fraenkel – hess : a biography spike milligan – adolf hitler : my part in his downfall alison plowden – young elizabeth john rawls – a theory of justice b . f . skinner – beyond freedom and dignity keith thomas – religion and the decline of magic : studies in popular beliefs in 16th and 17th-century england pierre vallières – white niggers of america ( translation ) esther vilar – the manipulated man . births . january 6 – karin slaughter , american crime novelist january 16 – helen darville , australian novelist january 18 – binyavanga wainaina , kenyan writer ( died 2019 ) january 25 – philip coppens , belgian journalist and author ( died 2012 ) february 3 – sarah kane , english playwright ( died 1999 ) march 13 – viet thanh nguyen , vietnamese fiction writer march 29 – josé luis rodríguez pittí , panamanian writer and photographer may 28 – richard gunn , english journalist and motoring writer may 9 – dan chiasson , american poet , critic and journalist june 28 – sophie hannah , english poet and novelist july 17 – cory doctorow , canadian science fiction writer july 22 – akhil sharma , indian novelist july 23 – mohsin hamid , pakistani fiction writer september 3 – kiran desai , indian novelist october 25 – elif shafak ( elif şafak ) , french-born turkish novelist november 5 – rana dasgupta , english-born indian novelist december 19 – tristan egolf , american novelist and activist ( died 2005 ) unknown dates petina gappah , zambian-born fiction writer john wray , american novelist . deaths . january 24 – st . john greer ervine , irish-born dramatist ( born 1883 ) march 5 – allan nevins , american journalist and historian ( born 1890 ) march 7 – stevie smith ( florence margaret smith ) , english poet and novelist ( born 1902 ) march 21 – kyūya fukada ( 深田 久弥 ) , japanese writer and mountaineer ( born 1903 ) march 23 – simon vestdijk , dutch writer ( born 1898 ) april 10 – andré billy , french novelist ( born 1882 ) may 19 – ogden nash , american poet and humorist ( born 1902 ) may 20 – waldo williams , welsh-language poet ( born 1904 ) june 1 – reinhold niebuhr , american theologian ( born 1892 ) june 4 – györgy lukács ( györgy bernát löwinger ) , hungarian philosopher and critic ( born 1885 ) june 5 – clifford dyment , english poet ( born 1914 ) peter dale , '' dyment , clifford '' in the oxford companion to twentieth-century poetry in english , ian hamilton ( ed . ) , oxford univ . press , 1994 , p . 142 . june 6 – edward andrade , english writer , poet and physicist ( born 1887 ) july 4 maurice bowra , english poet , humorist and oxford don ( born 1898 ) august derleth , american writer and anthologist ( heart attack , born 1909 ) july 7 – claude gauvreau , québécois canadian poet and dramatist ( born 1925 ) july 27 – jacques lusseyran , french author and resistance fighter ( car crash , born 1924 ) august 30 – peter fleming , english travel writer and traveler ( born 1907 ) october 13 – jános kemény , american-born hungarian writer and editor ( born 1903 ) october 21 – naoya shiga , japanese novelist ( pneumonia , born 1883 ) october 25 – philip wylie , american novelist and non-fiction writer ( born 1902 ) november – lucia mantu , romanian writer ( born 1888 ) november 1 – gertrud von le fort , german novelist , poet and essayist ( born 1876 ) november 10 – walter van tilburg clark , american novelist ( cancer , born 1909 ) november 11 – a . p . herbert , english humorist , novelist and politician ( born 1890 ) december 5 – gaito gazdanov , russian-born novelist ( born 1903 ) december 22 – godfried bomans , dutch writer and broadcaster ( heart attack , born 1913 ) december 25 – s . foster damon , american critic and poet ( born 1893 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature : pablo neruda . canada . see 1971 governor general 's awards for complete list . france . prix goncourt : jacques laurent , les bêtises prix médicis : pascal lainé , l'irrévolution . united kingdom . booker prize : v . s . naipaul , in a free state carnegie medal for children 's literature : ivan southall , josh cholmondeley award : charles causley , gavin ewart , hugo williams eric gregory award : martin booth , florence bull , john pook , d . m . warman , john welch james tait black memorial prize for fiction : nadine gordimer , a guest of honour james tait black memorial prize for biography : julia namier , lewis namier queen 's gold medal for poetry : stephen spender . united states . frost medal : melville cane hugo award : larry niven , ringworld nebula award : robert silverberg , a time of changes newbery medal for children 's literature : betsy byars , summer of the swans pulitzer prize for drama : paul zindel , the effect of gamma rays on man-in-the-moon marigolds pulitzer prize for fiction : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : william s . merwin , the carrier of ladders . elsewhere . akutagawa prize : azuma mineo , okinawan boy miles franklin award : david ireland , the unknown industrial prisoner alfaguara prize : luis berenguer , leña verde premio nadal : josé maría requena , el cuajarón viareggio prize : ugo attardi , l'erede selvaggio . references .