Nuns on the Run

plot . after their boss is killed during a bank heist , london gangsters brian hope ( idle ) and charlie mcmanus ( coltrane ) desire to lead more peaceful lives in brazil , disapproving of their new younger and more brash boss , casey ( patterson ) . while planning to rob a local triad gang of their ill-gotten drug money , brian meets and falls in love with a waitress , faith ( coduri ) . during the robbery , brian and charlie betray their fellow gangsters , abbott and morley , steal the money and flee , but are forced to abandon their car when it runs out of petrol and seek refuge in a nearby nunnery during the ensuing gunfight . faith , who had tried to warn brian beforehand , is shot in the wrist by abbott , while one of the triads is shot and hospitalised . after this , casey places a bounty on brian and charlie 's heads . disguising themselves as nuns , brian and charlie introduce themselves to the sister superior , liz , as sisters inviolata and euphemia , respectively . faith , having witnessed the gunfight and brian and charlie fleeing into the nunnery , follows them and poses as a mature student to get inside . her gunshot wound is exposed and she is taken to the infirmary . brian pays her a secret visit and claims he is married in order to end their relationship for her safety . when faith intends to go to church and confess , charlie distracts the priest , father seamus , while brian poses as him . faith admits she still loves brian , but brian convinces faith to keep silent . on her way out , she is abducted by the triads and interrogated . she directs them to casey and they set her free , but bumps into a lamppost and hits her head on the road , ending up in the hospital , where one triad has infiltrated the staff as a janitor . brian and charlie acquire tickets to brazil , despite brian 's desire to take faith with them . brian decides to tell faith the truth , but discovers she has not returned to the nunnery . they go to her apartment and only barely escape from abbott and morley , who had been sent to retrieve her by casey . they sneak back into the nunnery and manage to slip into their spare habits after accidentally waking up an eccentric nun , sister mary . in conversation , brian learns that faith is in the hospital , with her father and brother who are protecting her from the gang . he visits her , but she is heartbroken , believing that brian no longer loves her . they attempt to flee for the airport the next morning , but are caught and exposed by sister mary . in desperation , they steal a truck and head for the airport pursued by sisters liz and mary , morley and abbott , and eventually casey and the triads . brian forces charlie to go to the hospital , where brian tells faith the truth while charlie stalls the gangsters . they manage to escape the hospital with faith and casey is arrested , though one briefcase of money is lost during the chase . sister liz and sister mary find the lost case of drug money and , ignoring the police 's concerns , decide to use it to fund a drug rehabilitation clinic . sister liz then leads the nuns in prayer , thanking god for sending them sisters euphemia and inviolata , and asking him to , '' keep on eye on them , wo n't you ? they need you . '' brian , charlie and faith reach the airport and check-in , when an airport policeman warns the attendant about brian and charlie . they board the flight disguised as attendants and successfully escape the uk for brazil . cast . eric idle as brian hope/sister euphemia of the five wounds robbie coltrane as charlie mcmanus/sister inviolata of the immaculate conception janet suzman as sister liz , the sister superior of the nunnery camille coduri as faith thomas robert patterson as mr . '' case '' casey doris hare as sister mary of the sacred heart lila kaye as sister mary of the annunciation tom hickey as father seamus , the somewhat lecherous priest of the nunnery colin campbell as norm robert morgan as abbott , one of casey 's henchmen winston dennis as morley , one of casey 's henchmen and the bouncer of his health club gary tang as ronnie chang , the head of the triads david forman as henry ho ozzie yue as ernie wong , the most senior of the triads as an in-joke , brian hope and charlie mcmanus are credited as playing the flight attendants . reception . the movie received mixed reviews from critics , and was criticised in the united states for its lack of depth and excessive use of nuns for humour . robert patterson 's performance as mr . casey was also widely panned . nuns on the run currently holds a 45 % rating on rotten tomatoes from 20 reviews . roger ebert asked , '' why do filmmakers so often insist that nuns are funny ? i 'll bet there are some psychological reasons buried around here somewhere . '' ebert and gene siskel had also ridiculed fox 's advertising campaign for the film ; in retaliation , fox 's president of marketing , bob harper , announced that they would be barred from press screenings of future films released by the company , though he backed down after only three weeks under pressure from the chicago film critics association ( of which neither siskel nor ebert was a member ) . michael wilmington of the los angeles times noted that as far as drag comedies go , the film '' has some bawdy class—but only because of its casting '' . vincent canby wrote in the new york times that '' nuns on the run is a great leveler . it makes everyone in the audience feel a rascally 8 years old , the age at which whoopee cushions ( when they work ) seem the greatest invention since firecrackers . '' owen gleiberman wrote in one of entertainment weekly first issues that the film '' is n't a madcap-hysterical , end-of-the-empire drag farce ; it does n't hash over what monty python did definitively over 20 years ago . it 's a cleverly directed caper comedy about two crooks on the lam , and it has its fair share of chuckles . '' . box office . the film was successful in the us on limited release , making 658,835 in first screenings at 76 theatres . nuns on the run grossed us 10,959,015 , according to box office mojo . it made £3.2 million at the uk box office . . home media . the distribution rights for nuns on the run were initially held by anchor bay entertainment for dvd release in the united kingdom . the original dvd was made available on 8 april 2002 . a second printing was released on 10 october 2005 under its subsidiary 'bay view ' , while a third and final release came from anchor bay , alongside time bandits in a 'double disc box set ' on 6 february 2006 . after which , the then optimum releasing ( now studiocanal uk ) released the film on 4 january 2010 . arrow films currently hold distribution rights to the film as all previous releases are now out-of-print . arrow released nuns on the run to dvd on 27 june 2016 . . see also . cross-dressing in film and television . references . external links .