Mallow, County Cork

economy . mallow developed in the late 16th century as a plantation town . it prospered throughout the centuries as a market town due to its rich agricultural hinterland . irish statesmen such as thomas davis and william o'brien were both born in mallow in the 19th century . the main street in mallow is called davis street ( although commonly referred to as main street ) , and joins with william o'brien street outside mallow town hall . at the point where davis street meets o'brien street there is a monument to j.j . fitzgerald , a little-known local politician who was involved in establishing both mallow urban district council and cork county council . the town developed an industrial base in the early 20th century , based largely on its agricultural capability , with dairy produce and sugar beet supplying the sugar factory , rowntree mackintosh , bournes and dairygold . changes in the european union sugar subsidy programme resulted in the closure of the sugar beet factory in mid-2006 , after 75 years continual production . one of the last sugar beet plants to be closed in ireland . transport and communications . road . mallow lies at the convergence of several important routes : national primary route 20 ( n20 ) north-south road between cork ( 35 & nbsp ; km ) and limerick ( 70 & nbsp ; km ) , national secondary route 72 ( n72 ) east-west between dungarvan ( 51.5 & nbsp ; km ) and killarney ( 41.5 & nbsp ; km ) , national secondary route 73 ( n73 ) northeast to mitchelstown and the m8 motorway ( 21 & nbsp ; km ) . bus . mallow is a stop on the bus éireann 51 bus service from cork to galway and 243 bus service from cork to newmarket service . rail . the mallow railway viaduct which straddles the blackwater , commonly known as the '' ten arch bridge '' , was bombed and destroyed during the irish civil war . it was rapidly rebuilt in girder form due to its importance in connecting the cork , tralee and dublin lines . an additional line east through fermoy and lismore to the waterford south station closed in 1967 . mallow railway station was opened on 17 march 1849 by the great southern and western railway . it is served by trains to via limerick junction to dublin heuston , cork and killarney , farranfore and tralee . onward connecting trains link mallow via limerick junction to limerick , ennis , athenry and galway as well as carrick-on-suir and waterford . air . the nearest airports are cork airport ( 42.5 & nbsp ; km ) , kerry airport ( 70 & nbsp ; km ) and shannon airport ( 84 & nbsp ; km ) . kerry airport is accessible by train from farranfore railway station . there is a flying club at nearby rathcoole aerodrome , and a helicopter charter company in nearby dromahane . cork racecourse , now known as cork racecourse , became an emergency airfield on 18 april 1983 , when a mexican gulfstream ii business jet piloted by captain reuben ocaña made a precautionary landing . a temporary tarmacadam runway of 910 & nbsp ; m ( 3,000 & nbsp ; ft ) in length which was paid for by the plane 's insurers was laid to enable the aircraft to leave five weeks later . in the meantime captain ocaña became a local celebrity . on 23 may 1983 just before the plane departed , the captain said his farewell to the people of ireland in the irish language . the runway was subsequently used for parking during race meets and for learner driving . light aircraft have occasionally landed at the racecourse on the grass area . the f3a world model aircraft aerobatic championship was held there in 2001 . the 1983 incident formed the basis of the 2010 film the runway . . sport . founded in 1882 , mallow rugby club is one of the oldest rugby clubs in the country . official mallow rugby website former players include munster second row ian nagle , who played juvenile rugby for mallow and ulster prop jerry cronin , who played juvenile and junior rugby for the club . the town 's association football club , mallow united f.c . , was founded in 1926 and fields senior , junior , schoolboy , and schoolgirl football teams in the munster leagues . official mallow united fc website the local racecourse , cork racecourse , now renamed '' cork racecourse mallow '' , cork racecourse mallow plays host to large horse racing events . mallow gaa is the town 's gaa club , and fields teams in hurling and gaelic football . the club won the 2017 cork premier intermediate football championship . mallow golf club , founded in 1947 , is located just outside mallow and has 18 holes . mallow golf club mallow ac is a local running club . mallow ac . amenities . mallow has a cinema as well as other community amenities such the youth centre and a nearby swimming pool . it also has several gyms . the town also has several pubs and nightclubs . people . celeste bowe ( 1931–1976 ) , daughters of charity of saint vincent de paul nun and nurse was born in newberry , mallow elaine crowley ( b.1977 ) , television presenter from newtwopothouse near mallow thomas osborne davis ( 1814–1845 ) , nationalist , politician , author , poet and author of the rebel song '' a nation once again '' , was born here . donovan ( b.1946 ) , singer born in scotland who now lives near mallow john hogan ( 1805–1892 ) , a united states representative from missouri born in mallow . paul kane ( 1810–1871 ) , canadian painter joe lynch ( 1925–2001 ) , actor john francis moriarty ( 1855–1915 ) attorney general for ireland and judge of the irish court of appeal . joan denise moriarty ( c.1910–1992 ) , ballet dancer , dance teacher and musician , and niece of john francis ( above ) , is believed to have been born in mallow . robert murphy ( 1806–1843 ) , mathematician and physicist . william o'brien ( 1852–1928 ) , nationalist , journalist , agrarian agitator , social revolutionary , politician , party leader , newspaper publisher and author . stephen o'flynn ( b.1982 ) , former league of ireland and nifl premiership footballer seán sherlock ( b.1972 ) , labour party td for cork east constituency , was born in mallow sir edward sullivan , 1st baronet ( 1822–1885 ) , lord chancellor of ireland , was born in mallow . . international relations . mallow is twinned with the towns of tinley park , illinois , united states tréguier , côtes-d'armor , brittany , france . see also . metropolitan cork list of towns and villages in ireland mallow ( parliament of ireland constituency ) the corkman davis college ( mallow ) . references . external links . official website mallow town community website mallow town online guide