Park Lane

21st century . the animals in war memorial was opened at the northeast edge of park lane in 2004 by anne , princess royal . it commemorates animals that served in wars , and alongside servicemen . in june 2007 , a car bomb was successfully defused in an underground car park on park lane . the road was closed for most of the day for police investigation . the road still attracts notable residents . in 2002 , robert b . sherman , composer of the musicals chitty the musical and mary poppins , moved to an apartment on park lane following the death of his wife . he enjoyed the views of hyde park and in 2003 painted an eponymous portrait , park lane . the business mogul mohamed al-fayed has offices in 55 and 60 park lane . trevor rees-jones , the only survivor of the car crash that killed al-fayed 's son dodi fayed and diana , princess of wales in 1997 , briefly recuperated in a flat on park lane following the accident . property prices on park lane remain some of the highest in london . in 2006 , former conservative leader of westminster city council , shirley porter moved into a new £1.5m development on curzon square after twelve years of exile in israel . in 2015 , a report showed the average monthly rent for a 2-bedroom apartment on the road was £5,200 . homelessness also made use of the road 's surroundings from at least 2012 , with large begging gangs or other homeless groups sleeping in subways or covered shopping parades despite occasionally being cleared or moved on by police . many of the hotels and establishments on park lane are today owned by some of the wealthiest middle eastern and asian businessmen , sheikhs and sultans . the dorchester was purchased by the sultan of brunei in 1985 , and since 1996 has been part of the dorchester collection , owned by the brunei investment agency ( bia ) , an arm of the ministry of finance of brunei . the dorchester collection connects the dorchester on park lane to other luxury hotels internationally , including the beverly hills hotel and hotel bel-air of los angeles , and the hôtel meurice of paris . in 1978 , a new branch of the allied arab bank opened at 131–2 park lane , facilitating the interests of both arab world and western clients . mamasino restaurant at 102 park lane serves african cuisine and is african-owned . wolfgang puck 's restaurant at no . & nbsp ; 45 has been described by gq magazine as serving one of the best breakfasts in london , with a mixture of american , european and asian food . . traffic . owing to property on the road becoming more desirable , traffic began to increase on park lane during the 19th century . a short section of the lane was widened in 1851 as part of the redevelopment work on marble arch . in july 1866 , following the destruction of the boundary railings after a demonstration supporting the second reform bill , the road was widened as far as stanhope gate . in 1871 , hamilton place was widened to allow an alternative traffic flow to piccadilly . by the 1950s , motor traffic levels along park lane had reached saturation point . a 1956 survey by the metropolitan police reported '' at peak hours it is overloaded '' , with traffic surveys showing 91,000 and 65,000 vehicles travelling around hyde park corner and marble arch respectively in a twelve-hour period , making park lane the link between the busiest and third busiest road junctions in london . between 1960 and 1963 , the road was widened to three lanes each way either side of a central reservation . this required the demolition of nos . & nbsp ; 145–148 piccadilly , near hyde park corner , which had previously formed a line east of apsley house . the work also re-appropriated east carriage drive inside hyde park as the northbound carriageway , moving the park 's boundary westwards . additionally , a car park was installed under the road , which became the largest underground parking area in london . care was taken to preserve as much of the park as possible during the widening works ; in all , of park was removed and around 95 trees were felled . at the time of opening , the project was the largest road improvement scheme in central london since the construction of kingsway in 1905 . the total estimated cost was £1,152,000 ( now £ . further traffic signals were installed at the junction of park lane and hyde park corner in 1983 . the road forms part of the london inner ring road and is part of the london congestion charge zone 's boundary . when the zone was extended westward in february 2007 , park lane was designated as one of the '' free through routes '' , on which vehicles could cross the zone during its hours of operation without paying the charge . the western extension was removed in january 2011 . in november 2008 , the mayor of london , boris johnson announced plans to build a tunnel beneath the street , allowing land to be released for development and green spaces . the traffic improvements and remodelling have diminished the appeal of park lane as a residential address , since it became one of the busiest and noisiest roads in central london . in 2011 , johnson introduced spot fines for coaches idling on park lane . the widening of the road distanced the houses on the east side of park lane from hyde park itself , access to which is now by underpass . despite the traffic noise the road is still upmarket , featuring five-star hotels ( such as the dorchester , the grosvenor house hotel and the intercontinental london park lane hotel ) and showrooms for several sports car models , including bmw , aston martin and mercedes-benz . in 2020 , tfl installed a two-way cycle lane on the northbound side of park lane . . cultural references . park lane is the second most valuable property in the london edition of the board game monopoly . the street had a prestigious social status when the british version of the monopoly board was first produced , in 1936 . on the board , park lane forms a pair with mayfair , the most expensive property in the game . the squares were designed to be equivalents of park place and boardwalk , respectively , on the original board , which used streets in atlantic city , new jersey . in 1988 , the world monopoly championships were held at the park lane hotel , sponsored by waddingtons , manufacturers of the british version . since the game 's original production , prices on the real park lane have held their value , though average rent costs have been overtaken by bond street . in arthur conan doyle 's short story '' the adventure of the empty house '' ( 1903 ) , sherlock holmes investigates and solves a locked-room murder which took place at no . 427 park lane ( the old numbering ) , and which is referred to as the '' park lane mystery '' . the story is set in 1894 . the writer jasper fforde refers to the street and its monopoly square in his novel the eyre affair ( 2001 ) , via the character landen parke-laine . the street has several mentions in john galsworthy 's 1922 trilogy , the forsyte saga . the the forsyte saga ( 1967 series ) used croxteth hall in liverpool for footage of james and emily 's house on park lane . the road is mentioned in the second stanza of noël coward 's patriotic song '' london pride '' . the mini countryman is a high-end four wheel drive sport utility vehicle named after the road , where the company has a showroom . in walter lord 's book a night to remember , which documents the fate of the rms titanic , a broad , lower-deck working corridor on e deck , which ran the length of the ship , was referred to by officers as '' park lane '' ( and by crew as '' scotland road '' ) . . references . notes citations sources