Loveland, Ohio

2010 census . as of the census of 2010 , there were 12,081 people , 4,701 households , and 3,270 families residing in the city . the population density was . there were 4,961 housing units at an average density of . the racial makeup of the city was 93.5 % white , 2.1 % african american , 0.1 % native american , 1.7 % asian ( of whom 36 % were asian indian and 20 % were chinese ) , 0.1 % pacific islander , 0.6 % from other races , and 1.9 % from two or more races . hispanic or latino of any race were 2.4 % of the population , of whom 53 % were of mexican descent . there were 4,701 households , of which 38.3 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 52.5 % were marriage living together , 13.4 % had a female householder with no husband present , 3.7 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 30.4 % were non-families . 26.3 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 11.7 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . the average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.09 . the median age in the city was 38 years . 27.9 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 6.7 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 25.6 % were from 25 to 44 ; 27.2 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 12.8 % were 65 years of age or older . the gender makeup of the city was 47.9 % male and 52.1 % female . the median income for a household in the city was 68,801 , and the median income for a family was 89,199 . males had median earnings of 70,262 versus 44,652 for females . the per capita income for the city was 32,024 , while the unemployment rate was 5.4 % for those age 16 or older . about 8.0 % of families and 8.4 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 11.2 % of those under age 18 and 10.4 % of those age 65 or over . according to 2002 data from the internal revenue service , loveland residents gave 2.60 % of their net income to charity . . economy . tourism associated with the loveland bike trail forms a significant part of downtown loveland 's economy . there is light industry at the loveland commerce park in the northwestern corner of the city . companies headquartered in loveland include dos madres press and rozzi fireworks . from 1986 to 1998 , the baldwin piano company was headquartered in loveland . martinizing dry cleaning , totes isotoner , pro mach , and blue chip cookies were also formerly headquartered in loveland . culture . although the city 's unusual name came from the last name of the village storeowner and postmaster , rather than love , loveland has incorporated a '' love '' theme throughout the city . loveland water towers and park signs sport the city 's logo : a red heart inscribed with a sun , clouds , and the little miami river , and surrounded with the city 's nickname , '' sweetheart of ohio . '' the loveland post office was the site of the united states postal service 's issuance of a 29¢ commemorative '' love sunrise '' stamp on january 27 , 1994 , the first self-adhesive love stamp . each year since 1972 , the loveland area chamber of commerce has run a special valentine 's day program , which includes a poetry contest and the selection of a volunteer '' valentine lady '' . the valentine lady helps stamp up to 20,000 envelopes by hand with a valentine-themed cachet and cancellation that reads '' there is nothing in this world so sweet as love . '' the first valentine lady was doris pfiester . loveland has held a greeting card design contest annually since 1989 . , valentine 's day is the only day of the year when non-residents may reserve loveland city hall for marriage ceremonies , other than for senior citizens . . parks and recreation . , a state park that runs through the city . from spring to fall , people canoe down the little miami river , departing from the livery at loveland canoe & kayak . loveland canoe & kayak loveland is included in the dan beard council of the boy scouts of america , which operates the dan beard reservation campground in miamiville to the south . another landmark , shield 's crossing , is located nearby . the gothic-style building , also known as the william johnston house , is listed on the national register of historic places . the grail 's national headquarters and retreat center , known as grailville , has been located just outside loveland since 1944 . loveland 's indoor attractions include castle skateland , a roller skating rink not to be confused with the museum ; and the loveland stage company , a theatre group that started in 1979 and has performed at least two major productions each year since 1980 . in october 2002 , after several years of fundraising and renovations , the group moved into crist theater , an old movie theater donated by the loveland–symmes fire department , which is stationed next door . the building had to be rebuilt after a fire gutted it on october 20 , 2008 . the loveland castle is also located in loveland , ohio . government . loveland uses a council–manager form of government . the loveland city council has seven at-large seats , elected to four-year terms in non-partisan elections held every two years . , they are held by mayor kathy bailey , vice-mayor rob weisgerber , and councilmembers neal oury , kent blair , ted phelps , angie settell and tim butler . dave kennedy is city manager . traffic cases and other misdemeanors are heard in loveland mayor 's court , which is presided over by a magistrate . at the federal level , loveland is located within ohio 's 2nd congressional district . at the state level , it is also served by the 27th , 62nd , and 65th house districts ; the 7th and 14th senate districts ; and the 1st and 12th appellate court districts . see ohio house of representatives and ohio senate for the current representatives of the respective state districts . according to the loveland code of ordinances , the city 's company seal consists of '' the great seal of ohio engraved in the center and the words 'city of loveland ' engraved around the edge '' . loveland city ordinance 105.01 : '' corporate seal '' . walter h . drane company . . education . the city 's public school district , loveland city school district , operated as separate loveland east and loveland west districts until 1926 . until 2009 , loveland high school was located in symmes township , just outside the city limits . the northern- and southernmost parts of loveland are served by sycamore community school district . surrounding communities lie within the boundaries of kings local school district ( see kings high school ) , milford exempted village school district ( milford high school ) , and little miami schools ( little miami high school ) . the city is also served by the great oaks institute of technology and career development and a regional vocational school district . there are many private schools located near loveland , including cincinnati hills christian academy , moeller high school , and ursuline academy at the secondary level , and st . margaret of york school , st . columban school , and children 's meeting house montessori school at the elementary level . at the 2000 census , 24.6 % of loveland children attended private or parochial schools , the nineteenth-highest rate among greater cincinnati communities . the public library of cincinnati and hamilton county maintains a branch library in downtown loveland , as well as a larger regional branch library in symmes township . the nearest branch of the clermont county public library is in milford . warren county has no county-wide public library system , but the mason public library is the nearest public library in the county . media . loveland lies within the media in cincinnati . some dayton-area media is also available . cable television is provided by spectrum . cincinnati bell provides iptv service under the fioptics brand . loveland magazine was the first '' on-line only '' newspaper accepted into the ohio news media association ( formerly the ohio newspaper association ) on october 11 , 2013 . loveland magazine is owned by publisher , david miller and was founded in 2004 . loveland magazine also produces video on loveland magazine tv . the cincinnati enquirer publishes the loveland herald , a weekly newspaper . the herald began as the tri-county press in 1901 and took its present name in 1917 . the herald editorial offices were located in miami township until 2015 and are now located at the enquirer headquarters in downtown cincinnati . eye on loveland is a blog about local government and distributes a free podcast focused on the politics of the city . distributed in loveland but primarily publishing regional stories previously printed in the cincinnati enquirer is the loveland herald a weekly newspaper . the advertising insert vehicle is owned by community press/recorder newspapers/enquirer/gannet with their editorial office at 312 elm street in cincinnati . defunct newspapers include the loveland weekly herald ( 1877– ? ) , the loveland enterprise ( 1884– ? ) , the hustler ( 1906–1911 ) , the loveland news world ( 1980s ) , and the loveland record . . infrastructure . law enforcement . loveland is protected by the loveland police division and the loveland-symmes fire department , a member of the northeast fire collaborative . dispatching for both is handled by northeast communications center ( necc ) , which provides wireless enhanced 911 service and also activates the local network of tornado sirens . . services . the city lies in the little miami telephone exchange , within cincinnati bell 's ilec coverage area . loveland receives electric and natural gas services from duke energy ohio , formerly cinergy . waste disposal and recycling services are provided by rumpke through the southwest ohio regional refuse ( sworre ) consortium . loveland has water interconnectivity agreements with the city of cincinnati and clermont county . loveland 's polk run wastewater treatment plant is part of hamilton county 's metropolitan sewer district ( cincinnati ) ( msd ) under a 1985 operating agreement . the city sought to end the agreement in 2008 , due to district-wide rate increases , but was barred from leaving msd by a court ruling affirmed by the u.s . 6th circuit appeals court . . notable people . this list includes notable people who at some point lived in loveland : . arts and entertainment . wendy barrie-wilson broadway actress nancy ford cones photographer , featured on woman 's home companion and country life in america ann donahue screenwriting vanessa german sculptor , painter , writer , activist , performer , and poet lillian morris survivor : pearl islands contestant ashley palmer actress and singer madison young porn star . athletics . todd benzinger former major league baseball first baseman and outfielder don biggs canadian retired professional ice hockey player tyler biggs ice hockey player , orlando solar bears steve brown darts player adam engel professional baseball outfielder , chicago white sox matt hamill mixed martial arts fighter and three-time ncaa wrestling division iii national champion joe kelly professional football linebacker dan ketchum gold medalist in swimming at the 2004 summer olympics tacks latimer professional baseball catcher and convicted murderer henry w . lever head football coach , tcu horned frogs football bob lohr professional golfer jack pfiester professional baseball player mike sylvester professional basketball player , silver medalist for italy in 1980 summer olympics . business . cecil bauer former mayor of loveland , owner of bauer insurance joshua i . smith founder of maxima corporation ; chair of the united states commission on minority business development . military . james hall army captain , editor of western monthly magazine , lawyer , and jurist . politics and law . salmon p . chase chief justice of the united states william johnston surveyor general of the northwest territory , superior court judge , and whig gubernatorial nominee lindiwe mabuza formerly south african ambassador to germany and high commissioner to the uk '' south africa thanks the commonwealth and the uk in the celebrations of freedom '' , commonwealth secretariat , 22 april 2004 . anna mcgarry social activism on interracial justice and community organizer bill schickel iowa state representative jerry springer former mayor of cincinnati , television host joe uecker republican member of the ohio house of representatives , 66th district . see also . loveland frog loveland park , ohio . references . further reading . . external links . greater loveland historical society museum