1964 in literature

events . january 10 – federico garcía lorca 's play the house of bernarda alba , completed just before his assassination in 1936 , receives its first performance in spain . house of bernarda alba – premiere in madrid ( spanish ) . accessed 27 november 2013 . january 12 – the royal shakespeare company experimental group open a four-week theatre of cruelty season at the lamda theatre club , london . january 23 – arthur miller 's play after the fall opens at the anta washington square theatre off-broadway in new york city , directed by elia kazan and starring jason robards and kazan 's wife barbara loden . a semi-autobiographical work , it arouses controversy over miller 's portrayal of his late ex-wife marilyn monroe . february 11 – a london retailer , in the case of r . v . gold , is found guilty under section 3 of the obscene publications act 1959 of stocking a 1963 edition of john cleland 's novel fanny hill ( memoirs of a woman of pleasure , 1748–1749 ) . february 28 – the dutch comic artist and writer jan cremer publishes his autobiographical novel i , jan cremer , which provokes controversy for its frank content and style and becomes a bestseller . april 23 – shakespeare birthplace trust opens the shakespeare centre in stratford-upon-avon , england , to house its library and research facilities . april 29 – peter weiss 's play with music die verfolgung und ermordung jean paul marats dargestellt durch die schauspielgruppe des hospizes zu charenton unter anleitung des herrn de sade ( the persecution and assassination of jean-paul marat as performed by the inmates of the asylum of charenton under the direction of the marquis de sade , known as marat/sade ) premières at the schiller theater in west berlin . in august it receives its english-language première by the royal shakespeare company in london at the aldwych theatre . may – michael moorcock becomes editor of the science fiction magazine new worlds . may 5 – w . h . auden 's preface to the anthology the protestant mystics describes the supernatural '' vision of agape '' he experienced in june 1933 . may 6 – joe orton 's black comedy entertaining mr sloane premières at the arts theatre in london with dudley sutton in the title rôle . may 29 – le théâtre du soleil is established as a collective avant-garde stage ensemble by ariane mnouchkine , philippe léotard and fellow students of l'école internationale de théâtre jacques lecoq in paris . it opens with les petits bourgeois ( adapted from maxim gorky 's мещане ) , at théâtre mouffetard . june 22 – henry miller 's tropic of cancer is allowed to circulate legally in the united states by the u.s . supreme court three decades after its publication in france , after the u.s . supreme court , in grove press , inc . v . gerstein , cites jacobellis v . ohio ( decided the same day ) and overrules state court findings that the book is obscene . august 11 – ian fleming walks to the royal st george 's golf club in canterbury , kent , for lunch and then dines at his hotel with friends , collapsing shortly afterward with a heart attack . his last recorded words are an apology to the ambulance drivers : '' i am sorry to trouble you chaps . i do n't know how you get along so fast with the traffic on the roads these days . '' fleming dies next day . september – the everyman theatre opens in liverpool , england . september 28 – brian friel 's play philadelphia , here i come ! is premièred at the gaiety theatre , dublin . october 28 – the wednesday play is broadcast for the first time on bbc1 television , presenting original one-off contemporary social drama , mostly written for television . . new books . fiction . chinua achebe – arrow of god josé agustín – la tumba lloyd alexander – the book of three poul anderson – time and stars louis auchincloss – the rector of justin j . g . ballard – the terminal beach simone de beauvoir – a very easy death ( une mort très douce ) saul bellow – herzog thomas berger – little big man leigh brackett people of the talisman the secret of sinharat ray bradbury – the machineries of joy john braine – the jealous god richard brautigan – a confederate general from big sur john brunner to conquer chaos the whole man edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the madman william s . burroughs – nova express j . ramsey campbell – the inhabitant of the lake and less welcome tenants john dickson carr – most secret agatha christie – a caribbean mystery louis-ferdinand céline – london bridge : guignol 's band ii a . j . cronin – a song of sixpence len deighton – funeral in berlin r.f . delderfield – too few for drums august derleth ( editor ) – over the edge michel droit – le retour ralph ellison – shadow and act ian fleming – you only live twice max frisch – gantenbein daniel f . galouye – simulacron-3 ( counterfeit world ) william golding – the spire richard gordon – nuts in may l.p . hartley – the brickfield bohumil hrabal – dancing lessons for the advanced in age ( taneční hodiny pro starší a pokročilé ) carl jacobi – portraits in moonlight b . s . johnson – albert angelo ken kesey – sometimes a great notion richard e . kim – the martyred james leasor – passport to oblivion etienne leroux – een vir azazel ( one for azazel , translated as one for the devil ) liang yusheng ( 梁羽生 ) – datang youxia zhuan ( 大唐游俠傳 ) clarice lispector – the passion according to g.h . ( a paixão segundo g.h . ) h . p . lovecraft – at the mountains of madness and other novels john d . macdonald the deep blue good-by a purple place for dying the quick red fox iris murdoch – the italian girl sterling north – rascal vladimir nabokov – the defense ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o ( also known as james ngigi ) – weep not , child kenzaburō ōe ( 大江 健三郎 ) – a personal matter ( 個人的な体験 ; kojinteki na taiken ) anthony powell – the valley of bones mario puzo – fortunate pilgrim ellery queen – and on the eighth day jean ray – saint-judas-de-la-nuit ruth rendell – from doon with death karl ristikivi – imede saar hubert selby jr . – last exit to brooklyn ryōtarō shiba ( 司馬 遼太郎 ) – moeyo ken ( 燃えよ剣 , burn , o sword ) howard spring – winds of the day clark ashton smith – tales of science and sorcery wilbur smith – when the lion feeds rex stout trio for blunt instruments a right to die leon uris – armageddon jack vance the houses of iszm the killing machine star king gore vidal – julian irving wallace – the man raymond williams – second generation maia wojciechowska – shadow of a bull . children and young people . nina bawden – on the run ( also three on the run ) christianna brand – nurse matilda hesba fay brinsmead – pastures of the blue crane jeff brown – flat stanley roald dahl – charlie and the chocolate factory louise fitzhugh – harriet the spy ian fleming – chitty-chitty-bang-bang : the magical car rumer godden – home is the sailor irene hunt – across five aprils ervin lázár – a kisfiú meg az oroszlánok ( the little boy and the lions ) rhoda levine – harrison loved his umbrella ruth manning-sanders – a book of dwarfs j . p . martin – uncle ( first in a series of six books ) jean merrill – the pushcart war ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat on holiday bill peet ella randy 's dandy lions shel silverstein – the giving tree miriam young – miss suzy . drama . ama ata aidoo – the dilemma of a ghost david campton – dead and alive brian friel – philadelphia here i come ! girish karnad – tughlaq robert lowell – the old glory arthur miller after the fall incident at vichy joe orton – entertaining mr sloane alexander vampilov – farewell in june peter weiss – marat/sade . poetry . joseph payne brennan – nightmare need leonard cohen – flowers for hitler mehr lal soni zia fatehabadi – husn-e-ghazal ( the beauty of ghazal ) philip larkin – the whitsun weddings oodgeroo noonuccal – we are going : poems ion vinea – ora fântânilor ( the hour of fountains ) donald wandrei – poems for midnight up the line to death : the war poets 1914-1918 ( anthology ) . non-fiction . nelson algren – conversations with nelson algren ( interviews by h . e . f . donohue ) eric berne – games people play allan bloom with harry v . jaffa – shakespeare 's politics l . sprague de camp ancient ruins and archaeology ( with catherine crook de camp ) elephant hilda ellis davidson – gods and myths of northern europe aileen fox – south west england ( ancient peoples and places series ) henrietta quinnell , '' fox , aileen mary , lady fox ( 1907–2005 ) '' , oxford dictionary of national biography ( oxford , uk : oup , 2009 ) retrieved 21 november 2017 dick gregory – nigger ( 1964 book ) ernest hemingway – a moveable feast michael holroyd – hugh kingsmill : a critical biography john f . kennedy ( posthumous ) – a nation of immigrants martin luther king jr . – why we ca n't wait jan kott – shakespeare , our contemporary violette leduc – la bâtarde mao zedong – quotations from chairman mao tse-tung ( 毛主席语录 , máo zhǔxí yǔlù ) herbert marcuse – one-dimensional man marshall mcluhan – understanding media v . s . naipaul – an area of darkness sayyid qutb – ma'alim fi al-tariq ( معالم في الطريق , milestones ) ayn rand – the virtue of selfishness warren commission – the warren report evelyn waugh – a little learning . births . january 26 – peter braunstein , american journalist and playwright february 23 – joseph o'neill , irish-born writer march 7 – bret easton ellis , american novelist , screenwriter and short-story writer march 21 – kaori ekuni ( 江國 香織 ) , japanese novelist june 5 – rick riordan , american young-adult author june 7 – petr hruška , czech poet june 11 – dan chaon , american novelist and short-story writer july 3 – joanne harris , english novelist july 7 – karina galvez , ecuadorian poet july 16 – anne provoost , flemish novelist and essayist august 22 – diane setterfield , british author september 9 – aleksandar hemon , bosnian novelist and short-story writer september 19 – patrick marber , english comedian , playwright , director , puppeteer , actor and screenwriter september 25 carlos ruiz zafón , spanish novelist ( died 2020 ) gareth thompson , english children 's author december 26 – elizabeth kostova , american author december 29 – christine leunens , american-born belgian-new zealand novelist unknown dates ros barber , english novelist and poet ge fei ( 格非 , real name : liu yong , 刘勇 ) , chinese novelist mai jia ( real name : jiǎng běnhǔ , 蒋本浒 ) , chinese novelist nell zink , american novelist . deaths . january 17 – t . h . white , english novelist ( heart condition , born 1906 ) february 3 – clarence irving lewis , american philosopher ( born 1883 ) february 25 – grace metalious ( marie grace derepentigny ) , american novelist ( cirrhosis of liver , born 1924 ) march 17 – păstorel teodoreanu , romanian poet and satirist ( lung cancer , born 1894 ) march 20 – brendan behan , irish playwright , poet and writer ( born 1923 ) april 14 – rachel carson , american environmentalist ( breast cancer , born 1907 ) april 18 – ben hecht , american screenwriter ( born 1894 ) april 23 – karl polanyi ( károly polányi ) , austro-hungarian economic historian and social philosopher ( born 1886 ) may 13 – hamilton basso , american novelist and journalist ( born 1904 ) july 6 – ion vinea , romanian poet , novelist , and journalist ( cancer , born 1895 ) august 3 – flannery o'connor , american essayist and fiction writer ( born 1925 ) august 12 – ian fleming , english spy thriller writer ( heart attack , born 1908 ) august 17 – mihai ralea , romanian critic and sociologist of literature ( born 1896 ) september 14 – vasily grossman , soviet novelist ( cancer , born 1905 ) september 18 – seán o'casey , irish dramatist and memoirist ( born 1880 ) november 21 – leah bodine drake , american poet , editor and critic ( cancer , born 1914 ) november 29 – anne de vries , dutch novelist ( born 1904 ) december 9 – dame edith sitwell , english poet and critic ( born 1887 ) december 21 – carl van vechten , american writer and photographer ( born 1880 ) unknown date – radu d . rosetti , romanian poet and playwright ( born 1874 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature – jean-paul sartre ( refused ) . canada . see 1964 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : georges conchon , l'etat sauvage prix médicis : monique wittig , l ’ opoponax . united kingdom . carnegie medal for children 's literature : sheena porter , nordy bank eric gregory award : robert nye , ken smith , jean symons , ted walker james tait black memorial prize for fiction : frank tuohy , the ice saints james tait black memorial prize for biography : elizabeth longford , victoria r.i . queen 's gold medal for poetry : r . s . thomas . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medals drama : lillian hellman hugo award : clifford d . simak , way station newbery medal for children 's literature : emily cheney neville , it 's like this , cat pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for fiction : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : louis simpson : at the end of the open road . elsewhere . miles franklin award : george johnston , my brother jack premio nadal : alfredo martínez garrido , el miedo y la esperanza viareggio prize : giuseppe berto , il male oscuro . in literature . robert harris 's alternate history novel fatherland ( 1992 ) is set in a version of 1964 . sue monk kidd 's bildungsroman the secret life of bees ( 2001 ) is set in 1964 . references .