Al-Farabi

biography . the existing variations in the basic accounts of al-farabi 's origins and pedigree indicate that they were not recorded during his lifetime or soon thereafter by anyone with concrete information , but were based on hearsay or guesses ( as is the case with other contemporaries of al-farabi ) . little is known about his life . early sources include an autobiographical passage where al-farabi traces the history of logic and philosophy up to his time , and brief mentions by al-masudi , ibn al-nadim and ibn hawqal . said al-andalusi wrote a biography of al-farabi . arabic biographers of the 12th–13th centuries thus had few facts to hand , and used invented stories about his life . from incidental accounts it is known that he spent significant time ( most of his life ) in baghdad with christian scholars including the cleric yuhanna ibn haylan , yahya ibn adi , and abu ishaq ibrahim al-baghdadi . he later spent time in damascus and in egypt before returning to damascus where he died in 950-1 . reisman , d . ( ed . ) before and after avicenna . princeton , nj . 2001 his name was abū naṣr muḥammad b . muḥammad farabi , sometimes with the family surname al-ṭarḵānī , i.e . , the element ṭarḵān appears in a nisba . his grandfather was not known among his contemporaries , but a name , awzalaḡ , suddenly appears later in the writings of ibn abi osaybe ' a , and of his great-grandfather in those of ibn khallikan . his birthplace could have been any one of the many places in central asia-khurasan that is known by that name . the name '' parab/farab '' is a persian term for a locale that is irrigated by effluent springs or flows from a nearby river . thus , there are many places that carry the name ( or various evolutions of that hydrological/geological toponym ) in that general area , such as otrar on the jaxartes ( syr darya ) in modern kazakhstan , fārāb ( modern türkmenabat ) on the oxus amu darya in turkmenistan , or fāryāb in greater khorasan ( modern day afghanistan ) . the older persian pārāb ( in hudud ul-'alam ) or fāryāb ( also pāryāb ) , is a common persian toponym meaning '' lands irrigated by diversion of river water '' . daniel balland , '' fāryāb '' in encyclopedia iranica excerpt : '' fāryāb ( also pāryāb ) , common persian toponym meaning “ lands irrigated by diversion of river water '' dehkhoda dictionary under '' parab '' excerpt : '' پاراب . ( اِ مرکب ) زراعتی که به آب چشمه و کاریز ورودخانه و مانند آن کنند مَسقوی . آبی . مقابل دیم '' ( translation : '' lands irrigated by diversion of river water , springs and qanats . '' ) by the 13th century , fārāb on the jaxartes was known as otrar . scholars largely agree that farabi 's ethnic background is not knowable . david c . reisman , '' al-farabi and the philosophical curriculum '' , in peter adamson and richard c . taylor , the cambridge companion to arabic philosophy , cambridge university press , 2005 , p . 53 . f . abiola irele/biodun jeyifo , '' farabi '' , in the oxford encyclopedia of african thought , vol . 1 , p . 379 . . iranian origin theory . medieval arab historian ibn abi usaibia ( died in 1270 ) —al-farabi 's oldest biographer—mentions in his ʿuyūn that al-farabi 's father was of persian descent . ebn abi osaybea , oyun al-anba fi tabaqat at-atebba , ed . a . müller , cairo , 1299/1882 . وكان ابوه قائد جيش وهو فارسي المنتسب al-shahrazuri who lived around 1288 a.d . and has written an early biography also states that farabi hailed from a persian family . seyyed hossein nasr , mehdi amin razavi . '' an anthology of philosophy in persia , vol . 1 : from zoroaster to umar khayyam '' , i.b . tauris in association with the institute of ismaili studies , 2007 . pg 134 : '' ibn nadim in his al-fihrist , which is the first work to mention farabi considers him to be of persian origin , as does muhammad shahrazuri in his tarikh al-hukama and ibn abi usaybi'ah in his tabaqat al-atibba . in contrast , ibn khallikan in his ' '' wafayat al-'ayan considers him to be of turkish descent . in any case , he was born in farab in khurasan of that day around 257/870 in a climate of persianate culture '' arabic : و كان من سلاله فارس in j . mashkur , farab and farabi , tehran,1972 . see also dehkhoda dictionary under the entry farabi for the same exact arabic quote . according to majid fakhry , an emeritus professor of philosophy at georgetown university , farabi 's father '' was an army captain of persian extraction . '' majid fakhry , al-farabi , founder of islamic neoplatonism : his life , works and influence , great islamic thinkers ( oxford : oneworld publications , 2002 ) , 157 . dimitri gutas notes that farabi 's works contain references and glosses in persian , sogdian , and even greek , but not turkish . george fadlo hourani , essays on islamic philosophy and science , suny press , 1975 . kiki kennedy-day , books of definition in islamic philosophy : the limits of words , routledge , 2002 , page 32 . sogdian has also been suggested as his native language joshua parens ( 2006 ) . an islamic philosophy of virtuous religions : introducing alfarabi . albany , ny : state univ . of new york press . pp . 3 . excerpt : '' he was a native speaker of turkic dialect , soghdian . '' note : sogdian was an east iranian language and not a turkic dialect and the language of the inhabitants of fārāb . joep lameer , '' al-fārābī and aristotelian syllogistics : greek theory and islamic practice '' , e.j . brill , 1994 . pg 22 : '' . islamic world of that time , an area whose inhabitants must have spoken soghdian or maybe a turkish dialect . '' muhammad javad mashkoor argues for an iranian-speaking central asian origin . مشكور، محمدجواد . “ فاراب و فارابي “ . دوره14، ش161 ( اسفند 54 ) : 15-20- . j . mashkur , '' farabi and farabi '' in volume 14 , no . 161 , pp 15–12 , tehran,1972 . english translations of the arguments used by j . mashkur can be found in : g . lohraspi , '' some remarks on farabi 's background '' ; a scholarly approach citing c.e . bosworth , b . lewis , r . frye , d . gutas , j . mashkur and partial translation of j.mashkur 's arguments : pdf . ولي فارابي فيلسوف تنها متعلق به ايران نبود بلكه به عالم اسلام تعلق داشت و از بركت قرآن و دين محمد به اين مقام رسيد . از اينجهت هه دانشمنداني كه در اينجا گرد آمده‌اند او را يك دانشمند مسلمان متعلق به عالم انسانيت مي‌دانند و كاري به تركي و فارسي و عربي بودن او ندارند . a persian origin has been stated by many other sources as well . p.j . king , '' one hundred philosophers : the life and work of the world 's greatest thinkers '' , chapter al-fārābi , zebra , 2006 . pp 50 : '' of persian stock , al-farabi ( alfarabius , abunaser ) was born in turkestan '' henry thomas , understanding the great philosophers , doubleday , published 1962 t . j . de boer , '' the history of philosophy in islam '' , forgotten books , 2008 . excerpt page 98 : '' his father is said to have been a persian general '' . sterling m . mcmurrin , religion , reason , and truth : historical essays in the philosophy of religion , university of utah press , 1982 , . page 40 . edited by robert c . solomon and kathleen m . higgins . ( 2003 ) . from africa to zen : an invitation to world philosophy . lanham , md . : rowman & littlefield publishers . pp . 163 . '' al-farabi ( 870–950 ) , a persian , '' thomas f . glick . ( 1995 ) . from muslim fortress to christian castle : social and cultural change in medieval spain . manchester : manchester university press . pp . 170 . '' it was thus that al-farabi ( c . 870–950 ) , a persian philosopher '' the world 's greatest seers and philosophers . gardners books . 2005 . pp . 41 . '' al-farabi ( also known as abu al-nasr al-farabi ) was born of turkish parents in the small village of wasij near farab , turkistan ( now in uzbekistan ) in 870 ad . his parents were of persian descent , but their ancestors had migrated to turkistan . '' bryan bunch with alexander hellemans . ( 2004 ) . the history of science and technology : a browser 's guide to the great discoveries , inventions , and the people who made them , from the dawn of time to today . boston : houghton mifflin . pp . 108 . '' persian scholar al-farabi '' olivier roy , '' the new central asia : the creation of nations '' , i.b.tauris , 2000 . 1860642799 . pg 167 : '' kazakhstan also annexes for the purpose of bank notes al farabi ( 870–950 ) , the muslim philosopher who was born in the south of present-day kazakhstan but who presumably spoke persian , particularly because in that era there were no kazakhs in the region '' majid khadduri ; foreword by r . k . ramazani . the islamic conception of justice . baltimore : johns hopkins university press , c1984 . pp . 84 . '' nasr al-farabi was born in farab ( a small town in transoxiana ) in 259/870 to a family of mixed parentage — the father , who married a turkish woman , is said to have been of persian and turkish descent — but both professed the shi ' l heterodox faith . he spoke persian and turkish fluently and learned the arabic language before he went to baghdad . ḥannā fākhūrī , tārīkh al-fikr al-falsafī ʻinda al-ʻarab , al-duqqī , al-jīzah : al-sharikah al-miṣrīyah al-ʻālamīyah lil-nashr , lūnjmān , 2002 . ’ ammar al-talbi , al-farabi , unesco : international bureau of education , vol . xxiii , no . 1/2 , paris , 1993 , p . 353-372 david deming , '' science and technology in world history : the ancient world and classical civilization '' , mcfarland , 2010 . pg 94 : '' al-farabi , known in medieval europe as abunaser , was a persian philosopher who sought to harmonize . '' philosophers : abu al-nasr al-farabi , trinity college , 1995–2000 . turkic origin theory . the oldest known reference to a turkic origin is given by the medieval historian ibn khallikān ( died in 1282 ) , who in his work wafayāt ( completed in 669/1271 ) states that farabi was born in the small village of wasij near fārāb ( in what is today otrar , kazakhstan ) of turkic parents . based on this account , some modern scholars say he is of turkic origin . b.g . gafurov , central asia : pre-historic to pre-modern times , ( shipra publications , 2005 ) , 124 ; '' abu nasr farabi hailed from around ancient farabi which was situated on the bank of syr daria and was the son of a turk military commander '' . will durant , the age of faith , ( simon and schuster , 1950 ) , 253 . nicholas rescher , al-farabi 's short commentary on aristotle 's prior analytics , university of pittsburgh pre , 1963 , p.11 , online edition . antony black , the history of islamic political thought : from the prophet to the present , routledge , p . 61 , online edition james hastings , encyclopedia of religion and ethics , kessinger publishing , vol . 10 , p.757 , online edition edited by ted honderich . ( 1995 ) . the oxford companion to philosophy . oxford : oxford university press . pp . 269 . '' of turki origin , al-farabi studied under christian thinkers '' edited and translated by norman calder , jawid mojaddedi and andrew rippin . ( 2003 ) . classical islam : a sourcebook of religious literature . new york : routledge . pp . 170 . '' he was of turkish origin , was born in turkestan '' ian richard netton . ( 1999 ) . al-fārābī and his school . richmond , surrey : curzon . '' he appears to have been born into a military family of turkish origin in the village of wasil , farab , in turkestan '' edited by henrietta moore . ( 1996 ) . the future of anthropological knowledge . london : routledge . '' al-farabi ( 873–950 ) , a scholar of turkish origin . '' diané collinson and robert wilkinson . ( 1994 ) . thirty-five oriental philosophers . london : routledge . '' al-farabi is thought to be of turkish origin . his family name suggests that he came from the vicinity of farab in transoxiana . '' fernand braudel ; translated by richard mayne . ( 1995 ) . a history of civilizations . new york , n.y . : penguin . '' al-farabi , born in 870 , was of turkish origin . he lived in aleppo and died in 950 in damascus '' jaroslav krejčí ; assisted by anna krejčová . ( 1990 ) . before the european challenge : the great civilizations of asia and the middle east . albany : state university of new york press . pp . 140 . '' the transoxanian turk al-farabi ( d . circa 950 ) '' hamid naseem . ( 2001 ) . muslim philosophy science and mysticism . new delhi : sarup & sons . pp . 78 . '' al-farabi , the first turkish philosopher '' clifford sawhney . the world 's greatest seers and philosophers , 2005 , p . 41 zainal abidin ahmad . negara utama ( madinatuʾl fadilah ) teori kenegaraan dari sardjana islam al farabi . 1964 , p . 19 haroon khan sherwani . studies in muslim political thought and administration . 1945 , p . 63 ian richard netton . al-farabi and his school , 1999 , p . 5 dimitri gutas , an american arabist of greek origin , criticizes this , saying that ibn khallikān 's account is aimed at the earlier historical accounts by ibn abi osaybe ' a , and serves the purpose to '' prove '' a turkic origin for al-farabi , for instance by mentioning the additional nisba ( surname ) '' al-turk '' ( arab . '' the turk '' ) —a nisba farabi never had . however , abu al-fedā ' , who copied ibn ḵhallekān , corrected this and changed al-torkī to the phrase '' wa-kāna rajolan torkīyan '' , meaning '' he was a turkish man . '' in this regard , oxford professor c.e . bosworth notes that '' great figures such as al-farabi , al-biruni , and avicenna have been attached by over enthusiastic turkish scholars to their race '' . . life and education . al-farabi spent almost his entire life in baghdad . in the auto-biographical passage preserved by ibn abi osaybe ' a , farabi stated that he had studied logic , medicine and sociology with yūḥannā bin ḥaylān up to and including aristotle 's posterior analytics , i.e . , according to the order of the books studied in the curriculum , fārābī was claiming that he had studied porphyry 's eisagoge and aristotle 's categories , de interpretatione , prior and posterior analytics . his teacher , bin ḥaylān , was a nestorian cleric . this period of study was probably in baghdad , where al-masudi records that yūḥannā died during the reign of al-muqtadir ( 295-320/908-32 ) . he was in baghdad at least until the end of september 942 , as recorded in notes in his mabādeʾ ārāʾ ahl al-madīna al-fāżela . he finished the book in damascus the following year ( 331 ) , i.e . , by september 943 ) . he also studied in tétouan , morocco and lived and taught for some time in aleppo . farabi later visited egypt , finishing six sections summarizing the book mabādeʾ in egypt in 337/july 948 – june 949 when he returned to syria , where he was supported by sayf al-dawla , the hamdanid ruler . al-masudi , writing barely five years after the fact ( 955-6 , the date of the composition of the tanbīh ) , says that farabi died in damascus in rajab 339 ( between 14 december 950 and 12 january 951 ) . . religious beliefs . henry corbin writes that the evidence supports the opinion common in iran that al-farabi was a shia muslim . corbin argues that there are many similarities between what he calls farabi 's '' prophetic philosophy '' and the teachings of shiite imams . najjar fauzi likewise argues that al-farabi 's political philosophy was influenced by shiite sects . fazi , fārābī 's political philosophy and shī'ism , studia islamica , no . 14 ( 1961 ) , pp . 57–72 giving a positive account , nadia maftouni describes shi'ite aspects of farabi 's writings . as she put it , farabi in his al-millah , al-sīyāsah al-madanīyah , and tahsil al-sa ’ adah believes in a utopia governed by prophet and his successors : the imams . . works and contributions . farabi made contributions to the fields of logic , mathematics , music , philosophy , psychology , and education . alchemy . al-farabi wrote : the necessity of the art of the elixir . logic . though he was mainly an aristotelian logician , he included a number of non-aristotelian elements in his works . he discussed the topics of future contingents , the number and relation of the categories , the relation between logic and grammar , and non-aristotelian forms of inference . history of logic : arabic logic , encyclopædia britannica . he is also credited with categorizing logic into two separate groups , the first being '' idea '' and the second being '' proof '' . al-farabi also considered the theories of conditional syllogisms and analogy , which were part of the stoic tradition of logic rather than the aristotelian . another addition al-farabi made to the aristotelian tradition was his introduction of the concept of poetic syllogism in a commentary on aristotle 's poetics . . music . al-farabi wrote a book on music titled kitab al-musiqa ( the book of music ) . in it , he presents philosophical principles about music , its cosmic qualities , and its influences . he also wrote a treatise on the meanings of the intellect , which dealt with music therapy and discussed the therapy effects of music on the soul . . philosophy . as a philosopher , al-farabi was a founder of his own school of early islamic philosophy known as '' farabism '' or '' alfarabism '' , though it was later overshadowed by avicennism . al-farabi 's school of philosophy '' breaks with the philosophy of plato and aristotle . and . moves from metaphysics to methodology , a move that anticipates modernity '' , and '' at the level of philosophy , alfarabi unites theory and practice . and in the sphere of the politics he liberates practice from theory '' . his neoplatonic theology is also more than just metaphysics as rhetoric . in his attempt to think through the nature of a first cause , alfarabi discovers the limits of human knowledge '' . al-farabi had great influence on science and philosophy for several centuries , and was widely considered second only to aristotle in knowledge ( alluded to by his title of '' the second teacher '' ) in his time . his work , aimed at synthesis of philosophy and sufism , paved the way for the work of avicenna ( avicenna ) . al-farabi also wrote a commentary on aristotle 's work , and one of his most notable works is al-madina al-fadila where he theorized an ideal state as in plato 's the republic . arabic and islamic natural philosophy and natural science , stanford encyclopedia of philosophy al-farabi argued that religion rendered truth through symbols and persuasion , and , like plato , saw it as the duty of the philosopher to provide guidance to the state . al-farabi incorporated the platonic view , drawing a parallel from within the islamic context , in that he regarded the ideal state to be ruled by the prophet-imam , instead of the philosopher-king envisaged by plato . al-farabi argued that the ideal state was the city-state of medina when it was governed by the prophet muhammad as its head of state , as he was in direct communion with allah whose law was revealed to him . in the absence of the prophet-imam , al-farabi considered democracy as the closest to the ideal state , regarding the republican order of the sunni rashidun caliphate as an example within early muslim history . however , he also maintained that it was from democracy that imperfect states emerged , noting how the republican order of the early islamic caliphate of the rashidun caliphs was later replaced by a form of government resembling a monarchy under the umayyad and abbasid dynasties . ronald bontekoe , mariėtta tigranovna stepaniants ( 1997 ) , justice and democracy , university of hawaii press , p . 251 , isbn 0824819268 . physics . al-farabi wrote a short treatise '' on vacuum '' , where he thought about the nature of the existence of void . he also may have carried out the first experiments concerning the existence of vacuum , in which he investigated handheld plungers in water . his final conclusion was that air 's volume can expand to fill available space , and he suggested that the concept of perfect vacuum was incoherent . . psychology . al-farabi wrote social psychology and principles of the opinions of the citizens of the virtuous city , which were the first treatises to deal with social psychology . he stated that '' an isolated individual could not achieve all the perfections by himself , without the aid of other individuals , '' and that it is the '' innate disposition of every man to join another human being or other men in the labor he ought to perform . '' he concluded that to '' achieve what he can of that perfection , every man needs to stay in the neighborhood of others and associate with them . '' amber haque ( 2004 ) , '' psychology from islamic perspective : contributions of early muslim scholars and challenges to contemporary muslim psychologists '' , journal of religion and health 43 ( 4 ) : 357–377 363 . in his treatise on the cause of dreams , which appeared as chapter 24 of his principles of the opinions of the citizens of the ideal city , he distinguished between dream interpretation and the nature and causes of dreams . . philosophical thought . influences . the main influence on al-farabi 's philosophy was the neo-aristotelian tradition of alexandria . a prolific writer , he is credited with over one hundred works . black , d . al-farabi in leaman , o & nasr , h ( 2001 ) . history of islamic philosophy . london : routledge . p178 . amongst these are a number of prolegomena to philosophy , commentaries on important aristotelian works ( such as the nicomachean ethics ) as well as his own works . his ideas are marked by their coherency , despite drawing together of many different philosophical disciplines and traditions . some other significant influences on his work were the planetary model of ptolemy and elements of neo-platonism , motahhari , mortaza , becoming familiar with islamic knowledge , v1 , p:162 particularly metaphysics and practical ( or political ) philosophy ( which bears more resemblance to plato 's republic than aristotle 's politics ) . reisman , d . al-farabi and the philosophical curriculum in adamson , p & taylor , r . ( 2005 ) . the cambridge companion to arabic philosophy . cambridge : cambridge university press . p52 . al-farabi , aristotle , maimonides . in the handing down of aristotle ’ s thought to the christian west in the middle ages , al-farabi played an essential part as appears in the translation of farabi ’ s commentary and short treatise on aristotle ’ s de interpretatione that f.w . zimmermann published in 1981 . farabi had a great influence on maimonides , the most important jewish thinker of the middle ages . maimonides wrote in arabic a treatise on logic , the celebrated maqala fi sina at al-mantiq . in a wonderfully concise way , the work treats of the essentials of aristotelian logic in the light of comments made by the persian philosophers : avicenna and , above all , al-farabi . rémi brague in his book devoted to the treatise stresses the fact that farabi is the only thinker mentioned therein . al-farabi as well as ibn sina and averroes have been recognized as peripatetics ( al-mashsha ’ iyun ) or rationalism ( estedlaliun ) among muslims . motahhari , morteza , becoming familiar with islamic knowledge , v1 , p.166 اگر بخواهيم كلمهای را به كار بريم كه مفيد مفهوم روش فلسفی مشائين باشد بايد كلمه ( استدلالی ) را به كار بريم . however , he tried to gather the ideas of plato and aristotle in his book '' the gathering of the ideas of the two philosophers '' . motahhari , mortaza , becoming familiar with islamic knowledge , v1 , p.167 فارابی كتاب كوچك معروفی دارد به نام ( الجمع بين رأيی الحكيمين ) در اين كتاب مسائل اختلافی اين دو فيلسوف طرح شده و كوشش شده كه به نحوی اختلافات ميان اين دو حكيم از بين برود . according to adamson , his work was singularly directed towards the goal of simultaneously reviving and reinventing the alexandrian philosophical tradition , to which his christian teacher , yuhanna bin haylan belonged . his success should be measured by the honorific title of '' the second master '' of philosophy ( aristotle being the first ) , by which he was known . adamson also says that he does not make any reference to the ideas of either al-kindi or his contemporary , abu bakr al-razi , which clearly indicates that he did not consider their approach to philosophy as a correct or viable one . reisman , p55 . thought . metaphysics and cosmology . in contrast to al-kindi , who considered the subject of metaphysics to be god , al-farabi believed that it was concerned primarily with being qua being ( that is , being in and of itself ) , and this is related to god only to the extent that god is a principle of absolute being . al-kindi 's view was , however , a common misconception regarding greek philosophy amongst muslim intellectuals at the time , and it was for this reason that avicenna remarked that he did not understand aristotle 's metaphysics properly until he had read a prolegomenon written by al-farabi . black , p188 al-farabi 's cosmology is essentially based upon three pillars : aristotelian metaphysics of causation , highly developed plotinus emanationism and the ptolemaic astronomy . reisman , p56 in his model , the universe is viewed as a number of concentric circles ; the outermost sphere or '' first heaven '' , the sphere of fixed stars , saturn , jupiter , mars , the sun , venus , mercury and finally , the moon . at the centre of these concentric circles is the sub-lunar realm which contains the material world . black , p189 each of these circles represent the domain of the secondary intelligences ( symbolized by the celestial bodies themselves ) , which act as causal intermediaries between the first cause ( in this case , god ) and the material world . furthermore these are said to have emanated from god , who is both their formal and efficient cause . the process of emanation begins ( metaphysically , not temporally ) with the first cause , whose principal activity is self-contemplation . and it is this intellectual activity that underlies its role in the creation of the universe . the first cause , by thinking of itself , '' overflows '' and the incorporeal entity of the second intellect '' emanates '' from it . like its predecessor , the second intellect also thinks about itself , and thereby brings its celestial sphere ( in this case , the sphere of fixed stars ) into being , but in addition to this it must also contemplate upon the first cause , and this causes the '' emanation '' of the next intellect . the cascade of emanation continues until it reaches the tenth intellect , beneath which is the material world . and as each intellect must contemplate both itself and an increasing number of predecessors , each succeeding level of existence becomes more and more complex . this process is based upon necessity as opposed to will . in other words , god does not have a choice whether or not to create the universe , but by virtue of his own existence , he causes it to be . this view also suggests that the universe is eternal , and both of these points were criticized by al-ghazzali in his attack on the philosophers reisman , p57 corbin , h . ( 1993 ) . history of islamic philosophy . london : keagan paul international . p161 in his discussion of the first cause ( or god ) , al-farabi relies heavily on negative theology . he says that it can not be known by intellectual means , such as dialectical division or definition , because the terms used in these processes to define a thing constitute its substance . therefore if one was to define the first cause , each of the terms used would actually constitute a part of its substance and therefore behave as a cause for its existence , which is impossible as the first cause is uncaused ; it exists without being caused . equally , he says it can not be known according to genus and differentia , as its substance and existence are different from all others , and therefore it has no category to which it belongs . if this were the case , then it would not be the first cause , because something would be prior in existence to it , which is also impossible . this would suggest that the more philosophically simple a thing is , the more perfect it is . and based on this observation , adamson says it is possible to see the entire hierarchy of al-farabi 's cosmology according to classification into genus and species . each succeeding level in this structure has as its principal qualities multiplicity and deficiency , and it is this ever-increasing complexity that typifies the material world . reisman , p58-59 . epistemology and eschatology . human beings are unique in al-farabi 's vision of the universe because they stand between two worlds : the '' higher '' , immaterial world of the celestial intellects and universal intelligibles , and the '' lower '' , material world of generation and decay ; they inhabit a physical body , and so belong to the '' lower '' world , but they also have a rational capacity , which connects them to the '' higher '' realm . each level of existence in al-farabi 's cosmology is characterized by its movement towards perfection , which is to become like the first cause , i.e . a perfect intellect . human perfection ( or '' happiness '' ) , then , is equated with constant intellection and contemplation . reisman , p61 al-farabi divides intellect into four categories : potential , actual , acquired and the agent . the first three are the different states of the human intellect and the fourth is the tenth intellect ( the moon ) in his emanational cosmology . the potential intellect represents the capacity to think , which is shared by all human beings , and the actual intellect is an intellect engaged in the act of thinking . by thinking , al-farabi means abstracting universal intelligibles from the sensory forms of objects which have been apprehended and retained in the individual 's imagination . this motion from potentiality to actuality requires the agent intellect to act upon the retained sensory forms ; just as the sun illuminates the physical world to allow us to see , the agent intellect illuminates the world of intelligibles to allow us to think . reisman , p64 this illumination removes all accident ( such as time , place , quality ) and physicality from them , converting them into primary intelligibles , which are logical principles such as '' the whole is greater than the part '' . the human intellect , by its act of intellection , passes from potentiality to actuality , and as it gradually comprehends these intelligibles , it is identified with them ( as according to aristotle , by knowing something , the intellect becomes like it ) . reisman , p63 because the agent intellect knows all of the intelligibles , this means that when the human intellect knows all of them , it becomes associated with the agent intellect 's perfection and is known as the acquired intellect . black , p186 while this process seems mechanical , leaving little room for human choice or volition , reisman says that al-farabi is committed to human voluntarism . this takes place when man , based on the knowledge he has acquired , decides whether to direct himself towards virtuous or unvirtuous activities , and thereby decides whether or not to seek true happiness . and it is by choosing what is ethical and contemplating about what constitutes the nature of ethics , that the actual intellect can become '' like '' the active intellect , thereby attaining perfection . it is only by this process that a human soul may survive death , and live on in the afterlife . corbin , p158 according to al-farabi , the afterlife is not the personal experience commonly conceived of by religious traditions such as islam and christianity . any individual or distinguishing features of the soul are annihilated after the death of the body ; only the rational faculty survives ( and then , only if it has attained perfection ) , which becomes one with all other rational souls within the agent intellect and enters a realm of pure intelligence . henry corbin compares this eschatology with that of the ismaili neo-platonists , for whom this process initiated the next grand cycle of the universe . corbin , p165 however , deborah black mentions we have cause to be skeptical as to whether this was the mature and developed view of al-farabi , as later thinkers such as ibn tufayl , averroes and ibn bajjah would assert that he repudiated this view in his commentary on the nicomachean ethics , which has been lost to modern experts . . psychology , the soul and prophetic knowledge . in his treatment of the human soul , al-farabi draws on a basic aristotelian outline , which is informed by the commentaries of later greek thinkers . he says it is composed of four faculties : the appetitive ( the desire for , or aversion to an object of sense ) , the sensitive ( the perception by the senses of corporeal substances ) , the imaginative ( the faculty which retains images of sensible objects after they have been perceived , and then separates and combines them for a number of ends ) , and the rational , which is the faculty of intellection . black , p184 it is the last of these which is unique to human beings and distinguishes them from plants and animals . it is also the only part of the soul to survive the death of the body . noticeably absent from these scheme are internal senses , such as common sense , which would be discussed by later philosophers such as avicenna and averroes . reisman , p60-61 black ( 2 ) , d . psychology : soul and intellect in adamson , p and taylor , r . ( 2005 ) . the cambridge companion to arabic philosophy . cambridge : cambridge university press . p313 special attention must be given to al-farabi 's treatment of the soul 's imaginative faculty , which is essential to his interpretation of prophethood and prophetic knowledge . in addition to its ability to retain and manipulate sensible images of objects , he gives the imagination the function of imitation . by this he means the capacity to represent an object with an image other than its own . in other words , to imitate '' x '' is to imagine '' x '' by associating it with sensible qualities that do not describe its own appearance . this extends the representative ability of the imagination beyond sensible forms and to include temperaments , emotions , desires and even immaterial intelligibles or abstract universals , as happens when , for example , one associates '' evil '' with '' darkness '' . black ( b ) , p313 black , p185 the prophet , in addition to his own intellectual capacity , has a very strong imaginative faculty , which allows him to receive an overflow of intelligibles from the agent intellect ( the tenth intellect in the emanational cosmology ) . these intelligibles are then associated with symbols and images , which allow him to communicate abstract truths in a way that can be understood by ordinary people . therefore what makes prophetic knowledge unique is not its content , which is also accessible to philosophers through demonstration and intellection , but rather the form that it is given by the prophet 's imagination . corbin , p164 black , p187 . practical philosophy ( ethics and politics ) . the practical application of philosophy was a major concern expressed by al-farabi in many of his works , and while the majority of his philosophical output has been influenced by aristotelian thought , his practical philosophy was unmistakably based on that of plato . corbin , p162 in a similar manner to plato 's republic , al-farabi emphasized that philosophy was both a theoretical and practical discipline ; labeling those philosophers who do not apply their erudition to practical pursuits as '' futile philosophers '' . the ideal society , he wrote , is one directed towards the realization of '' true happiness '' ( which can be taken to mean philosophical enlightenment ) and as such , the ideal philosopher must hone all the necessary arts of rhetoric and poetics to communicate abstract truths to the ordinary people , as well as having achieved enlightenment himself . black , p190 al-farabi compared the philosopher 's role in relation to society with a physician in relation to the body ; the body 's health is affected by the '' balance of its humours '' just as the city is determined by the moral habits of its people . the philosopher 's duty , he wrote , was to establish a '' virtuous '' society by healing the souls of the people , establishing justice and guiding them towards '' true happiness '' . butterworth , p278 of course , al-farabi realized that such a society was rare and required a very specific set of historical circumstances to be realized , which means very few societies could ever attain this goal . he divided those '' vicious '' societies , which have fallen short of the ideal '' virtuous '' society , into three categories : ignorant , wicked and errant . ignorant societies have , for whatever reason , failed to comprehend the purpose of human existence , and have supplanted the pursuit of happiness for another ( inferior ) goal , whether this be wealth , sensual gratification or power . al-farabi mentions '' weeds '' in the virtuous society : those people who try to undermine its progress towards the true human end . black , p191 the best known arabic source for al-farabi 's political philosophy is his work titled , al-madina al-fadila ( the virtuous city ) . whether or not al-farabi actually intended to outline a political programme in his writings remains a matter of dispute amongst academics . henry corbin , who considers al-farabi to be a crypto- shi'ite , says that his ideas should be understood as a '' prophetic philosophy '' instead of being interpreted politically . corbin , p162-163 on the other hand , charles butterworth contends that nowhere in his work does al-farabi speak of a prophet-legislator or revelation ( even the word philosophy is scarcely mentioned ) , and the main discussion that takes place concerns the positions of '' king '' and '' statesmen '' . butterworth , c . ethical and political philosophy in adamson , p and taylor , r . ( 2005 ) . the cambridge companion to arabic philosophy . cambridge : cambridge university press . p276 occupying a middle position is david reisman , who , like corbin , believes that al-farabi did not want to expound a political doctrine ( although he does not go so far to attribute it to islamic gnosticism either ) . he argues that al-farabi was using different types of society as examples , in the context of an ethical discussion , to show what effect correct or incorrect thinking could have . reisman , p68 lastly , joshua parens argues that al-farabi was slyly asserting that a pan-islamic society could not be made , by using reason to show how many conditions ( such as moral and deliberative virtue ) would have to be met , thus leading the reader to conclude that humans are not fit for such a society . joshua parens , an islamic philosophy of virtuous religions : introducing alfarabi ( new york : state university of new york press , 2006 ) , 2 . some other authors such as mykhaylo yakubovych argue that for al-farabi religion ( milla ) and philosophy ( falsafa ) constituted the same praxeological value ( i.e . basis for amal al-fadhil— '' virtuous deed '' ) , while its epistemological level ( ilm— '' knowledge '' ) was different . mykhaylo yakubovych . al-farabi 's book of religion . ukrainian translation , introduction and comments / ukrainian religious studies bulletin , 2008 , vol . 47 , p . 237 . . legacy . the main-belt asteroid 7057 al-fārābī was named in his honor .