USS Maine (1889)

yellow journalism . the new york journal and new york world , owned respectively by william randolph hearst and joseph pulitzer , gave maine intense press coverage , employing tactics that would later be labeled '' yellow journalism . '' both papers exaggerated and distorted any information they could obtain , sometimes even fabricating news when none that fitted their agenda was available . for a week following the sinking , the journal devoted a daily average of eight and a half pages of news , editorials and pictures to the event . its editors sent a full team of reporters and artists to havana , including frederic remington , and hearst announced a reward of 50,000 '' for the conviction of the criminals who sent 258 american sailors to their deaths . '' . as quoted in . the world , while overall not as lurid or shrill in tone as the journal , nevertheless indulged in similar theatrics , insisting continually that maine had been bombed or mined . privately , pulitzer believed that '' nobody outside a lunatic asylum '' really believed that spain sanctioned maines destruction . nevertheless , this did not stop the world from insisting that the only '' atonement '' spain could offer the u.s . for the loss of ship and life , was the granting of complete cuban independence . nor did it stop the paper from accusing spain of '' treachery , willingness , or laxness '' for failing to ensure the safety of havana harbor . the american public , already agitated over reported spanish atrocities in cuba , was driven to increased hysteria . william randolph hearst 's reporting on maine whipped up support for military action against the spanish in cuba regardless of their actual involvement in the sinking . he frequently cited various naval officers saying that the explosion could not have been an on-board accident . he quoted an '' officer high in authority '' as saying '' the idea that the catastrophe resulted from an internal accident is preposterous . in the first place , such a thing has never occurred before that i have ever heard of either in the british navy or ours . '' hearst 's sources never had to be specifically named because he just needed them to support the narrative that the explosion was caused by an attack by the spanish . spanish–american war . maines destruction did not result in an immediate declaration of war with spain , but the event created an atmosphere that precluded a peaceful solution . the spanish investigation found that the explosion had been caused by spontaneous combustion of the coal bunkers , but the sampson board ruled that the explosion had been caused by an external explosion from a torpedo . the episode focused national attention on the crisis in cuba . the mckinley administration did not cite the explosion as a casus belli , but others were already inclined to go to war with spain over perceived atrocities and loss of control in cuba . advocates of war used the rallying cry , '' remember the maine ! to hell with spain ! '' the spanish–american war began on april 21 , 1898 , two months after the sinking . investigations . in addition to the inquiry commissioned by the spanish government to naval officers del peral and de salas , two naval courts of inquiry were ordered : the sampson board in 1898 and the vreeland board in 1911 . in 1976 , admiral hyman g . rickover commissioned a private investigation into the explosion , and the national geographic society did an investigation in 1999 , using computer simulations . all investigations agreed that an explosion of the forward magazines caused the destruction of the ship , but different conclusions were reached as to how the magazines could have exploded . . 1898 del peral and de salas inquiry . the spanish inquiry , conducted by del peral and de salas , collected evidence from officers of naval artillery , who had examined the remains of the maine . del peral and de salas identified the spontaneous combustion of the coal bunker , located adjacent to the munition stores in maine , as the likely cause of the explosion . the possibility that other combustibles , such as paint or drier products , had caused the explosion was not discounted . additional observations included that : had a mine been the cause of the explosion , a column of water would have been observed . the wind and the waters were calm on that date and hence a mine could not have been detonated by contact , but only by using electricity , but no cables had been found . no dead fish were found in the harbor , as would be expected following an explosion in the water . munition stores do not usually explode when a ship is sunk by a mine . the conclusions of the report were not reported at that time by the american press . hugh thomas , memoria del 98 ( 1997 edition ) , chapter 7 ( '' la explosión del maine '' ) , p . 104 . 1898 sampson board 's court of inquiry . in order to find the cause of the explosion , a naval inquiry was ordered by the united states shortly after the incident , headed by captain william t . sampson . ramón blanco y erenas , spanish governor of cuba , had proposed instead a joint spanish-american investigation of the sinking . captain sigsbee had written that '' many spanish officers , including representatives of general blanco , now with us to express sympathy . '' in a cable , the spanish minister of colonies , segismundo moret , had advised blanco '' to gather every fact you can , to prove the maine catastrophe can not be attributed to us . '' according to dana wegner , who worked with u.s . admiral hyman g . rickover on his 1974 investigation of the sinking , the secretary of the navy had the option of selecting a board of inquiry personally . instead , he fell back on protocol and assigned the commander-in-chief of the north atlantic squadron to do so . the commander produced a list of junior line officers for the board . the fact that the officer proposed to be court president was junior to the captain of maine , wegner writes , '' would indicate either ignorance of navy regulations or that , in the beginning , the board did not intend to examine the possibility that the ship was lost by accident and the negligence of her captain . '' eventually , navy regulations prevailed in leadership of the board , captain sampson being senior to captain sigsbee . the board arrived on 21 february and took testimony from survivors , witnesses , and divers ( who were sent down to investigate the wreck ) . the sampson board produced its findings in two parts : the proceedings , which consisted mainly of testimonies , and the findings , which were the facts , as determined by the court . between the proceedings and the findings , there was what wegner calls , '' a broad gap '' , where the court '' left no record of the reasoning that carried it from the often-inconsistent witnesses to its conclusion . '' another inconsistency , according to wegner , was that of only one technical witness , commander george converse , from the torpedo station at newport , rhode island . captain sampson read commander converse a hypothetical situation of a coal bunker fire igniting the reserve six-inch ammunition , with a resulting explosion sinking the ship . he then asked commander converse about the feasibility of such a scenario . commander converse '' simply stated , without elaboration , that he could not realize such an event happening '' . the board concluded that maine had been blown up by a mine , which , in turn , caused the explosion of her forward magazines . they reached this conclusion based on the fact that the majority of witnesses stated that they had heard two explosions and that part of the keel was bent inwards . the official report from the board , which was presented to the navy department in washington on 21 march , specifically stated the following : . 1911 vreeland board 's court of inquiry . in 1910 , the decision was made to have a second court of inquiry . besides the desire for a more thorough investigation , this would also facilitate the recovery of the bodies of the victims , so they could be buried in the united states . the fact that the cuban government wanted the wreck removed from havana harbor might also have played a role : it at least offered the opportunity to examine the wreck in greater detail than had been possible in 1898 , while simultaneously obliging the now-independent cubans . wegner suggests that the fact that this inquiry could be held without the threat of war , which had been the case in 1898 , lent it the potential for greater objectivity than had been possible previously . moreover , since several of the members of the 1910 board would be certified engineers , they would be better qualified to evaluate their findings than the line officers of the 1898 board had been . beginning in december 1910 , a cofferdam was built around the wreck and water was pumped out , exposing the wreck by late 1911 . between 20 november and 2 december 1911 , a court of inquiry headed by rear admiral charles e . vreeland inspected the wreck . they concluded that an external explosion had triggered the explosion of the magazines . this explosion was farther aft and lower powered than concluded by the sampson board . the vreeland board also found that the bending of frame 18 was caused by the explosion of the magazines , not by the external explosion . after the investigation , the newly located dead were buried in arlington national cemetery and the hollow , intact portion of the hull of maine was refloated and ceremoniously scuttled at sea on 16 march 1912 . maine ( 2nd class battleship ) , navsource online : battleship photo archive . 1974 rickover investigation . admiral hyman g . rickover became intrigued with the disaster and began a private investigation in 1974 , using information from the two official inquiries , newspapers , personal papers , and information on the construction and ammunition of maine . he concluded that the explosion was not caused by a mine , and speculated that spontaneous combustion was the most likely cause , from coal in the bunker next to the magazine . he published a book about this investigation in 1976 entitled how the battleship maine was destroyed . in the 2001 book theodore roosevelt , the u.s . navy and the spanish–american war , wegner revisits the rickover investigation and offers additional details . according to wegner , rickover interviewed naval historians at the energy research and development agency after reading an article in the washington star by john m . taylor . the author claimed that the u.s . navy '' made little use of its technically trained officers during its investigation of the tragedy . '' the historians were working with rickover on a study of the navy 's nuclear propulsion program , but they said that they knew no details of maines sinking . rickover asked whether they could investigate the matter , and they agreed . wegner says that all relevant documents were obtained and studied , including the ship 's plans and weekly reports of the unwatering of maine in 1912 ( the progress of the cofferdam ) written by william furgueson , chief engineer for the project . these reports included numerous photos annotated by furgueson with frame and strake numbers on corresponding parts of the wreckage . two experts were brought in to analyze the naval demolitions and ship explosions . they concluded that the photos showed '' no plausible evidence of penetration from the outside , '' and they believed that the explosion originated inside the ship . wegner suggests that a combination of naval ship design and a change in the type of coal used to fuel naval ships might have facilitated the explosion postulated by the rickover study . up to the time of the maines building , he explains , common bulkheads separated coal bunkers from ammunition lockers , and american naval ships burned smokeless anthracite coal . with an increase in the number of steel ships , the navy switched to bituminous coal , which burned at a hotter temperature than anthracite coal and allowed ships to steam faster . wegner explains that anthracite coal is not subject to spontaneous combustion , but bituminous coal is considerably more volatile and is known for releasing the largest amounts of firedamp , a dangerous and explosive mixture of gases ( chiefly methane ) . firedamp is explosive at concentrations between 4 % and 16 % , with most violence at around 10 % . in addition , there was another potential contributing factor in the bituminous coal : iron sulfide , also known as pyrite , was likely present . the presence of pyrites presents two additional risk factors , the first involving oxidation . pyrite oxidation is sufficiently exothermic that underground coal mines in high-sulfur coal seams have occasionally experienced spontaneous combustion in the mined-out areas of the mine . this process can result from the disruption caused by mining from the seams , which exposes the sulfides in the ore to air and water . the second risk factor involves an additional capability of pyrites to provide fire ignition under certain conditions . pyrites derive their name from the greek root word pyr , meaning fire , as they can cause sparks when struck by steel or other hard surfaces . pyrites were used to strike sparks to ignite gunpowder in wheellock guns , for example . the pyrites could have provided the ignition capability needed to create an explosion . a number of bunker fires of this type had been reported aboard warships before the maines explosion , in several cases nearly sinking the ships . wegner also cites a 1997 heat transfer study which concluded that a coal bunker fire could have taken place and ignited the ship 's ammunition . 1998 national geographic investigation . in 1998 , national geographic magazine commissioned an analysis by advanced marine enterprises ( ame ) . this investigation , done to commemorate the centennial of the sinking of uss maine , was based on computer modeling , a technique unavailable for previous investigations . the results reached were inconclusive . national geographic reported that '' a fire in the coal bunker could have generated sufficient heat to touch off an explosion in the adjacent magazine but on the other hand , computer analysis also shows that even a small , handmade mine could have penetrated the ship 's hull and set off explosions within '' . the ame investigation noted that '' the size and location of the soil depression beneath the maine 'is more readily explained by a mine explosion than by magazine explosions alone ' '' . the team noted that this was not '' definitive in proving that a mine was the cause of the sinking '' but it did '' strengthen the case '' . some experts , including admiral rickover 's team and several analysts at ame , do not agree with the conclusion . wegner claims that technical opinion among the geographic team was divided between its younger members , who focused on computer modeling results , and its older ones , who weighed their inspection of photos of the wreck with their own experience . he adds that ame used flawed data concerning the maines design and ammunition storage . wegner was also critical of the fact that participants in the rickover study were not consulted until ame 's analysis was essentially complete , far too late to confirm the veracity of data being used or engage in any other meaningful cooperation . 2002 discovery channel unsolved history investigation . in 2002 , the discovery channel produced an episode of the unsolved history documentaries , entitled '' death of the u.s.s . maine '' . it used photographic evidence , naval experts , and archival information to argue that the cause of the explosion was a coal bunker fire , and it identified a weakness or gap in the bulkhead separating the coal and powder bunkers that allowed the fire to spread from the former to the latter . . false flag operation conspiracy theories . several claims have been made in spanish-speaking media that the sinking was a false flag operation conducted by the u.s . and those claims are the official view in cuba . the maine monument in havana describes maines sailors as '' victims sacrificed to the imperialist greed in its fervor to seize control of cuba '' , which claims that u.s . agents deliberately blew up their own ship . eliades acosta was the head of the cuban communist party 's committee on culture and a former director of the josé martí national library in havana . he offered the standard cuban interpretation in an interview to the new york times , but he adds that '' americans died for the freedom of cuba , and that should be recognized . '' this claim has also been made in russia by mikhail khazin , a russian economist who once ran the cultural section at komsomolskaya pravda , and in spain by eric frattini , a spanish peruvian journalist in his book manipulando la historia . operaciones de falsa bandera . del maine al golpe de estado de turquía . operation northwoods was a series of proposals prepared by pentagon officials for the joint chiefs of staff in 1962 , setting out a number of proposed false flag operations that could be blamed on the cuban communists in order to rally support against them . one of these suggested that a u.s . navy ship be blown up in guantanamo bay deliberately . in an echo of the yellow press headlines of the earlier period , it used the phrase '' a 'remember the maine incident '' . . raising and final sinking . for several years , the maine was left where she sank in havana harbor , but it was evident she would have to be removed sometime . it took up valuable space in the harbor , and the buildup of silt around her hull threatened to create a shoal . in addition , various patriotic groups wanted mementos of the ship . on 9 may 1910 , congress authorized funds for the removal of the maine , the proper interment in arlington national cemetery of the estimated 70 bodies still inside , and the removal and transport of the main mast to arlington . congress did not demand a new investigation into the sinking at that time . the army corps of engineers built a cofferdam around the maine and pumped water out from inside it . by 30 june 1911 , the maines main deck was exposed . the ship forward of frame 41 was entirely destroyed ; a twisted mass of steel out of line with the rest of the hull , all that was left of the bow , bore no resemblance to a ship . the rest of the wreck was badly corroded . army engineers dismantled the damaged superstructure and decks , which were then dumped at sea . about halfway between bow and stern , they built a concrete and wooden bulkhead to seal the after-section , then cut away what was left of the forward portion . holes were cut in the bottom of the after-section , through which jets of water were pumped , to break the mud seal holding the ship , then plugged , with flood cocks , which would later be used for sinking the ship . the maine had been outfitted with worthington corporation . after lying on the bottom of havana harbor for fourteen years these pumps were found to be still operational , and were subsequently used to raise the ship . on 13 february 1912 , the engineers let water back into the interior of the cofferdam . three days later , the interior of the cofferdam was full and maine floated . two days after that , the maine was towed out by the tug . the bodies of its crew were then removed to the armored cruiser for repatriation . on 16 march , the maine was towed four miles from the cuban coast by osceola , escorted by north carolina and the light cruiser . she was loaded with dynamite as a possible aid to her sinking . flowers adorned maines deck , and an american flag was strung from her jury mast . at 5pm local time , with a crowd of over 100,000 persons watching from the shore , her sea cocks were opened , and just over twenty minutes later , maine sank , bow first , in of water , to the sound of taps and the 21-gun salute of birmingham and north carolina . during the salvage , remains of 66 more were found , of whom only one , harry j . keys ( an engineering officer ) , was identified and returned to his home town ; the rest were reburied at arlington national cemetery , making a total of 229 buried there . . rediscovery . in 2000 , the wreck of maine was rediscovered by advanced digital communications , a toronto-based expedition company , in about 3,770 feet ( 1,150 m ) of water roughly 3 miles ( 4.8 & nbsp ; km ) northeast of havana harbor . the company had been working with cuban scientists and oceanographers from the university of south florida college of marine science , on testing underwater exploration technology . the ship had been discovered east of where it was believed it had been scuttled ; according to the researchers , during the sinking ceremony and the time it took the wreck to founder , currents pushed maine east until it came to rest at its present location . before the team identified the site as maine , they referred to the location as the '' square '' due to its unique shape , and at first they did not believe it was the ship , due to its unexpected location . the site was explored with an rov . according to dr . frank muller-karger , the hull was not oxidized and the crew could '' see all of its structural parts '' . the expedition was able to identify the ship due to the doors and hatches on the wreck , as well as the anchor chain , the shape of the propellers , and the holes where the bow was cut off . due to the 1912 raising of the ship , the wreck was completely missing its bow ; this tell-tale feature was instrumental in identifying the ship . the team also located a boiler nearby , and a debris field of coal . alt url . memorials . arlington , annapolis , havana , key west . in february 1898 , the recovered bodies of sailors who died on maine were interred in the colon cemetery , havana . some injured sailors were sent to hospitals in havana and key west , florida . those who died in hospitals were buried in key west . in december 1899 , the bodies in havana were disinterred and brought back to the united states for burial at arlington national cemetery . in 1915 , president woodrow wilson dedicated the uss maine mast memorial to those who died . the memorial includes the ship 's main mast . roughly 165 were buried at arlington , although the remains of one sailor were exhumed for his home town , indianapolis , indiana . of the rest , only 62 were known . nine bodies were never recovered and 19 crewmen , several unidentified , are buried in key west cemetery under a statue of a u.s . sailor holding an oar . file : uss maine mast.jpg memorial at arlington national cemetery centered on the ship 's main mast file : cubanfriendshipurnwashingtondc.jpg the cuban friendship urn on ohio drive , southwest , washington , d.c . , east potomac park file : mainemonument1200.jpg monument to victims of maine in havana , cuba , c . 1930 file : gun recovered from the uss maine.jpg a 6-inch gun from maine at fort allen park in portland , maine file : u.s . battleship maine monument key west cemetery , florida.jpg u.s . battleship maine monument key west cemetery , florida the explosion-bent fore mast of maine is located at the united states naval academy at annapolis , maryland . in 1926 , the cuban government erected a memorial to the victims of maine on the malecon , near the hotel nacional , to commemorate united states assistance in acquiring cuban independence from spain . the monument features two of maines four 10-inch guns . in 1961 , the memorial was damaged by crowds , following the bay of pigs invasion , and the eagle on top was broken and removed . the communist government then added its own inscription blaming '' imperialist voracity in its eagerness to seize the island of cuba '' for maines sinking . the rough guide to cuba p . 159 the monument was cleaned and restored in 2013 . the eagle 's head was retained by the u.s . interests section in havana , and the body by the city 's museum . . uss maine monument , new york city . file : uss maine mounment ( 1913 ) , new york , ny ( p1010836 ) . jpg uss maine monument in new york city file : uss maine ( acr-1 ) monument columbus circle nyc.jpg uss maine monument , columbus circle , nyc file : uss maine ( acr-1 ) monument columbus circle nyc columbia triumphant.jpg columbia triumphant file : uss maine monument ( 1913 ) , new york city ( p1000111 ) . jpg memorial plaque by charles keck , uss maine memorial file : uss maine monument ( 1913 ) , new york city ( p1000124r ) . jpg sculpture group by attilio piccirilli at uss maine memorial file : uss maine monument ( 1913 ) , new york city ( p1000126 ) . jpg columbia triumphant sculpture group atop uss maine memorial . other memorials . in 1898 , georges méliès made his movie , divers at work on the wreck of the '' maine '' , about rescuers freeing bodies from the sunken maine . on march 25 , 1912 , a cowl from the uss maine arrived in woburn , massachusetts and is still on display in woburn center . in 1912 , a porthole cover and a section of the base mast was given to the newburgh heights , ohio . the relics were mounted on a large rock in the city 's washington park in 1948 . in 1914 , one of maines six anchors was taken from the washington navy yard to city park in reading , pennsylvania , and dedicated during a ceremony presided over by franklin d . roosevelt , who was then assistant secretary of the navy . a brass torpedo tube hatch recovered from maine is on display at lakeside park in oakland , california . it was stolen from its mount in the park in may 2011 , but quickly recovered by authorities after the thieves attempted to sell it for scrap metal . the large piece was relocated and mounted by opw facility services in front of oakland 's veterans building on grand ave . a memorial including the shield and scrollwork from the bow of the ship is located in bangor , maine . a 6-inch gun from maine is in washington , d.c . at the national museum of the united states navy . a 6-inch gun from maine is in fort allen park in portland , maine . a 6-inch gun from maine is displayed on the front lawn of city hall in alpena , michigan , as well as a bronze plaque made from the vessel . the base of maines conning tower is currently on display at westbrook veterans ' memorial park in canton , ohio , hometown of president mckinley . shells from the main battery were placed along with small plaques as memorials at the soldier 's home in marion , indiana ( now a va hospital and national cemetery ) , at the st . joseph county courthouse lawn in south bend , indiana , and at point defiance park in tacoma , washington . a shell from the main battery is located in veterans park in lewiston , maine . a monument for maine with a portion of a bronze engine room ventilator shaft is located in pompton lakes , new jersey . the capstan of the ship was secured for charleston , south carolina where it was displayed on the battery until 2006 ; it is currently awaiting reinstallation . a shell from the maine is on display at the hoboken public library in hoboken , new jersey . there is a plaque dedicated to maine at the war memorial in stephen r . gregg park in bayonne , new jersey . the plaque is made from metal salvaged from the ship . a 6-pound deck gun from maine is on the north lawn of the south carolina state house in columbia , south carolina . a 6-pound deck gun from maine is at the white plains public works yard in white plains , new york , after being removed from battle whitney park . one of the ship 's anchors was donated to the city of reading , pennsylvania . then secretary of the navy , franklin d . roosevelt was present at its installation in city park . a bronze torpedo tube and armoured hatch form part of a memorial in west park , pittsburgh , pennsylvania , just south of west north avenue . there is also a uss maine memorial plaque ( visible in photographs and physically in situ ) at the south door of the jefferson county courthouse , in steubenville , ohio . the maine state museum in augusta has a porthole on display , recovered in 1910 . it has other artifacts which are not on display .