Spatha

etymology . the word comes from the latin spatha , spatha , charlton t . lewis , charles short , a latin dictionary , on perseus digital library which derives from greek ( spáthē ) , meaning '' any broad blade , of wood or metal '' but also '' broad blade of a sword '' . σπάθη , henry george liddell , robert scott , a greek-english lexicon , on perseus digital library the greek word was used in the middle archaic greece for various types of iron age swords . the word does not appear in homeric greek , but it is mentioned in the works of alcaeus of mytilene ( sixth century bc ) '' χαλκίδικαι σπάθαι '' ( chalcidian spathai ) , alcaeus , 15.6 and theophrastus ( fourth century bc ) . theophrastus , characters , 25.4 , original greek text , on perseus digital library it is likely that spatha is the romanization of a doric greek σπάθα ( spáthā ) . recorded in the accusative plural , as σπάθας ( spáthās ) . ap6.288 ( leon . ) lsj , s.v . '' σπάθη '' . the word survives in modern greek as and . the latin word became the french épée , regional spanish occitan espasa , portuguese and spanish espada , italian spada , romanian spadă and albanian shpata , all meaning '' sword '' . the english word spatula comes from latin spat ( h ) ula , the diminutive of spatha . english spade , from old english spadu or spædu , is the germanic cognate , derived from a common germanic spadō , ultimately from a proto-indo-european stem sph 2 -dh- . . usage . during the gallic wars celts would introduce the spatha to the roman army . the spatha was a weapon used by the cavalrymen , while the auxilia and legionary used the gladius instead . eventually , in the 2nd century the roman infantry would adopt the spatha . the spatha was a very versatile sword , undergoing many changes from its origins in gaul to its usage in the roman army the blade was 60 to 75 & nbsp ; cm ( 2 to 2½ feet ) long . forging . the pattern welding was used to strengthen the core of the blade . the appearance of the metal was enhanced due to inlay and contrasting metals . the sword was also made of forged fullers , thus making the spatha a strong and lightweight blade . . history . roman empire . the spatha was first introduced to the romans by celts during the second punic war . the celts would have used weaponry and armor from their homeland , and one of the celtic weapons would have been the spatha . many believe that the spatha was adopted by the romans due to contact with germania , however this is not true . the earlier gladius sword was gradually replaced by the spatha from the late 2nd to the 3rd century . from the early 3rd century , legionaries and cavalrymen began to wear their swords on the left side , perhaps because the scutum had been abandoned and the spatha had replaced the gladius . lesley adkins , roy a . adkins , handbook to life in ancient rome , oxford university press , 1998 , p . 87 . in the imperial period , the romans adopted the original greek term , spáthē ( σπάθη ) , as spatha , which still carried the general meaning of any object considered long and flat . an online version of '' middle liddell '' is offered at referring to the middle of three sizes in which the most commonly used lexicon by liddell & scott has been published . the unabridged is preferable for research , as it lists all the uses in ancient greek of the word . spatha appears first in pliny and then seneca with different meanings : a spatula , a metal-working implement , a palm-leaf and so on . an interactive latin dictionary , lewis & short , based on andrews , is given at www.perseus.com , but any good printed latin dictionary also states the various uses and sources of spatha . there is no hint of any native roman sword called a spatha . referring to an actual sword , the term first appears in the pages of tacitus with reference to an incident of the principate . annales 12.35 . the british king , caractacus , having rebelled , found himself trapped on a rocky hill , so that if he turned one way he encountered the gladii of the legionaries , and if the other , the spathae of the auxiliaries . there is no indication in tacitus that they were cavalry . the next mention of spathae is in the 5th century , by vegetius , now as a weapon carried by infantry . the spatha remained in use in the byzantine empire and its army . in the byzantine court , spatharios ( σπαθάριος ) , or '' bearer of the spatha '' , was a mid-level court title . other variants deriving from it were protospatharios , spatharokandidatos and spatharokoubikoularios , the latter reserved for eunuchs . one of the more famous spatharokandidatoi was harald hardrada . kekaumenos , strategikon , '' oration of admonition to an emperor '' , para . 81 . roman iron age . the term '' roman iron age '' refers approximately to the time of the roman empire in north europe , which was outside the jurisdiction of the empire , but , judging from the imported roman artifacts , was influenced by roman civilization . one source of artifacts from this period are the bogs of schleswig , holstein and denmark . objects were deliberately broken and thrown into the bog in the belief that they could go with a deceased chief on his voyage to a better place . a cache of 90 swords was found at nydam mose in denmark in 1858 . they were in the form of the spatha and therefore have been classified as '' roman swords '' . they are dated to the 3rd to 4th centuries . many connect the nydam cache with the sword of beowulf , who was supposed to be a contemporary . a professional site may be found at das nydam moor . german is required but a good picture of a sword is shown . another site is to be found at genealogies , maps , glossary & pictorial guide to beowulf . it presents the ancient germanic sword vocabulary and shows a picture of a nydam spatha but does not connect it to a specific name . . migration period . of roman cavalrymen buried in germany : roman auxiliary , tombstone in mainz ; signifer of a turma , tombstone in worms when germanic tribes began to invade the roman empire during the 3rd and 4th centuries they would come into contact with the spatha . surviving examples of these germanic iron age swords have blades measuring between in length and in width . these single handed weapons of war sport a tang long and have very little taper in their blades . they usually end in a rounded tip . viking age . perhaps the most recognisable descendant of the spathae were the viking age blades . these swords took on a much more acute distal taper and point . these blades had deep fullers running their length , yet still had single-handed hilts which sported a uniquely shaped pommel , flat at the grip side and roughly triangular early on , with the flat curving to fit the hand later . while the pattern of hilt and blade design of this type might readily be called a '' viking sword '' , to do so would be to neglect the widespread popularity it enjoyed . all over continental europe between the 8th and 10th centuries , this design and its variations could be found . many of the best blades were of frankish origin , hilted in local centres . these blades had significantly better balance . during norman times , the blade 's length increased by around , and the hilt changed significantly . instead of the brazil-nut pommel , a thick disc-shaped pommel was attached '' on-edge '' to the bottom of the iron hilt . in addition the upper guard grew substantially from the near-absent design predating it . also the blades tended to taper slightly less than those found in the time of the vikings . jan petersen in de norske vikingsverd ( the norwegian viking swords , 1919 ) introduced the most widely used classification of swords of the viking age , discriminating 26 types labelled a–z . in 1927 , r . e . m . wheeler condensed petersen 's typology into a simplified typology of nine groups , numbered i & ndash ; ix . norman swords . the transition from the viking age spatha-inspired sword to the high medieval knightly sword took place between the 10th and 11th centuries . the main development was the growth of the front handguard into a full cross-guard , and the reduction of the typical viking-era lobated pommel into simpler brazil nut or disc shapes . the sword of otto iii , preserved in essen , is such an example of the emerging arming sword , although it has been encrusted with decorations during the centuries it was conserved as a relic ( total length 95.5 & nbsp ; cm ) . . see also . pugio viking age arms and armour . references . sources . ewart oakeshott , the archaeology of weapons , barnes & noble , 1994 , . the book was copyrighted in 1960 . external links . some typological features of byzantine spatha by marko aleksić ( 2010 ) the norwegian viking swords by jan petersen ( 1919 ) translated by kristin noer ( 1998 ) a record of european armour and arms through seven centuries by sir guy francis laking ( 1919 ) anatomy of the sword ( myarmoury.com article ) a sword from the late viking age from the higgins museum ( myarmoury.com article ) vikingsword.com sword forum international