1914 in literature

events . january 18 – a party held in honour of english poet wilfrid scawen blunt at his stud farm in west sussex brings together w . b . yeats , ezra pound , thomas sturge moore , victor plarr , richard aldington , f . s . flint and frederic manning . peacock is on the menu . february–december – publication of new numbers , a quarterly collection of work by the dymock poets in england edited by lascelles abercrombie . february 2 – james joyce 's semi-autobiographical novel a portrait of the artist as a young man commences serialization in the egoist , a new london literary magazine founded by dora marsden . february 4 – a staging of george a . birmingham 's comedy general john regan at westport town hall in ireland provokes a riot . february 10 – thomas hardy marries his second wife , the children 's author florence dugdale , at st andrew 's , enfield . thomas hardy website . accessed 3 march 2013 ] march the times literary supplement is published separately for the first time ( in london ) . the little review is founded by margaret caroline anderson as part of chicago 's literary renaissance . march 4 – irish-born novelist george moore publishes vale , the final of his 3-volume autobiographical hail and farewell ( first in 1911 ) . april 11 – the first english-language performance of george bernard shaw 's comedy pygmalion at her majesty 's theatre is given in london starring mrs . patrick campbell and herbert beerbohm tree , and famously including the act iii line '' not bloody likely ! '' . june – james joyce 's dubliners , a collection of fifteen short stories depicting the irish middle classes in and around dublin during the early 20th century , is published in london . june 20 – the first issue ( of two ) appears of the vorticism literary magazine blast edited by wyndham lewis . it includes ford madox ford 's '' the saddest story '' , a preliminary version of the good soldier . june 24 – edward thomas makes the english railway journey which inspires his poem '' adlestrop '' while traveling to meet robert frost ; thomas begins writing poetry for the first time after this summer . july e . m . forster completes his novel maurice , with its theme of homosexuality love ; it is not published until 1971 . heinrich mann completes his novel der untertan , with its critique of german nationalism ; it is not published until 1918 . july 23 – austro-hungarian ultimatum includes demands that serbia should suppress all publications which '' incite hatred and contempt of the austro-hungarian monarchy '' , particularly schoolbooks . august the literature of world war i makes its first appearance . john masefield writes the poem '' august , 1914 '' ( published in the september 1 issue of the english review ) , the last he will produce before the peace . stanley unwin purchases a controlling interest in the london publisher george allen . at about this date loughborough ( england ) publishers wills & hepworth publish their first illustrated children 's books in the ladybird series , hans andersen 's fairy tales by ethel talbot and tiny tots travels by m . burridge . august 3 – siegfried sassoon volunteers for military service , initially as a trooper in the sussex yeomanry . august 25 – the library of the catholic university of leuven is set on fire by german troops during the rape of belgium . ; september – j . r . r . tolkien writes a poem about eärendil , the first appearance of his mythopoeia middle-earth legendarium . eärendil will much later appear in the silmarillion . at this time tolkien is an oxford undergraduate staying at phoenix farm , gedling , near nottingham . september 2 – charles masterman invites 25 '' eminent literary men '' to wellington house in london to form a secret british war propaganda bureau . those who attend include william archer , arnold bennett , hall caine , g . k . chesterton , arthur conan doyle , ford madox ford , john galsworthy , thomas hardy , rudyard kipling , john masefield , henry newbolt , gilbert parker , g . m . trevelyan and h . g . wells . kipling soon afterwards writes the poem '' for all we have and are '' . w . b . yeats , however , refuses to sign a letter of support for the war signed by most of the participants and published in the times on september 18 . september 9 – hilaire belloc is contracted to write regular articles on the war in the new british weekly land and water . september 21 – laurence binyon 's poem '' for the fallen '' , containing his '' ode of remembrance '' , is published in the times ( london ) . september 22 french novelist alain-fournier ( lieutenant henri-alban fournier ) , aged 27 , is killed in action near vaux-lès-palameix ( meuse ) a month after enlisting , leaving his second novel , colombe blanchet , unfinished ; his body will not be identified until 1991 . t . s . eliot ( at this time in england to study ) meets fellow american poet ezra pound for the first time , in london . september 29 – arthur machen 's short story '' the bowmen '' , origin of the legend of the angels of mons , is published in the evening news ( london ) . october 2 – the date predicted by charles taze russell , founder of the watchtower society ( jehovah 's witnesses ) , as the date for the eschatology of jehovah 's witnesses , with statements such as : '' true , it is expecting great things to claim , as we do , that within the coming twenty-six years all present governments will be overthrown and dissolved . in view of this strong bible evidence concerning the times of the gentiles , we consider it an established truth that the final end of the kingdoms of this world , and the full establishment of the kingdom of god , will be accomplished at the end of a . d . 1914 . '' studies in the scriptures series ii – the time is at hand ( 1889 ed . ) pp . 99 and 101 . november 7 – the first issue of the new republic magazine is published in the united states . november 16 – m . p . shiel is convicted and imprisoned for '' indecently assaulting and carnally knowing '' his 12-year-old de facto stepdaughter on october 26 in london . december – wilhelm apollinaris de kostrowitzky , who writes under the pen name '' guillaume apollinaire '' , enlists in the french army to fight in world war i and becomes a french citizen after an august attempt at enlistment is rejected . december 31 – t . s . eliot writes to conrad aiken from oxford ( where he has a scholarship at merton college ) , saying : '' i hate university towns and university people , who are the same everywhere , with pregnant wives , sprawling children , many books and hideous pictures on the walls . oxford is very pretty , but i do n't like to be dead . '' . new books . fiction . ion agârbiceanu – arhanghelii arnold bennett – the price of love e . f . benson – arundel rhoda broughton – concerning a vow mary grant bruce from billabong to london grays hollow g . k . chesterton – the flying inn dikran chökürian – vanke ( վանքը , the monastery ) marie corelli – innocent : her fancy and his fact miguel de unamuno niebla ( mist , '' nivola '' ) vida de don quijote y sancho ( the life of don quixote and sancho or our lord don quixote ) ethel m . dell – the rocks of valpré theodore dreiser – the titan edna ferber – personality plus james elroy flecker – the king of alsander anatole france – la révolte des anges ( the revolt of the angels ) andré gide – les caves du vatican ( the cellars of the vatican ) elinor glyn – letters to caroline nathaniel gould – a gamble for love john macdougall hay – gillespie hermann hesse – rosshalde james joyce – dubliners d . h . lawrence – the prussian officer and other stories stephen leacock – arcadian adventures with the idle rich ada leverson – birds of paradise sinclair lewis – our mr . wrenn harold macgrath – the adventures of kathlyn compton mackenzie – sinister street , vol . 2 natsume sōseki ( 夏目 漱石 ) – kokoro ( こころ ) frank norris – vandover and the brute baroness orczy the laughing cavalier unto cæsar eleanor h . porter – miss billy married raymond roussel – locus solus berta ruck – his official fiancée saki – beasts and super-beasts paul scheerbart – das graue tuch und zehn prozent weiß : ein damenroman ( the gray cloth with ten percent white : a ladies ' novel ) henri stahl – un român în lună booth tarkington – penrod robert tressell ( died 1911 ) – the ragged-trousered philanthropists mary augusta ward – delia blanchflower h . g . wells – the world set free ( originally serialised as a prophetic trilogy in century illustrated monthly magazine january–march ) p . g . wodehouse – the man upstairs francis brett young – deep sea . children and young people . l . frank baum tik-tok of oz aunt jane 's nieces out west ( as edith van dyne ) edgar rice burroughs – tarzan of the apes ( book publication ) elsie j . oxenham – girls of the hamlet club ( first in the abbey series ) . drama . frank craven - too many cooks ( february 24 , new york ) lord dunsany – five plays ( publication ) harley granville-barker – vote by ballot d . h . lawrence – the widowing of mrs . holroyd ( publication , revised version ) john howard lawson – atmosphere terence macswiney – the revolutionist ( publication ) roi cooper megrue and walter c . hackett – it pays to advertise ramanbhai neelkanth – raino parvat elmer rice – on trial edward sheldon – the song of songs j . e . harold terry and lechmere worrall – the man who stayed at home ( also the white feather ) e . temple thurston – the evolution of katherine horace annesley vachell – quinneys . poetry . laurence binyon – '' for the fallen '' ( including '' ode of remembrance '' ) janus djurhuus – yrkingar robert frost – north of boston ( including '' mending wall '' ) ernst lissauer – song of hate against england ( hassgesang gegen england ) amy lowell – sword blades and poppy seeds gabriela mistral – los sonetos de la muerte ( sonnets of death ) ezra pound , ed . – des imagistes : an anthology ernst stadler – der aufbruch ( the departure ) gertrude stein – tender buttons wallace stevens – phases katharine tynan – the flower of peace . non-fiction . clive bell – art hall caine – king albert 's book henry james – notes of a son and brother chrystal macmillan – '' facts versus fancies on woman suffrage '' ( pamphlet ) paul scheerbart – glasarchitektur ( glass architecture ) . births . january 8 – norman nicholson , english poet ( died 1987 ) january 15 – etty hillesum , dutch correspondent , diarist and holocaust victim ( died 1943 ) january 26 – kaye webb , english publisher and journalist ( died 1996 ) february 5 – william s . burroughs , american author ( died 1997 ) february 25 – frank bonham , american novelist ( died 1988 ) march 1 – ralph ellison , american scholar and writer ( died 1994 ) march 4 – barbara newhall follett , american prodigy novelist ( went missing in december 1939 ) march 27 – budd schulberg , american writer ( died 2009 ) march 28 – bohumil hrabal , czech poet and controversialist ( died 1997 ) march 31 – octavio paz , nobel prize winning mexican author ( died 1998 ) april 4 – marguerite duras , french writer ( died 1996 ) april 26 – bernard malamud , american novelist ( died 1986 ) may 6 – randall jarrell , american poet ( died 1965 ) may 8 – romain gary , lithuanian-born french novelist ( died 1980 ) may 12 – james bacon , author and journalist ( died 2010 ) june 15 – lena kennedy , english novelist ( died 1986 ) june 17 – julián marías , spanish philosopher and author ( died 2005 ) june 26 – laurie lee , english poet and memoirist ( died 1997 ) july 15 hammond innes , english adventure novelist ( died 1998 ) gavin maxwell , scottish naturalist and author ( died 1969 ) july 23 – alf prøysen , norwegian author , musician and children 's writer ( died 1970 ) july 25 – winifred foley , english memoirist ( died 2009 ) august 9 – tove jansson , finnish children 's author ( died 2001 ) august 20 – colin macinnes , english novelist ( died 1976 ) august 26 – julio cortázar , argentine author ( died 1984 ) september 5 – nicanor parra , chilean poet and physicist ( died 2018 ) september 15 – adolfo bioy casares , argentine author ( died 1999 ) october 1 – hilda ellis davidson , english antiquarian and academic ( died 2006 ) october 6 – joan littlewood , english theater director and biographer ( died 2002 ) october 26 – john masters , british raj novelist ( died 1983 ) october 27 – dylan thomas , welsh poet and author ( died 1953 ) november 22 – leah bodine drake , american poet ( died 1964 ) december 12 – patrick o'brian ( richard patrick russ ) , english historical novelist ( died 2000 ) . deaths . january 6 – henrietta keddie ( sarah tytler ) , scottish novelist and children 's writer ( born 1827 ) february 25 – john tenniel , english cartoonist and illustrator ( born 1820 ) march 17 – hiraide shū ( 平出 修 ) , japanese novelist , poet , and lawyer ( born 1878 ) march 25 – frédéric mistral , nobel prize winning french author ( born 1830 ) april 2 – paul heyse , nobel prize winning german author ( born 1830 ) april 7 – edith maude eaton ( sui sin far , 水仙花 ) , english-born writer on chinese ( born 1865 ) may 19 – william aldis wright , english writer and editor ( born 1831 ) may 29 – laurence irving , english dramatist and novelist ( drowned , born 1871 ) june 6 – theodore watts-dunton , english critic and poet ( born 1832 ) june 21 – bertha von suttner , austrian pacifist writer ( born 1843 ) july 6 – delmira agustini , uruguayan poet ( murdered ; born 1886 ) july 23 – charlotte forten grimké , african american poet ( born 1837 ) september 4 – charles péguy , french poet and essayist ( killed in action , born 1873 ) september 11 – mircea demetriade , romanian poet and actor ( born 1861 ) september 22 – alain-fournier , french novelist ( killed in action , born 1886 ) september 25 – alfred lichtenstein , german expressionist writer ( killed in action , born 1889 ) october 9 – dumitru c . moruzi , russian-born romanian political figure and social novelist ( asthma ; born 1850 ) florin marinescu , '' un basarabean înflăcărat . scriitorul dumitru c . moruzi '' , in revista limba română , nr . 5 & ndash ; 6/2012 bezviconi , boierimea . , p . 137 ; coșa , pp . 399 , 403 ; penelea filitti , p . 60 october 30 – ernst stadler , german expressionist poet ( killed in action , born 1883 ) november 3 – georg trakl , austrian expressionist poet ( cocaine overdose , born 1887 ) . awards . newdigate prize : robert william sterling , '' the burial of sophocles '' nobel prize for literature : not awarded prix goncourt : adrien bertrand , l'appel du sol . references . see also . world war i in literature