Ingelmunster

history . the middle ages . the famous flemish historian sanderus mentioned ingelmunster as '' anglo-monasterium '' ( '' english monastery '' ) , but the name could also have originated from the term '' angle-monastère '' ( '' monastery on the corner '' ) , as it was situated in the outskirts of the fiefdom . it is said that saint amand ordered the locals to have a church built in the village , going so far as to plan a monastery . additionally , robrecht the frisian thought of the village as a strategic point and considered it important enough to have a fortification built . the parish was transferred to the chapter of harelbeke around 1200 . in 1300 , the castle and the fiefdom fell into the possession of the lords of rode , from the region of dendermonde . in the middle ages , ingelmunster was , partly owing to its fortification , an important location in the castellany of kortrijk and the canton of harelbeke . the village fiefdom came under the rule of the lords of gistel after the house of rode . it then became part of burgundy and cleves , and ultimately subject to the french throne . the most famous royal resident of the village was philip the fair , king of france , who resided in the castle in 1297 , five years before the battle of the golden spurs . at that time , philip was on his way to punish bruges . the people of bruges met him halfway with an offer of submission to his rule , on the condition that they be allowed to keep the relic of the holy blood . the french king accepted . religious conflict . left during the religious wars of the 16th century , ingelmunster became the victim of both warring parties . in august 1566 , the beeldenstormers passed by the village and pillaged and destroyed the church . the church was rebuilt with a tower in its center . in 1739 , that tower would be torn down and a new one rebuilt in front of the church . the new tower remains standing to this day . in 1580 , ingelmunster became the battlefield of a clash between the french huguenots , under françois de la noue , and the spanish occupying the castle . the village was destroyed , but de la noue was arrested and sent to the spanish lord alessandro farnese , duke of parma and piacenza . in 1878 , a large tapestry was woven in the local factories in commemoration of '' the battle of ingelmunster , 1580 . '' this tapestry currently hangs on the wall of the town hall . the extensive fighting in france and the southern netherlands exhausted the french crown 's money . paris was barely able to pay its german colonels . the fiefdom of ingelmunster-vijve-dendermonde was given as pay to the colonels . otto von plotho , a german colonel serving in the french army , purchased the fiefdom in 1583 . in doing so , he satisfied the needs of his superiors and also accumulated significant wealth for himself . otto von plotho assigned to his bailiff , françois de cabootere , the mission to organize his flemish regions and to create legislative order . ingelmunster became the center of the region and the administration there had absolute power . even the executions in the region were carried out in ingelmunster . in 1789 , the last execution was carried out and the body was put on display in the field behind the café called '' 't leestje '' . fifteen generations of lords owned the fiefdom and ruled it , with variable luck . however , after 400 years , the wealth was exhausted and the last remnants of the old fiefdom , the park and castle , were sold in 1986 to the two brothers vanhonsebrouck . the 17th century was a troublesome time for the region . many skirmishes and conflicts between the english , french , and spanish soldiers made life in the village of ingelmunster trying . in 1695 , the castle and the village were again completely razed . only 1050 inhabitants survived to the turn of the century . in that time , france had extended its control to the village border with emelgem . habsburg rule . the treaty of utrecht in 1713 ameliorated the strife . the southern netherlands were transferred to austrian rule . between 1716 and 1794 , five governors-general directed the local government . proof of ingelmunster 's revival was the reconstruction of the castle . the old fortification was demolished and a residential castle was built on its foundations around 1736 . under the rule of maria theresa of austria , the kortrijk-bruges road was rebuilt . in ingelmunster , the bridge over the river mandel was renewed and the toll rights were sold in 1751 . a private company maintained the connection between kortrijk and bruges and operated a post in ingelmunster . pastor jacobus dufort felt that something had to be done about the education of the local children . paying from his own pocket , he constructed the dufort institute ( later called '' marullenschool '' ) , a school for the poor employing seven nuns . from this school , the local monastery was founded in 1881 . this monastery is still a part of ingelmunster . the french revolution . the french revolution in 1789 marked a major turning point in european history . even the enlightened austrians were startled , and not even ingelmunster escaped the radical changes to society . the castle lost a significant amount of power and was forced to pay taxes . the local authorities were reformed and a municipal council with a mayor was created for the 4705 '' citoyens . '' the rebellion against the regime led to an uprising , the boerenkrijg , but subsequent to the brigandszondag on october 28 , 1798 , all resistance was gone . ingelmunster acquired its nickname '' brigandsgemeente '' from this historical event . the rural village continued to exist and changes were made , but life returned to normal for the villagers . the locals were happy they could celebrate mass on sunday again . indeed , when napoleon was defeated at the battle of waterloo in 1815 , there were no festivities in ingelmunster . the 19th century . william i of the netherlands granted ingelmunster a market day in 1825 in order to allow the villagers access to supplies without having to leave their town , and this initiative was lauded by the orangists . around 1830 , dozens of windmills were erected throughout in the municipality . the belgian revolution in 1830 first reached ingelmunster on november 11 , when a new council was to be elected . of the 5585 inhabitants , only 114 upper-class citizens had suffrage . the orangists lost and a local farmer , jacobus coussens , was elected the new mayor with 66 votes . at this time , the catholics formed a political party . it was immediately popular and thenceforth no other political party has controlled the council or mayorship . between the years of 1845 and 1850 , potato harvests failed . meanwhile , the industrial revolution was devastating local weaving businesses . additionally , the region was impacted by widespread cholera and typhus . in 1847 , the village saw some development with the laying of a railroad through the village . in the future , this improved access to transportation would reap both bounties and consequences for ingelmunster . for example , during world war i , the castle was commandeered by the germans as a headquarters , and during the war , thieves frequently robbed local businesses . a second city planning project met with less success the construction of the railroad . plans to connect the city of roeselare to the river leie met with resistance in ingelmunster due to the presence of the castle park . however , in 1872 the first ship sailed to the leie and a quay was built near the village bridge . the 20th century . ingelmunster has been spared from heavy industry and strong pollution up until the present day and still possesses a castle park and nature reserve in the center of the village . in 1976 , the town was preserved from fusions with the neighboring towns of meulebeke and oostrozebeke . the mayor at the time , vankeirsbilck , succeeded in safeguarding meulebeke and oostrozebeke from fusion as well . references . external links . official website - available only in dutch