Climate of Antarctica

temperature . the highest temperature ever recorded on antarctica was at comandante ferraz antarctic station on 9 february 2020 , beating the previous record of at esperanza base , on the northern tip of the antarctic peninsula , on 6 february 2020 . a higher temperature of recorded at signy research station on 30 january 1982 was the record for the antarctic region encompassing all land and ice south of 60° s . ( at sea level pressure ) . the altitude of the location is . satellite measurements have identified even lower ground temperatures , with having been observed at the cloud-free antarctic plateau on 10 august 2010 . coldest spot on earth identified by satellite , jonathan amos , bbc news , 9 december 2013 . the lowest recorded temperature of any location on earth 's surface at was revised with new data in 2018 in nearly 100 locations , ranging from to . this unnamed part of the antarctic plateau , between dome a and dome f , was measured on 10 august 2010 , and the temperature was deduced from radiance measured by the landsat 8 and other satellites . it was discovered during a national snow and ice data center review of stored data in december 2013 but revised by researchers on 25 june 2018 . this temperature is not directly comparable to the –89.2 & nbsp ; °c reading quoted above , since it is a skin temperature deduced from satellite-measured upwelling radiance , rather than a thermometer-measured temperature of the air above the ground surface . the mean annual temperature of the interior is . the coast is warmer ; on the coast antarctic average temperatures are around ( in the warmest parts of antarctica ) and in the elevated inland they average about in vostok . monthly means at mcmurdo station range from in august to in january . at the south pole , the highest temperature ever recorded was on 25 december 2011 . along the antarctic peninsula , temperatures as high as have been recorded , though the summer temperature is below most of the time . severe low temperatures vary with latitude , elevation , and distance from the ocean . east antarctica is colder than west antarctica because of its higher elevation . the antarctic peninsula has the most moderate climate . higher temperatures occur in january along the coast and average slightly below freezing . precipitation . the total precipitation on antarctica , averaged over the entire continent , is about per year ( vaughan et al . , j climate , 1999 ) . the actual rates vary widely , from high values over the peninsula ( 15 to 25 inches a year ) to very low values ( as little as in the high interior ( bromwich , reviews of geophysics , 1988 ) . areas that receive less than of precipitation per year are classified as deserts . almost all antarctic precipitation falls as snow . rainfall is rare and mainly occurs during the summer in coastal areas and surrounding islands . note that the quoted precipitation is a measure of its equivalence to water , rather than being the actual depth of snow . the air in antarctica is also very dry . the low temperatures result in a very low absolute humidity , which means that dry skin and cracked lips are a continual problem for scientists and expeditioners working on the continent . weather condition classification . the weather in antarctica can be highly variable , and the weather conditions can often change dramatically in short periods of time . there are various classifications for describing weather conditions in antarctica ; restrictions given to workers during the different conditions vary by station and nation . . ice cover . nearly all of antarctica is covered by a sheet of ice that is , on average , a mile thick or more ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) . antarctica contains 90 % of the world 's ice and more than 70 % of its fresh water . if all the land-ice covering antarctica were to melt — around of ice — the seas would rise by over . this is , however , very unlikely within the next few centuries . the antarctic is so cold that even with increases of a few degrees , temperatures would generally remain below the melting point of ice . higher temperatures are expected to lead to more precipitation , which takes the form of snow . this would increase the amount of ice in antarctica , offsetting approximately one third of the expected sea level rise from thermal expansion of the oceans . during a recent decade , east antarctica thickened at an average rate of about per year while west antarctica showed an overall thinning of per year . for the contribution of antarctica to present and future sea level change , see sea level rise . because ice flows , albeit slowly , the ice within the ice sheet is younger than the age of the sheet itself . ice shelves . about 75 % of the coastline of antarctica is ice shelf . the majority of ice shelf consists of floating ice , and a lesser amount consists of glaciers that move slowly from the land mass into the sea . ice shelves lose mass through breakup of glacial ice ( calving ) , or basal melting due to warm ocean water under the ice . melting or breakup of floating shelf ice does not directly affect global sea levels ; however , ice shelves have a buttressing effect on the ice flow behind them . if ice shelves break up , the ice flow behind them may accelerate , resulting in increasing melt of the antarctic ice sheet and an increasing contribution to sea level . known changes in coastline ice around the antarctic peninsula : 1936–1989 : wordie ice shelf significantly reduced in size . 1995 : ice in the prince gustav channel disintegrated . parts of the larsen ice shelf broke up in recent decades . 1995 : the larsen a ice shelf disintegrated in january 1995 . 2001 : of the larsen b ice shelf disintegrated in february 2001 . it had been gradually retreating before the breakup event . 2015 : a study concluded that the remaining larsen b ice-shelf will disintegrate by the end of the decade , based on observations of faster flow and rapid thinning of glaciers in the area . the george vi ice shelf , which may be on the brink of instability , has probably existed for approximately 8,000 years , after melting 1,500 years earlier . warm ocean currents may have been the cause of the melting . not only are the ice sheets losing mass , they are losing mass at an accelerating rate . . climate change . the continent-wide average surface temperature trend of antarctica is positive – that is , the temperature is increasing – and significant at more than per decade since 1957 . retrieved 2009-01-22 retrieved 2009-01-22 the west antarctic ice sheet has warmed by more than per decade in the last 50 years , and is strongest in winter and spring . although this is partly offset by fall cooling in east antarctica , this effect is restricted to the 1980s and 1990s . research published in 2009 found that overall the continent had become warmer since the 1950s , a finding consistent with the influence of man-made climate change . '' we ca n't pin it down , but it certainly is consistent with the influence of greenhouse gases from fossil fuels '' , said nasa scientist drew shindell , one of the study 's authors . some of the effects could be due to natural variability , he added . the british antarctic survey , which has undertaken the majority of britain 's scientific research in the area , stated in 2009 : west antarctic ice loss could contribute to sea level rise antarctica predicted to warm by around over this century 10 % increase in sea ice around the antarctic rapid ice loss in parts of the antarctic warming of the southern ocean will cause changes in antarctic ecosystem hole in ozone layer , which has delayed the impact of greenhouse gas increases on antarctica 's climate the area of strongest cooling appears at the south pole , and the region of strongest warming lies along the antarctic peninsula . a possible explanation is that loss of uv-absorbing ozone may have cooled the stratosphere and strengthened the polar vortex , a pattern of spinning winds around the south pole . the vortex acts like an atmospheric barrier , preventing warmer , coastal air from moving into the continent 's interior . a stronger polar vortex might explain the cooling trend in the interior of antarctica . in their latest study ( 20 september 2007 ) nasa researchers have confirmed that antarctic snow is melting farther inland from the coast over time , melting at higher altitudes than ever and increasingly melting on antarctica 's largest ice shelf . there is also evidence for widespread glacier retreat around the antarctic peninsula . ipcc 2007 , intergovernmental panel on climate change , climate change 2007 : the physical science basis . contribution of working group i to the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change , cambridge university press , 2007 , page 376 . researchers reported on 21 december 2012 in nature geoscience that from 1958 to 2010 , the average temperature at the mile-high byrd station rose by , with warming fastest in its winter and spring . the spot , which is located in the heart of the west antarctic ice sheet , is one of the fastest-warming places on earth . in 2015 , the temperature showed changes but in a stable manner and the only months that have drastic change in that year are august and september . it also did show that the temperature was very stable throughout the year . . see also . antarctic oscillation antarctica cooling controversy climate of the arctic effects of global warming polar amplification retreat of glaciers since 1850 southern ocean . references . notes sources . further reading . warm snap turned antarctica green around the edges ; thawed-out continent was lined with trees 15 million years ago , study says . 20 june 2012 national geographic taking antarctica 's temperature ; frozen continent may not be immune to global warming 27 july 2013 ; vol.184 2 science news . external links . climate . temperature data from the reader project a pamphlet about the weather and climate of antarctica antarctica 's central ice cap grows while glaciers melt antarctica climate and weather . climate change in antarctica . western antarctica warming confirmed 23 december 2012 usa today nasa experts explain ice melt in antarctica ( 2014 ) . antarctic ice .