Kimchi

dishes usually served with kimchi . kimchi is known to be a traditional side dish as it is almost always served along with other side dishes in most korean family households and restaurants . kimchi can be eaten alone or with white or brown rice , but it is also included in recipes of other traditional dishes , including porridges , soups , and rice cakes . kimchi is also the basis for many derivative dishes such as kimchi stew , kimchi pancake , kimchi soup , and kimchi fried rice . army base stew is a popular dish made with spam ( food ) , sausage , and kimchi . it originated after the korean war with ingredients that would be scrounged from the army . procedure . the first step in the making of any kimchi is to slice the cabbage or daikon into smaller , uniform pieces to increase the surface area . the pieces are then coated with salt as a preservative method , as this draws out the water to lower the free water activity . this inhibits the growth of undesirable microorganisms by limiting the water available for them to utilize for growth and metabolism . the salting stage can use 5 to 7 % salinity for 12 hours , or 15 % for 3 to 7 hours . the excess water is then drained away , and seasoning ingredients are added . the sugar that is sometimes added also acts to bind free water that still remains , further reducing free water activity . finally , the brined vegetables are placed into an airtight canning jars and left to sit for 24 to 48 hours at room temperature . the ideal salt concentration during the fermentation process is about 3 % . since the fermentation process results in the production of carbon dioxide , the jar should be “ burped ” daily to release the gas . the more fermentation that occurs , the more carbon dioxide will be incorporated , which results in a very carbonaded-drink-like affect . food regulations . the canadian food inspection agency has regulations for the commercial production of kimchi . the final product should have a ph ranging from 4.2 to 4.5 . any low-acidity ingredients with a ph above 4.6 , including white daikon and napa cabbage , should not be left under conditions that enable the growth of undesirable microorganisms and require a written illustration of the procedure designed to ensure this available if requested . this procedural design should include steps that maintain sterility of the equipment and products used , and the details of all sterilization processes . . recent history . 1996 kimchi standard dispute with japan . in 1996 , korea protested against japanese commercial production of kimchi arguing that the japanese-produced product ( kimuchi , was different from kimchi . in particular , japanese kimuchi was not fermented and more similar to asazuke . korea lobbied for an international standard from the codex alimentarius , an organization associated with the world health organization that defines voluntary standards for food preparation for international trade purposes . sims , calvin ( february 2000 ) '' cabbage is cabbage ? not to kimchi lovers ; koreans take issue with a rendition of their national dish made in japan '' . the new york times . in 2001 , the codex alimentarius published a voluntary standard defining kimchi as '' a fermented food that uses salted napa cabbages as its main ingredient mixed with seasonings , and goes through a lactic acid production process at a low temperature '' , but which neither specified a minimum amount of fermentation nor forbade the use of any additives . . 1998 to 2007 motherland tours . south korea developed programs for adult korean adoptees to return to south korea and learn about what it means to be korean . one of these programs was learning how to make kimchi . in a video that was published to youtube on 29 july 2013 , eleana j . kim who is assistant professor of anthropology as the university of rochester talked about the international adoption of south korean children . kim 's name and title appear at the 35:11 mark of the video . from the 26:56 mark of the video to the 28:09 mark of the video , kim said , '' another aspect of the korean adoptee experience that i explore in my book is their relationship to south korea , and the south korean state , and , uh , one of the things that the south korean government , um , was , in a way , uh , um , compelled , to do , in the late nineteen nineties was to , recognize , adoptees , overseas adoptees , as koreans , in some way . so , um , by nineteen ninety eight , adult korean adoptees , who were living in korea , petitioned the south korean state to recognize them as overseas koreans , korean diaspora , so that meant that they would be , uh , eligible for a special visa status , that would allow them to return to south korea for extended periods of time , and , in line with this , this is an image from the overseas korean foundation , uh , summer cultural program for overseas adoptees , and so , they developed these programs to help adult adoptees return to korea and learn something about what it means to be korean , so these programs are typically focused on traditional korean culture , um , you know , adoptees dressing up in hanbok and learning how to make kimchi , um , such as these images here . '' . 2010 kimchi ingredient price crisis . due to heavy rainfall shortening the harvesting time for cabbage and other main ingredients for kimchi in 2010 , the price of kimchi ingredients and kimchi itself rose greatly . korean and international newspapers described the rise in prices as a national crisis . some restaurants stopped offering kimchi as a free side dish , which the new york times compared to an american hamburger restaurant no longer offering free ketchup . in response to the kimchi price crisis , the south korean government announced the temporary reduction of tariffs on imported cabbage to coincide with the kimjang season . . 2012 effective ban of korean kimchi exports to china . since 2012 , the chinese government has effectively banned korean kimchi exports to china through government regulations . ignoring the standards of kimchi outlined by the codex alimentarius , china defined kimchi as a derivative of one of its own cuisines , called pao cai . however , due to significantly different preparation techniques from pao cai , kimchi has significantly more lactic acid bacteria through its fermentation process , which exceeds china 's regulations . since 2012 , commercial exports of korean kimchi to china has reached zero , the only minor amounts of exports accounting for korean kimchi are exhibition events held in china . . intangible cultural heritage of humanity . kimchi-related items have been inscribed on unesco 's representative list of the intangible cultural heritage of humanity by both south and north korea . this makes kimchi the second intangible heritage that was submitted by two countries , the other one being the folk song '' arirang '' which was also submitted by both the koreas . . submitted by south korea ( inscribed 2013 ) . kimjang , the tradition of making and sharing of kimchi that usually takes place in late autumn , was added to the list as '' kimjang , making and sharing kimchi in the republic of korea '' . the practice of kimjang reaffirms korean identity and strengthens family cooperation . kimjang is also an important reminder for many koreans that human communities need to live in harmony with nature . . submitted by north korea ( inscribed 2015 ) . north korean kimchi-making was inscribed on the list in december 2015 as '' tradition of kimchi-making in the democratic people 's republic of korea '' . north korean kimchi tends to be less spicy and red than south korean kimchi . seafood is used less often and less salt is added . additional sugar is used to help with fermentation in the cold climate . . boycott in china . a 2017 article in the new york times said that anti-korean sentiment in china has risen after south korea 's acceptance of the deployment of thaad in south korea , . hernández , javier c . , guo , owen & mcmorrow , ryan . ( 2017 ) . south korean stores feel china ’ s wrath as u.s . missile system is deployed . the new york times . retrieved 6 april 2017 , from link . the move was criticized by other chinese nationalists , who noted that china officially considered koreans an integral ethnic group in the multinational state , and that kimchi is also indigenous to the koreans in the yanbian korean autonomous prefecture . name '' kimchi-yanbian '' > nationalists have also criticized korean kimchi , by calling them '' merely pickles '' whereas chinese kimchi pao cai 's literal meaning is '' pickled vegetable '' . 2020 kimchi origin dispute with china . in november 2020 , the international organisation for standardisation ( iso ) posted new regulations for the making of pao cai . some press , including the korea times and the bbc , reported a claim made by the chinese state-run global times that said the pass of these new regulations set '' an international standard for the kimchi industry led by china . '' this claim has sparked strong responses from south korean media , which subsequently prompted anger on the internet . . gallery . file : korean cuisine-gimjang-preparation for making kimchi-01.jpg preparation for making kimchi file : korean cuisine-seongnyu kimchi-pomegranate kimchi-01.jpg seokryu kimchi named after its pomegranate-like shape file : koren cuisine-jang kimchi-pickled with soy sauce-01.jpg jang kimchi , pickled with soy sauce file : korean food-packed kimchi-01.jpg displayed manufactured kimchi file : oi-sobagi.jpg oi-sobagi ( cucumber kimchi ) . see also . – a variety of kimchi made of carrots by koryo-saram . . references . further reading . . external links . the a to z 's of kimchi , official korea tourism guide korean traditional kimchi site sponsored by the korean agro-fisheries trade corp . kimchi > history at the korea tourism organization official site korea food research institute