1961 in literature

events . january 24 – the american dramatist arthur miller and the film star marilyn monroe are granted a divorce in mexico on grounds of incompatibility . february – sylvia plath suffers a miscarriage . several of her poems , including '' parliament hill fields '' , address the event . march 15 – hugh wheeler 's comedy big fish , little fish opens at the anta theater in new york city , directed by sir john gielgud . it is one of the early broadway plays to explore frankly the issue of male homosexuality . march 20 – the shakespeare memorial theatre , stratford-upon-avon , becomes the royal shakespeare theatre and its company the royal shakespeare company , with peter hall as director . may – grove press publishes henry miller 's tropic of cancer in the united states 27 years after its original publication in france . the book leads to one of many obscenity trials ( grove press , inc . , v . gerstein ) that test american laws on pornography in the 1960s . may 27 – the british bookseller whsmith closes the last of its in-store circulating library branches . august 18 – the british magazine tribune publishes a letter from playwright john osborne beginning '' damn you , england . '' september 8 – publication of the science fiction novel series perry rhodan , der erbe des universums , originally authored by k . h . scheer and walter ernsting , is begun by arthur moewig verlag in germany in romanhefte ( partwork ) format . it is then published every week , attaining more than 2880 issues and around two billion total copies sold worldwide by the end of 2016 . september 14 – novelist william golding , having resigned a teaching post at bishop wordsworth 's school in salisbury , sets off for the academic year 1961/1962 to teach at hollins college , virginia , united states . november 10 – joseph heller 's satirical novel catch-22 is first put on sale by simon & schuster in the united states , after favorable advance reviews in october . heller has been working on the book since 1953 , based on his experiences as a bombardier during world war ii . its title , which becomes a phrase referring to a no-win situation , had previously been catch-18 . unknown date – michael halliday publishes a seminal paper on the systemic functional grammar model . . new books . fiction . brian aldiss – the primal urge poul anderson – three hearts and three lions j . g . ballard – the wind from nowhere james barlow – term of trial pat boone – twixt twelve and twenty morley callaghan – a passion in rome john dickson carr – the witch of the low tide : an edwardian melodrama jean cau – the mercy of god sid chaplin – the day of the sardine james hadley chase – a lotus for miss quon agatha christie double sin and other stories the pale horse a . j . cronin – the judas tree jennifer dawson – the ha-ha l . sprague de camp – the dragon of the ishtar gate r.f . delderfield – stop at a winner august derleth – the reminiscences of solar pons cyprian ekwensi – jagua nana ian fleming – thunderball ( based on screen treatment by kevin mcclory , jack whittingham and the author ) gillian freeman ( as eliot george ) – the leather boys gabriel garcía márquez – no one writes to the colonel ( el coronel no tiene quien le escriba ) martyn goff – the youngest director richard gordon – doctor on toast edward gorey ( as ogdred weary ) – the curious sofa . a pornographic tale winston graham – marnie vasily grossman – everything flows ( все течет ; first published 1989 ) harry harrison – the stainless steel rat robert a . heinlein – stranger in a strange land joseph heller – catch-22 marlen haushofer – the wall patricia highsmith – this sweet sickness richard hughes -the fox in the attic jun'ichirō tanizaki ( 谷崎 潤一郎 ) – the diary of a mad old man ( 瘋癲老人日記 ) james kennaway – household ghosts ismith khan – the jumbie bird margaret laurence – the stone angel john le carré – call for the dead stanisław lem – solaris audrey erskine lindop – the way to the lantern h . p . lovecraft – the shunned house compton mackenzie – mezzotint iris murdoch – a severed head v . s . naipaul – a house for mr . biswas r . k . narayan – the man-eater of malgudi juan carlos onetti – el astillero ( the shipyard ) walker percy – the moviegoer caradog prichard – un nos ola leuad ( one moonlit night ) harold robbins – the carpetbaggers j . d . salinger – franny and zooey leonardo sciascia – il giorno della civetta muriel spark – the prime of miss jean brodie howard spring – i met a lady john steinbeck – the winter of our discontent irving stone – the agony and the ecstasy rex stout – the final deduction theodore sturgeon – some of your blood jun'ichirō tanizaki ( 谷崎 潤一郎 ) – futen rojin nikki ( 瘋癲老人日記 , diary of a mad old man ) leon uris – mila 18 rose valland – le front de l'art h . russell wakefield – strayers from sheol edward lewis wallant – the pawnbroker evelyn waugh – unconditional surrender morris west – daughter of silence angus wilson – the old men at the zoo richard yates – revolutionary road . children and young people . roald dahl – james and the giant peach l . sprague de camp – non-fiction the heroic age of american invention man and power barbara c . freeman – two-thumb tom rumer godden – miss happiness and miss flower rené goscinny and albert uderzo – asterix the gaul ( astérix le gaulois ) maria gripe – josephine norton juster – the phantom tollbooth bill peet – huge harold kin platt – the blue man wilson rawls – where the red fern grows george selden – the cricket in times square ( first in an unnamed sequence of seven books ) dr . seuss – the sneetches and other stories elizabeth george speare – the bronze bow john rowe townsend – gumble 's yard tomi ungerer – the three robbers . drama . john barton – the hollow crown ( anthology ) samuel beckett happy days rough for radio i rough for radio ii emilio carballido – un pequeño día de ira spiro çomora – karnavalet e korçës ( carnival at korçë ) henry denker – a far country friedrich dürrenmatt – the physicists ( die physiker ) max frisch – andorra jean genet – the screens ( les paravents ) girish karnad – yayati heiner müller – die umsiedlerin ( the resettler woman ) tom murphy – a whistle in the dark john osborne – luther neil simon – come blow your horn john whiting – the devils tennessee williams – the night of the iguana wu han – hai rui dismissed from office ( 海瑞罢官 , hǎi ruì bà guān ) . poetry . august derleth editor – fire and sleet and candlelight . non-fiction . alison adburgham – a punch history of manners and modes , 1841–1940 wayne c . booth – the rhetoric of fiction e . h . carr – what is history ? frantz fanon – the wretched of the earth ( les damnés de la terre ) fritz fischer – griff nach der weltmacht : die kriegzielpolitik des kaiserlichen deutschland 1914–1918 georges friedmann – the anatomy of work ( english translation ) ernest k . gann – fate is the hunter jane jacobs – the death and life of great american cities richard foster jones – ancients and moderns : a study of the rise of the scientific movement in seventeenth century england theodora kroeber – ishi in two worlds r . d . laing – self and others marshall mcluhan – the gutenberg galaxy : the making of typographic man louis nizer – my life in court karl popper – the poverty of historicism anant priolkar – the goa inquisition maxime rodinson – muhammad bertrand russell – has man a future ? colin turnbull – the forest people webster 's third new international dictionary theodore h . white – the making of the president 1960 raymond williams – the long revolution peter wessel zapffe – indføring i litterær dramaturgi ( introduction to literary dramaturgy ) . births . january 8 – arnaldur indriðason , icelandic crime novelist january 11 – jasper fforde , english fantasy novelist january 12 – simon russell beale , malaysian-born english shakespearean actor january 28 – arnaldur indridason , icelandic writer may 17 – han dong , chinese poet and novelist may 19 – jennifer armstrong , american children 's author may 22 – andrea dunbar , english playwright ( died 1990 ) june 9 – aaron sorkin , american screenwriter , producer and playwright june 23 – david leavitt , american novelist june 24 – rebecca solnit , american writer and essayist july 7 – eric jerome dickey , american writer july 10 – carol anne davis , scottish crime writer july 18 – m.j . alexander , american author and photographer july – richard flanagan , australian novelist august 20 – greg egan , australian science fiction author september 13 – tom holt , english historical and comic novelist and poet september 26 – will self , english novelist , political commentator and broadcaster october 29 – michael gurr , australian playwright ( died 2017 ) november 9 – jackie kay , scottish poet and novelist november 14 – jurga ivanauskaitė , lithuanian writer ( died 2007 ) november 18 – steven moffat , scottish tv writer november 24 – arundhati roy , indian writer and activist november – sarah holland , english novelist , actress and singer december 8 – ann coulter , american author november 20 – david mills , american journalist and tv writer ( died 2010 ) december 23 – ezzat el kamhawi , egyptian novelist and journalist december 30 – douglas coupland , canadian author unknown date – winsome pinnock , british playwright . deaths . january 10 – dashiell hammett , american crime writer and screenwriter ( lung cancer , born 1894 ) hellman , lilian , introduction to posthumous hammett , dashiell , the big knockover : selected stories and short novels ( houghton mifflin : 1962 ) . january 21 – blaise cendrars ( frédéric-louis sauser ) , swiss novelist and poet ( born 1887 ) january 30 – dorothy thompson , american journalist ( born 1893 ) march 18 – e . arnot robertson , english novelist ( born 1903 ) april 9 – oliver onions ( george oliver ) , english novelist and ghost story writer ( born 1873 ) april 22 – joanna cannan , english pony book writer and detective novelist ( born 1896 ) may 26 – william troy , american writer and teacher ( cancer , born 1903 ) june 2 – george s . kaufman , american dramatist and critic ( born 1889 ) july 1 – louis-ferdinand céline , french novelist and pamphleteer ( born 1894 ) july 2 – ernest hemingway , american novelist ( suicide , born 1899 ) july 12 – mazo de la roche , canadian novelist ( born 1879 ) july 17 – olga forsh , russian dramatist , novelist and memoirist ( born 1873 ) september 27 – h.d . ( hilda doolittle ) , american poet , novelist and memoirist ( born 1886 ) october 19 – mihail sadoveanu , romanian novelist ( born 1880 ) november 2 – james thurber , american humorist ( born 1894 ) december 7 – roussan camille , haitian poet and journalist ( born 1912 ) december 26 – gertrude minnie faulding , english children 's writer and novelist ( born 1875 ) . awards . carnegie medal for children 's literature : lucy m . boston , a stranger at green knowe eric gregory award : adrian mitchell , geoffrey hill prix formentor : jorge luis borges and samuel beckett james tait black memorial prize for fiction : jennifer dawson , the ha-ha james tait black memorial prize for biography : m . k . ashby , joseph ashby of tysoe lorne pierce medal : robertson davies miles franklin award : patrick white , riders in the chariot newbery medal for children 's literature : scott o'dell , island of the blue dolphins nobel prize for literature : ivo andric premio nadal : juan antonio payno , el curso prix goncourt : jean cau , the mercy of god pulitzer prize for drama : tad mosel , all the way home pulitzer prize for fiction : harper lee , to kill a mockingbird pulitzer prize for poetry : phyllis mcginley , times three : selected verse from three decades national book award for fiction : conrad richter , the waters of kronos national book award for nonfiction : william l . shirer , the rise and fall of the third reich national book award for poetry : randall jarrell , the woman at the washington zoo : poems and translations . references .