John DeLorean

early life . delorean was born on january 6 , 1925 , in detroit , the eldest of four sons of zachary and kathryn ( née pribak ) delorean . delorean 's father was romanian , born in sugág village , alsó-fehér county , austria-hungary ( currently șugag , alba county , romania ) , who worked in a mill factory ; zachary emigrated to the united states when he was twenty . he spent time in montana and gary , indiana , before moving to michigan . by the time john was born , zachary had found employment as a union organizer at the ford motor company factory in nearby highland park . his poor english skills and lack of education prevented him from higher-paid work . when not required at ford , he occasionally worked as a carpenter . delorean 's mother was a fellow hungarian citizen of hungarian origin . she was employed at the carboloy products division of general electric throughout much of delorean 's early life . she took work wherever she could to supplement the family 's income . she generally tolerated certain intermittent episodes of erratic behavior by her husband , but during several of the worst times of zachary 's violent tendencies , she took her sons to live with her sister in los angeles , california , where they stayed for a year or so at a time . delorean 's parents divorced in 1942 . john subsequently saw little of his father , who moved into a boarding house , becoming a solitary and estranged drug addict . . education . delorean attended detroit 's public grade schools and was then accepted into cass technical high school , a technical high school for detroit 's honor students , where he signed up for the electrical curriculum . delorean found the cass experience exhilarating , and he excelled at his studies . his academic record and musical talents earned him a scholarship at lawrence institute of technology in the detroit suburb of highland park ( today known as lawrence technological university and located in southfield ) . the small college was the alma mater of some of the automobile industry 's best engineers . at lawrence , he excelled in the study of industrial engineering and was elected to the school 's honor society . world war ii interrupted his studies . in 1943 , delorean was drafted for military service and served three years in the u.s . army and received an honorable discharge . he returned to detroit to find his mother and siblings in economic difficulty . he worked as a draftsman for the public lighting commission for a year and a half to improve his family 's financial status , then returned to lawrence to finish his degree . while back in college , he worked part-time at chrysler and at a local body shop , foreshadowing his later contributions to the automotive industry . delorean graduated in 1948 with a bachelor of science degree in industrial engineering . instead of immediately entering the engineering workforce after earning his degree , delorean sold life insurance . he developed an analytical system aimed at engineers and sold '' about 850,000 worth of policies in ten months '' . however , he found the work boring and moved on to work for the factory equipment corporation . delorean states in his autobiography that he sold life insurance to improve his communication skills . both endeavors were successful financially , but these areas held little interest for delorean . a foreman at chrysler 's engineering garage recommended that delorean applies for work at chrysler and delorean agreed . chrysler ran a post-graduate educational facility named the chrysler institute of engineering , which allowed delorean to advance his education while gaining real-world experience in automotive engineering . he briefly attended the detroit college of law , but did not graduate . in 1952 , delorean graduated from the chrysler institute with a master 's degree in automotive engineering and joined chrysler 's engineering team . delorean attended night classes at the university of michigan 's ross school of business to earn credits for his mba degree , which he completed in 1957 . career . packard motor company . delorean 's time at chrysler lasted less than a year , ending in 1953 when he was offered a salary of us 14,000 at packard under the supervision of the engineer forest mcfarland . delorean quickly gained the attention of his new employer with an improvement to the ultramatic automatic transmission , giving it an improved torque converter and dual-drive ranges ; it was launched as the '' twin-ultramatic '' . packard was experiencing financial difficulties when delorean joined , because of the changing post-world war ii automotive market . while ford , general motors , and chrysler had begun producing affordable mainstream products designed to cater to the rising postwar middle class , packard clung to their pre-world war ii era notions of high-end , precisely engineered luxury cars . this exclusive philosophy was to take its toll on profitability . however , it proved to have a positive effect on delorean 's attention to engineering detail , and after four years at packard he became mcfarland 's successor as head of research and development . while still a profitable company , packard suffered alongside other independents as it struggled to compete when ford and general motors engaged in a price war . james nance , president of packard , decided to merge the company with studebaker in 1954 . a subsequent proposed merger with american motors corporation ( amc ) never passed the discussion phase . delorean considered keeping his job and moving to studebaker headquarters in south bend , indiana , when he received a call from oliver k . kelley , vice president of engineering at general motors , a man whom delorean greatly admired . kelley called to offer delorean his choice of a job in any of five divisions of gm . . general motors . . pontiac . in 1956 , delorean accepted a salary offer of us 16,000 with a bonus program , choosing to work at gm 's pontiac division as an assistant to chief engineer pete estes and general manager semon '' bunkie '' knudsen . knudsen was the son of the former president of gm , william knudsen , who was called away from his post to head the war mobilization production effort at the request of president roosevelt . knudsen was also an mit engineering graduate , and at 42 he was the youngest man to head a division of gm . delorean and knudsen quickly became close friends , and delorean eventually cited knudsen as a major influence and mentor . delorean 's years of engineering at pontiac were successful , producing dozens of patented innovations for the company , and in 1961 he was promoted to the position of division chief engineer . delorean 's most notable contribution to pontiac was the pontiac gto ( gran turismo omologato ) , a muscle car named after the ferrari 250 gto . as a slightly bigger chevrolet , the pontiac brand reached third place in total annual industry sales in the united states . to highlight the performance emphasis of the brand , the gto debuted as a tempest/lemans option package with a larger and more powerful engine in 1964 . this marked the beginning of pontiac 's renaissance as gm 's performance division instead of its previous position with no clear brand identity . the car and its popularity continued to grow in the following years . delorean received almost total credit for its success – conceptualizing , engineering , and marketing – becoming the golden boy of pontiac , and was rewarded with his 1965 promotion to head the entire pontiac division . at the age of 40 , delorean had broken the record for youngest division head at gm and was determined to continue his string of successes . adapting to the frustrations that he perceived in the executive offices was a difficult transition for him . delorean believed there was an undue amount of infighting at gm between division heads , and several of pontiac 's advertising campaign themes met with internal resistance , such as the '' tiger '' campaign used to promote the gto and other pontiac models in 1965 and 1966 . in addition , there was ed cole 's decision to ban multiple carburetors , a method of enhancing engine performance used by pontiac since 1956 , starting with two 4-barrel carburetors ( '' 2x4 bbl '' ) and tri-power ( three 2-barrel carburetors ( '' 3x2 bbl '' ) ) since 1957 . in response to the '' pony car '' market dominated by the wildly successful ford mustang , delorean asked gm executives for permission to market a smaller version of the pontiac banshee show car for 1966 . delorean 's version was rejected because of gm 's concern that his design would take away sales from the corvette , their flagship performance vehicle . their focus was on the new camaro design . pontiac developed its version , and the firebird was introduced for the 1967 model year . shortly after the firebird 's introduction , delorean turned his attention to the development of an all-new grand prix , the division 's personal luxury car based on the full-sized pontiac line since 1962 . sales were sagging by this time , however , but the 1969 model would have its own distinct body shell with drivetrain and chassis components from the intermediate-sized pontiac a-body ( tempest , lemans , gto ) . delorean knew pontiac division could n't finance the new car alone , so he went to his former boss pete estes and asked to share the cost of development with pontiac , having a one-year exclusivity before chevrolet would release the 1970 monte carlo . the deal was done . the 1969 pontiac grand prix featured sharp bodylines and a hood . the interior included a wraparound cockpit-style instrument panel , bucket seats and center console . the new model offered a sportier , high performance , somewhat smaller , and lower-priced alternative to the other personal luxury cars then on the market , such as the ford thunderbird , buick riviera , lincoln continental mark iii , and oldsmobile toronado . the 1969 grand prix production ended up at over 112,000 units , far higher than the 32,000 1968 grand prix units built from the full-sized pontiac body . during his time at pontiac , delorean had begun to enjoy the freedom and celebrity that came with his position and spent a good deal of his time traveling to locations around the world to support promotional events . his frequent public appearances helped to solidify his image as a '' rebel '' corporate businessman with his trendy dress style and casual banter . even as general motors experienced revenue declines , pontiac remained highly profitable under delorean , and despite his growing reputation as a corporate maverick , on february 15 , 1969 , he was again promoted . this time it was to head up the prestigious chevrolet division , general motors ' flagship marque . chevrolet . by this time , delorean earned an annual salary of us 200,000 , with yearly bonuses of up to us 400,000 . he was ubiquitous in popular culture . at a time when business executives were typically conservative , low-key individuals in three-piece suits , delorean wore long sideburns and unbuttoned shirts . he invited ford president lee iacocca to serve as best man at his second wedding . delorean was a limited partner in a pair of american professional sports franchises . the first was the san diego chargers , as part of a syndicate led by gene klein and sam schulman that bought controlling interest for 10 million in august 1966 . the other was the new york yankees , of which he was one of fifteen investors led by george steinbrenner and michael burke , who completed the purchase from cbs for 10 million on january 3 , 1973 . new york yankees 1973 yearbook . delorean continued his jet-setting lifestyle and was often seen hanging out in business and entertainment celebrity circles . he became friends with james t . aubrey , president of metro-goldwyn-mayer studios , and was introduced to celebrities such as financier kirk kerkorian , chris-craft chairman herb siegel , entertainer sammy davis jr . , and the tonight show host johnny carson . the executive offices of general motors headquarters continued to clash with delorean 's nonconformity . when he was appointed , chevrolet was having financial and organizational troubles , and gm president ed cole needed a manager in that position to sort things out . the new model camaro was due out for the 1970 model year , and it was rapidly falling behind schedule . redesigns for the corvette and nova were also delayed , and unit sales had still not recovered from the past four years of turmoil , much of that because of the bad publicity surrounding the corvair and well-publicized quality-control issues affecting other chevy models , including defective motor mounts that led to an unprecedented recall of 6.7 million chevrolets built between 1965 and 1969 . delorean responded to the production problems by delaying the release of the camaro and simplifying the modifications to the corvette and nova . he used the extra time to streamline chevrolet 's production overhead and reduce assembly costs . by 1971 , chevrolet was experiencing record sales in excess of 3 million vehicles , and his division alone was nearly matching that of the entire ford motor company . the vega was assigned to chevrolet by corporate management , specifically by gm president ed cole , just weeks before delorean 's 1969 arrival as chevrolet division 's general manager . in a motor trend interview in august 1970 , delorean said , '' vega will be the highest quality product ever built by chevrolet . '' motor trend-august 1970 . by delorean 's orders , dozens of extra inspectors were assigned to the vega assembly line and the first two thousand cars were road-tested . he stated , '' the first cars , from a manufacturing standpoint , were well built . '' but in 1972 , general motors assembly division ( gmad ) took over the chevrolet lordstown assembly plant and adjoining fisher body plant . their main goal was to cut costs and more than 800 workers were laid off , many of whom were additional inspectors . this led to assembly-line vandalism , with workers intentionally slowing the line , leaving off parts and installing others improperly . incomplete and often non-functioning cars soon filled the factory lot , which then had to be reprocessed and repaired by a team assigned to this task by delorean . a one-month strike followed , and dealers did not receive enough cars for the demand in 1972 . delorean regrouped for the 1973 model year with vega sales of 395,792 . the one-millionth vega was built in may 1973 , a month after delorean 's gm resignation . hot rod , december 1973 . rodden at random in 1972 , delorean was appointed to the position of vice president of car and truck production for the entire general motors line , and his eventual rise to president seemed inevitable . however , the idea of him assuming that position was almost intolerable to gm executives , and on april 2 , 1973 , he announced that he was leaving the company , telling the press , '' i want to do things in the social area . i have to do them , and unfortunately the nature of our business just did n't permit me to do as much as i wanted . '' however , it had been rumored that he had been fired . gm gave him a florida cadillac franchise as a retirement gift , and delorean took over the presidency of the national alliance of businessmen , a charitable trust with the mission of employing americans in need , founded by lyndon johnson and henry ford ii . gm was a major contributor to the group and agreed to continue his salary while he remained president of nab . delorean was sharply critical of the direction gm had taken by the start of the 1970s , as well as objecting to the idea of using rebates to sell cars : '' there 's no forward response at general motors to what the public wants today.a car should make people 's eyes light up when they step into the showroom . rebates are merely a way of convincing customers to buy bland cars they 're not interested in . '' . delorean motor company . delorean left general motors in 1973 to form his own company , the delorean motor company . a two-seat sports car prototype was shown in the mid-1970s called the delorean safety vehicle ( dsv ) , with its bodyshell designed by italdesign 's giorgetto giugiaro . the car entered into production as the delorean . the car 's body distinctively used stainless steel and featured gull-wing doors . it was powered by the prv engine engine developed by peugeot , renault , and volvo ( known as the prv ) . the manufacturing plant to build the new car was built in dunmurry , northern ireland , with substantial financial incentives from the northern ireland development agency of around £100 million . renault was contracted to build the factory , which employed over 2,000 workers at its peak production . the engine was made by renault , while lotus designed the chassis and bodywork details . the dunmurry factory eventually turned out around 9,000 cars during 21 months of operation . in 1980 , an american express catalog featured an ad for a delorean plated in 24-karat gold . according to the ad , only 100 were going to be manufactured and sold for 85,000 . in total , only 4 were actually purchased . production delays meant the delorean did not reach the consumer market until january 1981 ( nearly a decade after the company was founded ) , and in the interim , the new car market had slumped considerably due to the 1980 us economic recession . this was compounded by unexpectedly lukewarm reviews from critics and the public , who generally felt the uniqueness of the delorean 's styling did not compensate for the higher price and lower horsepower relative to other sport coupes on the market . while interest in the delorean quickly dwindled , competing models with lower price tags and more powerful engines ( such as the chevrolet corvette ) sold in record numbers during 1980–81 in spite of the ongoing recession . by february 1982 , more than half of the roughly 7,000 deloreans produced remained unsold , dmc was us 175 million in debt , and the dunmurry factory was placed in receivership . after going into receivership in february 1982 , dmc produced another 2,000 cars until john delorean 's arrest in late october , at which point liquidation proceedings were undertaken and the factory was seized by the british government for good . 1979 book about general motors . after delorean left general motors , patrick wright , author and former business week reporter , approached him with the idea of writing a book based on his experiences there . delorean agreed to dictate his recollections for wright , who wrote the book . the final product , published in 1979 , on a clear day you can see general motors , sold approximately 1.6 million copies , but disagreements over the content led to a conflict between the collaborators , with wright eventually publishing the book on his own . . arrest and trial . on october 19 , 1982 , delorean was charged by the us government with trafficking cocaine following a videotaped sting operation in which he was recorded by undercover federal agents agreeing to bankroll a cocaine smuggling operation . the fbi set him up with more than of cocaine ( worth about us 6.5 million ) in a hotel near los angeles international airport after arriving from new york , and the federal bureau of investigation stated delorean was the '' financier '' to help the financially declining company in a scheme to sell , with an estimated value of us 24 million . the government was tipped off to delorean by confidential informant james timothy hoffman , a former neighbor , who reported to his fbi superiors that delorean had approached him to ask about setting up a cocaine deal ; in truth , hoffman had called delorean and suggested the deal ( which delorean then accepted ) as part of hoffman 's efforts to receive a reduced sentence for a 1981 federal cocaine trafficking charge on which he was awaiting trial . hoffman ( whose name was redacted on the original indictment ) also stated that he was aware of delorean 's financial troubles before he contacted him , and had heard him admit that he needed us 17 million '' in a hurry '' to prevent dmc 's imminent insolvency . taken together , these two elements allowed delorean to successfully defend himself at trial with the procedural defense of entrapment . delorean 's lawyers successfully argued that the fbi and dea had unfairly targeted and illegally entrapped delorean when they allowed hoffman ( an active fbi informant who only knew delorean casually ) to randomly solicit delorean into a criminal conspiracy simply because he was known to be financially vulnerable . another factor was delorean 's lack of criminal history , whereas hoffman was a career criminal who stood to directly benefit if he was able to convince delorean to incriminate himself on tape . the delorean defense team called one witness , carol winkler , delorean 's administrative assistant . her call log proved that hoffman made the initial call . delorean was found not guilty on august 16 , 1984 , but by then dmc had already collapsed into bankruptcy and delorean 's reputation as a businessman was irrevocably tarnished . when asked after his acquittal if he planned to resume his career in the auto industry , delorean bitterly quipped , '' would you buy a used car from me ? '' harris , j . , p . 101 on september 21 , 1985 , delorean was indicted on charges he defrauded investors and committed tax evasion by diverting millions of dollars raised for the company to himself . he was acquitted of all charges . . later enterprises . on november 1 , 1994 , delorean filed with the us patent and trademark office for a raised monorail transport . the transport was never built . in the years before his death , delorean planned to resurrect his car company and gave interviews describing a new vehicle called the dmc2 . according to his family , he spent a lot of time in his last years working on this new venture . in an effort to gather funds , he designed and sold high-end watches via the internet under the name delorean time . the delorean motor company name was subsequently owned by a texas-based firm that provided parts and professional restoration to delorean owners . although john delorean was not involved in the business , its vice president james espey spoke with him on the phone once a month . according to espey , in their final conversation , delorean expressed his dismay at the direction of general motors , saying '' they have too many bean counters and not enough engineers . '' . personal life . delorean was married four times . he married elizabeth higgins on september 3 , 1954 ; they divorced in 1969 . he married kelly harmon on may 31 , 1969 , the sister of actor mark harmon and daughter of heisman trophy winner tom harmon and actress elyse knox ; they divorced in 1972 . delorean adopted a son whom he named zachary tavio , 14 months old at the time of his marriage to model cristina ferrare , who co-adopted zachary . the phoenix of bel-air : since her divorce from a delorean , cristina has become one red-hot ferrare , la times by dianne klein , april 17 , 1989 they had daughter kathryn ann , born november 15 , 1977 ; they divorced in 1985 . he then was married to sally baldwin who he had daughter sheila baldwin delorean with on february 19 , 2002 . he and sally stayed married until his death in 2005 . they lived in morristown , new jersey , having previously resided in bedminster , new jersey . delorean appeared in a magazine advertisement for cutty sark whisky the year before his arrest and the collapse of his company . it was captioned : '' one out of every 100 new businesses succeeds . here 's to those who take the odds . '' the film back to the future was released in 1985 , featuring delorean 's namesake car , and delorean wrote to writer and producer bob gale thanking him for immortalizing the car . in 1999 , delorean declared personal bankruptcy after fighting some 40 legal cases following the collapse of delorean motor company . he was forced to sell his estate in bedminster in 2000 . donald trump bought it and converted it to a golf course . delorean moved to a condominium in morristown , new jersey where he lived until his death five years later . during his marriage to ferrare , he and his family primarily resided in a 15-room , eighth- and ninth-floor duplex at 834 fifth avenue in manhattan ; this apartment was sold to businessman reginald lewis in 1992 . according to his autobiography , both delorean and former wife cristina ferrare became born-again christians following the entrapment controversy . death . delorean died at overlook hospital in summit , new jersey , from a stroke , on march 19 , 2005 at the age of 80 . his ashes are interred at the white chapel cemetery , in troy , michigan . his tombstone shows a depiction of his delorean sports car with the gull-wing doors open . . portrayals and coverage in media . feature films . driven ( 2018 ) , actor lee pace portrays john delorean in a film about the fbi sting operation to entrap the maverick car designer . the film was premiered at the 75th venice international film festival in 2018 and had a wide release in august 2019 . framing john delorean ( 2019 ) , actor alec baldwin portrays john delorean . '' the extraordinary life and career of controversial automaker john delorean -- from his meteoric rise at general motors co . to his obsessive quest to build the world 's best sports car . '' . documentary films . delorean ( 1981 ) , a documentary directed by academy award winning filmmakers d . a . pennebaker and chris hegedus . the film chronicles john delorean throughout the launch of his delorean sports car in 1981 . delorean : living the dream ( 2014 ) , chronicles the history of the iconic delorean automobile from the rise and fall of legendary automaker john z . delorean , to the international phenomenon of loyal owners and devoted fans who have kept the dream alive for over three decades . television . monkeys ( 1989 ) , a bbc northern ireland tv movie based on the book the delorean tapes . it was directed by academy award winning director danny boyle , and stars manning redwood as john delorean . scandal : the fast lane ( 1989 ) ( john delorean / roy nesseth documentary ) . an un-aired british television documentary about the delorean motor company , john z . delorean , roy nesseth . car crash : the delorean story ( 2004 ) , a bbc television documentary about the rise and fall of the delorean motor company . anything to win : the crash of john delorean ( 2006 ) , a tv series produced on game show network . untitled delorean miniseries , a miniseries based on the life and career of john delorean , and the rise and fall of the delorean motor company is in active development from stainless steel productions . delorean : back from the future ( 2021 ) , a bbc documentary about john delorean and his short lived car company . music . stainless style ( 2007 ) a concept album about delorean by the synthpop group neon neon . the delorean museum . the delorean museum , based in humble , texas , was established in 2006 , to honor john z . delorean through the display , interpretation , conservation , and preservation of delorean vehicles , archives , and other objects . . see also . chevrolet vega delorean influence delorean story-an . references . further reading . brownlow , graham . '' back to the failure : an analytic narrative of the de lorean debacle . '' business history 57.1 ( 2015 ) : 156-181 online . wright , j . patrick . on a clear day you can see general motors : john z . delorean 's look inside the automotive giant ( 1979 ) . primary sources . de lorean , john z . and ted schwarz . de lorean ( zondervan publishing house . 1985 ) online . external links . delorean motor company the delorean museum delorean owners association john delorean the times obituary stainless steel productions ( production company producing the delorean tv miniseries ) the rise and fall of john delorean 1980s carmaker delorean dies at 80