Bophuthatswana

series of coups d'état . on 10 february 1988 rocky malebane-metsing of the people 's progressive party ( ppp ) became the president of bophuthatswana for one day when he took over the government through a military coup . he accused mangope of corruption and charged that the recent election had been rigged in the government 's favour . a statement by the defence force said '' serious and disturbing matters of great concern '' had emerged , citing mangope 's close association with a multimillionaire soviet emigre . south africa quells coup attempt in a homeland , the new york times , 11 february 1988 subsequently , the south african defence force invaded bophuthatswana and mangope was reinstated and continued his term unabated . p . w . botha , president of south africa at the time , justified the reinstatement by saying that '' the south african government is opposed in principle to the obtaining or maintaining of power by violence . '' in 1990 , a second coup attempt took place in which an estimated 50,000 protesters demanded the president 's resignation over his handling of the economy . the new york times reported that seven people had been killed and 450 wounded '' after police officers in armoured cars fired their rifles into the crowds and used tear gas and rubber bullets '' . after mangope had asked for help from the south african government , he declared a state of emergency and cut telephone links to the territory '' for political reasons '' , claiming that '' normal laws had become inadequate '' . turmoil spreads to 2d 'homeland ' , the new york times , 8 march 1990 human rights watch put the number of protesters at 150,000 . human rights watch world report 1990 - south africa , published 1 january 1991 . crisis of 1994 . in the beginning of 1994 with south africa heading for democratic elections , the president lucas mangope resisted the elections taking place in bophuthatswana and opposed reincorporation of the territory into south africa . this resulted in increasing unrest and 40 people were wounded when bophuthatswana defence force troops opened fire on striking civil servants . mangope took an increasingly hardline stance , rejected independent electoral commission chairman judge johann kriegler 's plea for freedom ( political ) in the territory , '' 40 wounded as mangope 's men open fire '' . business day . 10 march 1994 . and fired the staff of the bophuthatswana broadcasting corporation , closing down two television stations and three radio stations . with unrest growing and rumors of anc supporters massing at bophuthatswana 's borders , mangope invited general constand viljoen , head of the right-wing afrikaner volksfront , to immediately assist in keeping the peace . the afrikaners were hastily rallied and mobilised , including the white supremacist group afrikaner weerstandsbeweging ( awb ) , which took the opportunity to move in and try to restore the apartheid status quo . uniformed members of the awb on an armed incursion to the mmabatho/mafikeng area shot at unarmed civilians blocking the road , injuring and killing many . they themselves were shot at by members of the bophuthatswana defence force ( bdf ) and the police and forced to retreat . one member of the awb travelling back in a blue mercedes benz shot at some people along the road , which was then followed by members of the bophuthatswana police opening fire at the car . the driver , nicolaas fourie , and his two passengers promptly surrendered and were disarmed . after the media were allowed to photograph the badly injured prisoners , they were then executed at point-blank range by a bophuthatswana policeman , ontlametse bernstein menyatsoe . these killings effectively spelt the end of white right-wing military opposition to democratic reforms . on 12 march 1994 , mangope was deposed as president of bophuthatswana by the south african government and the transitional executive council . south african ambassador to bophuthatswana , prof . tjaart van der walt , was then appointed as the territory 's new administrator . . dissolution . with the end of apartheid after the first multi-racial elections and the coming into force of the interim constitution of south africa on 27 april 1994 , bophuthatswana ceased to exist and once again became part of south africa . the 7 enclaves that formed the country were absorbed into the north west province , gauteng and the free state . the capital , mmabatho , was merged with mafikeng and the combined city is now the capital of the north-west province . . geography . territory . bophuthatswana had a surface area of approximately and consisted of seven enclaves dispersed over the former south african provinces of cape province , transvaal , and orange free state . six of the enclaves were located relatively close together with three in the cape province and another three in transvaal . the seventh enclave was in the orange free state between bloemfontein and the lesotho border . one of the enclaves shared a border with botswana , while two of the enclaves were located near pretoria and its surrounding industrial areas . the townships in these enclaves , such as ga-rankuwa and mabopane continued to serve as dormitory townships for the supply of labour ( as they had done prior to bophuthatswana 's independence ) despite being located in bophuthatswana territory . other enclaves were similarly located near south african cities such as rustenburg and bloemfontein . the capital , mmabatho , was situated in the enclave bordering botswana . the territory and borders of the country were fluid as the south african government frequently incorporated territory into the country . as a result , when independence was declared in 1977 , the country originally consisted of six enclaves but just before its reincorporation into south africa , it had seven enclaves . another example was the incorporation of mafeking , which was located just outside the borders of bophuthatswana when it gained independence in 1977 , into the country in 1980 after a local referendum . . districts and cities . districts of bophuthatswana and their population in 1991 are : odi : 354,782 moretele : 235,540 tlhaping-tlharo : 101,425 ditsobotla : 135,045 molopo : 128,383 mankwe : 89,841 bafokeng : 88,399 taung : 134,277 thaba 'nchu : 49,053 lehurutshe : 62,901 madikwe : 52,268 ganyesa : 47,036 major cities and towns in bophuthatswana include : ga-rankuwa mabopane mafikeng mmabatho – the capital mogwase temba tlhabane . demographics . the homeland was set up to house setswana-speaking peoples . in 1983 , it had more than 1,430,000 inhabitants ; in 1990 , it had an estimated population of 2,352,296 . '' 1990 cia world factbook '' . central intelligence agency . retrieved on 2008-08-19 . only 10 % of bophuthatswana 's total land area was arable , and much of that was covered with scrub brush . though the majority of its population was tswana-speaking , tswana , english , and afrikaans were all designated as official languages by the constitution . constitution of bophuthatswana , as revised in 1984 , chapter 1 , 5 . . economy . bophuthatswana was the richest of the tbvc-states as it had platinum mines , which accounted for two-thirds of the total platinum production in the western world . it was also rich in asbestos , granite , vanadium , chromium and manganese . additional revenues came from the sun city casino , which was a day trip from johannesburg and pretoria , where gambling was illegal under the national party government , as it was throughout all of south africa . bophuthatswana also issued bearer development bonds . the so-called '' bop bonds '' are not recognized or redeemable in south africa , and are worthless as financial instruments . however , bonds in excellent condition are considered collectible . bonds issued in 1988 and 1989 , in r10 and r20 denominations , currently trade at 10–25 % of original face value . . media . bophuthatswana ran a now-defunct television station called bop tv . bop tv was also available in some townships like soweto , for tswana people ( who were ostensibly citizens of bophuthatswana ) , but the signal was also watched by white south africans seeking a more entertaining alternative to the sabc . . security forces . towards the end of its existence , the bophuthatswana defence force ( bdf ) had an estimated number of 4,000 troops , mostly infantry . it was organized into six military regions , and its ground forces included two infantry battalions , possessing two armoured personnel carriers . the bophuthatswana air force of 150 personnel possessed three combat aircraft and two armed helicopters . the president was commander-in-chief and was authorised to deploy the armed forces in both cross-border operations as well as domestically . constitution of the republic of bophuthatswana as amended in 1984 , chapter 3 , 20 . ( 2 ) ( a ) during its last days in 1994 , the bophuthatswana police had 6,002 police officers , operating from 56 police stations throughout the territory . 'policing agencies : 1994 , prior to amalgamation : south africa ' . website of the south african police service . with the dissolution of bophuthatswana in 1994 , the bdf and the bophuthatswana police were incorporated into the south african national defence force and the south african police service , respectively . coins . bophuthatswana was the first and only bantustan to produce its own coins . two coins were minted as a proof set only , the south african rand remained the official currency . see also . bantustan coins of bophuthatswana list of heads of state of bophuthatswana postal orders of bophuthatswana list of historical unrecognized states and dependencies puppet state satellite state . references .