Carbon fibers

history . in 1860 , joseph swan produced carbon fibers for the first time , for use in light bulbs . in 1879 , thomas edison baked cotton threads or bamboo slivers at high temperatures carbonizing them into an all-carbon fiber filament used in one of the first incandescent light bulbs to be heated by electricity . in 1880 , lewis latimer developed a reliable carbon wire filament for the incandescent light bulb , heated by electricity . in 1958 , roger bacon created high-performance carbon fibers at the union carbide parma technical center located outside of cleveland , ohio . those fibers were manufactured by heating strands of rayon until they carbonized . this process proved to be inefficient , as the resulting fibers contained only about 20 % carbon and had low strength and stiffness properties . in the early 1960s , a process was developed by dr . akio shindo at agency of industrial science and technology of japan , using polyacrylonitrile ( pan ) as a raw material . this had produced a carbon fiber that contained about 55 % carbon . in 1960 richard millington of h.i . thompson fiberglas co . developed a process ( us patent no . 3,294,489 ) for producing a high carbon content ( 99 % ) fiber using rayon as a precursor . these carbon fibers had sufficient strength ( modulus of elasticity and tensile strength ) to be used as a reinforcement for composites having high strength to weight properties and for high temperature resistant applications . the high potential strength of carbon fiber was realized in 1963 in a process developed by w . watt , l . n . phillips , and w . johnson at the royal aircraft establishment at farnborough , hampshire . the process was patented by the uk ministry of defence , then licensed by the british national research development corporation to three companies : rolls-royce , who were already making carbon fiber ; morganite ; and courtaulds . within a few years , after successful use in 1968 of a hyfil carbon-fiber fan assembly in the rolls-royce conway jet engines of the vickers vc10 , rolls-royce took advantage of the new material 's properties to break into the american market with its rb-211 aero-engine with carbon-fiber compressor blades . unfortunately , the blades proved vulnerable to damage from bird strike . this problem and others caused rolls-royce such setbacks that the company was nationalized in 1971 . the carbon-fiber production plant was sold off to form bristol composite materials engineering ltd ( often referred to as bristol composites ) . in the late 1960s , the japanese took the lead in manufacturing pan-based carbon fibers . a 1970 joint technology agreement allowed union carbide to manufacture japan 's toray industries product . morganite decided that carbon-fiber production was peripheral to its core business , leaving courtaulds as the only big uk manufacturer . courtelle 's water-based inorganic process made the product susceptible to impurities that did not affect the organic process used by other carbon-fiber manufacturers , leading courtaulds ceasing carbon-fiber production in 1991 . during the 1960s , experimental work to find alternative raw materials led to the introduction of carbon fibers made from a petroleum pitch derived from oil processing . these fibers contained about 85 % carbon and had excellent flexural strength . also , during this period , the japanese government heavily supported carbon fiber development at home and several japanese companies such as toray , nippon carbon , toho rayon and mitsubishi started their own development and production . since the late 1970s , further types of carbon fiber yarn entered the global market , offering higher tensile strength and higher elastic modulus . for example , t400 from toray with a tensile strength of 4,000 mpa and m40 , a modulus of 400 gpa . intermediate carbon fibers , such as im 600 from toho rayon with up to 6,000 mpa were developed . carbon fibers from toray , celanese and akzo found their way to aerospace application from secondary to primary parts first in military and later in civil aircraft as in mcdonnell douglas , boeing , airbus , and irkut mc-21 planes . in 1988 , dr . jacob lahijani invented balanced ultra-high young 's modulus ( greater than 100 mpsi ) and high tensile strength pitch carbon fiber ( greater than 500 kpsi ) used extensively in automotive and aerospace applications . in march 2006 , the patent was assigned to the university of tennessee research foundation . . structure and properties . carbon fiber is frequently supplied in the form of a continuous tow wound onto a reel . the tow is a bundle of thousands of continuous individual carbon filaments held together and protected by an organic coating , or size , such as polyethylene oxide ( peo ) or polyvinyl alcohol ( pva ) . the tow can be conveniently unwound from the reel for use . each carbon filament in the tow is a continuous cylinder with a diameter of 5–10 micrometres and consists almost exclusively of carbon . the earliest generation ( e.g . t300 , hta and as4 ) had diameters of 16–22 micrometre . later fibers ( e.g . im6 or im600 ) have diameters that are approximately 5 micrometers . the atomic structure of carbon fiber is similar to that of graphite , consisting of sheets of carbon atoms arranged in a regular hexagonal pattern ( graphene sheets ) , the difference being in the way these sheets interlock . graphite is a crystalline material in which the sheets are stacked parallel to one another in regular fashion . the intermolecular forces between the sheets are relatively weak van der waals forces , giving graphite its soft and brittle characteristics . depending upon the precursor to make the fiber , carbon fiber may be turbostratic or graphitic , or have a hybrid structure with both graphitic and turbostratic parts present . in turbostratic carbon fiber the sheets of carbon atoms are haphazardly folded , or crumpled , together . carbon fibers derived from polyacrylonitrile are turbostratic , whereas carbon fibers derived from mesophase pitch are graphitic after heat treatment at temperatures exceeding 2200 & nbsp ; °c . turbostratic carbon fibers tend to have high ultimate tensile strength , whereas heat-treated mesophase-pitch-derived carbon fibers have high young 's modulus ( i.e . , high stiffness or resistance to extension under load ) and high thermal conductivity . applications . in 2012 , estimated global demand for carbon fiber market was 1.7 billion with estimated annual growth of 10–12 % from 2012–2018 . the strongest demand for carbon fiber come from aircraft and aerospace , wind energy , as well as the automotive industry with optimized resin systems . carbon fiber can have higher cost than other materials which has been one of the limiting factors of adoption . in a comparison between steel and carbon fiber materials for automotive industry , carbon fiber may be 10-12x more expensive . however , this cost premium has come down over the past decade from estimates of 35x more expensive than steel in the early 2000s . . composite materials . carbon fiber is most notably used to reinforce composite materials , particularly the class of materials known as carbon fiber reinforced polymer . non-polymer materials can also be used as the matrix for carbon fibers . due to the formation of metal carbides and corrosion considerations , carbon has seen limited success in metal matrix composite applications . reinforced carbon-carbon ( rcc ) consists of carbon fiber-reinforced graphite , and is used structurally in high-temperature applications . the fiber also finds use in filtration of high-temperature gases , as an electrode with high surface area and impeccable corrosion resistance , and as an anti-static component . molding a thin layer of carbon fibers significantly improves fire resistance of polymers or thermoset composites because a dense , compact layer of carbon fibers efficiently reflects heat . the increasing use of carbon fiber composites is displacing aluminum from aerospace applications in favor of other metals because of galvanic corrosion issues . carbon fiber can be used as an additive to asphalt to make electrically-conductive asphalt concrete . using this composite material in the transportation infrastructure , especially for airport pavement , decreases some winter maintenance problems that led to flight cancellation or delay due to the presence of ice and snow . passing current through the composite material 3d network of carbon fibers dissipates thermal energy that increases the surface temperature of the asphalt , which is able to melt ice and snow above it . . textiles . precursors for carbon fibers are polyacrylonitrile ( pan ) , rayon and pitch . carbon fiber filament yarns are used in several processing techniques : the direct uses are for prepregging , filament winding , pultrusion , weaving , braiding , etc . carbon fiber yarn is rated by the linear density ( weight per unit length ; i.e . , 1 & nbsp ; g/1000 & nbsp ; m 1 & nbsp ; tex ) or by number of filaments per yarn count , in thousands . for example , 200 & nbsp ; tex for 3,000 & nbsp ; filaments of carbon fiber is three times as strong as 1,000 & nbsp ; carbon filament yarn , but is also three times as heavy . this thread can then be used to weave a carbon fiber filament fabric or cloth . the appearance of this fabric generally depends on the linear density of the yarn and the weave chosen . some commonly used types of weave are twill , satin and plain . carbon filament yarns can also be knitted or braided . microelectrodes . carbon fibers are used for fabrication of carbon-fiber microelectrodes . in this application typically a single carbon fiber with diameter of 5–7 μm is sealed in a glass capillary . at the tip the capillary is either sealed with epoxy and polished to make carbon-fiber disk microelectrode or the fiber is cut to a length of 75–150 μm to make carbon-fiber cylinder electrode . carbon-fiber microelectrodes are used either in amperometry or fast-scan cyclic voltammetry for detection of biochemical signaling . flexible heating . known for their conductivity , or lack thereof , carbon fibers can carry very low currents on their own . when woven into larger fabrics , they can be used to reliably deliver infrared heating in applications requiring flexible heating elements and can easily sustain temperatures past 100 & nbsp ; °c due to their physical properties . many examples of this type of application can be seen in diy heated articles of clothing and blankets . due to its chemical inertness , it can be used relatively safely amongst most fabrics and materials ; however , shorts caused by the material folding back on itself will lead to increased heat production and can lead to a fire . synthesis . each carbon filament is produced from a polymer such as polyacrylonitrile ( pan ) , rayon , or petroleum pitch . all these polymers are known as a precursor . for synthetic polymers such as pan or rayon , the precursor is first spun into filament yarns , using chemical and mechanical processes to initially align the polymer molecules in a way to enhance the final physical properties of the completed carbon fiber . precursor compositions and mechanical processes used during spinning filament yarns may vary among manufacturers . after drawing or spinning , the polymer filament yarns are then heated to drive off non-carbon atoms ( carbonization ) , producing the final carbon fiber . the carbon fibers filament yarns may be further treated to improve handling qualities , then wound on to bobbins . a common method of manufacture involves heating the spun pan filaments to approximately 300 & nbsp ; °c in air , which breaks many of the hydrogen bonds and oxidizes the material . the oxidized pan is then placed into a furnace having an inert atmosphere of a gas such as argon , and heated to approximately 2000 & nbsp ; °c , which induces graphitization of the material , changing the molecular bond structure . when heated in the correct conditions , these chains bond side-to-side ( ladder polymers ) , forming narrow graphene sheets which eventually merge to form a single , columnar filament . the result is usually 93–95 % carbon . lower-quality fiber can be manufactured using pitch or rayon as the precursor instead of pan . the carbon can become further enhanced , as high modulus , or high strength carbon , by heat treatment processes . carbon heated in the range of 1500–2000 & nbsp ; °c ( carbonization ) exhibits the highest tensile strength ( 5,650mpa , or 820,000psi ) , while carbon fiber heated from 2500 to 3000 & nbsp ; °c ( graphitizing ) exhibits a higher modulus of elasticity ( 531gpa , or 77,000,000psi ) . see also . basalt fiber carbon fiber reinforced polymer ceramic matrix composite carbon nanotube esd materials graphene . references . external links . making carbon fiber how carbon fiber is made [ carbon fibres – the first 5 naked years