1919 in literature

events . february – richmal crompton 's anarchic english schoolboy william brown is introduced in the first published just william story , '' rice-mould '' , in home magazine . march 1 – october 15 – publication runs of the american pulp magazine the thrill book are oriented towards the fantasy genre or science fiction . it includes the serialization of the heads of cerberus , written by gertrude barrows bennett as francis stevens , with its early thematic use of an alternate time-track , or parallel worlds . march – the diaries up to the end of 1917 from the english naturalist w . n . p . barbellion ( bruce frederick cummings ) are published as the journal of a disappointed man in london by chatto & windus . this treats his resignation to the disease multiple sclerosis , of which he will die on october 22 , aged 30 , at gerrards cross . march 28 – two paintings by e . e . cummings appear in an exhibition of the new york society of independent artists . april 2 – vladimir nabokov leaves russia with his family . april 7 – the anarchist writers gustav landauer and erich mühsam play leading roles in creating the bavarian soviet republic . they are later joined by the essayist and debt relief advocate silvio gesell . taken over by the communist party of germany , the republic is eventually crushed by the freikorps ; landauer is killed in prison ( may 2 ) . combatants on the freikorps side include ernst kantorowicz , later famous as a historian . april and october – the english writers vera brittain and winifred holtby return after war service to complete their degree courses at somerville college , oxford . oxford dictionary of national biography . june – the algonquin round table of writers , critics , actors and wits led by alexander woollcott first meets at the algonquin hotel in new york city . july 29 – alfred harcourt and donald brace set up the publishing company harcourt ( publisher ) in new york city . october 28 – arthur ransome leaves russia with his future wife evgenia petrovna shelepina , previously trotsky 's secretary , carrying a diplomatic message for estonia . november – the literary monthly the london mercury is launched with j . c . squire as editor . november 17 – an american expatriate , sylvia beach , opens the shakespeare and company bookstore in paris . november 29 – the großes schauspielhaus opens as a theater in berlin , with an interior designed by hans poelzig . it begins with the director max reinhardt 's production of the oresteia . december – t . e . lawrence loses most of the manuscript of seven pillars of wisdom while changing trains at reading in england en route from the paris peace conference to oxford . unknown dates the column '' by the way '' and the pen name beachcomber in the london newspaper the daily express are taken over by d . b . wyndham lewis as a humorous feature . singer house in petrograd ( russian soviet federative socialist republic ) is allocated to the petrograd state publishing house , quickly becoming the city 's largest bookstore . it will be known subsequently as дом книги ( dom knigi , '' the house of books '' ) . new books . fiction . ryūnosuke akutagawa ( 芥川 龍之介 ) – '' dragon : the old potter 's tale '' ( 龍 , ryū , published in akutagawa ryūnosuke zenshū ) sherwood anderson – winesburg , ohio daisy ashford – the young visiters ( written in 1890 aged nine ) pio baroja – caesar or nothing max beerbohm – seven men ( short stories ) andré breton and philippe soupault – les champs magnétiques ( first book to use techniques of surrealist automatism ) james branch cabell – jurgen , a comedy of justice henry de montherlant – songe ( dream ) ronald firbank – valmouth gilbert frankau – peter jackson , cigar merchant : a romance of married life philip gibbs – the street of adventure andré gide – la symphonie pastorale a . p . herbert – the secret battle joseph hergesheimer linda condon java head hermann hesse ( as emil sinclair ) – demian e . m . hull – the sheik jerome k . jerome – all roads lead to calvary franz kafka – '' in the penal colony '' ( '' in der strafkolonie '' ) halldór laxness – '' barn náttúrunnar '' jack london – on the makaloa mat compton mackenzie poor relations sylvia and michael w . somerset maugham – the moon and sixpence christopher morley – the haunted bookshop seumas o'kelly ( died 1918 ) – the golden barque and the weaver 's grave ( novellas ) baroness orczy his majesty 's well-beloved the league of the scarlet pimpernel premchand – seva sadan marcel proust à l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs ( in the shadow of young girls in flower or within a budding grove ) , vol . 2 of in search of lost time pastiches et mélanges romain rolland colas breugnon les précurseurs ( the forerunners ) ivan tavčar – visoška kronika ( the visoko chronicle , novella ) edgar wallace – the green rust mary augusta ward fields of victory helena anna elisabet weirauch – the scorpion ( der skorpion ) ( vol . 1 ) george mcleod winsor – station x p . g . wodehouse – my man jeeves ( collection ) virginia woolf – night and day francis brett young – the young physician . children and young people . l . frank baum – the magic of oz edgar rice burroughs – jungle tales of tarzan christine chaundler – ronald 's burglar grace may north – adele doring of the sunnyside club ( first in the adele doring series ) else ury – nesthäkchen 's teenage years hugh walpole – jeremy . drama . ramón del valle-inclán – divine words ( divinas palabras ) edward salisbury field – wedding bells susan glaspell – bernice harley granville-barker – the secret life ian hay – tilly of bloomsbury avery hopwood – the gold diggers karl kraus – the last days of mankind ( die letzten tage der menschheit ) kwee tek hoay – allah jang palsoe ( the false god ) else lasker-schüler – die wupper ( the ( river ) wupper ; first performed , written 1908 ) h . f . maltby – a temporary gentleman w . somerset maugham – caesar 's wife a . a . milne the camberley triangle mr . pim passes by louis n . parker – summertime liviu rebreanu – the quadrille ernst toller – transformation . poetry . e . j . brady – the house of the winds uri zvi greenberg – in tsaytns roysh ( in the tumult of the times , verse and prose ) siegfried sassoon – the war poems of siegfried sassoon august stramm ( posthumous ) – tropfblut giuseppe ungaretti allegria di naufragi ( the joy of shipwrecks ) la guerra ( the war ) louis untermeyer ( ed . ) – modern american poetry . non-fiction . henri bergson – l'energie spirituelle : essais et conférences ( spiritual energy : essays and lectures ) francis p . duffy with joyce kilmer – father duffy 's story : a tale of humor and heroism , of life and death with the fighting sixty-ninth johan huizinga – the waning of the middle ages ( herfsttij der middeleeuwen ) william inge – outspoken essays ( first series ) john maynard keynes – the economic consequences of the peace karl kraus – weltgericht ( last judgment ) dorothy lawrence – sapper dorothy lawrence : the only english woman soldier ( autobiography ) h . l . mencken – the american language arthur ransome – six weeks in russia 1919 john reed – ten days that shook the world carl sandburg – the chicago race riots , july 1919 prof . william strunk , jr . – the elements of style h . g . wells – the outline of history ( publication of first installment , november 22 ) arthur graeme west ( posthumous ) – the diary of a dead officer frances garnet wolseley , 2nd viscountess wolseley – gardens , their form and design . births . january 1 – j . d . salinger , american novelist ( died 2010 ) january 7 – robert duncan , american poet ( died 1988 ) january 10 – ugo sansonetti , italian writer and masters athlete january 20 – silva kaputikyan , armenian poet ( died 2006 ) january 24 – juan eduardo zúñiga , spanish fiction writer , literary scholar and translator ( died 2020 ) january 25 – edwin newman , american writer and journalist ( died 2010 ) march 18 – g . e . m . anscombe , irish-born english analytic philosophy ( died 2001 ) march 24 lawrence ferlinghetti , american beat poet , writer , publisher , painter , socialist activist and bookseller ( died 2021 ) robert heilbroner , american economic philosopher ( died 2005 ) graciela palau de nemes , cuban-born literary critic ( died 2019 ) april 15 – emyr humphreys , welsh novelist and poet ( died 2020 ) may 16 – john robinson , english bible scholar , religious writer and bishop ( died 1983 ) may 17 – robert h . adleman , american novelist and historian ( died 1995 ) june 6 – helen forrester ( june bhatia ) , english memoirist and novelist ( died 2011 ) june 8 – władysław siemaszko , polish publicist , lawyer and writer who is who w polsce . wydanie ii , 2003 r . , page 3861 . hübners blaues who is who . june 27 – jaswant singh kanwal , punjabi novelist ( died 2020 ) june 28 – ion dezideriu sîrbu , romanian philosopher , novelist and dramatist ( died 1989 ) july 15 – iris murdoch , irish-born novelist ( died 1999 ) july 23 davis grubb , american novelist and short story writer ( died 1980 ) héctor germán oesterheld , argentine comic book writer ( forced disappearance c.1977 ) july 31 – primo levi , italian novelist and memoirist ( died 1987 ) august 1 – stanley middleton , english novelist ( died 2009 ) august 31 – amrita pritam , punjabi poet and novelist ( died 2005 ) september 13 – george weidenfeld , viennese-born english publisher ( died 2016 ) september 23 – tōta kaneko , japanese writer ( died 2018 ) september 26 – matilde camus , spanish poet ( died 2012 ) october 22 – doris lessing , persian-born english novelist ( died 2013 ) november 23 – p . f . strawson , english philosopher ( died 2006 ) november 26 – frederik pohl , american science fiction author ( died 2013 ) november 29 – frank kermode , manx-born literary critic ( died 2010 ) december 17 charlotte jay , australian suspense writer ( died 1996 ) es'kia mphahlele , south african writer ( died 2008 ) . deaths . january 4 – matilda betham-edwards , english novelist , poet and travel writer ( born 1836 ) january 11 – kazimierz zalewski , polish dramatist , critic and publisher ( born 1849 ) january 15 – rosa luxemburg , polish-born german revolutionary socialist ( assassinated , born 1871 ) january 31 – paul lindau , german dramatist ( born 1839 ) february 26 – anne thackeray ritchie , english novelist and essayist ( born 1837 ) may 2 – gustav landauer , german philosopher and revolutionary ( murdered , born 1870 ) may 6 – l . frank baum , children 's writer ( stroke , born 1856 ) may 10 – ferdinando fontana , italian journalist , dramatist , and poet ( born 1850 ) may 17 – guido von list , viennese poet , dramatist , and occultist ( born 1848 ) may 30 – barbu nemțeanu , romanian poet and translator ( tuberculosis , born 1887 ) june 14 – weedon grossmith , english writer , actor and playwright ( born 1854 ) june 19 – petre p . carp , romanian politician , polemicist , and translator ( born 1837 ) june 23 – kolachalam srinivasa rao , indian dramatist ( born 1854 ) july 8 – john fox , jr . , american novelist and short story writer ( pneumonia , born 1862 ) august 11 – andrew carnegie , scottish american industrialist and writer ( pneumonia , born 1835 ) september 12 – leonid andreyev , russian dramatist , novelist and short-story writer ( heart failure , born 1871 ) october 22 – w . n . p . barbellion ( bruce frederick cummings ) , english naturalist and diarist ( multiple sclerosis , born 1889 ) october 30 – ella wheeler wilcox , american author and poet ( born 1850 ) november 3 – abraham valdelomar , peruvian poet , essayist and dramatist ( accidental fall , born 1888 ) . awards . james tait black memorial prize for fiction ( first award ) : hugh walpole , the secret city james tait black memorial prize for biography ( first award ) : henry festing jones , samuel butler , author of erewhon ( 1835–1902 ) – a memoir nobel prize for literature : carl spitteler prix goncourt : marcel proust , within a budding grove pulitzer prize for biography or autobiography : henry brooks adams , the education of henry adams pulitzer prize for drama : no award given pulitzer prize for poetry : margaret widdemer , old road to paradise and carl sandburg , corn huskers pulitzer prize for the novel : booth tarkington , the magnificent ambersons . in literature . opening of j . g . farrell 's novel troubles ( 1970 ) . references .