The Parallax View

plot . lee carter , a television journalist in seattle , witnesses the assassination of presidential candidate charles carroll atop the space needle . a waiter armed with a revolver is pursued and falls to his death while a second waiter , also armed , leaves the scene unnoticed . a congressional committee decides the killing was the work of a lone assassin . three years later , carter visits her former boyfriend , an oregon newspaper reporter named joe frady , claiming others must have been behind the assassination as six of the witnesses to the killing have since died and she fears she will be next . frady does not take her seriously ; however , carter is soon found dead of a drug overdose . guilty over disregarding carter 's pleas , frady visits the small town of salmontail to probe the recent death of judge arthur bridges , also a witness . a bar fight with the salmontail sheriff 's deputy draws the attention of the sheriff himself , l . d . wicker , who offers to take frady to the spot where bridges drowned . when they arrive at the dam , however , wicker pulls his gun on frady while the floodgates are opening , plotting to have him drown the same way bridges did . frady manages to escape , while wicker drowns . frady commandeers wicker 's squad car , and at the sheriff 's house he uncovers parallax corporation documents which reveal that the organization recruits political assassins . frady tries to convince his skeptical newspaper editor bill rintels he is onto a big story , connecting the dots of witnesses of assassinations who have died , but rintels refuses to support his efforts . undaunted , frady seeks out a local psychology professor who assesses the parallax corporation 's personality test taken from wicker 's desk , and deems it to be likely a profiling exam to identify psychopaths . austin tucker , the paranoid aide to the assassinated carroll , agrees to meet frady on his boat , while anxiously revealing there have been two attempts on his life since carroll 's assassination . shortly after tucker shows photos to frady of a suspicious waiter who may have been involved in carroll 's shooting , a bomb explodes onboard , killing tucker and his assistant . frady survives by diving overboard but is believed to be dead . later that night , frady slips into the newspaper 's offices and informs rintels of his belief that he has uncovered an organization that recruits assassins , and wants the public to believe he is dead so he can apply to the parallax corporation under an assumed identity . days later , jack younger , a parallax official , pays him a visit to let him know he is , based on his preliminary application , the kind of man parallax is interested in . frady is accepted for training in the parallax corporation 's division of human engineering in los angeles , where he watches a montage which associates positive images with negative actions . while leaving the parallax 's offices , frady recognizes one of the parallax operatives from a photo tucker showed him , as the second waiter from carroll 's assassination . he watches the assassin retrieve a case from a car , drive to an airport , and check it as stowed baggage on a passenger jet . frady boards the plane and notices a senator aboard , but can not find the assassin , who is actually watching the jet 's takeoff from the airport 's roof . frady writes a warning , that there is a bomb on board , on a napkin and slips it onto the drink service cart . the warning is found and the jet returns to los angeles . passengers are evacuated moments before the bomb explodes . returning to his apartment , frady is confronted by younger about not being the man whose identity he has been using . frady 'confesses ' he is actually yet another man who had gotten in trouble with the police , and younger agrees to validate this new identity . later , at the newspaper office , rintels listens to a secretly recorded tape of the conversation between frady and younger , then places it in an envelope with other such tapes . rintels is poisoned by the senator 's killer and bomb-planter and the tapes disappear . frady goes to the parallax offices to see younger , and is told he is not there , but then sees him leaving the building . he follows the operative to the dress rehearsal for a political rally for senator george hammond and hides in the auditorium 's catwalks to observe parallax agents , who are posing as security personnel . frady attempts to follow one of the men back to the auditorium , but finds he had been locked in the catwalk area . as hammond drives a golf cart across the auditorium floor , an unseen sniper fatally shoots him , causing pandemonium below . frady realizes too late he has been set up as a scapegoat and attempts to flee across the catwalks , but is spotted by the police who are now in the auditorium below . as frady runs to the reopened exit door from the catwalks , a shadowy agent ( implied to be the same parallax assassin whom the audience and frady have seen throughout the film ) steps through , killing frady with a shotgun . six months later , the same committee that investigated carroll 's death reports that frady , acting alone , killed hammond out of paranoia and misguided patriotism . cast . production . development . the film is based on a novel by loren singer . while the novel followed witnesses of john f . kennedy 's assassination who were killed , the screenplay shifted the victim to a fictional politician closely resembling robert f . kennedy . . filming . the distinctive anamorphic photography , with long lens , unconventional framing , and shallow focus was supervised by gordon willis . the river scene was filmed at the gorge dam , on the skagit river ( ross lake national recreation area ) in washington state . the space needle in seattle , washington , is featured extensively in the first assassination sequence . the airport scene was filmed at bob hope airport in burbank , california . the train scene has never been credited . cinematography . frady is often filmed from great distances , suggesting that he is being watched . . montage . most of the images used in the assassin training montage were of anonymous figures or patriotic backgrounds , featuring among others richard nixon , adolf hitler , pope john xxiii , and lee harvey oswald ( in the picture taken moments after his shooting ) . the montage also uses a drawing by jack kirby of the marvel comics character thor . it juxtaposes the concepts of love , mother , father , enemy , and me . the montage '' captures the confusion of post-kennedy america '' by demonstrating the decay of values and longstanding traditions . the sequence has received much praise in recent years . it has been compared to the brainwashing scene in the 1971 stanley kubrick-directed a clockwork orange . . critical reception . at the time of its release , the parallax view received mixed reactions from critics . roger ebert gave the film three out of four stars and wrote , '' the parallax view will no doubt remind some reviewers of executive action ( 1973 ) , another movie released at about the same time that advanced a conspiracy theory of assassination . it 's a better use of similar material , however , because it tries to entertain instead of staying behind to argue . '' in his review for the new york times , vincent canby wrote , '' neither mr . pakula nor his screenwriters , david giler and lorenzo semple , jr . , display the wit that alfred hitchcock might have used to give the tale importance transcending immediate plausibility . the moviemakers have , instead , treated their central idea so soberly that they sabotage credulity . '' joseph kanon of the atlantic found the film 's subject pertinent : '' what gives the movie its real force is the way its menace keeps absorbing material from contemporary life . '' time magazine 's richard schickel wrote , '' we would probably be better off rethinking—or better yet , not thinking about—the whole dismal business , if only to put an end to ugly and dramatically unsatisfying products like the parallax view . '' in 2006 , entertainment weekly critic chris nashawaty wrote , '' the parallax view is a mother of a thriller . and beatty , always an underrated actor thanks ( or no thanks ) to his off-screen rep as a hollywood lothario , gives a hell of a performance in a career that 's been full of them . '' the motion picture won the critics award at the avoriaz film festival ( france ) and was nominated for the edgar award for best motion picture . gordon willis won the award for best cinematography from the national society of film critics ( usa ) . the film 's reception has been more positive in recent years . on rotten tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 89 % based on reviews from 35 critics . the site 's consensus states '' the parallax view blends deft direction from alan j . pakula and a charismatic warren beatty performance to create a paranoid political thriller that stands with the genre 's best . '' on metacritic the film has a score of 65 % based on reviews from 12 critics . reviewing films depicting political assassination conspiracies for the guardian , director alex cox labelled the film the '' best jfk conspiracy movie '' . film critic matt zoller seitz has called the film , '' a damn near perfect movie '' . . see also . list of american films of 1974 assassinations in fiction list of films featuring surveillance the manchurian candidate arlington road permindex . references . external links . dvd savant review of the montage