Glass fiber

fiber formation . glass fiber is formed when thin strands of silica-based or other formulation glass are extruded into many fibers with small diameters suitable for textile processing . the technique of heating and drawing glass into fine fibers has been known for millennia ; however , the use of these fibers for textile applications is more recent . until this time , all glass fiber had been manufactured as staple ( that is , clusters of short lengths of fiber ) . the modern method for producing glass wool is the invention of games slayter working at the owens-illinois glass company ( toledo , ohio ) . he first applied for a patent for a new process to make glass wool in 1933 . the first commercial production of glass fiber was in 1936 . in 1938 owens-illinois glass company and corning glass works joined to form the owens-corning fiberglas corporation . when the two companies joined to produce and promote glass fiber , they introduced continuous filament glass fibers . owens-corning is still the major glass-fiber producer in the market today . the most common types of glass fiber used in fiberglass is e-glass , which is borosilicate glass with less than 1 % w/w alkali oxides , mainly used for glass-reinforced plastics . other types of glass used are a-glass ( alkali-lime glass with little or no boron oxide ) , e-cr-glass ( electrical/chemical resistance ; alumino-lime silicate with less than 1 % w/w alkali oxides , with high acid resistance ) , c-glass ( alkali-lime glass with high boron oxide content , used for glass staple fibers and insulation ) , d-glass ( borosilicate glass , named for its low dielectric constant ) , r-glass ( alumino silicate glass without mgo and cao with high mechanical requirements as reinforcement ) , and s-glass ( alumino silicate glass without cao but with high mgo content with high tensile strength ) . pure silica ( silicon dioxide ) , when cooled as fused quartz into a glass with no true melting point , can be used as a glass fiber for fiberglass , but has the drawback that it must be worked at very high temperatures . in order to lower the necessary work temperature , other materials are introduced as '' fluxing agents '' ( i.e . , components to lower the melting point ) . ordinary a-glass ( '' a '' for '' alkali-lime '' ) or soda lime glass , crushed and ready to be remelted , as so-called cullet glass , was the first type of glass used for fiberglass . e-glass ( '' e '' because of initial electrical application ) , is alkali free , and was the first glass formulation used for continuous filament formation . it now makes up most of the fiberglass production in the world , and also is the single largest consumer of boron minerals globally . it is susceptible to chloride ion attack and is a poor choice for marine applications . s-glass ( '' s '' for '' strength '' ) is used when high tensile strength ( modulus ) is important , and is thus important in composites for building and aircraft construction . the same substance is known as r-glass ( '' r '' for '' reinforcement '' ) in europe . c-glass ( '' c '' for '' chemical resistance '' ) and t-glass ( '' t '' is for '' thermal insulator '' – a north american variant of c-glass ) are resistant to chemical attack ; both are often found in insulation-grades of blown fiberglass . fiberglass . redorbit.com ( 2014-06-20 ) . retrieved on 2016-06-02 . . mechanical properties . the strength of glass is usually tested and reported for '' virgin '' or pristine fibers—those that have just been manufactured . the freshest , thinnest fibers are the strongest because the thinner fibers are more ductile . the more the surface is scratched , the less the resulting tenacity . because glass has an amorphous structure , its properties are the same along the fiber and across the fiber . humidity is an important factor in the tensile strength . moisture is easily adsorbed and can worsen microscopic cracks and surface defects , and lessen tenacity . in contrast to carbon fiber , glass can undergo more elongation before it breaks . thinner filaments can bend further before they break . hillermeier kh , melliand textilberichte 1/1969 , dortmund-mengede , pp . 26–28 , '' glass fiber—its properties related to the filament fiber diameter '' . the viscosity of the molten glass is very important for manufacturing success . during drawing , the process where the hot glass is pulled to reduce the diameter of the fiber , the viscosity must be relatively low . if it is too high , the fiber will break during drawing . however , if it is too low , the glass will form droplets instead of being drawn out into a fiber . manufacturing processes . melting . there are two main types of glass fiber manufacture and two main types of glass fiber product . first , fiber is made either from a direct melt process or a marble remelt process . both start with the raw materials in solid form . the materials are mixed together and melted in a furnace . then , for the marble process , the molten material is sheared and rolled into marbles which are cooled and packaged . the marbles are taken to the fiber manufacturing facility where they are inserted into a can and remelted . the molten glass is extruded to the bushing to be formed into fiber . in the direct melt process , the molten glass in the furnace goes directly to the bushing for formation . . formation . the bushing plate is the most important part of the machinery for making the fiber . this is a small metal furnace containing nozzles for the fiber to be formed through . it is almost always made of platinum alloyed with rhodium for durability . platinum is used because the glass melt has a natural affinity for wetting it . when bushings were first used they were 100 % platinum , and the glass wetted the bushing so easily that it ran under the plate after exiting the nozzle and accumulated on the underside . also , due to its cost and the tendency to wear , the platinum was alloyed with rhodium . in the direct melt process , the bushing serves as a collector for the molten glass . it is heated slightly to keep the glass at the correct temperature for fiber formation . in the marble melt process , the bushing acts more like a furnace as it melts more of the material . bushings are the major expense in fiber glass production . the nozzle design is also critical . the number of nozzles ranges from 200 to 4000 in multiples of 200 . the important part of the nozzle in continuous filament manufacture is the thickness of its walls in the exit region . it was found that inserting a counterbore here reduced wetting . today , the nozzles are designed to have a minimum thickness at the exit . as glass flows through the nozzle , it forms a drop which is suspended from the end . as it falls , it leaves a thread attached by the meniscus to the nozzle as long as the viscosity is in the correct range for fiber formation . the smaller the annular ring of the nozzle and the thinner the wall at exit , the faster the drop will form and fall away , and the lower its tendency to wet the vertical part of the nozzle . the surface tension of the glass is what influences the formation of the meniscus . for e-glass it should be around 400 & nbsp ; mn/m . the attenuation ( drawing ) speed is important in the nozzle design . although slowing this speed down can make coarser fiber , it is uneconomic to run at speeds for which the nozzles were not designed . . continuous filament process . in the continuous filament process , after the fiber is drawn , a size is applied . this size helps protect the fiber as it is wound onto a bobbin . the particular size applied relates to end-use . while some sizes are processing aids , others make the fiber have an affinity for a certain resin , if the fiber is to be used in a composite . size is usually added at 0.5–2.0 % by weight . winding then takes place at around 1 km/min . . staple fiber process . for staple fiber production , there are a number of ways to manufacture the fiber . the glass can be blown or blasted with heat or steam after exiting the formation machine . usually these fibers are made into some sort of mat . the most common process used is the rotary process . here , the glass enters a rotating spinner , and due to centrifugal force is thrown out horizontally . the air jets push it down vertically , and binder is applied . then the mat is vacuumed to a screen and the binder is cured in the oven . . safety . glass fiber has increased in popularity since the discovery that asbestos causes cancer and its subsequent removal from most products . however , the safety of glass fiber is also being called into question , as research shows that the composition of this material ( asbestos and glass fiber are both silicate fibers ) can cause similar toxicity as asbestos . 1970s studies on rats found that fibrous glass of less than 3 μm in diameter and greater than 20 μm in length is a '' potent carcinogen '' . likewise , the international agency for research on cancer found it '' may reasonably be anticipated to be a carcinogen '' in 1990 . the american conference of governmental industrial hygienists , on the other hand , says that there is insufficient evidence , and that glass fiber is in group a4 : '' not classifiable as a human carcinogen '' . the north american insulation manufacturers association ( naima ) claims that glass fiber is fundamentally different from asbestos , since it is man-made instead of naturally occurring . they claim that glass fiber '' dissolves in the lungs '' , while asbestos remains in the body for life . although both glass fiber and asbestos are made from silica filaments , naima claims that asbestos is more dangerous because of its crystalline structure , which causes it to cleave into smaller , more dangerous pieces , citing the u.s . department of health and human services : a 1998 study using rats found that the biopersistence of synthetic fibers after one year was 0.04–13 % , but 27 % for amosite asbestos . fibers that persisted longer were found to be more carcinogenic . . glass-reinforced plastic ( fiberglass ) . glass-reinforced plastic ( grp ) is a composite material or fiber-reinforced plastic made of a plastic reinforced by fine glass fibers . like graphite-reinforced plastic , the composite material is commonly referred to as fiberglass . the glass can be in the form of a chopped strand mat ( csm ) or a woven fabric . as with many other composite materials ( such as reinforced concrete ) , the two materials act together , each overcoming the deficits of the other . whereas the plastic resins are strong in compressive loading and relatively weak in tensile strength , the glass fibers are very strong in tension but tend not to resist compression . by combining the two materials , grp becomes a material that resists both compressive and tensile forces well . erhard , gunter . designing with plastics . trans . martin thompson . munich : hanser publishers , 2006 . the two materials may be used uniformly or the glass may be specifically placed in those portions of the structure that will experience tensile loads . . uses . uses for regular glass fiber include mats and fabrics for thermal insulation , electrical insulation , sound insulation , high-strength fabrics or heat- and corrosion-resistant fabrics . it is also used to reinforce various materials , such as tent poles , pole vault poles , arrows , bows and crossbows , translucent roofing panels , automobile bodies , hockey sticks , surfboards , boat hulls , and paper honeycomb . it has been used for medical purposes in casts . glass fiber is extensively used for making frp tanks and vessels . open-weave glass fiber grids are used to reinforce asphalt pavement . non-woven glass fiber/polymer blend mats are used saturated with asphalt emulsion and overlaid with asphalt , producing a waterproof , crack-resistant membrane . use of glass-fiber reinforced polymer rebar instead of steel rebar shows promise in areas where avoidance of steel corrosion is desired . . potential uses . glass fiber use has recently seen use in biomedical applications in the assistance of joint replacement electric field-assisted orientation of short phosphate glass fibers on stainless steel for biomedical applications qiang chen , jiajia jing , hongfei qi , ifty ahmed , haiou yang , xianhu liu , t . l . lu , and aldo r . boccaccini acs applied materials & interfaces 2018 10 ( 14 ) , 11529-11538 doi : 10.1021/acsami.8b01378 where the electric field orientation of short phosphate glass fibers can improve osteogenic qualities through the proliferation of osteoblasts and with improved surface chemistry . another potential use is within electronic applications nandi , s . , jaffee , a . m . , goya , k . f . , & dietz , a . g . ( 2019 ) . u.s . patent no . us10193138 . washington , dc : u.s . patent and trademark office . as sodium based glass fibers assist or replace lithium in lithium-ion batteries due to its improved electronic properties . role of recycling in glass fiber manufacturing . manufacturers of glass-fiber insulation can use recycled glass . recycled glass fiber contains up to 40 % recycled glass . new recycling effort aims to push kc to go green with its glass , kansas city star , october 14 , 2009 faqs about fiber glass insulation . north american insulation manufacturers association . see also . basalt fiber carbon fiber bs4994 composite materials fiberglass fiberglass molding filament tape gelcoat glass fiber reinforced concrete ( gfrc or grc ) glass microsphere glass poling glass wool optical fiber pele 's hair , naturally occurring glass fibre . quartz fiber . notes and references . external links . cdc – fibrous glass – niosh workplace safety and health topic fiberglass and health international geosynthetics society , information on geotextiles and geosynthetics in general .