Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond

birth and early life . left following the death of henry v of england , the queen dowager catherine of valois married owen tudor . the marriage was in secret , and was not common knowledge until after catherine 's death . it is accepted that catherine and owen were married around 1429/30 , as the queen stopped living in the household of her son henry vi , and owen was granted the rights of an englishman in the parliament of may 1432 . the children of catherine and owen were born away from court . their first son , edmund , was born at much hadham palace , hertfordshire . the manor house was owned by the bishop of london . in 1436 , his mother retired to bermondsey abbey , where she died on 3 january 1437 . with catherine dead , the queen 's enemies moved against owen . he was called to london , but was acquitted by the royal court of charges relating to the marriage . while en route to wales , he was arrested and imprisoned in newgate prison . after he escaped in early 1438 , he was recaptured and imprisoned once more in windsor castle . following the death of their mother and the imprisonment of their father , edmund and his brother jasper were brought up in the care of katherine de la pole , the daughter of michael de la pole , 2nd earl of suffolk , with whom they remained till at least march 1442 . henry vi began to take notice of his half-brothers by that point . he ensured that they were placed in the care of priests who oversaw their teaching . edmund , and his brother and father , were taken into henry 's royal household . henry was seemingly fond of his half brothers , and ennobled each of them with edmund becoming earl of richmond on 15 december 1449 , and jasper earl of pembroke on 23 november 1452 . earl of richmond . as earls , and recognised by court as the king 's half brothers , edmund and jasper had unparalleled precedence over all other non-clerics in the court , with the exception of the dukes . they were each given lands , although jasper received a yearly stipend until pembroke became available . after seven years of marriage to margaret of anjou , henry was still childless . after the death of humphrey , duke of gloucester , the royal line was at risk , and the tudor brothers were considered as possible heirs . there were concerns that while they were of french royal descent through catherine , they had no blood relation to the english throne . by 1452 , edmund and jasper were both among henry 's small group of personal advisers ; they were the only blood relations in court . however , neither was skilled at matters of state within england , and instead they were primarily given the task of ensuring the authority of the king within wales . this resulted in a long-held affection for the family in that country . the formal investiture of the duo took place in the tower of london on 5 january 1453 . later that year on 6 march , they took their seats in the parliament of england as the head of all the earls in the court . after a petition by the house of commons of england , both jasper and edmund were recognised officially as legitimate half-brothers of the king and the statutory disabilities associated with being considered welsh were removed . in 1452 and 1453 , henry gave them large monetary grants , and also gave edmund property in westmorland and lancashire . edmund ran a profitable estate and invested in the wool industry based out of boston , lincolnshire . henry also granted him the medieval palace of baynard 's castle , near to the river thames in london . the wars of the roses , marriage , and death . in the summer of 1453 , henry suffered a mental breakdown which lasted over 17 months . several parties sought to take power during this period . henry 's wife , margaret of anjou , demanded to be declared regent . the tudor brothers supported richard of york , who sought to become protector of the realm . however , edmund did not attend the parliament of 3 april 1454 where york was named protector . edmund did attend the council of advisors to the protector , although not as frequently as jasper . both brothers were in attendance in november 1445 , when the council reduced the size of the royal household . as a result , they each received an entourage of a chaplain , two esquires , two yeoman and two chamberlains . the king recovered around christmas of 1454 , and dismissed york , with resultant hostility . this left the tudor brothers in a quandary . edmund was not present when the wars of the roses began with the first battle of st albans on 22 may 1455 , where henry was captured by richard of york . both brothers attended the following parliament where york was once again named protector . while york cancelled the majority of the grants henry had made during his reign , those to edmund and jasper were exempt . both brothers were absent when the second session of parliament that year began on 12 november ; edmund had been sent to wales to put down the rebellion of gruffudd ap nicolas . margaret beaufort , was the daughter and only child of john beaufort , 1st duke of somerset . she was a descendant of john of gaunt 's eldest bastard son , john beaufort . as such she carried a claim to the throne . thus she was married as a child to john de la pole , son of the ambitious duke of suffolk . however , the duke was murdered in 1450 . in early 1453 , the marriage of margaret and john was annulled , and on 24 march edmund was given wardship of margaret , still only nine years old . edmund married margaret on 1 november 1455 at bletsoe castle . it was through margaret that edmund 's children could claim the english throne . the marriage was consummated immediately . edmund died a year later , leaving a 13-year-old widow who was seven months pregnant with their child , henry tudor . capture , captivity and death . right gruffudd made war with the troops under edmund , capturing the castles at aberystwyth , carmarthen and carreg cennen by june 1456 . the rebellion did n't last long , and by early august , edmund 's forces had retaken those castles although minor skirmishes continued for several months longer . while edmund was in wales , the king had deposed york . in retaliation , york sent 2,000 men under william herbert on 10 august to take south wales . when they arrived at carmarthen castle , they took the stronghold and captured edmund tudor . as herbert 's troops moved on to aberystwyth , edmund was left behind , imprisoned in carmarthen castle . on 3 november 1456 , edmund became infected with the bubonic plague and died there . he was buried at the nearby franciscan church in carmarthen . there were suspicions that edmund may have been murdered , and so a trial was held several months later with several parties accused , but no one was found guilty . edmund 's remains were removed to the choir of st david 's cathedral , pembrokeshire , in 1539 , due to the dissolution of the monasteries enacted by his grandson , king henry viii of england of the royal house of tudor . lineage . notes . references . -