Battle of Fleurus (1690)

background . in 1690 the main theatre of the nine years ' war moved to the spanish netherlands . command of french forces now passed to the talented marshal luxembourg ( a position he would keep until his death in 1695 ) , superseding marshal humières who had suffered defeat at the battle of walcourt the previous year . luxembourg 's army consisted of 34 battalions and 94 squadrons ; if necessary he could call upon support from marshal boufflers ’ forces on the moselle . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 205 once again king william entrusted allied forces in the region to prince waldeck ( william was himself busy in ireland forestalling king james ' attempt to regain his throne ) . in other theatres marshal de lorge commanded french forces in the rhineland , ( although the dauphin held honorific command ) . de lorge was opposed by the elector of bavaria , who had succeeded command of allied forces in the region after the death of charles of lorraine . meanwhile , nicolas catinat led the french forces in dauphiné against the duke of savoy , whilst marshal noailles commanded forces deployed on the border of catalonia . . prelude . prince waldeck had hoped to delay the campaign to enable the frederick i of prussia to move on the moselle and tie down boufflers , but luxembourg 's early manoeuvres had allowed boufflers to move between the rivers sambre and meuse to support the french commander . waldeck , meanwhile , left his assembly point at tienen ( tirlemont ) and advanced to wavre . after dispersing his troops to live off forage , the allied army reassembled and advanced to genappe on 8 june . in mid-june luxembourg split his forces . humières was relegated to supervise the garrison of the lines of the lys and the scheldt , whilst the main french army left deinze and marched south , crossing the river sambre at jeumont on 23 june . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 206 meanwhile , detachments from boufflers force under rubantel had augmented luxembourg 's army , which continued its march , camping at boussu on 27 june . as luxembourg manoeuvred south of mons and charleroi , waldeck moved his camp between nivelles and pieton on 28 june . that same evening , luxembourg personally led a detachment from gerpinnes ( together with bridging pontoons ) , to establish a crossing of the sambre at ham . a fortified position at froidmont ( garrisoned by about 100 men ) was soon compelled to surrender after artillery was brought across the river ; a simultaneous attack by french dragoons seized an enemy redoubt that had been abandoned at the approach of luxembourg 's army . with the bridgehead secure , the rest of the french army ( apart from the heavy baggage that had remained on the south bank at ham ) crossed the sambre on 30 june . ( see map ) . waldeck decamped and moved towards the french bridgehead . french and dutch cavalry sent out to reconnoitre the area crossed swords in an inconclusive action near fleurus , but by evening the french cavalry had withdrawn to velaine where it was joined by the rest of their army , only 3 & nbsp ; km ( luxembourg divided his forces to attack both flanks of the allied army – an audacious plan that in order for it to succeed would require secrecy and deception . the columns of the first french line split to take position between heppignies and fleurus , with some troops moving up towards st amant . the two columns of luxembourg 's right veered off to the north across the orme , their passage covered by the hedges and wheat fields , and by a screen of french cavalry . forty cannons were positioned near the chateau of st amant , and another 30 guns positioned between the chateau and fleurus . image : battle of fleurus , 1 july 1690.png thumb left 200px luxembourg divides his forces and attacks waldeck 's army on both flanks . unnoticed by waldeck , luxembourg had enveloped his flanks . had the allied commander realised that luxembourg had split his army in two , he might have overwhelmed the isolated french left before the right came into position , but he did not . after the french right wing was in position ( commanded by luxembourg himself ) , their artillery opened fire at about 10:00 , striking the allied infantry with great effect . the french left wing , commanded by lieutenant-general jean christophe , comte de gournay , opened their attack with a cavalry charge but gournay was killed in the assault ; his death disordered his cavalry who retired to fleurus to regroup . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 208 a cavalry charge on the right wing however , met with more success , driving the enemy cavalry back . on the heels of this attack , the french infantry now advanced against both flanks of waldeck 's line which , finding itself enveloped by the enemy , finally broke . some of the allied troops managed to regroup on high ground near fleurus , but were eventually overwhelmed . despite being pressed by french cavalry , waldeck was able to create a new line with his remaining forces further back . however , this line also collapsed , broken by french infantry flushed with confidence from their initial success . the remainder of waldeck 's troops streamed towards nivelles in the best order they could . . aftermath . the battle of fleurus was a complete success , but devoid of result . guizot : a popular history of france from the earliest times , volume v louvois , louis ’ war minister , wanted to order luxembourg to immediately besiege namur or charleroi , but louis , concerned about the dauphin 's forces on the rhine , ordered luxembourg to detach part of his forces and forgo a major siege . louvois objected , but king louis wanted to be sure that nothing ‘ disagreeable ’ happened to his son 's command . wolf : louis xiv , p . 560 nevertheless , luxembourg was able to put much of the land east of brussels under contribution . waldeck eventually retired on brussels where his injured troops were replaced with men from fortress garrisons . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 209 spanish troops under the marquis of gastañaga joined the main allied army , as did the count of tilly with troops from liège and brandenburg on 22 july . on 2 august , the elector of brandenburg 's forces combined with waldeck whose allied army now numbered 55,000 men . with this force , the allied army marched to genappe , proceeding on to nivelles on 7 august . the remainder of the campaign season in the spanish netherlands was relatively quiet . boufflers temporarily combined his forces with luxembourg , but in late august he returned to the area between the sambre and meuse rivers . after a series of minor skirmishes both the allies and the french returned to winter quarters in october ; luxembourg careful to station his men on enemy territory , while the allies quartered in and around maastricht . the hanoverians returned home while many from brandenburg and lüneburg found quarters in the fortresses of the spanish netherlands . lynn : the wars of louis xiv 1667–1714 , p . 210 . see also . trois burettes . notes . references . childs , john . warfare in the seventeenth century . cassell , ( 2003 ) . dupuy , r . e & dupuy , t . n . the collins encyclopaedia of military history 4th ed . harpercollins publishers , ( 1995 ) . françois guizot . a popular history of france from the earliest times , volume v . gutenberg.org lynn , john a . the french wars 1667–1714 : the sun king at war . osprey publishing , ( 2002 ) . lynn , john a . the wars of louis xiv , 1667–1714 . longman , ( 1999 ) . wolf , john b . louis xiv . panther books , ( 1970 ) .