Saw

terminology . abrasive saw : a saw that cuts with an abrasive disc or band , rather than a toothed blade . back : the edge opposite the toothed edge . fleam : the angle of the faces of the teeth relative to a line perpendicular to the face of the saw . gullet : the valley between the points of the teeth . heel : the end closest to the handle . kerf : the narrow channel left behind by the saw and ( relatedly ) the measure of its width . the kerf depends on several factors : the width of the saw blade ; the set of the blade 's teeth ; the amount of wobble created during cutting ; and the amount of material pulled out of the sides of the cut . although the term '' kerf '' is often used informally , to refer simply to the thickness of the saw blade , or to the width of the set , this can be misleading , because blades with the same thickness and set may create different kerfs . for example , a too-thin blade can cause excessive wobble , creating a wider-than-expected kerf . the kerf created by a given blade can be changed by adjusting the set of its teeth with a tool called a saw tooth setter . the kerf left behind by a laser beam can be changed based on the laser 's power and type of material being cut . points per inch ( 25 mm ) : the most common measurement of the frequency of teeth on a saw blade . it is taken by setting the tip ( or point ) of one tooth at the zero point on a ruler , and then counting the number of points between the zero mark and the one-inch mark , inclusive ( that is , including both the point at the zero mark and any point that lines up precisely with the one-inch mark ) . there is always one more point per inch than there are teeth per inch ( e.g . , a saw with 14 points per inch will have 13 teeth per inch , and a saw with 10 points per inch will have 9 teeth per inch ) . some saws do not have the same number of teeth per inch throughout their entire length , but the vast majority do . those with more teeth per inch at the toe are described as having incremental teeth , in order to make starting the saw cut easier . barley , simon '' british saws and saw makers from c1660 , 2014 rake : the angle of the front face of the tooth relative to a line perpendicular to the length of the saw . teeth designed to cut with the grain ( ripping ) are generally steeper than teeth designed to cut across the grain ( crosscutting ) set : the degree to which the teeth are bent out sideways away from the blade , usually in both directions . in most modern serrated saws , the teeth are set , so that the kerf ( the width of the cut ) will be wider than the blade itself . this allows the blade to move through the cut easily without binding ( getting stuck ) . the set may be different depending on the kind of cut the saw is intended to make . for example , a rip saw has a tooth set that is similar to the angle used on a chisel , so that it rips or tears the material apart . a '' flush-cutting saw '' has no set on one side , so that the saw can be laid flat on a surface and cut along that surface without scratching it . the set of the blade 's teeth can be adjusted with a tool called a saw set . teeth : sharp protrusions along the cutting side of the saw . teeth per inch : an alternative measurement of the frequency of teeth on a saw blade . usually abbreviated tpi , as in , '' a blade consisting of 18tpi . '' ( cf . points per inch . ) toe : the end farthest from the handle . toothed edge : the edge with the teeth ( on some saws both edges are toothed ) . web : a narrow saw blade held in a frame , worked either by hand or in a machine , sometimes with teeth on both edges . history . saws were at first serrated materials such as flint , obsidian , sea shells and shark teeth . p . d ' a . jones and e . n . simons , '' story of the saw '' spear and jackson limited 1760-1960 in ancient egypt , open ( unframed ) saws made of copper are documented as early as the early dynastic period , circa 3,100–2,686 bc . walter b . emery excavations at saqqara , the tomb of hemaka and hor-aha , cairo , government press , bulâq , 1938 ( 2 vols ) many copper saws were found in tomb no . 3471 dating to the reign of djer in the 31st century bc . the 1st dynasty tombs of saqqara in egypt by john watson saws have been used for cutting a variety of materials , including humans ( death by sawing ) . models of saws have been found in many contexts throughout egyptian history . particularly useful are tomb wall illustrations of carpenters at work that show sizes and the use of different types . egyptian saws were at first serrated , hardened copper which cut on both pull and push strokes . as the saw developed , teeth were raked to cut only on the pull stroke and set with the teeth projecting only on one side , rather than in the modern fashion with an alternating set . saws were also made of bronze and later iron . in the iron age , frame saws were developed holding the thin blades in tension . the earliest known sawmill is the roman hierapolis sawmill from the third century ad and was for sawing stone . according to chinese legend , the saw was invented by lu ban . lu ban and the invention of the saw history anecdote at cultural china website in greek mythology , as recounted by ovid , ovid metamorphoses bk viii:236-259 : the death of talos a . s . kline translation , electronic text center at university of virginia library talos , the nephew of daedalus , invented the saw . in archeological reality , saws date back to prehistory and most probably evolved from neolithic stone or bone tools . '' the identities of the axe , adz , chisel , and saw were clearly established more than 4,000 years ago . '' richard s . hartenberg , joseph a . mcgeough neolithic hand tools at encyclopædia britannica online . manufacture of saws by hand . once mankind had learned how to use iron , it became the preferred material for saw blades of all kinds ; some cultures learned how to harden the surface ( '' case hardening '' or '' steeling '' ) , prolonging the blade 's life and sharpness . steel , made of iron with moderate carbon content and hardened by quenching hot steel in water , was used as early as 1200 bc . jones & simons , story of the saw , p15 by the end of the 17th century european manufacture centred on germany , ( the bergisches land ) in london , and the midlands of england . most blades were made of steel ( iron carbonised and re-forged by different methods ) . moxon , j : mechanick exercises , p95-99 in the mid 18th century a superior form of completely melted steel ( '' crucible cast '' ) began to be made in sheffield , england , and this rapidly became the preferred material , due to its hardness , ductility , springiness and ability to take a fine polish . barley , simon , british saws and saw makers from c1660 , p7 a small saw industry survived in london and birmingham , but by the 1820s the industry was growing rapidly and increasingly concentrated in sheffield , which remained the largest centre of production , with over 50 % of the nation 's saw makers . barley , ibid p42 the us industry began to overtake it in the last decades of the century , due to superior mechanisation , better marketing , a large domestic market , and the imposition of high tariffs on imports . tweedale , g . , sheffield steel and america , ch 11 highly productive industries continued in germany and france . early european saws were made from a heated sheet of iron or steel , produced by flattening by several men simultaneously hammering on an anvil ( barley ibid p11 ) after cooling , the teeth were punched out one at a time with a die , the size varying with the size of the saw . the teeth were sharpened with a triangular file of appropriate size , and set with a hammer or a wrest ( moxon , ibid ) . by the mid 18th century rolling the metal was usual , the power for the rolls being supplied first by water , and increasingly by the early 19th century by steam engines . the industry gradually mechanized all the processes , including the important grinding the saw plate '' thin to the back '' by a fraction of an inch , which helped the saw to pass through the kerf without binding ( moxon , ibid , p95 ) . the use of steel added the need to harden and temper the saw plate , to grind it flat , to smith it by hand hammering and ensure the springiness and resistance to bending deformity , and finally to polish it ( barley ibid pp5–22 ) . most hand saws are today entirely made without human intervention , with the steel plate supplied ready rolled to thickness and tensioned before being cut to shape by laser . the teeth are shaped and sharpened by grinding and are flame hardened to obviate ( and actually prevent ) sharpening once they have become blunt . a large measure of hand finishing remains to this day for quality saws by the very few specialist makers reproducing the 19th century designs . pit saws . a pit saw was a two-man rip saw . in parts of early colonial north america , it was one of the principal tools used in shipyards and other industries where water-powered sawmills were not available . it was so-named because it was typically operated over a saw pit , either at ground level or on trestles across which logs that were to be cut into boards . the pit saw was '' a strong steel cutting-plate , of great breadth , with large teeth , highly polished and thoroughly wrought , some eight or ten feet in length '' charles w . upham salem witchcraft with an account of salem village and a history of opinions on witchcraft and kindred subjects . frederick unger , new york , 1978 ( reprint ) , 2 vols . , vol . 1 , p 191 with either a handle on each end or a frame saw . a pit-saw was also sometimes known as a whipsaw . glossary of tools at ( american ) pilgrim hall museum website it took 2-4 people to operate . a '' pit-man '' stood in the pit , a '' top-man '' stood outside the pit , and they worked together to make cuts , guide the saw , and raise it . massingham , h . j . , and thomas hennell . country relics ; an account of some old tools and properties once belonging to english craftsmen and husbandmen saved from destruction and now described with their users and their stories . cambridge , eng . : university press , 1939.reprint 2011 books.google.com/books ? id 6_auycccqoqc & pg pit-saw workers were among the most highly paid laborers in early colonial north america . types of saws . hand saws . hand saws typically have a relatively thick blade to make them stiff enough to cut through material . ( the pull stroke also reduces the amount of stiffness required . ) thin-bladed handsaws are made stiff enough either by holding them in tension in a frame , or by backing them with a folded strip of steel ( formerly iron ) or brass ( on account of which the latter are called '' back saws . '' ) some examples of hand saws are : artillery saw , chain saw , portable link saw : a flexible chain saw up to four feet long , supplied to the military for clearing tree branches for gun sighting ; butcher 's saw : for cutting bone ; many different designs were common , including a large one for two men , known in the usa as a beef-splitter ; most were frame saws , some backsaws ; crosscut saw : for cutting wood perpendicular to the grain ; docking saw : a large , heavy saw with an unbreakable metal handle of unique pattern , used for rough work farmer's/miner 's saw : a strong saw with coarse teeth ; felloe saw ; : the narrowest-bladed variety of pit saw , up to 7 feet long and able to work the sharp curves of cart wheel felloes ; a slightly wider blade , equally long , was called a stave saw , for cutting the staves for wooden casks ; floorboard/flooring saw : a small saw , rarely with a back , and usually with the teeth continued onto the back at the toe for a short distance ; used by house carpenters for cutting across a floor board without damaging its neighbour ; grafting/grafter/table saw ; a hand saw with a tapering narrow blade from 6 to 30 inches long ; the origins of the terms are obscure salaman , dictionary , p420 and 433 ice saw : either of pit saw design without a bottom tiller , or a large handsaw , always with very coarse teeth , for harvesting ice to be used away from source , or stored for use in warmer weather ; japanese saw or pull saw : a thin-bladed saw that cuts on the pull stroke , and with teeth of different design to european or american traditional forms ; keyhole/compass saw : a narrow-bladed saw , sharply tapered thin to the back to cut round curves , with one end fixed in a handle ; musical saw , a hand saw , possibly with the teeth filed off , used as a musical instrument . nest of saws : three or four interchangeable blades fitted to a handle with screws or quick-release nuts ; one-man cross cut saw : a coarse-toothed saw of 30-60 inches length for rough or green timber ; a second , turned , handle could be added at the heel or the toe for a second operator ; pad saw : a short narrow blade held in a wooden or metal handle ( the pad ) ; panel saw : a lighter variety of handsaw , usually less than 24 inches long and having finer teeth ; plywood saw : a fine-toothed saw ( to reduce tearing ) , for cutting plywood ; pruning saw : the commonest variety has a 12-28 inch blade , toothed on both edges , one tooth pattern being considerably coarser than the other ; rip saw : for cutting wood along the grain ; rule/combination saw ; a handsaw with a measuring scale along the back and a handle making a 90° square with the scaled edge ; salt saw : a short hand saw with a non-corroding zinc or copper blade , used for cutting a block of salt at a time when it was supplied to large kitchens in that form ; turkish/monkey saw : a small saw with a parallel-sided blade , designed to cut on the pull stroke ; two-man saw : a general term for a large crosscut saw or rip saw for cutting large logs or trees ; veneer saw : a two-edged saw with fine teeth for cutting veneer ; wire saw : a toothed or coarse cable or wire wrapped around the material and pulled back and forth . back saws . '' back saws '' which have a thin blade backed with steel or brass to maintain rigidity , are a subset of hand saws . back saws have different names depending on the length of the blade ; '' tenon saw '' ( from use in making mortise and tenon joints ) is often used as a generic name for all the sizes of woodworking backsaw . some examples are : bead saw/gent 's saw/jeweller 's saw : a small backsaw with a turned wooden handle ; blitz saw : a small backsaw , for cutting wood or metal , with a hook at the toe for the thumb of the non-dominant hand ; carcase saw : a term used until the 20th century for backsaws with long blades ; dovetail saw : a backsaw with a blade of length , for cutting intricate joints in cabinet making work ; electrician 's saw : a very small backsaw used in the early 20th century on the wooden capping and casing in which electric wiring was run ; flush-cutting saw/offset saw : a backsaw with a flat side and a handle offset toward the opposite side , usually reversible , for cutting flush to a surface such as a floor ; mitre-box saw : a saw with a blade long , held in an adjustable frame ( the mitre box ) for making accurate crosscuts and mitres in a workplace ; sash saw : a backsaw of blade length . frame saws . a class of saws for cutting all types of material ; they may be small or large and the frame may be wood or metal . bow saw , turning saw or buck saw : a saw with a narrow blade held in tension in a frame ; the blade can usually be rotated and may be toothed on both edges ; it may be a rip or a crosscut , and was the preferred form of hand saw for continental european woodworkers until superseded by machines ; coping saw : a saw with a very narrow blade held in a metal frame in which it can usually be rotated , for cutting wood patterns ; felloe saw ; a pit saw with a narrow tapering blade for sawing out the felloes of wooden cart wheels fretsaw : a saw with a very narrow blade which can be rotated , held in a deep metal frame , for cutting intricate wood patterns such as jigsaw puzzles ; girder saw : a large hack saw with a deep frame ; hacksaw/bow saw for iron : a fine-toothed blade held in a frame , for cutting metal , and other hard materials ; pit saw/sash saw/whip saw : large wooden framed saws for converting timber to lumber , with blades of various widths and lengths up to 10 feet ; the timber is supported over a pit or raised on trestles ; other designs are open bladed ; stave saw : a narrow tapering-bladed pit saw for sawing out staves for wooden casks ; surgeon's/surgical saw/bone cutter : for cutting bone during surgical procedures ; some designs are framed , others have an open blade with a characteristic shape of the toe . mechanically powered saws . . circular-blade saws . circular saw : a saw with a circular blade which spins . circular saws can be large for use in a mill or hand held up to 24 '' blades and different designs cut almost any kind of material including wood , stone , brick , plastic , etc . table saw : a saw with a circular blade rising through a slot in a table . if it has a direct-drive blade small enough to set on a workbench , it is called a '' workbench '' or '' jobsite '' saw . if set on steel legs , it is called a '' contractor 's saw . '' a heavier , more precise and powerful version , driven by several belts , with an enclosed base stand , is called a '' cabinet saw . '' a newer version , combining the lighter-weight mechanism of a contractor 's saw with the enclosed base stand of a cabinet saw , is called a '' hybrid saw . '' radial arm saw : a versatile machine , mainly for cross-cutting . the blade is pulled on a guide arm through a piece of wood that is held stationary on the saw 's table . rotary saw or '' spiral-cut saw '' or '' rotozip '' : for making accurate cuts , without using a pilot hole , in wallboard , plywood , and other thin materials . electric miter saw or '' chop saw , '' or '' cut-off saw '' or '' power miter box '' : for making accurate cross cuts and miter cuts . the basic version has a circular blade fixed at a 90° angle to the vertical . a '' compound miter saw '' has a blade that can be adjusted to other angles . a '' sliding compound miter saw '' has a blade that can be pulled through the work , in an action similar to that of a radial-arm saw , which provides more capacity for cutting wider workpieces . concrete saw : ( usually powered by an internal combustion engine and fitted with a diamond blade ) for cutting concrete or asphalt pavement . pendulum saw or '' swing saw '' : a saw hung on a swinging arm , for the rough crosscut saw of wood in a sawmill and for cutting ice out of a frozen river . abrasive saw : a circular or reciprocating saw-like tool with an abrasive disc rather than a toothed blade , commonly used for cutting very hard materials . as it does not have regularly shaped edges the abrasive saw is not a saw in technical terms . hole saw : ring-shaped saw to attach to a power drill , used for cutting a circular hole in material . reciprocating blade saws . dragsaw : for log bucking ( used before the invention of the chainsaw ) . frame saw or sash saw : a thin bladed rip-saw held in tension by a frame used both manually and in sawmills . some whipsaws are frame saws and some have a heavy blade which does not need a frame called a mulay or muley saw . ice saw : for ice cutting . looks like a mulay saw but sharpened as a cross-cut saw . jigsaw or '' saber saw '' ( us ) : narrow-bladed saw , for cutting irregular shapes . ( also an old term for what is now more commonly called a '' scroll saw . '' ) power hacksaw or electric hacksaw : a saw for cutting metal , with a frame like a normal hacksaw . reciprocating saw or '' sabre saw '' ( uk and australia ) : a saw with an '' in-and-out '' or '' up-and-down '' action similar to a jigsaw , but larger and more powerful , and using a longer stroke with the blade parallel to the barrel . hand-held versions , sometimes powered by compressed air , are for demolition work or for cutting pipe . scroll saw : for making intricate curved cuts ( '' scrolls '' ) . sternal saw : for cutting through a patient 's sternum during surgery . continuous band . band saw : a ripsaw on a motor-driven continuous band . portable sawmills are typically band saw mills . chainsaws . chainsaw : an engine-driven saw with teeth on a chain normally used as a cross-cut saw . chainsaw mill : a chainsaw with a special saw chain and guide system for use as a rip-saw . types of blades and blade cuts . most blade teeth are made either of tool steel or carbide . carbide is harder and holds a sharp edge much longer . ; band saw blade : a long band welded into a circle , with teeth on one side . compared to a circular-saw blade , it produces less waste because it is thinner , dissipates heat better because it is longer ( so there is more blade to do the cutting , and is usually run at a slower speed . ; crosscut : in woodworking , a cut made at ( or close to ) a right angle to the direction of the wood grain of the workpiece . a crosscut saw is used to make this type of cut . ; rip cut : in woodworking , a cut made parallel to the direction of the grain of the workpiece . a rip saw is used to make this type of cut . ; plytooth blade : a circular saw blade with many small teeth , designed for cutting plywood with minimal splintering . ; dado blade : a special type of circular saw blade used for making wide-grooved cuts in wood so that the edge of another piece of wood will fit into the groove to make a joint . some dado blades can be adjusted to make different-width grooves . a '' stacked '' dado blade , consisting of chipper blades between two dado blades , can make different-width grooves by adding or removing chipper blades . an '' adjustable '' dado blade has a movable locking cam mechanism to adjust the degree to which the blade wobbles sideways , allowing continuously variable groove widths from the lower to upper design limits of the dado . ; strobe saw blade : a circular saw blade with special rakers/cutters to easily saw through green or uncured wood that tends to jam other kinds of saw blades . materials used for saws . there are several materials used in saws , with each of its own specifications . ; brass : used only for the reinforcing folded strip along the back of backsaws , and to make the screws that in earlier times held the blade to the handle . ; iron : used for blades and for the reinforcing strip on cheaper backsaws until superseded by steel . ; zinc : used only for saws made to cut blocks of salt , as formerly used in kitchens ; copper : used as an alternative to zinc for salt-cutting saws ; steel : used in almost every existing kind of saw . because steel is cheap , easy to shape , and very strong , it has the right properties for most kind of saws . ; diamond : fixed onto the saw blade 's base to form diamond blade . as diamond is a superhard material , diamond saw blades can be used to cut hard brittle or abrasive materials , for example , stone , concrete , asphalt , bricks , ceramics , glass , semiconductor and gem stone . there are many methods used to fix the diamonds onto the blades ' base and there are various kinds of diamond saw blades for different purposes . ; high speed steel ( hss ) : the whole saw blade is made of high speed steel ( hss ) . hss saw blades are mainly used to cut steel , copper , aluminum and other metal materials . if high-strength steels ( e.g . , stainless steel ) are to be cut , the blades made of cobalt hss ( e.g . m35 , m42 ) should be used . ; tungsten carbide : normally , there are two ways to use tungsten carbide to make saw blades : : ; carbide-tipped saw blades : the saw blade 's teeth are tipped ( via welding ) with small pieces of sharp tungsten carbide block . this type of blade is also called tct ( tungsten carbide-tipped ) saw blade . carbide-tipped saw blades are widely used to cut wood , plywood , laminated board , plastic , glass , aluminum and some other metals . : ; solid-carbide saw blades : the whole saw blade is made of tungsten carbide . comparing with hss saw blades , solid-carbide saw blades have higher hardness under high temperatures , and are more durable , but they also have a lower toughness . uses . saws are commonly used for cutting hard materials . they are used extensively in forestry , construction , demolition , medicine , and hunting . musical saws are used as instruments to make music . chainsaw carving is a flourishing modern art form . special saws have been developed for the purpose . the production of lumber , lengths of squared wood for use in construction , begins with the felling of trees and the transportation of the logs to a sawmill . plainsawing : lumber that will be used in structures is typically plainsawn ( also called flatsawn ) , a method of dividing the log that produces the maximum yield of useful pieces and therefore the greatest economy . quarter sawing : this sawing method produces edge-grain or vertical grain lumber , in which annual growth rings run more consistently perpendicular to the pieces ' wider faces .