Montagnard (Vietnam)

ethnic groups . below is a list of officially recognized ethnic groups in vietnam that are indigenous to the central highlands and nearby areas , with a total population of approximately 2.25 million . they speak austroasiatic languages of the katuic and bahnaric , as well as chamic languages ( which belong to the austronesian languages ) . population statistics are from the 2009 vietnam population census . katuic speakers bru ( 2009 population : 74,506 ) : quảng trị province cơ tu ( 2009 population : 61,588 ) : quảng nam province tà ôi ( 2009 population : 43,886 ) : thừa thiên-huế province and quảng trị province bahnaric speakers west bahnaric brâu ( 2009 population : 397 ) : kon tum province east bahnaric co ( 2009 population : 33,817 ) : quảng ngãi province north bahnaric xơ đăng ( 2009 population : 169,501 ) : kon tum province and quảng nam province hrê ( 2009 population : 127,420 ) : quảng ngãi province rơ măm ( 2009 population : 436 ) : kon tum province central bahnaric ba na ( 2009 population : 227,741 ) : gia lai province and kon tum province giẻ triêng ( 2009 population : 50,962 ) : kon tum province and quảng nam province south bahnaric chơ ro ( 2009 population : 26,855 ) : đồng nai province cờ ho ( 2009 population : 166,112 ) : lâm đồng province mạ ( 2009 population : 41,405 ) : lâm đồng province x ’ tiêng ( 2009 population : 85,436 ) : bình phước province mnông ( 2009 population : 102,741 ) : đắk lắk province and đắk nông province chamic speakers chăm ( 2009 population : 161,729 ) : ninh thuận province and bình thuận province chu ru ( 2009 population : 19,314 ) : lâm đồng province ê đê ( 2009 population : 331,194 ) : đắk lắk province gia rai ( 2009 population : 411,275 ) : gia lai province ra glai ( 2009 population : 122,245 ) : ninh thuận province and khánh hòa province listed by province , from north to south as well as west to east : quảng trị province : bru ( katuic ) , tà ôi ( katuic ) thừa thiên-huế province : tà ôi ( katuic ) quảng nam province : cơ tu ( katuic ) , xơ đăng ( north bahnaric ) , giẻ triêng ( central bahnaric ) quảng ngãi province : hrê ( north bahnaric ) , co ( east bahnaric ) kon tum province : giẻ triêng ( central bahnaric ) , ba na ( central bahnaric ) , xơ đăng ( north bahnaric ) , rơ măm ( north bahnaric ) , brâu ( west bahnaric ) gia lai province : gia rai ( chamic ) , ba na ( central bahnaric ) đắk lắk province : ê đê ( chamic ) , mnông ( south bahnaric ) khánh hòa province : ra glai ( chamic ) đắk nông province : mnông ( south bahnaric ) lâm đồng province : chu ru ( chamic ) , mạ ( south bahnaric ) , cờ ho ( south bahnaric ) ninh thuận province : ra glai ( chamic ) , chăm ( chamic ) bình phước province : x ’ tiêng ( south bahnaric ) đồng nai province : chơ ro ( south bahnaric ) bình thuận province : chăm ( chamic ) . history . thumb in 1962 , the population of the montagnard people in the central highlands was estimated to number as many as one million . jackson , larry r . ( 1969 ) , '' the vietnamese revolution and the montagnards '' , asian survey , vol 9 , no . 5 , pp . 315-315 today , the population is approximately four million , of whom about one million are montagnards . the 30 or so montagnard tribes in the central highlands comprise more than six different ethnic groups who speak languages drawn primarily from the malayo-polynesian , tai , and austroasiatic language families . the main tribes , in order of population , are the jarai , rade , bahnar , koho , mnong , and stieng . the montagnard have a long history of tensions with the vietnamese majority . while the vietnamese are themselves heterogeneous , they generally share a common language and culture and have developed and maintained the dominant social institutions of vietnam . the montagnard do not share that heritage . there have been conflicts between the two groups over many issues , including land ownership , language and cultural preservation , access to education and resources , and political representation . originally inhabitants of the coastal areas of the region , they were driven to the uninhabited mountainous areas by the chams and cambodians beginning prior to the 9th century . since then , they lived independently in the mountains up until 19th century when the vietnamese began to incorporate the territory . french missionary converted some montagnard to the catholic church in the nineteenth century , but american missionaries converted more to protestantism in the 1930s . of the approximately one million montagnard , close to half are protestant , and around 200,000 are roman catholic . this made vietnam 's communist party suspicious of the montagnard , particularly during the vietnam war , since it was thought that they would be more inclined to help the predominantly christian american forces . in 1950 the french government established the central highlands as the pays montagnard du sud ( pms ) under the authority of vietnamese emperor bảo đại , whom the french had installed as nominal chief of state in 1949 as an alternative to ho chi minh 's north vietnam . in the mid-1950s , the once-isolated montagnard began experiencing more contact with outsiders after the vietnamese government launched efforts to gain better control of the central highlands and , following the 1954 geneva accord , new ethnic minorities from north vietnam moved into the area . as a result of these changes , montagnard communities felt a need to strengthen some of their own social structures and to develop a more formal shared identity . when the french withdrew from vietnam and recognized a vietnamese sovereignty , montagnard political independence was drastically diminished . vietnam war . image : f38 ( colorized ) . jpg thumb a u.s . army ranger trains montagnard guerrillas as the vietnam war began to loom on the horizon , both south vietnamese and american policy makers sought to begin training troops from minority groups in the vietnamese populace . the u.s . mission to saigon sponsored the training of the montagnard in unconventional warfare by american special forces . these newly trained montagnard were seen as a potential ally in the central highlands area to stop viet cong activity in the region and a means of preventing further spread of viet cong sympathy . later , their participation would become much more important as the ho chi minh trail , the north vietnamese supply line for viet cong forces in the south , grew . the u.s . military , particularly the special forces , developed base camps in the area and recruited the montagnard . because of their quiet resolve and skills in tracking , roughly 40,000 fought alongside american soldiers and became a major part of the u.s . military effort in the highlands and i corps , the northernmost region of south vietnam . the central highlands were greatly affected by bombings and herbicides from the united states during the war to stop materiel transportation on the ho chi minh trail . it is estimated that over 200,000 montagnards died and 85 % of their villages destroyed during the vietnam war . in 1958 , the montagnard launched a movement known as bajaraka ( the name is made up of the first letters of prominent tribes ; similar to the later nicaraguan contras ) to unite the tribes against the vietnamese . there was a related , well-organized political and ( occasionally ) military force within the montagnard communities known by the french acronym , fulro , or united front for the liberation of oppressed races . fulro 's objectives were autonomy for the montagnard tribes . in 1967 , the viet cong slaughtered 252 montagnard in the village of dak son , home to 2,000 highlanders , known as the đắk sơn massacre , in revenge for the montagnard 's support and allegiance with south vietnam . in 1975 , thousands of montagnard fled to cambodia after the fall of saigon to the north vietnamese army , fearing that the new government would launch reprisals against them because they had aided the u.s . army . the u.s . military resettled some montagnard in the united states , primarily in north carolina , but these evacuees numbered less than 2,000 . in addition , the vietnamese government has steadily displaced thousands of villagers from vietnam 's central highlands , to use the fertile land for coffee plantations . post vietnam war . purges from the people 's army of vietnam in 1976 and 1979 revealed that there were some montagnards in its senior positions . fulro continued the fight against the united vietnamese government , the insurgency last into the mid 1980s . vietnam 's south and center highlands were subjected to systematic state backed settlement by ethnic vietnamese kinh people . the original peoples of the central highlands experienced ruin during and after the vietnam war ; in the worst cases , they were driven from their land and became refugees . in february 2001 , thousands of montagnards participated in mass protests demanding returns of ancestral lands and religious freedom . other such protests took place in 2002 , 2004 , and 2008 . the protests involved marches and sit ins . the nearby government officials reacted with military involvement and police arrests . many montagnards such as the jarai were put on trial and imprisoned for years for their involvement in the protests . some montagnards residing in the united states also traveled to washington , d.c . to protest and bring awareness to the montagnards back in vietnam . persecuting '' evil way '' religion : abuses against montagnards in vietnam . , 2015 . internet resource . in 2003 , the group gained admittance to the unrepresented nations and peoples organization as the '' degar-montagnards '' , but this membership was discontinued in 2016 . outside of southeast asia , the largest community of montagnards in the world is located in greensboro , north carolina , us . greensboro is also the home of several community and lobbying organizations , such as the montagnard foundation , inc . see also . rhade people ( anak dagar ) khmer loeu lao theung thủy xá and hỏa xá dieu python movement list of ethnic groups in vietnam . references . books . sidney jones , malcolm smart , joe saunders , hrw . ( 2002 ) . repression of montagnards : conflicts over land and religion in vietnam 's central highlands . human rights watch . united states congress . senate . committee on foreign . ( 1998 ) . the plight of the montagnards : hearing before the committee on foreign relations , united states relations , original from the library of congress . further reading . georges condominas . we have eaten the forest : the story of a montagnard village in the central highlands of vietnam . new york : hill and wang , 1977 . montagnard foundation . human rights violations : montagnard foundation report , 2001 : report on the situation of human rights concerning the montagnards or degar peoples of vietnam 's central highlands . spartanburg , south carolina : the foundation , 2001 . montagnard foundation . history of the montagnard/degar people : their struggle for survival and rights before international law . spartanburg , south carolina : the foundation , 2001 . external links . degar foundation unpo website : degar-montagnards