Modern Orthodox Judaism

modern orthodoxy . modern orthodoxy comprises a fairly broad spectrum of movements each drawing on several distinct , though related , philosophies , which in some combination provide the basis for all variations of the movement today . characteristics . in general , modern orthodoxy 's '' overall approach . is the belief that one can and should be a full member of modern society , accepting the risks to remaining observant , because the benefits outweigh those risks '' . jews should engage constructively with the world that they are in to tikkun olam within both themselves and the larger community , such as by avoiding sin in their personal lives while also tzedakah . thus , modern orthodoxy holds that halakha is normative and binding , while simultaneously attaching a positive value to interaction with the modern world . in this view , as expressed by rabbi saul berman , rabbi saul j . berman , the ideology of modern orthodoxy orthodox judaism can '' be enriched '' by its intersection with modernity ; further , '' modern society creates opportunities to be productive citizens engaged in the divine work of tikkun olam '' . at the same time , in order to preserve the integrity of halakha , any area of '' powerful inconsistency and conflict '' between torah and modern culture must be filtered out . this includes modern orthodox 's unequivocal stance prohibiting its members from engaging in gay and lesbian relationships . there is , however , a difference of opinion as to what stance to take with individuals who violate halakha in this regard . see modern orthodoxy also assigns a central role to the '' people of israel '' . here two characteristics are manifest : in general , modern orthodoxy places a high national , as well as religious , significance on the state of israel , and institutions and individuals are , typically , zionist in orientation ; relatedly , involvement with non-orthodox jews will extend beyond '' outreach '' to include institutional relations and cooperation ; see further under torah umadda . other '' core beliefs '' are a recognition of the value and importance of secular studies ( see torah umadda torah and secular knowledge ) , a commitment to equality of education for both men and women , and a full acceptance of the importance of being able to financially support oneself and one 's family ( see torah im derech eretz earning a livelihood ) ; see below . ideological spectrum . the specific expression of modern orthodoxy , however , takes many forms , and particularly over the past 30-40 years , describes a political spectrum . william b . helmreich and reuel shinnar : modern orthodoxy in america : possibilities for a movement under siege among the issues have been the extent to which modern orthodoxy should cooperate with the more liberal denominations , support secular academic pursuits combined with religious learning , and embrace efforts to give women a larger role in jewish learning and worship ; the acceptability of modern textual criticism as a tool for torah study is also debated . rabbi david bigman : finding a home for critical talmud study , the edah journal 2:1 for further discussion , see orthodox judaism diversity ; joseph b . soloveitchik debate over world view ; torah im derech eretz interpretation . to the conservatism , the line between haredi and modern orthodox has blurred in recent years ; some have referred to this trend as '' haredization '' . in addition to increasing stringency in adherence to halakha , many modern orthodox jews express a growing sense of alienation from the larger , secular culture . ( '' western civilisation has moved from what was once called the judeo-christian ethic to a consumerism , choice-fixated culture . such a world is not chol , but chiloni , not secular , but secularist . it is impermeable to the values of q-d-š . '' chief rabbi dr . jonathan sacks . shattering the idols : the struggle for holiness in a secular age , jewish action , volume 62 no . 1 . ) here , '' the balance has tipped heavily in favor of torah over madda ( secular studies ) . and many have redefined 'madda ' as support for making one 's livelihood in the secular world , not culturally or intellectually engaging with it . '' although defining themselves as '' centrist '' , institutions here include the orthodox union ( union of orthodox jewish congregations of america ) , the rabbinical council of america , and the rabbi isaac elchanan theological seminary . ( see hardal . ) adherents on the ideological left have begun to develop new institutions that aim to be outward looking while maintaining a discourse between modernity and halakhah . the resultant '' open orthodoxy '' seeks to re-engage with secular studies , jews of all denominations and global issues . some within this movement have experimented with orthodox egalitarianism where gender equality solutions are found through halakhah . this has led to women taking on more leadership roles . others in this movement are increasingly re-engaging with social justice issues from a halakhic point of view . see yeshivat chovevei torah , shalom hartman institute , hebrew institute of riverdale , partnership minyan , shira hadasha , maharat . the behaviorally modern . it is also noted that many modern orthodox are '' behaviorally modern '' as opposed to '' ideologically modern '' , and , in truth , fall outside of '' modern '' orthodoxy , at least in the philosophical sense ; see below . this phenomenon is sometimes termed '' social orthodoxy '' . the distinction is as follows : the ideologically modern are '' meticulously observant of halakha '' , and their interaction with the secular comprises a tangible expression of their ideology , wherever it may lie on the spectrum described . the '' behaviorally modern '' , on the other hand , define themselves as '' modern orthodox '' only in the sense that they are neither haredi ( '' ultra-orthodox '' ) nor conservative : these , in other words , are '' not deeply concerned with philosophical ideas '' , and , often , are not as careful in their observance . this '' orthodoxy of convenience '' has maintained a certain stability over time : as long as these do n't seek to legitimize their behaviour in halakhic terms , the leadership of the ( modern ) orthodox world have no particular difficulty with them . . positioning . various highly differing views ( or non views ) - ranging from traditionalist to revisionist - are offered under the banner of '' modern orthodoxy '' . in fact , even among its leadership , there is limited agreement '' on the philosophical parameters of modern orthodoxy '' . the boundaries here , with respect to haredi and conservative judaism , have therefore become increasingly indistinct . at the same time , some elements of haredi judaism appear to be more receptive to messages that have traditionally been part of the modern-orthodox agenda . similarly , at modern orthodoxy 's left , many appear to align with more traditional elements of conservative judaism . in discussing '' modern orthodoxy '' , it is thus also important to clarify its position with reference to other movements in judaism : see comparison with other movements below . further , given this wide range of views , some see the possibility that , in fact , '' there is no longer a cohesive , singular modern orthodoxy '' ; see further below . philosophy . modern orthodoxy traces its roots to the works of rabbis azriel hildesheimer ( 1820–1899 ) and samson raphael hirsch ( 1808–1888 ) . while hildesheimer 's role is not disputed—comprising distinct philosophy and pragmatic contributions—hirsch 's role is less clear , with some hirsch scholars arguing that his '' torah im derech eretz '' philosophy is in fact at odds with that of modern orthodoxy ; see further below and in the hildesheimer article . today , the movement is additionally , and particularly , influenced by the philosophy of rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik and the closely related torah umadda , as well as by the writings of rabbi abraham isaac kook . ( religious zionism , strictly speaking a distinct philosophy , has an indirect influence . ) . torah im derech eretz . hirsch 's torah im derech eretz – '' torah with the 'way of the world'/society '' ) is a philosophy of orthodox judaism that formalizes a relationship between halakhically observant judaism and the modern world . hirsch held that judaism requires the application of torah philosophy to all human endeavor and knowledge compatible with it . thus , secular education becomes a positive religious duty . '' judaism is not a mere adjunct to life : it comprises all of life . in the synagogue and the kitchen , in the field and the warehouse , in the office and the pulpit . with the pen and the chisel . '' s . r . hirsch : '' religion allied to progress '' hirsch 's vision , although not unqualified , extended to the sciences as well as to ( german ) literature , philosophy and culture . torah im derech eretz remains influential to this day in all branches of orthodox judaism . neo orthodoxy , the movement descended from hirsch 's frankfurt community , regards itself as positioned , ideologically , outside of contemporary modern orthodoxy ; see further below . pragmatism . rabbi azriel hildesheimer , along with rabbi hirsch , was insistent that orthodox jews living in the west should not segregate themselves behind ghetto walls . on the contrary , modern jewish education must teach jews how best to confront and deal with modernity in all of its aspects . marc b . shapiro , rabbi esriel hildesheimer 's program of torah u-madda his approach , '' cultured orthodoxy '' , was defined as representing '' unconditional agreement with the culture of the present day ; harmony between judaism and science ; but also unconditional steadfastness in the faith and traditions of judaism '' . he was , however , '' the pragmatist rather than the philosopher '' , and it is his actions , rather than his philosophy , which have become institutionalized in modern orthodoxy , chaim i . waxman , dilemmas of modern orthodoxy : sociological and philosophical and through which his influence is still felt . he established jewish education for males and females , which included both religious and secular studies . he established hildesheimer rabbinical seminary , one of the first orthodox yeshiva incorporating jewish studies , secular studies , and academic scholarship in its curriculum . he was non-sectarian , and worked with communal leaders , even non-orthodox ones , on issues that affected the community . he maintained traditional attachments to the land of israel , and worked with the non-orthodox on its behalf . torah umadda . torah umadda – '' torah and secular knowledge '' ) is a philosophy concerning the secular world and judaism , and in particular secular knowledge and jewish knowledge . it envisions a personal—as opposed to philosophic— '' synthesis '' between torah scholarship and western , secular scholarship , entailing , also , positive involvement with the broader community . here , the '' individual has absorbed the attitudes characteristic of science , democracy , and jewish life , and responds appropriately in diverse relations and contexts '' . rabbi sol roth , the jewish idea of community the resultant mode of orthodox judaism is referred to as '' centrist orthodoxy '' . this philosophy , as formulated today , is to a large extent a product of the teachings and philosophy of rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik ( 1903–1993 ) , rosh yeshiva at yeshiva university . in rav soloveitchik 's thought , judaism , which believes that the world is '' very good '' , enjoins man to engage in tikkun olam . '' halakhic man '' must therefore attempt to bring the sanctity and purity of the transcendent realm into the material world . rabbi ronnie ziegler : introduction to the philosophy of rav soloveitchik : the need for action centrist orthodoxy is the dominant mode of modern orthodoxy in the united states , while torah umadda remains closely associated with yeshiva university . torah umadda is related to hirsch 's torah im derech eretz , but see below for a comparison between the two . religious zionism . modern orthodoxy draws on the teachings of rabbi abraham isaac kook ( 1864–1935 ) , as well as the writings and interpretations of his son rabbi zvi yehuda kook ( 1891–1982 ) , both as regards their views on jewish peoplehood and as they regard the ( related ) interaction with the secular world . '' rav kook '' saw zionism as a part of a divine scheme finally to result in the resettlement of the jewish people in its homeland , bringing salvation ( '' geula '' ) to the jewish people , and the entire world . in rav kook 's thought kodesh and chol ( sacred and profane ) play an important role : kodesh is the inner taam ( reason / meaning ) of reality , while chol is that which is detached from kodesh and is without any meaning ; judaism , then , is the vehicle '' whereby we sanctify our lives , and attach all the practical , secular elements of life to spiritual goals which reflect the absolute meaning of existence – g-d himself '' . rabbi hillel rachmani : introduction to the thought of rav kook in israel , the religious zionism of the dati leumi , '' national religious '' ) dominates modern orthodoxy . here too , the ideological basis is largely drawn from the teachings of rav kook , lisa richlen ( 2003 ) . , wzo.org.il and there is therefore much overlap ; philosophical differences , as well as other '' non-modern '' forms of religious zionism , are discussed below . : see also mizrachi ; bnei akiva ; national religious party ; hesder ; mechina ; gush emunim ; torat eretz yisrael . comparison with other movements . as above , modern orthodoxy comprises various approaches , ranging from traditionalist to revisionist , and the movement apparently overlaps with conservative judaism and with haredi judaism at its respective boundaries . at its centre too , the movement appears to share practices and values with neo orthodoxy and with religious zionism . therefore , in clarifying what modern orthodoxy in fact entails , its positioning must be discussed with reference to these movements . haredi judaism . : see also under centrist orthodoxy and divine providence for further elaboration of the differences discussed here . although there is some question as how precisely to define the distinction between modern orthodoxy and haredi judaism , there is basic agreement that they may be distinguished on the basis of three major characteristics : modern orthodoxy adopts a relatively inclusive stance toward society in general , and the larger jewish community in particular . modern orthodoxy is , in comparison , accommodating , '' if not welcoming '' , to modernity , general scholarship , and science . modern orthodoxy is almost uniformly receptive toward israel and zionism , viewing the state of israel ( in addition to the land of israel ) as having inherent religious significance . a fourth difference suggested , relates to the acceptability of moderation within halakha . both modern orthodoxy and ultra orthodoxy regard halakha as divine in origin , and as such , no position is assumed without justification in the shulchan aruch and in the acharonim . the movements differ , however , in their approach to strictures ( chumras ) and leniencies ( kulas ) . modern orthodoxy holds that strictures are not normative , rather , these are a matter of personal choice ; rabbi saul berman ( edah.org ) : diverse orthodox attitudes : chumrah '' severity and leniency are relevant only in circumstances of factual doubt , not in situations of debate or varied practice . in the latter situations , the conclusion should be based solely on the legal analysis . '' ( note though , that in recent years , many modern orthodox jews are described as '' increasingly stringent in their adherence to jewish law '' . michael kress , the state of orthodox judaism today ) see torah umadda moderation . in the haredi view , on the other hand , '' the most severe position . is the most likely basis for unity and commonality of practice within the orthodox community , and is therefore to be preferred '' . further , '' such severity . results in the greatest certainty that god 's will is being performed '' . see also , mesillat yesharim ch 14 haredi judaism thus tends to adopt chumras as a norm . as to the contention that modern orthodoxy 's standards of observance of halakha are '' relaxed '' , as opposed to moderate , see below under criticism . modern orthodoxy 's efforts to encourage religious observance among non-orthodox jews has been likened to similar efforts by the chabad movement . the similarity between the two groups in their relationships towards the non-orthodox , and its adoption by some haredi groups , has blurred the lines between the modern and haredi segments of orthodoxy . ferziger , adam s . '' church/sect theory and american orthodoxy reconsidered '' . ambivalent jew - charles s . liebman in memoriam , ed . stuart cohen and bernard susser ( 2007 ) : 107-124 . . neo-orthodoxy/torah im derech eretz . both modern orthodoxy and neo orthodoxy , the movement directly descended from hirsch 's frankfurt community , have combined torah and secular knowledge with participation in contemporary western life , and thus some maintain that there is a degree of practical and philosophical overlap between the two . the movements are nevertheless distinct , and in general , neo-orthodoxy has taken a more qualified approach than modern orthodoxy , emphasizing that followers must exercise caution in engagements with the secular world . differences between the movements may be more than a question of degree : some hirsch scholars argue that hirschian philosophy is at odds with that of modern orthodoxy , see , for example : joseph elias ' introduction to the nineteen letters . feldheim , 1995 . while some modern orthodox scholars maintain that modern orthodoxy accords with hirsch 's worldview . see , for example : norman lamm torah umadda : the encounter of religious learning and worldly knowledge in the jewish tradition . jason aronson , 1994 . these philosophical distinctions ( though subtle ) , manifest in markedly divergent religious attitudes and perspectives . for example , shimon schwab , second rabbi of the torah im derech eretz community in the united states , has been described as being '' spiritually very distant '' from yeshiva university and modern orthodoxy . from the viewpoint of neo-orthodoxy , that movement differs from modern orthodoxy ( and particularly centrist orthodoxy ) on three main counts . others claim that these distinctions -save the last one - are unclear and/or unsubstantiated given the selective nature of the evidence . the role of secular life and culture : in the hirschian view , interaction with the secular and the requisite acquisition of culture and knowledge is encouraged , only insofar as it facilitates the application of torah to worldly matters . for modern orthodoxy , on the other hand , secular culture and knowledge are seen as a complement to torah , and , to some extent , encouraged for their own sake . some would suggest that in modern orthodoxy , judaism is enriched by interaction with modernity , whereas in neo-orthodoxy human experience ( and modernity ) are enriched by the application of torah outlook and practice . priority of torah versus secular knowledge : in the hirschian view , torah is the '' sole barometer of truth '' by which to judge secular disciplines , as '' there is only one truth , and only one body of knowledge that can serve as the standard . compared to it , all the other sciences are valid only provisionally . '' ( hirsch , commentary to leviticus 18:4–5 ; see also rashi ad loc . ) . by contrast , in the view of modern orthodoxy , although torah is the '' preeminent center '' , secular knowledge is considered to offer '' a different perspective that may not agree at all with torah . but both together present the possibility of a larger truth '' . ( torah umadda , p . & nbsp ; 236 ) . broader communal involvement : neo-orthodoxy , influenced by hirsch 's philosophy on austritt ( secession ) , '' could not countenance recognition of a non-believing body as a legitimate representative of the jewish people '' , and is therefore opposed to the mizrachi movement , which is affiliated with the world zionist organization and the jewish agency . ernst j . bodenheimer and nosson scherman rabbi joseph breuer : the rav of frankfurt , u.s.a . modern orthodoxy , on the other hand , is characterised by its involvement with the broader jewish community and by its religious zionism . religious zionism . broadly defined , religious zionism is a movement that embraces the idea of jewish national sovereignty , often in connection with the belief in the ability of the jewish people to bring about a redemptive state through natural means , and often attributing religious significance to the modern state of israel . the spiritual thinkers who started this stream of thought include rabbi zvi hirsch kalischer ( 1795–1874 ) and rabbi yitzchak yaacov reines ( 1839–1915 ) . ( this attitude is rejected by most haredim—but not all , particularly the hardal movement . ) thus , in this sense , religious zionism in fact encompasses a wide spectrum of religious views including modern orthodoxy . note , however , that modern orthodoxy , in fact , overlaps to a large extent with mizrachi ( religious zionism ) ( '' throughout the world , a 'religious zionist day school ' is a synonym for a 'modern orthodox day school ' '' . ) . at the least , the two are not in any direct conflict , and generally coexist , sharing both values and adherents . further , in practice , except at their extremes , the differences between religious zionism and modern orthodoxy in israel are not pronounced , and they are often identical , especially in recent years and for the younger generation . . nevertheless , the two movements are philosophically distinct on two broad counts . firstly , ( chardal ) religious zionists differ with modern orthodoxy in its approach to secular knowledge . . here , engagement with the secular is permissible , and encouraged , but only insofar as this benefits the state of israel ; secular knowledge ( or , at the least , an extensive secular education ) is viewed as valuable for practical ends , though not in and of itself . see further under torah umadda . secondly , under religious zionism , a '' nationalistic coloration '' is given to traditional religious concepts , whereas , by contrast , modern orthodoxy includes '' a greater balance which includes openness to the non-jewish world '' ; thus , under religious zionism , the jewish nation is conceived of as an '' organic unity '' , whereas modern orthodoxy emphasises the individual . applying the above distinction , in israel today , modern orthodoxy—as distinct from ( right-wing ) religious zionism—is represented by only a select group of institutions : the religious kibbutz movement , ne'emanei torah va'avodah , . the meimad political party , and the shalom hartman institute , yeshivat har etzion / migdal oz and yeshivat hamivtar/ohr torah stone institutions/midreshet lindenbaum ( some would include yeshivat hesder petach tikva , yeshivat ma'ale gilboa , and the tzohar foundation . ) . conservative judaism . in some areas , modern orthodoxy 's left wing appears to align with more traditional elements of conservative judaism , and in fact some on the left of modern orthodoxy have allied with the formerly conservative union for traditional judaism . nonetheless , the two movements are generally described as distinct . rabbi avi weiss , from the left of modern orthodoxy , stresses that orthodox and conservative judaism are '' so very different in . three fundamental areas : torah mi-sinai , rabbinic interpretation , and rabbinic legislation '' . avraham weiss : judaism ; fall 1997 weiss argues as follows : torah mi-sinai ( '' torah from sinai '' ) : modern orthodoxy , in line with the rest of orthodoxy , holds that jewish law is divine in origin , and as such , no underlying principle may be compromised in accounting for changing political , social or economic conditions , see for example , rabbi aryeh kaplan , the rules of halacha . whereas conservative judaism holds that posek should make use of literary and historical analysis in deciding jewish law , and may reverse decisions of the acharonim that are held to be inapplicable today . rabbinic interpretation : ( modern ) orthodoxy contends that legal authority is cumulative , and that a contemporary posek ( decisor ) can only issue judgments based on a full history of jewish legal precedent , whereas the implicit argument of the conservative movement is that precedent provides illustrations of possible positions rather than binding law . conservatism , therefore , remains free to select whichever position within the prior history appeals to it . rabbi professor david golinkin : the hows and whys of conservative halakhah rabbinic legislation : since the ( modern ) orthodox community is ritually observant , rabbinic law legislated by ( today 's ) orthodox rabbis can meaningfully become binding if accepted by the community ( see minhag ) . conservative judaism , on the other hand , has a largely non-observant laity . according to the 1990 national jewish population survey , 29 % of conservative congregants buy only kosher meat and 15 % consider themselves shomer shabbat . according to the 2001 survey , 30 % keep kosher at home and 50 % light shabbat candles . see also : sacred cluster 6 , jtsa.edu and conservative halakha . thus , although conservatism similarly holds that '' no law has authority unless it becomes part of the concern and practice of the community '' elliott n dorff : '' how conservative judaism makes decisions in jewish law halakha '' communal acceptance of a '' permissive custom '' is not '' meaningful '' , and , as a result , related rabbinic legislation can not assume the status of law . in general , modern orthodoxy does not , therefore , view the process by which the conservative movement decides halakha as legitimate—or with the non-normative weighting assigned to particular halakha by the conservative movement . in particular , modern orthodoxy disagrees with many of conservative judaism 's halakhic rulings , particularly as regards issues of egalitarianism . see further on the orthodox view and the conservative view . modern orthodoxy clearly differs from the approach of reform judaism and humanistic judaism , which do not consider halakha to be normative . criticism . this section deals with criticism relating to standards of observance and to social issues . see '' criticism '' under torah umadda for discussions of philosophy . standards of observance . there is an often repeated contention that modern orthodoxy—beyond its approach to chumrahs ( '' strictures '' ) described above—has lower standards of observance of halakha than other branches of orthodox judaism . see for example , what is modern orthodox ? -hashkafah.com . this view is largely anecdotal , and is based on individual behaviour , as opposed to any formal , institutional position ; see above : additionally , whereas the modern orthodox position is ( generally ) presented as '' unquestioned allegiance to the primacy of torah , and that the apprehension of all other intellectual disciplines must be rooted and viewed through the prism of torah '' , haredi groups have sometimes compared modern orthodoxy with early reform judaism in germany : modern orthodox rabbis have been criticised for attempting to modify halakha , in adapting judaism to the needs of the modern world . note that claims of this nature have been commonplace within orthodox judaism since the first '' reforms '' of samson raphael hirsch and azriel hildesheimer . thus , in europe of the early 19th century , all of judaism that differed from the strictest forms present at the time was called '' reform '' . then , as now , modern orthodoxy took pains to distance its '' reforms '' , which were consistent with the shulkhan arukh and poskim , from those of the reform movement ( and the conservative movement ) , which were not . sociological and philosophical dilemmas . some observe that the ability of modern orthodoxy to attract a large following and maintain its strength as a movement is inhibited by the fact that it embraces modernity—its raison d'être—and that it is highly rational and intellectual . modern orthodoxy is , almost by definition , inhibited from becoming a strong movement , because this would entail organization and authority to a degree '' which goes against the very grain of modernity '' . a related difficulty is that modern orthodox rabbis who do adopt stringencies may , in the process , lose the support of precisely the '' modern '' group they sought to lead . the logic : since one of the characteristics of orthodoxy is the submission to the authority of oral law , the individual is expected to conform to all of its dictates , whereas modernity , by contrast , emphasizes a measure of personal autonomy as well as rationalist truth . the very term '' modern orthodoxy '' is thus , in some sense , an oxymoron . modern orthodoxy 's '' highly intellectual and rational stance '' presents its own difficulties . firstly , the ideology entails built-in tensions and frequently requires conscious living with inconsistency ( even in the term itself : modernity vs . orthodoxy ) . secondly , there are also those who question whether '' the literature . with its intellectually elitist bias fails to directly address the majority of its practitioners '' . rabbi prof . alan brill , judaism in culture : beyond the bifurcation of torah and madda . the suggestion here is that modern orthodoxy may not provide a directly applicable theology for the contemporary modern orthodox family ; see further discussion under torah umadda . as observed above , the ( precise ) '' philosophical parameters of modern orthodoxy '' are not readily defined . it is posited then that '' modern orthodoxy '' , as such , may be disappearing , '' being sucked into pluralistic judaism on the left and yeshivish on the right '' . this tongue in cheek comment is from frumsatire.net ; although see shmuel hain in note . '' modern orthodoxy '' , then , as opposed to constituting an ideological spectrum centred on a common core of values , is , in fact , ( tending towards ) several entirely separate movements . in fact , '' many are making the argument that the time has come to state the inevitable or to admit that which already has occurred : there is no longer a cohesive , singular modern orthodoxy . separate rabbinical schools and separate rabbinic organizations , the argument goes , reflect the reality of a community divided . '' shmuel hain : op-ed : the vital center and modern orthodoxy , jta.org see . important figures . many orthodox jews find the intellectual engagement with the modern world as a virtue . examples of orthodox rabbis who promote or have promoted this worldview include : rabbi yehuda amital – a hungarian survivor of the holocaust , rabbi amital emigrated to israel in 1944 , and resumed his yeshiva studies in jerusalem . during the war of independence , he served in the hagana armored corps , taking part in the famous battle of latrun . subsequently , he took an active role in the development of yeshivat hadarom , where he was involved in the formulation of the idea of yeshivat hesder . following the six day war , rabbi amital founded and assumed leadership of yeshivat har etzion . he was a dominant public figure in israel who was widely respected on matters of religious and national concern . raymond apple – former senior rabbi of the great synagogue , sydney , australia , and the pre-eminent jewish spokesperson on judaism in australia . dr . samuel belkin , former president of yeshiva university eliezer berkovits – philosopher , author of many works including not in heaven : the nature and function of halakha and faith after the holocaust . saul berman – director of the now defunct edah , a modern orthodox advocacy organization . rabbi dr . j . david bleich , professor at yeshiva university and expert in jewish law rabbi dr . shalom carmy – professor of jewish studies and philosophy at yeshiva university ; a prominent modern orthodox theologian and student of the rav rabbi chuck davidson , an activist against the chief rabbinate of israel , specifically in the areas of conversion and marriage , where he is creating rogue alternatives to the official paths . dr . barry freundel – former rabbi of kesher israel congregation in washington , d.c . , his specialties were jewish medical ethics , eruvim , and conversion ; he was fired in 2014 after being arrested and subsequently pleaded guilty to 52 counts of voyeurism . because of his crimes he is no longer considered an authority within the community rabbi dr . irving greenberg ( yitz ) is a theologian , lecturer , and author of contemporary jewish thought . a student of rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik , greenberg espouses the philosophy of tikkun olam and has written extensively on the theological impact of the holocaust and the creation of the state of israel . rabbi david hartman – rabbi and founder of shalom hartman institute in jerusalem , a prominent philosopher , lecturer , and author , and a student of rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik rabbi leo jung , rabbi at the jewish center ( manhattan , new york ) rabbi norman lamm – rosh yeshiva , yeshiva university ; orthodox forum ; author of torah u-maddah . one of the leading voices for the validity and importance of modern orthodoxy . rabbi dr . aharon lichtenstein – lichtenstein grew up in the united states , earning semicha at yeshiva university , and a ph.d . in english literature at harvard . he is committed to intensive and original torah study , and articulates a bold jewish worldview that embraces modernity , reflecting the tradition of his teacher and father-in-law , rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik . in 1971 , lichtenstein answered rabbi amital 's request to join him at the helm of yeshivat har etzion . he is a source of inspiration for a wide circle of jewry , for both his educational attainments and his intellectual leadership . author of leaves of faith : the world of jewish learning , and by his light : character and values in the service of god . rabbi haskel lookstein – rabbi of congregation kehilath jeshurun in manhattan and principal of the ramaz school . voted by newsweek magazine as the most influential orthodox rabbi in the united states in 2008 . rabbi lookstein is best known for his strong political activism , which began with numerous visits to the former soviet union , numerous rallies on behalf of natan sharansky and continues today with activism on behalf of the jews of israel and worldwide . rabbi shlomo riskin – formerly rabbi of the lincoln square synagogue in manhattan , he emigrated to israel to become the chief rabbi of efrat . rabbi jonathan sacks , noted philosopher and theologian , author of 25 books , and previous chief rabbi of the commonwealth ; see esp . torah v'chokhma there , re modern orthodoxy . hershel schachter – one of rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik 's most prominent students , dean of the katz kollel at the yeshiva university-affiliated rabbi isaac elchanan theological seminary ( riets ) . has published several works attempting to establish a definitive view of rabbi soloveitchik 's weltanschauung . rabbi joseph b . soloveitchik – known as '' the rav '' , he was effectively the spiritual and intellectual guide of modern orthodoxy in america for the mid-20th century . he is the author of the lonely man of faith and halakhic man , an outspoken zionist , an opponent of extending rabbinic authority into areas of secular expertise , and a proponent of some interdenominational cooperation , such as the rabbinical council of america 's participation in the now-defunct synagogue council of america . he was known as a stern leader who described in his writings the spiritual loneliness and internal isolation of the modern religious '' man of faith '' . harav gedalia dov schwartz – an eminent modern orthodox rabbi , scholar , and posek ( halakhic authority ) in chicago , illinois . since 1991 , he has been the av beis din ( head of the rabbinical court ) of both the beth din of america and the chicago rabbinical council . rav dr . moshe david tendler – rav tendler is the rabbi isaac and bella tendler professor of jewish medical ethics , and is a professor of biology , as well as being a rosh yeshiva in yeshivat rav yitzchak elchanan ( myp/riets ) . holding a ph.d . in microbiology , rav tendler is among the most prominent students of both rav moshe feinstein , zt ' l ( his father-in-law ) and rav yosef dov soloveitchik . rabbi tendler is an expert on medical ethics as it pertains to jewish law . he is the author of practical medical halakhah , a textbook of jewish responsa to medical issues , and '' pardes rimonim '' , a book about the halakhot of taharat mishpacha . rabbi tendler is currently rabbi of the community synagogue in monsey , new york , and is the chairman of the bioethical commission , rca , and of the medical ethics task force , uja-federation of greater new york . joseph telushkin – author , teacher , lecturer marc b . shapiro – author , lecturer stanley m . wagner – american rabbi and academic joel b . wolowelsky – yeshiva of flatbush ; orthodox forum ; tradition ; meotzar horav rabbi walter wurzburger – former pulpit rabbi , editor of tradition magazine , and head of the rca dr . pinchas polonsky – jewish-religious philosopher , researcher , and educator active among the russian-speaking jewish community . modern orthodox advocacy groups . there are a few organizations dedicated to furthering modern orthodoxy as a religious trend : the largest and oldest are the orthodox union ( union of orthodox jewish congregations of america ) , which sponsors youth groups , kashrut supervision , and many other activities , and its rabbinic counterpart , the rabbinical council of america ( rca ) . both have israel and diaspora ( outside the land of israel ) programs . others include : meimad is a political/intellectual alternative to israel 's highly nationalistic religious parties or those hostile to modern secularist values the jewish orthodox feminist alliance ( jofa ) : a forum for enhancing the roles of orthodox jewish women within the orthodox community , and reducing orthodox religious disabilities against women . ne'emanei torah va'avodah is a non-profit organization operating in israel whose proposed goal is '' to forge a more open and tolerant discourse in religious zionism , one that integrates a halachic lifestyle with active engagement in israeli society , in order to strengthen tolerance , equality , and social responsibility '' . see also . bar-ilan university hebrew theological college hebrew university of jerusalem jerusalem college of technology touro college religious zionism yeshiva university young israel . notes .