Cartilage

structure . development . in embryogenesis , the skeleton system is derived from the mesoderm germ layer . chondrification ( also known as chondrogenesis ) is the process by which cartilage is formed from condensed mesenchyme tissue , which differentiates into chondroblasts and begins secreting the molecules ( aggrecan and collagen type ii ) that form the extracellular matrix . following the initial chondrification that occurs during embryogenesis , cartilage growth consists mostly of the maturing of immature cartilage to a more mature state . the division of cells within cartilage occurs very slowly , and thus growth in cartilage is usually not based on an increase in size or mass of the cartilage itself . it has been identified that non-coding rnas ( e.g . mirnas and long non-coding rnas ) as the most important epigenetic modulators can affect the chondrogenesis . this also justifies the non-coding rnas ' contribution in various cartilage-dependent pathological conditions such as arthritis , and so on . . articular cartilage . the articular cartilage function is dependent on the molecular composition of the extracellular matrix ( ecm ) . the ecm consists mainly of proteoglycan and collagens . the main proteoglycan in cartilage is aggrecan , which , as its name suggests , forms large aggregates with hyaluronan . these aggregates are negatively charged and hold water in the tissue . the collagen , mostly collagen type ii , constrains the proteoglycans . the ecm responds to tensile and compressive forces that are experienced by the cartilage . cartilage growth thus refers to the matrix deposition , but can also refer to both the growth and remodeling of the extracellular matrix . due to the great stress on the patellofemoral joint during resisted knee extension , the articular cartilage of the patella is among the thickest in the human body . function . mechanical properties . the mechanical properties of articular cartilage in load-bearing joints such as the knee and hip have been studied extensively at macro , micro , and nano-scales . these mechanical properties include the response of cartilage in frictional , compressive , shear and tensile loading . cartilage is resilient and displays viscoelastic properties . . frictional properties . lubricin , a glycoprotein abundant in cartilage and synovial fluid , plays a major role in bio-lubrication and wear protection of cartilage . . repair . cartilage has limited repair capabilities : because chondrocytes are bound in lacunae , they can not migrate to damaged areas . therefore , cartilage damage is difficult to heal . also , because hyaline cartilage does not have a blood supply , the deposition of new matrix is slow . over the last years , surgeons and scientists have elaborated a series of articular cartilage repair that help to postpone the need for joint replacement . a tear of meniscus of the knee cartilage can often be surgically trimmed to reduce problems . biological engineering techniques are being developed to generate new cartilage , using a cellular '' scaffolding '' material and cultured cells to grow artificial cartilage . international cartilage repair society icrs . clinical significance . disease . several diseases can affect cartilage . chondropathy are a group of diseases , characterized by the disturbance of growth and subsequent ossification of cartilage . some common diseases that affect the cartilage are listed below . osteoarthritis : osteoarthritis is a disease of the whole joint , however , one of the most affected tissues is the articular cartilage . the cartilage covering bones ( articular cartilage—a subset of hyaline cartilage ) is thinned , eventually completely wearing away , resulting in a '' bone against bone '' within the joint , leading to reduced motion , and pain . osteoarthritis affects the joints exposed to high stress and is therefore considered the result of '' wear and tear '' rather than a true disease . it is treated by arthroplasty , the replacement of the joint by a synthetic joint often made of a stainless steel alloy ( cobalt chromoly ) and ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene ( uhmwpe ) . chondroitin sulfate or glucosamine supplements , have been claimed to reduce the symptoms of osteoarthritis , but there is little good evidence to support this claim . traumatic rupture or detachment : the cartilage in the knee is frequently damaged but can be partially repaired through knee cartilage replacement therapy . often when athletes talk of damaged '' cartilage '' in their knee , they are referring to a damaged meniscus ( a fibrocartilage structure ) and not the articular cartilage . achondroplasia : reduced proliferation of chondrocytes in the epiphyseal plate of long bones during infancy and childhood , resulting in dwarfism . costochondritis : inflammation of cartilage in the ribs , causing chest pain . spinal disc herniation : asymmetrical compression of an intervertebral disc ruptures the sac-like disc , causing a herniation of its soft content . the hernia often compresses the adjacent nerves and causes back pain . relapsing polychondritis : a destruction , probably autoimmune , of cartilage , especially of the nose and ears , causing disfiguration . death occurs by asphyxia as the larynx loses its rigidity and collapses . tumors made up of cartilage tissue , either benign or cancer , can occur . they usually appear in bone , rarely in pre-existing cartilage . the benign tumors are called chondroma , the malignant ones chondrosarcoma . tumors arising from other tissues may also produce a cartilage-like matrix , the best-known being pleomorphic adenoma of the salivary glands . the matrix of cartilage acts as a barrier , preventing the entry of lymphocytes or diffusion of antibody . this property allows for the transplantation of cartilage from one individual to another without fear of tissue rejection . imaging . cartilage does not absorb x-rays under normal in vivo conditions , but a dye can be injected into the synovial membrane that will cause the x-rays to be absorbed by the dye . the resulting void on the radiography film between the bone and meniscus represents the cartilage . for in vitro x-ray scans , the outer soft tissue is most likely removed , so the cartilage and air boundary are enough to contrast the presence of cartilage due to the refraction of the x-ray . osteoarthritis . osteoarthritis.about.com . retrieved on 2015-10-26 . . other animals . cartilaginous fish . chondrichthyes like sharks , rays and skates have a skeleton composed entirely of cartilage . invertebrate cartilage . cartilage tissue can also be found among some arthropods such as horseshoe crabs , some mollusks such as marine snails and cephalopods , and some annelids like sabellid polychaetes . arthropods . the most studied cartilage in arthropods is the limulus polyphemus branchial cartilage . it is a vesicular cell-rich cartilage due to the large , spherical and vacuolated chondrocytes with no homologies in other arthropods . other type of cartilage found in limulus polyphemus is the endosternite cartilage , a fibrous-hyaline cartilage with chondrocytes of typical morphology in a fibrous component , much more fibrous than vertebrate hyaline cartilage , with mucopolysaccharides immunoreactive against chondroitin sulfate antibodies . there are homologous tissues to the endosternite cartilage in other arthropods . the embryos of limulus polyphemus express cola and hyaluronan in the gill cartilage and the endosternite , which indicates that these tissues are fibrillar-collagen-based cartilage . the endosternite cartilage forms close to hh-expressing ventral nerve cords and expresses cola and soxe , a sox9 analog . this is also seen in gill cartilage tissue . . mollusks . in cephalopods , the models used for the studies of cartilage are common octopus and common cuttlefish . the cephalopod cranial cartilage is the invertebrate cartilage that shows more resemblance to the vertebrate hyaline cartilage . the growth is thought to take place throughout the movement of cells from the periphery to the center . the chondrocytes present different morphologies related to their position in the tissue . the embryos of sepia officinalis express colaa , colab , and hyaluronan in the cranial cartilages and other regions of chondrogenesis . this implies that the cartilage is fibrillar-collagen-based . the sepia officinalis embryo expresses hh , whose presence causes colaa and colab expression and is also able to maintain proliferating cells undiferentiated . it has been observed that this species presents the expression soxd and soxe , analogs of the vertebrate sox5/6 and sox9 , in the developing cartilage . the cartilage growth pattern is the same as in vertebrate cartilage . in gastropods , the interest lies in the odontophore , a cartilaginous structure that supports the radula . the most studied species regarding this particular tissue is busycotypus canaliculatus . the odontophore is a vesicular cell rich cartilage , consisting of vacuolated cells containing myoglobin , surrounded by a low amount of extra cellular matrix containing collagen . the odontophore contains muscle cells along with the chondrocytes in the case of lymnaea and other mollusks that graze vegetation . . sabellid polychaetes . the sabellidae , or feather duster worms , have cartilage tissue with cellular and matrix specialization supporting their tentacles . they present two distinct extracellular matrix regions . these regions are an acellular fibrous region with a high collagen content , called cartilage-like matrix , and collagen lacking a highly cellularized core , called osteoid-like matrix . the cartilage-like matrix surrounds the osteoid-like matrix . the amount of the acellular fibrous region is variable . the model organisms used in the study of cartilage in sabellid polychaetes are potamilla sp and myxicola infundibulum . . plants and fungi . vascular plants , particularly seeds , and the stems of some mushrooms , are sometimes called '' cartilaginous '' , although they contain no cartilage . eflora – glossary . university of sydney ( 2010-06-16 ) . retrieved on 2015-10-26 . . biomechanics . biomechanics