Longinus

origins of the story . no name for this soldier is given in the canonical gospels ; the name longinus is instead found in the acts of pilate , a text appended to the apocryphal gospel of nicodemus . longinus did not start out as a saint . an early tradition , found in a sixth or seventh century pseudepigraphal '' letter of herod to pilate '' , claims that longinus suffered for having pierced jesus , and that he was condemned to a cave where every night a lion came and mauled him until dawn , after which his body healed back to normal , in a pattern that would repeat till the end of time . ehrman , bart d , and zlatko pleše . the apocryphal gospels : texts and translations . new york : oxford university press , 2011 , p . 523 later traditions turned him into a christian convert , but as sabine baring-gould observed : '' the name of longinus was not known to the greeks previous to the patriarch germanus , in 715 . it was introduced amongst the westerns from the apocryphal gospel of nicodemus . there is no reliable authority for the acts and martyrdom of this saint . '' baring-gould , the lives of the saints , vol . iii ( edinburgh ) 1914 , sub '' march 15 : saint longinus martyr '' ; baring-gould adds , '' the greek acts pretend to be by s . hesychius ( march 28th ) , but are an impudent forgery of late date . '' ( on-line text ) . the name is probably latinized from the greek lonche ( λόγχη ) , the word used for the lance mentioned in john . see at kontos ; '' the name can not be ascribed to any tradition ; its obvious derivation from logchē ( λόγχη ) , spear or lance , shows that it was , like that of saint veronica , fashioned to suit the event , '' noted elizabeth jameson , the history of our lord as exemplified in works of art 1872:160 . it first appears lettered on an illumination of the crucifixion beside the figure of the soldier holding a spear , written , perhaps contemporaneously , in horizontal greek letters , loginos ( λογινοϲ ) , in the syriac rabula gospels in the year 586 , in the laurentian library , florence . the spear used is known as the holy lance , and more recently , especially in occult circles , as the '' spear of destiny '' , which was revered at jerusalem by the sixth century , although neither the centurion nor the name '' longinus '' were invoked in any surviving report . as the '' lance of longinus '' , the spear figures in the legends of the holy grail . blindness or other eye problems are not mentioned until after the tenth century . petrus comestor was one of the first to add an eyesight problem to the legend and his text can be translated as '' blind '' , '' dim-sighted '' or '' weak-sighted '' . the golden legend says that he saw celestial signs before conversion and that his eye problems might have been caused by illness or age . the touch of jesus 's blood cures his eye problem : christian legend has it that longinus was a blind roman centurion who thrust the spear into christ 's side at the crucifixion . some of jesus 's blood fell upon his eyes and he was healed . upon this miracle longinus believed in jesus . the body of longinus is said to have been lost twice , and that its second recovery was at mantua in 1304 , together with the holy sponge stained with christ 's blood , wherewith it was told—extending longinus ' role—that longinus had assisted in cleansing christ 's body when it was taken down from the cross . the relic , corpules of alleged blood taken from the holy lance , enjoyed a revived cult in late 13th century bologna under the combined impetus of the grail romances , the local tradition of eucharistic miracles , the chapel consecrated to longinus , the holy blood in the benedictine monastery church of sant'andrea , and the patronage of the bonacolsi . the relics are said to have been divided and then distributed to prague and elsewhere , with the body taken to the basilica of sant'agostino in rome . however , official guides of the basilica do not mention the presence of any tomb associated with saint longinus . it is also said that the body of longinus was found in sardinia ; greek sources assert that he suffered martyrdom in gabala , cappadocia . present-day veneration . longinus is venerated , generally as a martyr , in the roman catholic church , the eastern orthodox church , and the armenian apostolic church . his feast day is kept on 16 october in the roman martyrology , which mentions him , without any indication of martyrdom , in the following terms : '' at jerusalem , commemoration of saint longinus , who is venerated as the soldier opening the side of the crucified lord with a lance '' . '' hierosolymae , commemoratio sancti longini , qui miles colitur latus domini cruci affixi lancea aperiens '' – martyrologium romanum ( libreria editrice vaticana 2001 , die 16 octobris the pre-1969 feast day in the roman rite is 15 march . the eastern orthodox church commemorates him on 16 october . in the armenian apostolic church , his feast is commemorated on 22 october . calendar of saints ( armenian apostolic church ) the statue of saint longinus , sculpted by gian lorenzo bernini , is one of four in the niches beneath the dome of saint peter 's basilica , vatican city . a spearpoint fragment said to be from the holy lance is also conserved in the basilica . longinus and his legend are the subject of the moriones festival held during holy week on the island of marinduque , the philippines . in popular culture . in irving pichel 's 1939 film the great commandment , albert dekker portrays him as the commanding officer of a roman army company escorting a tax collector about judea . subsequently , he is converted to christianity through the kindness of joel bar lamech and by his own experiences at golgotha . in the george stevens 's 1965 film the greatest story ever told , longinus is identified with the centurion who professed , '' truly this man was the son of god '' on golgotha ( portrayed by john wayne in a cameo role ) . leonard maltin , 2004 movie & video guide , ( new york : new american library , 2003 ) , 558 sub loco . casca rufio longinus , in the casca novel series by barry sadler , accidentally ingests some of christ 's blood after lancing him . he is condemned by christ to walk the earth as a soldier until they meet again at the second coming . this series of novels is continued by british writer tony roberts following the death of barry sadler . cassius longinus is the main character of louis de wohl 's novel the spear ( 1955 ) . the spear of longinus plays a significant role in robin jarvis ' the woven path series of novels . the spear of longinus is mentioned briefly in hellboy ( 2004 ) , a loose cinematic adaptation of the graphic novel , hellboy : seed of destruction , as a supernatural artifact in the collection of the bprd . hellboy : seed of destruction dark horse the spear of longinus is a central plot point in the film constantine ( 2005 ) as the “ blood of the son of god ” is used to bring about “ the birth of the son of the devil . ” in the 1990s anime tv show neon genesis evangelion , the lance of longinus is a giant spear found in the body of adam , the first angel . it is shown to have incredible destructive power . longinus is a recurring spear in the final fantasy series . it often is the most powerful spear in the games . longinus is both a weapon and a demon in multiple megami tensei games . it has an important role in persona 2 : innocent sin , where the order of the holy lance carry copies of the longinus spear while adolf hitler carries the real one . in the strategy board game kingdom death : monster the lance of longinus is a weapon gear card available for players to craft . he is referenced in the second season of dc 's legends of tomorrow and most of the season is about trying to find the “ spear of destiny ” that he used to kill christ in the japanese light novel series highschool dxd the holy lance is a weapon owned by cao cao , with the name of the true longinus . in the vampire : the requiem roleplaying books , longinus is a mythical character who was cursed with vampirism when jesus died . his story , called the testament of longinus , serves as the basis for a sect of modern christian vampires called the lancea et sanctum . gallery . image : meister_der_nea-moni-kirche_in_chios_005.jpg longinus depicted in the nea moni church , chios , greece image : mathis gothart grünewald 047.jpg christ on the cross , the three marys , john the evangelist , and saint longinus image : sao longuinhos - bom jesus.jpg saint longinus in bom jesus do monte image : longinus.jpg fresco in basilica of st peter and st paul in vyšehrad ( prague ) . file : first class bone relic of st . longinus - the centurion who pierced the side of jesus with the holy lance ( spear of destiny ) . jpg first class bone relic of st . longinus . see also . list of names for the biblical nameless moriones festival wandering jew , a figure with whom he is sometimes identified . references . external links . the reliquary of saint longinus catholic forum : st . longinus st . longinus catholic-saints st . longinus longinus martyr longinus