Pieter van Vollenhoven

early life and career . born in schiedam , he is the second son of pieter van vollenhoven sr . ( 1897–1977 ) and his wife jacoba gijsbertha stuylingh de lange ( 1906–1983 ) . the van vollenhoven family and the stuylingh de lange family belong to the dutch patriciate . van vollenhoven attended secondary school in rotterdam , and he subsequently studied law at the university of leiden . he graduated in 1965 , after which he worked as a legal officer for the netherlands council of state . in 1966 , he performed his military service with the royal netherlands air force , and attained a military pilot license the following year . current positions . pieter van vollenhoven is currently most well known in the netherlands for having been the chairman of the dutch safety board from which he retired in february 2011 . he was originally appointed chairman of the road transportation safety board and the rail incident board by minister tjerk westerterp . following the bijlmer and herculesramp , a need was felt in the netherlands for a single body to investigate all transportation-related incidents ; the transportation safety council ( dutch : raad voor de transportveiligheid ) was created , which incorporated the earlier road transportation safety and rail incident boards and also had van vollenhoven as chairman . van vollenhoven felt , however , that the country should have a single board to investigate all safety-related issues ; lobbying on his part finally convinced the government to transform the transportation safety council into a general safety board , of which van vollenhoven was made the first chairman . due to his expertise in the area , the university of twente made van vollenhoven a professor on october 1 , 2005 . he holds the policy research chair , which is a subspecialty of the risk management group . he held his oration on april 28 , 2006 and called for the creation of a minister of safety at that time . in 1989 , van vollenhoven took the initiative in setting up the dutch victim support fund , of which he is also the chairman . he is also chairman of the nationaal groenfonds , the national restorationfund and the society , safety and police association and the international transport safety board . he is a member of the european transport safety council . notable acts . as chairman of the safety board , van vollenhoven oversaw the investigation of the schipholbrand , a fire in a holding facility for illegal immigrants in the netherlands . he presented a final report on september 21 , 2006 with such devastating findings that ministers piet hein donner and sybilla dekker resigned over it . a third responsible minister , rita verdonk refused to resign despite her responsibility in the matter . following the turkish airlines flight 1951 crash , van vollenhoven led the investigation by the safety board . this investigation brought him into conflict with the attorney general , which requested access to the black box data . citing that there was no reason at that time to suspect foul play and that the board investigation would be hampered by the threat of legal action against persons , van vollenhoven absolutely refused this access . when he turned 70 , barry sweedler ( of the us national transportation safety board ) said to him : '' the world is a safer place because of your work and leadership '' . hobbies . van vollenhoven is an avid pianist . in 1986 he formed a trio – de gevleugelde vrienden – with two of the country 's leading pianists ( pim jacobs and louis van dijk ) and gave some twenty concerts a year both at home and abroad in aid of the victim support fund . de gevleugelde vrienden were awarded four gold discs . since the death of one of the members of the trio , pim jacobs , van vollenhoven has continued to give concerts with pianists louis van dijk and koos mark . van vollenhoven is still an active pilot and he also dives . he almost lost the tip of his right index finger during a dive in 2005 , when he got caught between the boat and the dock steps . doctors were able to reattach the tip . he is also a photographer . the victim support fund raised money in 2008 and 2009 by selling calendars with his photographs . health . van vollenhoven was diagnosed with a melanoma , a common type of skin cancer , in may 2017 . he had it removed at the netherlands cancer institute in amsterdam . in november that same year , he was diagnosed with another melanoma and had it removed . . marriage and family . van vollenhoven married princess margriet of the netherlands at the hague on january 10 , 1967 , in the st . james church . royal wedding in the netherlands this made him the first member of the dutch royal house being a commoner and not of royal or noble origin . he was not given any royal titles as a result of the marriage and is therefore formally addressed as '' mister van vollenhoven '' or by his professional title as '' professor van vollenhoven '' . the couple went to live in het loo house , near the het loo palace . they have four sons : prince maurits of orange-nassau , van vollenhoven ( born april 17 , 1968 ) , married marilène van den broek ( born february 4 , 1970 ) ; prince bernhard of orange-nassau , van vollenhoven ( born december 25 , 1969 ) , married annette sekrève ( born april 18 , 1972 ) ; prince pieter-christiaan of orange-nassau , van vollenhoven ( born march 22 , 1972 ) , married anita van eijk ( born october 27 , 1969 ) ; prince floris of orange-nassau , van vollenhoven ( born april 10 , 1975 ) , married aimée söhngen ( born october 19 , 1977 ) . the german house name lippe-biesterfeld is borne by the children of prince maurits ( making them van lippe-biesterfeld van vollenhoven ) ; his other ( grand ) children are just van vollenhoven . honours and awards . van vollenhoven received numerous honours and awards in the netherlands but also internationally : onderscheidingen van de koninklijke familie – website alles op een rij . netherlands honours and decorations . grand cross of the order of the house of orange ( january 10 , 1967 ) knight grand cross of the order of the netherlands lion ( april 29 , 2004 ) wedding medal of princess beatrix , and claus von amsberg the netherlands coronation medal 1980 medal visiting netherlands antilles 1980 royal wedding medal 2002 officer 's long service decoration ( the netherlands ) , with roman numeral xx king willem-alexander inauguration medal 2013 . foreign honours and decorations . : grand cross of the order of the crown : grand cordon of order of merit : grand cross first class of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany : grand cross of the order of the white rose of finland : grand cross of the national order of merit : grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic : grand cross of the national order : grand cordon of the order of the sacred treasure : grand cordon of the supreme order of the renaissance ppe agency , group photo ppe agency , pieter : grand cross of the order of adolphe of nassau the royal forums , state visit of luxembourg to netherlands , 2006 , photo : grand cross of the order of the oak crown : commemorative medal of the marriage of trh prince jean and princess josephine-charlotte of luxembourg : grand cross of the royal norwegian order of merit : grand cross of the order of prince henry romania : grand cross of the order of august 23 : grand cross of the national order of the lion : grand cross of the order of isabella the catholic viva máxima blog , state visit of juan carlos in netherlands 2001 , group photo : grand cordon of the honorary order of the yellow star : grand cordon of the order of the liberator : commander grand cross of the order of the polar star '' noblesse et royautés '' ( french ) , state visit of sweden in the netherlands , april 2009 , group photo . honorary citizenship . on june 12 , 2004 , he was made an honorary citizen of the town of vollenhove . references . external links . professor pieter van vollenhoven description and cv on the royal house website