The Handmaid's Tale

sex and occupation . the sexes are strictly divided . gilead 's society values white women 's reproductive commodities over those of other ethnicities . women are categorized '' hierarchically according to class status and reproductive capacity '' as well as '' metonymically colour-coded according to their function and their labour '' ( kauffman 232 ) . the commander expresses his personal opinion that women are considered inferior to men , as the men are in a position where they have power to control society . women are segregated by clothing , as are men . with rare exception , men wear military or paramilitary uniforms . all classes of men and women are defined by the colours they wear , drawing on colour symbolism and psychology . all lower-status individuals are regulated by this dress code . all '' non-persons '' are banished to the '' colonies '' . sterile , unmarried women are considered to be non-persons . both men and women sent there wear grey dresses . the women , particularly the handmaids , are stripped of their individual identities as they lack formal names , taking on their assigned commander 's first name in most cases . this hierarchical society has forced women to come to terms with their inability to make decisions about their own bodies and lives . unwomen . sterile women , the unmarried , some widows , feminists , lesbians , nuns , and politically dissident women : all women who are incapable of social integration within the republic 's strict gender divisions . gilead exiles unwomen to '' the colonies '' , areas both of agricultural production and deadly pollution . joining them are handmaids who fail to bear a child after three two-year assignments . jezebels . jezebels are women who are forced to become prostitutes and entertainers . they are available only to the commanders and to their guests . offred portrays jezebels as attractive and educated ; they may be unsuitable as handmaids due to temperament . they have been sterilized , a surgery that is forbidden to other women . they operate in unofficial but state-sanctioned brothels , unknown to most women . jezebels , whose title also comes from the bible ( note queen jezebel in the books of kings ) , dress in the remnants of sexualized costumes from '' the time before '' , such as cheerleaders ' costumes , school uniforms , and playboy bunny costumes . jezebels can wear make-up , drink alcohol and socialize with men , but are tightly controlled by the aunts . when they pass their sexual prime and/or their looks fade , they are discarded without any precision as to whether they are killed or sent to the colonies in the novel . race analysis . african americans , the main non-white ethnic group in this society , are called the hamitic . a state tv broadcast mentions they have been relocated '' en masse '' to '' national homelands '' in the midwest , which are suggestive of the apartheid-era homelands ( bantustans ) set up by south africa . ana cottle characterized the handmaid 's tale as '' white feminism '' , noting that atwood does away with black people in a few lines by relocating the '' children of ham '' while borrowing heavily from the african-american experience and applying it to white women . it is implied that native americans living in territories under the rule of gilead are exterminated . jews are given a choice between converting to the state religion or being '' repatriated '' to israel . however , converts who were subsequently discovered with any symbolic representations or artifacts of judaism were executed , and the repatriation scheme was privatized . many argue that readers can not simply ignore the parallels between racism and sexism within the handmaid 's tale . many critics believe that atwood chooses to erase the black community from the novel by sending them elsewhere in order to make the republic of gilead a white society . scholar ben merriman believes that atwood 's portrayal of society in the handmaid 's tale mimics that of a society run on black slavery , due to the novel 's heavy focuses on '' sexual exploitation , isolation , and compelled ignorance that accompany severe economic and political powerlessness '' , which are themes often associated with african-american slavery . merriman accuses atwood of purposely failing to acknowledge the parallels between her novel and the african-american experience . in gilead , handmaids are forbidden to read or write and the men in charge control access to literacy . in black slavery , african-americans had restrictions on literacy as well . additionally , the handmaid 's tale is written as an oral narration of offred 's experiences ; oral narration is a theme commonly associated with slave narratives . . language analysis . in the novel 's fictional fundamentalist society , sterile is an outlawed word . in this society , there is no such thing as a sterile man . in this culture , women are either fruitful or barren , the latter of which are declared to be '' unwomen '' and are sent to the colonies with the rest of the '' unwomen '' to do life-threatening work until their death , which is , on average , three years . atwood emphasises how changes in context affect behaviours and attitudes by repeating the phrase '' context is all '' throughout the novel , establishing this precept as a motif . playing the game of scrabble with her commander illustrates the key significance of changes in '' context '' ; once '' the game of old men and women '' , the game became forbidden for women to play and therefore '' desirable '' . through living in a morally rigid society , offred has come to perceive the world differently from earlier . offred expresses amazement at how '' it has taken so little time to change our minds about things '' . wearing revealing clothes and makeup had been part of her former life , but when she sees japanese tourists dressed that way , she now feels the women are inappropriately dressed . offred can read but not translate the phrase '' illegitimi non carborundum '' carved into the closet wall of her small bedroom ; this dog latin aphorism signifies '' do n't let the bastards grind you down '' . awards . 1985 – governor general 's award for english-language fiction ( winner ) 1986 – booker prize ( nominated ) 1986 – nebula award ( nominated ) 1987 – arthur c . clarke award ( winner ) 1987 – prometheus award ( nominated ) commonwealth literature prize ( winner ) welsh arts council international writer 's prize ( winner ) . academic reception . atwood 's novels , and especially her works of speculative fiction , the handmaid 's tale and oryx and crake , are frequently offered as examples for the final , open-ended question on the north american advanced placement english literature and composition exam each year . as such , her books are often assigned in high-school classrooms to students taking this advanced placement course , despite the mature themes the work presents . atwood herself has expressed surprise that her books are being assigned to high-school audiences , largely due to her own censored education in the 1950s , but she has assured readers that this increased attention from high-school students has not altered the material she has chosen to write about since . . challenges . many people have expressed discontent at the handmaid 's tale presence in the classroom . some of these challenges have come from parents concerned about the explicit sexuality and other adult themes represented in the book . others have argued that the handmaid 's tale depicts a negative view of religion , a view supported by several academics who propose that atwood 's work satirizes contemporary religious fundamentalists in the united states , offering a feminist critique of the trends this movement to the right represents . the american library association ( ala ) lists the handmaid 's tale as number 37 on the '' 100 most frequently challenged books of 1990–2000 '' . atwood participated in discussing the handmaid 's tale as the subject of an ala discussion series titled '' one book , one conference '' . concerns inaugural program featuring margaret atwood held in toronto , 19–25 june 2003 . some complaints have included : 1990 : challenged at rancho cotate high school , rohnert park , california , as too explicit for students . 1992 : challenged in schools in waterloo , iowa , reportedly because of profanity , lurid passages about sex , and statements defamatory to minorities , god , women , and the disabled . 1993 : removed because of profanity and sex from the chicopee , massachusetts , high-school english class reading list . 1998 : challenged for use in richland , washington , high-school english classes , along with six other titles determined to be '' poor quality literature and that stress suicide , illicit sex , violence , and hopelessness '' . 1999 : challenged because of graphic sex , but retained on the advanced placement english list , at george d . chamberlain high school in tampa , florida . 2000 : downgraded from '' required '' to '' optional '' on the summer reading list for eleventh graders in the upper moreland school district near philadelphia due to '' age-inappropriate '' subject matter . 2001 : challenged , but retained , in the dripping springs , texas , senior advanced placement english course as an optional reading assignment . some parents were offended by the book 's descriptions of sexual encounters . 2006 : initially banned by superintendent ed lyman from an advanced placement english curriculum in the judson independent school district in texas after a parent complained . lyman had overruled the recommendation of a committee of teachers , students , and parents ; the committee appealed the decision to the school board , which overturned his ban . 2012 : challenged as required reading for a page high school international baccalaureate class and as optional reading for advanced placement reading courses at grimsley high school in greensboro , north carolina because the book is '' sexually explicit , violently graphic and morally corrupt '' . some parents thought the book is “ detrimental to christian values '' . 2009 toronto district school board . report in the star , 16 january 2009 : '' atwood novel too brutal , sexist for school : parent '' , by kristin rushowy , education reporter . the handmaid 's tale was n't likely written for 17-year-olds , but neither are a lot of things we teach in high school , like shakespeare . and they are all the better for reading it . they are on the edge of adulthood already , and there 's no point in coddling them , '' he said , adding , '' they are n't coddled in terms of mass media today anyway '' . he said the book has been accused of being anti-christian and , more recently , anti-islamic because the women are veiled and polygamy is allowed . but that '' misses the point '' , said brown . '' it 's really anti-fundamentalism . '' : :in her earlier account ( 14 january 2009 ) , star reporter kristin rushowy commented that a toronto district school board committee was '' reviewing the novel '' . while noting that '' the handmaid 's tale is listed as one of the 100 'most frequently challenged books ' from 1990 to 1999 on the american library association 's website '' , rushowy reports that '' the canadian library association says there is 'no known instance of a challenge to this novel in canada ' but says the book was called anti-christian and pornographic by parents after being placed on a reading list for secondary students in texas in the 1990s . '' november 2012 guilford county , north carolina , where two parents protested against the inclusion of the book on a required reading list at a local high school . the parents presented the school board with a petition signed by 2,300 people , prompting a review of the book by the school 's media advisory committee . according to local news reports , one of the parents said '' she felt christian students are bullied in society , in that they 're made to feel uncomfortable about their beliefs by non-believers . she said including books like the handmaid 's tale contributes to that discomfort , because of its negative view on religion and its anti-biblical attitudes toward sex . '' . in higher education . in institutions of higher education , professors have found the handmaid 's tale to be useful , largely because of its historical and religious basis and atwood 's captivating delivery . the novel 's teaching points include : introducing politics and the social sciences to students in a more concrete way ; demonstrating the importance of reading to our freedom , both intellectual and political ; and acknowledging the '' most insidious and violent manifestations of power in western history '' in a compelling manner . the chapter entitled '' historical notes '' at the end of the novel also represents a warning to academics who run the risk of misreading and misunderstanding historical texts , pointing to the satirized professor pieixoto as an example of a male scholar who has taken over and overpowered offred 's narrative with his own interpretation . . in other media . audio . an audiobook of the unabridged text , read by claire danes , won the 2013 audie award for fiction . in 2014 , canadian band lakes of canada released their album transgressions , which is intended to be a concept album inspired by the handmaid 's tale . on his album shady lights from 2017 , snax references the novel and film adaption , specifically the character of serena joy , in the song , '' make me disappear . '' the first verse reads , ‘ you can call me serena joy . drink in hand , in front of the tv , i ’ m teary eyed , adjusting my cc . ’ . film . the 1990 film the handmaid 's tale was based on a screenplay by harold pinter and directed by volker schlöndorff . it stars natasha richardson as offred , faye dunaway as serena joy , and robert duvall as the commander ( fred ) . graphic novel . in 2019 , a graphic novel based on this book and with the same title was published by renée nault , . radio . a dramatic adaptation of the novel for radio was produced for bbc radio 4 by john dryden in 2000 . a canadian dramatic adaptation for radio was written by playwright michael o'brien and produced on cbc radio in 2002 . stage . a stage adaptation written and directed by bruce shapiro played at tufts university in 1989 . an operatic adaptation , the handmaid 's tale , by poul ruders , premiered in copenhagen on 6 march 2000 , and was performed by the english national opera , in london , in 2003 . it was the opening production of the 2004–2005 season of the canadian opera company . . boston lyric opera mounted a production in may 2019 . a stage adaptation of the novel , by brendon burns , for the haymarket theatre , basingstoke , england , toured the uk in 2002 . a ballet adaptation choreographed by lila york and produced by the royal winnipeg ballet premiered on 16 october 2013 . amanda green appeared as offred and alexander gamayunov as the commander . a one-woman stage show , adapted from the novel , by joseph stollenwerk premiered in the u.s . in january 2015 . . television . hulu has produced a television series based on the novel , starring elisabeth moss as offred . the first three episodes were released on 26 april 2017 , with subsequent episodes following on a weekly basis . margaret atwood served as consulting producer . the series won eight primetime emmy awards in 2017 , including outstanding drama series and outstanding lead actress in a drama series ( moss ) . the series was renewed for a second season , which premiered on 25 april 2018 , and in may 2018 , hulu announced renewal for a third season . third season premiered on 5 june 2019 . hulu announced season 4 , which will consist of 10 episodes , and it was to start production in march 2020 , but was delayed due to the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic . . sequel . in november 2018 , atwood announced the sequel , titled the testaments , which was published in september 2019 . '' margaret atwood announces sequel to the handmaid 's tale '' . cbc news , 28 november 2018 . the novel is set fifteen years after offred 's final scene , with the testaments of three female narrators from gilead . . see also . canadian literature feminist science fiction reproduction and pregnancy in speculative fiction . notes . references . bibliography . ( 17 june 2005 ) , '' aliens have taken the place of angels '' , the guardian ( 14 jan 2009 ) , '' complaint spurs school board to review novel by atwood '' , the toronto star . alexander , lynn ( 22 may 2009 ) , '' the handmaid 's tale working bibliography '' , department of english , university of tennessee at martin . hyperlinked to online resources for alexander , dr lynn ( spring 1999 ) , women writers : magic , mysticism , and mayhem ( course ) . includes entry for book chap . by kauffman . an interview with margaret atwood on her novel , the handmaid 's tale ( n.d . ) . in nashville public library . armrbuster , j . ( 1990 ) . '' memory and politics — a reflection on 'the handmaid 's tale ' '' . social justice 17 ( 3 ) , 146–52 . parenthetical page references are to the 1998 ed . digitized 2 june 2008 by google books ( 311 pp . ) ( 2005 ) , la servante écarlate the handmaid 's tale ( in french ) , rué , sylviane transl , paris : j'ai lu , . atwood , m . ( 2004 ) . the handmaid 's tale and oryx and crake '' in context '' . pmla , 119 ( 3 ) , 513–517 . atwood , m . ( 20 january 2012 ) . '' haunted by the handmaid 's tale '' . the guardian . bergmann , h . f . ( 1989 ) . '' teaching them to read : a fishing expedition in the handmaid 's tale '' . college english , 51 ( 8 ) , 847–854 . burack , c . ( 1988–89 ) . '' bringing women 's studies to political science : the handmaid in the classroom '' . nwsa journal 1 ( 2 ) , 274–83 . callaway , a . a . ( 2008 ) . '' women disunited : margaret atwood 's the handmaid 's tale as a critique of feminism '' . san jose state university . curwood , steve . ( 13 june 2014 ) . '' margaret atwood on fiction , the future , and environmental crisis '' . living on earth . n.p . evans , m . ( 1994 ) . '' versions of history : the handmaid 's tale and its dedicatees '' . in c . nicholson ( ed . ) , margaret atwood : writing and subjectivity ( pp . & nbsp ; 177–188 ) . london , united kingdom : palgrave macmillan uk . greene , gayle . ( 1986 ) . '' choice of evils '' . the women 's review of books 3 ( 10 ) , 14–15 . gruss , s . ( 2004 ) . '' people confuse personal relations with legal structures '' . an interview with margaret atwood . in gender forum . retrieved 28 march 2016 . hines , m . e . ( 2006 ) . margaret atwood 's the handmaid 's tale : fundamentalist religiosity and the oppression of women . n.p . : angelo state university . kauffman , linda ( 1989 ) , '' 6 . special delivery : twenty-first century epistolarity in the handmaid 's tale '' , in goldsmith , elizabeth , writing the female voice : essays on epistolary literature , boston : northeastern university press , pp . & nbsp ; 221–44 . cited in alexander . langford , david ( aug 2003 ) , '' bits and pieces '' , sfx ( uk : ansible ) ( 107 ) . larson , j . l . ( 1989 ) . '' margaret atwood and the future of prophecy '' . religion & literature 21 ( 1 ) , 27–61 . laz , c . ( january 1996 ) . '' science fiction and introductory sociology : the 'handmaid ' in the classroom '' . teaching sociology,24 ( 1 ) , 54–63 . lewis , lapham h . ( september 2004 ) . '' tentacles of rage : the republican propaganda mill , a brief history '' . harper 's magazine . mercer , n . ( 2013 ) . '' subversive feminist thrusts '' : feminist dystopian writing and religious fundamentalism in margaret atwood 's the handmaid 's tale , louise marley 's the terrorists of irustan , marge piercy 's he , she and i . madison , wi : university of wisconsin . miner , madonne ( 1991 ) , '' 'trust me ' : reading the romance plot in margaret atwood 's the handmaid 's tale '' . twentieth century literature 37 : 148–68 , . morris , m . ( 1990 ) . '' margaret atwood , the art of fiction no . 121 '' . the paris review . neuman , s . c . ( 2006 ) . '' 'just a backlash ' : margaret atwood , feminism , and the handmaid 's tale '' . university of toronto quarterly , 75 ( 3 ) , 857–868 . oates , j . c . ( 2 november 2006 ) . '' margaret atwood 's tale '' . the new york review of books . perry , d . ( 30 december 2014 ) . '' margaret atwood and the 'four unwise republicans ' : 12 surprises from the legendary writer 's reddit ama '' . the oregonian . rothstein , mervyn . ( 17 february 1986 ) . '' no balm in gilead for margaret atwood '' . the new york times . stein , k . f . ( 1996 ) . '' margaret atwood 's modest proposal : the handmaid 's tale '' . canadian literature , 148 , 57–72 . the 100 most frequently challenged books of 1990–2000 , american library association , 2009 . andriano , joseph . '' the handmaid ’ s tale as scrabble game . '' critical insights : the handmaid 's tale , edited by j . brooks bouson , salem , 2009 . salem online . elliott , john . '' a watershed moment for atwood '' the ottawa citizen , 5 december 2004 , pp . a3 . proquest , . further reading . long chapter on the handmaid 's tale as utopia and dystopia . . external links . . the handmaid 's tale ballet at the royal winnipeg ballet