SPSS

overview . spss is a widely used program for statistics in social science . it is also used by market researchers , health researchers , survey companies , government , education researchers , marketing organizations , data miners , and others . the original spss manual ( nie , bent & hull , 1970 ) has been described as one of '' sociology 's most influential books '' for allowing ordinary researchers to do their own statistical analysis . in addition to statistical analysis , data management ( case selection , file reshaping , creating derived data ) and data documentation ( a metadata dictionary is stored in the datafile ) are features of the base software . the many features of spss statistics are accessible via pull-down menus or can be programmed with a proprietary 4gl command syntax language . command syntax programming has the benefits of reproducible output , simplifying repetitive tasks , and handling complex data manipulations and analyses . additionally , some complex applications can only be programmed in syntax and are not accessible through the menu structure . the pull-down menu interface also generates command syntax : this can be displayed in the output , although the default settings have to be changed to make the syntax visible to the user . they can also be pasted into a syntax file using the '' paste '' button present in each menu . programs can be run interactively or unattended , using the supplied production job facility . additionally a '' macro '' language can be used to write command language subroutines . a python programmability extension can access the information in the data dictionary and data and dynamically build command syntax programs . the python programmability extension , introduced in spss 14 , replaced the less functional sax basic '' scripts '' for most purposes , although saxbasic remains available . in addition , the python extension allows spss to run any of the statistics in the free software package r . from version 14 onwards , spss can be driven externally by a python or a vb.net program using supplied '' plug-ins '' . ( from version 20 onwards , these two scripting facilities , as well as many scripts , are included on the installation media and are normally installed by default . ) spss statistics places constraints on internal file structure , data types , data processing , and matching files , which together considerably simplify programming . spss datasets have a two-dimensional table structure , where the rows typically represent cases ( such as individuals or households ) and the columns represent measurements ( such as age , sex , or household income ) . only two data types are defined : numeric and text ( or '' string '' ) . all data processing occurs sequentially case-by-case through the file ( dataset ) . files can be matched one-to-one and one-to-many , but not many-to-many . in addition to that cases-by-variables structure and processing , there is a separate matrix session where one can process data as matrices using matrix and linear algebra operations . the graphical user interface has two views which can be toggled by clicking on one of the two tabs in the bottom left of the spss statistics window . the 'data view ' shows a spreadsheet view of the cases ( rows ) and variables ( columns ) . unlike spreadsheets , the data cells can only contain numbers or text , and formulas can not be stored in these cells . the 'variable view ' displays the metadata dictionary where each row represents a variable and shows the variable name , variable label , value label ( s ) , print width , measurement type , and a variety of other characteristics . cells in both views can be manually edited , defining the file structure and allowing data entry without using command syntax . this may be sufficient for small datasets . larger datasets such as statistical surveys are more often created in data entry software , or entered during computer-assisted personal interviewing , by scanning and using optical character recognition and optical mark recognition software , or by direct capture from online questionnaires . these datasets are then read into spss . spss statistics can read and write data from ascii text files ( including hierarchical files ) , other statistics packages , spreadsheets and databases . spss statistics can read and write to external table ( database ) via odbc and sql . statistical output is to a proprietary format ( . spv file , supporting pivot tables ) for which , in addition to the in-package viewer , a stand-alone reader can be downloaded . the proprietary output can be exported to text or microsoft word , pdf , excel , and other formats . alternatively , output can be captured as data ( using the oms command ) , as text , tab-delimited text , pdf , xls , html , xml , spss dataset or a variety of graphic image formats ( jpeg , png , bmp and emf ) . several variants of spss statistics exist . spss statistics gradpacks are highly discounted versions sold only to students . spss statistics server is a version of spss statistics with a client–server model . add-on packages can enhance the base software with additional features ( examples include complex samples which can adjust for clustered and stratified samples , and custom tables which can create publication-ready tables ) . spss statistics is available under either an annual or a saas license . spss statistics launched version 25 on aug 08 , 2017 . spss v25 adds new and advanced statistics , such as random effects solution results ( genlinmixed ) , robust standard errors ( glm/unianova ) , and profile plots with error bars within the advanced statistics and custom tables add-on . v25 also includes new bayesian statistics capabilities , a method of statistical inference and publication ready charts , such as powerful new charting capabilities , including new default templates and the ability to share with microsoft office applications . . versions and ownership history . the software was released in its first version in 1968 as the statistical package for the social sciences ( spss ) after being developed by norman h . nie , dale h . bent , and c . hadlai hull . those principals incorporated as spss inc . in 1975 . early versions of spss statistics were written in fortran and designed for batch processing on mainframes , including for example ibm and icl versions , originally using punched cards for data and program input . a processing run read a command file of spss commands and either a raw input file of fixed format data with a single record type , or a 'getfile ' of data saved by a previous run . to save precious computer time an 'edit ' run could be done to check command syntax without analysing the data . from version 10 ( spss-x ) in 1983 , data files could contain multiple record types . prior to spss 16.0 , different versions of spss were available for windows , mac os x and unix . spss statistics version 13.0 for mac os x was not compatible with intel-based macintosh computers , due to the rosetta ( software ) causing errors in calculations . spss statistics 15.0 for windows needed a downloadable hotfix to be installed in order to be compatible with windows vista . from version 16.0 , the same version runs under windows , mac , and linux . the graphical user interface is written in java . the mac os version is provided as a universal binary , making it fully compatible with both powerpc and intel-based mac hardware . spss inc announced on july 28 , 2009 that it was being acquired by ibm for us 1.2 billion . because of a dispute about ownership of the name '' spss '' , between 2009 and 2010 , the product was referred to as pasw ( predictive analytics software ) . as of january 2010 , it became '' spss : an ibm company '' . complete transfer of business to ibm was done by october 1 , 2010 . by that date , spss : an ibm company ceased to exist . ibm spss is now fully integrated into the ibm corporation , and is one of the brands under ibm software group 's business analytics portfolio , together with ibm algorithmics , cognos and openpages . companion software in the '' ibm spss '' family are used for data mining and text mining ( spss modeler ) , and realtime credit score ( ibm spss collaboration and deployment services ) . spss data collection and spss dimensions were sold in 2015 to unicom systems , inc . , a division of unicom global , and merged into the integrated software suite unicom intelligence ( survey design , survey deployment , data collection , data management and reporting ) . . ( interactive data analysis ) . ida ( interactive data analysis ) or analyzer was a software package that originated at what formerly was the n ational o pinion r esearch c enter ( norc ) , at the university of chicago . initially offered on the hp-2000 , somewhat later , under the ownership of spss , it was also available on dec 's decsystem-20 . . - conversational / columnar spss . scss was a software product intended for online use of ibm mainframes . although the '' c '' was for conversational , it also represented a distinction regarding how the data was stored : it used a column-oriented rather than a row-oriented ( internal ) database . this gave good interactive response time for the spss conversational statistical system ( scss ) , whose strong point , as with spss , was cross-tabulation . . see also . comparison of statistical packages jasp , an open-source and free of charge alternative to spss that offers both frequentist and bayesian analysis methods pspp , a free spss replacement from the gnu project spss modeler . references . further reading . . external links . official spss user community 50 years of spss history raynald levesque 's spss tools & nbsp ; – library of worked solutions for spss programmers ( faq , command syntax ; macros ; scripts ; python ) archives of spssx-l discussion & nbsp ; – spss listserv active since 1996 . discusses programming , statistics and analysis ucla ats resources to help you learn spss & nbsp ; – resources for learning spss ucla ats technical reports & nbsp ; – report 1 compares stata , sas , and spss against r ( r is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics ) . spss community ? ref wikipedia & nbsp ; – support for developers of applications using spss products , including materials and examples of the python and r programmability features biomedical statistics - an educational website dedicated to statistical evaluation of biomedical data using spss software