Print on demand

predecessors . before the introduction of digital printing technology , production of small numbers of publications had many limitations . large print jobs were not a problem , but small numbers of printed pages were typically during the early 20th century produced using stencils and reproducing on a mimeograph or similar machine . these produced printed pages of inferior quality to a book , cheaply and reasonably fast . by about 1950 , photocopier were available to make paper master plates for offset duplicating machines . from about 1960 , xerography became possible for photocopy machines to make multiple good-quality copies of a monochrome original . in 1966 , frederik pohl discussed in galaxy science fiction '' a proposal for high-speed facsimile machines which would produce a book to your order , anywhere in the world '' . as the magazine 's editor , he said that '' it , or something like it , is surely the shape of the publishing business some time in the future '' . as technology advanced , it became possible to store text in digital form paper tape , punched cards readable by digital computer , magnetic mass storage , etc . and to print on a teletypewriter , line printer or other computer printer , but the software and hardware to produce original good-quality printed colour text and graphics and to print small jobs fast and cheaply was unavailable . book publishing . print on demand with digital technology is a way to print items for a fixed cost per copy , regardless of the size of the order . while the unit price of each physical copy is greater than with offset printing , the average cost is lower for very small print jobs , because setup costs are much greater for offset printing . pod has other business benefits besides lesser costs ( for small jobs ) : technical set-up is usually quicker than for offset printing . large inventories of a book or print material do not need to be kept in stock , reducing storage , handling costs , and inventory accounting costs . there is little or no waste from unsold products . many publishers use pod for other printing needs other than books such as galley proof , catalogs and review copies . these advantages reduce the risks associated with publishing books and prints and can result in increased choice for consumers . however , the reduced risks for the publisher can also mean that quality control is less rigorous than usual . other publishing . digital technology is ideally suited to publish small print jobs of posters ( often as a single copy ) when they are needed . the introduction of ultraviolet-curable inks and media for large-format inkjet printers has allowed artists , photographers and owners of image collections to take advantage of print on demand . for example , uk art retailer king and mcgaw fulfills many of its art print orders by printing on-demand rather than pre-printing and storing them until they are sold , requiring less space and reducing overheads to the business . this was brought about after a fire destroyed £3 million worth of stock and damage to their warehouse . other notable art retailers utilising pod include arthaus , society6 , teepublic , and redbubble . service providers . the introduction of pod technologies and business models has created a range of new book creation and publishing opportunities . there are three main categories of offerings . self-publishing authors . pod creates a new category of publishing ( or printing ) company that offers services , usually for a fee , directly to authors who wish to self-publish . these services generally include printing and shipping each individual book ordered , handling royalties , and getting listings in online bookstores . the initial investment required for pod services is less than for offset printing . other services may also be available , including formatting , proofreading , and editing , but such companies typically do not spend money for marketing , unlike conventional publishers . such companies are suitable for authors prepared to design and promote their work themselves , with minimal assistance and at minimal cost . pod publishing gives authors editorial independence , speed to market , ability to revise content , and greater financial return per copy than royalties paid by conventional publishers . self publishing also helps authors share their message with the world without waiting in line for a traditional publisher 's approval . pod enablement . while amateur/professional writers are targeted as early adopters by companies like infinity publishing and trafford publishing , there is an effort presently to make pod more mass-market . a class of companies like lulu , picaboo , blurb , peecho and qoop have chosen to be '' author-agnostic '' , attempting to serve a broad mass-market of ordinary citizens who may want to express , record and print keepsake copies of memories and personal writing ( diaries , travelogues , wedding journals , baby books , family reunion reports etc . ) . instead of tailoring themselves to the classic book format ( at least 100 pages , mostly text , complex rules for copyright and royalties ) , these companies strive to make pod more mass-market by creating programs by which a range of different text and picture items can be produced as finished books . the management of copyrights and royalties is often less important for this market , as the books themselves have a small clientele ( close family and friends , for instance ) . the major photo storage services ( e.g . eastman kodak 's ofoto and shutterfly and hewlett-packard 's snapfish ) have included the ability to produce picture books and calendars . however , they emphasize digital photography . the companies blurb and lulu apply this method to a greater volume of creative work ( primarily text , as typed in personal weblogs ) and include the capability to embed photographs and other media . qoop and peecho assume the role of an infrastructure service provider , allowing any partner website to use its pre-designed payment and printing functions . the program peecho provides an embeddable print button . publisher use . print-on-demand services that offer printing and distributing services to publishing companies ( instead of directly to self-publishing authors ) are also growing in popularity within the industry . many major publishers print on demand as a way to save money . it can become costly to print a book regularly that is going to sit on a bookshelf for more than a year before being purchased . print on demand allows texts to be revised and published rather more quickly . pod is environmentally friendly because there are only printing and shipping costs for actual sales . pod allows self-publishers to get their books out for little start-up costs . maintaining availability . among traditional publishers , pod services can be used to make sure that books remain available when one print job has sold out , but another has not yet become available . this maintains the availability of older works , the estimated future sales of which may not be great enough to justify a further conventional print job . this can be useful for publishers with large backlists , such that sales for individual works may be few , but cumulative sales may be significant . managing uncertainty . print on demand can be used to reduce risk when dealing with '' surge '' publications that are expected to have large sales but a brief sales life ( such as biographies of minor celebrities , or event tie-ins ) : these publications represent good profitability but also great risk owing to the danger of inadvertently printing many more copies than are necessary , and the associated costs of maintaining excess inventory or pulping . pod allows a publisher to use cheaper conventional printing to produce enough copies to satisfy a pessimistic forecast of the publication sales , and then rely on pod to make up the difference . pod offers advantages over conventional print production and distribution . pod service is not always easy to implement . print providers and customers have to be willing to evaluate their business process with the flexibility and self-determination to change what is necessary . niche publications . print on demand is also used to print and reprint '' niche '' books that may have a high retail price but limited sales opportunities , such as specialist academic works . an academic publisher may be expected to keep these specialist works in print even though the target market is almost saturated , making further conventional print jobs uneconomic . the local history of a small community is well adapted to print on demand , as these books are invaluable to libraries , museums and archives in that small community but are limited in their marketability outside their home region . public libraries which normally avoid print-on-demand tomes due to their lesser quality will readily make exceptions if content is appropriate for a local topic which can not be addressed by more conventional means . many of the smallest small presses , often known as micro-presses because they have inconsequential profits , have become reliant on pod technology and ebooks . this is either because they serve such a small market that print jobs would be unprofitable or because they are too small to absorb much financial risk . variable formats . print on demand also allows books to be printed in a variety of formats . this process , known as accessible publishing , allows books to be printed in a variety of larger type sizes and special formats for those with vision impairment or reading disabilities , as well as personalised typefaces and formats that suit an individual reader 's needs . this has been championed by a variety of new companies . economics . profits from print-on-demand publishing are on a per-sale basis , and royalties vary depending on the method by which the item is sold . greatest profits are usually generated from sales direct from a print-on-demand service 's website or by the author buying copies from the service at a discount , as the publisher , and then selling them personally . lesser royalties come from traditional bookshops and online retailers , both of which buy at high discount , although some pod companies allow the publisher or author to set their own discount level . unless the publisher or author has fixed their discount rate , the greater the volume sold , the less the royalty becomes , as the retailer is able to buy at greater discount . because the per-unit cost is typically greater with pod than with a print job of thousands of copies , it is common for pod books to be more expensive than similar books made by conventional print jobs , especially if a book is produced exclusively with pod instead of using pod as a supplemental technology between print jobs . book stores order books through a wholesaler or distributor , usually at high discount of as much as 70 % . wholesalers obtain their books in two ways : either as a special order such that the book is ordered direct from a publisher when a book store requests a copy , or as stocked , which they keep in their own warehouse as part of their inventory . stocked books are usually also available through '' sale or return '' , meaning that the book store can return unsold stock for full credit as much as one year after the initial sale . pod books are rarely if ever available on such terms because for the publishing provider it is considered too much of a risk . however , wholesalers monitor what works they are selling , and if authors promote their work successfully and achieve a reasonable number of orders from book stores or online retailers ( who use the same wholesalers as the stores ) , then there is a reasonable chance of their work becoming available on such terms . although returnability lessens the risk for book stores , only a certain proportion of such stock can be returned . non-returnability can make bookstores less enthusiastic about pod books . many print-on-demand publications are debut works ; many bookstores are reluctant to risk an author 's first , untested work without the endorsement of a commercial publisher . another issue is that these books are not available right away and take time to create ( friedlander ) . when a customer wants to purchase one of these books , they are less likely to follow through with the sale because they do not get the book that day . they are more likely to go home and order through another company like amazon .