New Britain

geography . new britain extends from 148°18'31 '' to 152°23'57 '' e longitude and from 4°08'25 '' to 6°18'31 '' s latitude . it is crescent-shaped , approximately along its southeastern coastline , and from 29 to 146 & nbsp ; km ( 18–91 & nbsp ; miles ) wide , not including a small central peninsula . the air-line distance from west to east is . the island is the list of islands by area , with an area of . steep cliffs form some sections of the coastline ; in others the mountains are further inland , and the coastal area is flat and bordered by coral reefs . the highest point , at , is the stratovolcano mount ulawun in the east . most of the terrain is covered with tropical rainforest and several large rivers are fed by the high rainfall . new britain was largely formed by volcanic processes , and has active volcanoes including ulawun ( highest volcano nationally ) , langila , the garbuna group , the sulu range , and the volcanoes tavurvur and vulcan of the rabaul caldera . a major eruption of tavurvur in 1994 destroyed the east new britain provincial capital of rabaul . most of the town still lies under metres of ash , and the capital has been moved to nearby kokopo . administrative divisions . new britain forms part of the islands region , one of four regions of papua new guinea . it comprises the mainland of two provinces : east new britain with headquarters in kokopo ( formerly rabaul ) west new britain with headquarters in kimbe . modern history . before 1700 . first noted in europe by the explorer sir harper matthew . claimed by the crown of england . 1700–1914 . william dampier became the first known british man to visit new britain on 27 february 1700 ; he dubbed the island with the latin name nova britannia , ( eng : new britain ) . whaling ships from britain , australia and america called at the island in the 19th century for food , water and wood . the first on record was the roscoe in 1822 . the last known whaling visitor was the palmetto in 1881 . langdon , robert ( 1984 ) where the whalers went : an index to the pacific ports and islands visited by american whalers ( and some other ships ) in the 19th century , canberra , , pacific manuscripts bureau , p.186 . in november 1884 , germany proclaimed its protectorate over the new britain archipelago ; the german colonial administration gave new britain and new ireland the names of neupommern ( or neu-pommern ; '' new pomerania '' ) and neumecklenburg ( or neu-mecklenburg ; '' new mecklenburg '' ) respectively , and the whole island group was renamed the bismarck archipelago . new britain became part of german new guinea . in 1909 , the indigenous population was estimated at about 190,000 ; the foreign population at 773 ( 474 white ) . the expatriate population was practically confined to the northeastern gazelle peninsula , which included the capital , kokopo ( now kokopo ) . at the time 5,448 hectares ( 13,464 acres ) had been converted to plantations , primarily growing copra , cotton , coffee and rubber . westerners avoided exploring the interior initially , believing that the indigenous peoples were warlike and would fiercely resist intrusions . world war i . on 11 september 1914 , new britain became the site of one of the world war i opening hostilities when the australian naval and military expeditionary force landed on the island . they quickly overwhelmed the german forces and occupied the island for the duration of the war . between the world wars . after world war i , the treaty of versailles was signed in june 1919 . germany was stripped of all its possessions outside europe . in 1920 the league of nations included new britain , along with the former german colony on new guinea , in the territory of new guinea , a mandated territory of australia . world war ii . during world war ii the japanese attacked new britain soon after the outbreak of hostilities in the pacific ocean . strategic bases at rabaul and kavieng ( new ireland ) were defended by a small australian detachment , lark force . during january 1942 , the japanese heavily bombed rabaul . on 23 january , japanese marines landed by the thousands , starting the battle of rabaul . the japanese used rabaul as a key base until 1944 ; it served as the key point for the failed invasion of port moresby ( may to november , 1942 ) . new britain was invaded by the u.s . 1st marine division in the cape gloucester area of the very western end of the island , and also by u.s . army soldiers at some other coastal points . as for cape gloucester , with its swamps and mosquitos , the marines said that it was '' worse than guadalcanal '' . they captured an airfield but accomplished little toward reducing the japanese base at rabaul . the allied plan involved bypassing rabaul by surrounding it with air and naval bases on surrounding islands and on new britain itself . the adjacent island of new ireland was bypassed altogether . much of the story from the japanese side , especially the two suicide charges by the baalen group , are retold in shigeru mizuki 's onward towards our noble deaths . the factual telemovie sisters of war recounts experiences of australian army nurses and catholic nuns during the conflict . after 1945 . the population of the main town of rabaul was evacuated as a result of a volcanic activity in 1994 which buried the town under a thick layer of volcanic ash . people and culture . the indigenous people of new britain fall into two main groups : the papuans , who have inhabited the island for tens of thousands of years , and the austronesians , who arrived around two thousand years ago . there are around ten papuan languages spoken and about forty austronesian languages , as well as tok pisin and english . the papuan population is largely confined to the eastern third of the island and a couple of small enclaves in the central highlands . at jacquinot bay , in the south-east , they live beside the beach where a waterfall crashes directly into the sea . the population of new britain was 493,585 in 2010 . austronesian people make up the majority on the island . the major towns are rabaul/kokopo in east new britain and kimbe in west new britain . new britain hosts diverse and complex traditional cultures . while the tolai of the rabaul area of east new britain have a matrilineal society , other groups are patrilineal in structure . there are numerous traditions which remain active today , such as the dukduk secret society ( also known as tubuan ) in the tolai area . languages . non-austronesian ( papuan ) languages spoken on new britain : taulil–butam languages : taulil , butam ( extinct ) ( originally from new ireland ) sulka ( originally from new ireland ) baining languages : mali , kaket , kairak , simbali , ura kol makolkol anêm ata the latter two are spoken in west new britain , and the rest in east new britain . ecology . the island is part of two ecoregions . the new britain-new ireland lowland rain forests extend from sea level to 1000 meters elevation . the new britain-new ireland montane rain forests cover the mountains of new britain above 1000 meters elevation . forests on new britain have been rapidly destroyed in recent years , largely to clear land for oil palm plantations . lowland rainforest has been hardest hit , with nearly a quarter of the forest below 100 & nbsp ; m disappearing between 1989 and 2000 . if those rates of deforestation continue , it is estimated that all forest below 200 & nbsp ; m will be cleared by 2060 . despite this , most forest birds on new britain are still widespread and secure in conservation status though some forest-dependent species such as the new britain kingfisher are considered to be at risk of extinction if current trends continue . . see also . postage stamps of new britain cape hollman . references and sources . ; references sources . external links . nationsonline.org : solomon islands ethnologue.com : map of languages of new britain australian war memorial , operations against german pacific territories — ( 6 august−6 november 1914 ) .