Walter Cronkite

other activities . post-cbs evening news . as he had promised on his last show as anchor in 1981 , cronkite continued to broadcast occasionally as a special correspondent for cbs , cnn , and npr into the 21st century ; one such occasion was cronkite anchoring the second space flight by john glenn in 1998 as he had glenn 's first in 1962 . in 1983 , he reported on the british general election for the itv current affairs series world in action , interviewing , among many others , the victorious prime minister , margaret thatcher . cronkite hosted the annual vienna new year 's concert on pbs from 1985 to 2008 , succeeded by julie andrews in 2009 . for many years , until 2002 , he was also the host of the annual kennedy center honors . in 1998 , cronkite hosted the 90-minute documentary , silicon valley : a 100 year renaissance , produced by the silicon valley historical association . the film documented silicon valley 's rise from the origin of stanford university to the current high-technology powerhouse . the documentary was broadcast on pbs throughout the united states and in 26 countries . prior to 2004 , he could also be seen in the opening movie '' back to neverland '' shown in the walt disney world attraction the magic of disney animation , interviewing robin williams as if he is still on the cbs news channel , ending his on-camera time with cronkite 's famous catchphrase . in the feature , cronkite describes the steps taken in the creation of an animated film , while robin williams becomes an animated character ( and even becomes walter cronkite , impersonating his voice ) . he also was shown inviting disney guests and tourists to the disney classics theater . on may 21 , 1999 , walter cronkite participated in a panel discussion on '' integrity in the media '' with ben bradlee and mike mccurry at the connecticut forum in hartford , connecticut . cronkite provided a particularly funny anecdote about taking a picture from a house in houston , texas , where a newsworthy event occurred and being praised for getting a unique photograph , only to find out later that the city desk had provided him with the wrong address . . voice-overs . cronkite narrated the imax film about the space shuttle , the dream is alive , released in 1985 . from may 26 , 1986 , to august 15 , 1994 , he was the narrator 's voice in the epcot attraction spaceship earth , at walt disney world in orlando , florida . he provided the pivotal voice of captain neweyes in the 1993 animated film we 're back : a dinosaur 's story , delivering his trademark line at the end . in 1995 , he made an appearance on broadway , providing the voice of the titular book in the 1995 revival of how to succeed in business without really trying . cronkite was a finalist for nasa 's journalist in space program , which mirrored the teacher in space project , an opportunity that was suspended after the challenger disaster in 1986 . he recorded voice-overs for the 1995 film apollo 13 , modifying the script he was given to make it more '' cronkitian . '' in 2002 , cronkite was the voice of benjamin franklin in the educational television cartoon liberty 's kids , which included a news segment ending with the same phrase he did back on the cbs evening news . his distinctive voice provided the narration for the television ads of the university of texas , austin , his alma mater , with its 'we 're texas ' ad campaign . cronkite voiced tim 's grandpa in the brainpop episode about aging . he held amateur radio operator license kb2gsd and narrated a 2003 american radio relay league documentary explaining amateur radio 's role in disaster relief . the video tells amateur radio 's public service story to non-hams , focusing on ham radio 's part in helping various agencies respond to wildfires in the western us during 2002 , ham radio in space and the role amateur radio plays in emergency communications . '' dozens of radio amateurs helped the police and fire departments and other emergency services maintain communications in new york , pennsylvania and washington , dc , '' narrator cronkite intoned in reference to ham radio 's response to the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 . unusually , cronkite was a novice-class licensee—the entry level license—for his entire , and long , tenure in the hobby . on february 15 , 2005 , he went into the studio at cbs to record narration for wcc chatham radio , a documentary about guglielmo marconi and his chatham station , which became the busiest ship-to-shore wireless station in north america from 1914 to 1994 . the documentary was directed by christopher seufert of mooncusser films and premiered at the chatham marconi maritime center in april 2005 . in 2006 , cronkite hosted the world war one living history project , a program honoring america 's final handful of veterans from the first world war . the program was created by treehouse productions and aired on npr on november 11 , 2006 . in may 2009 , legacy of war , produced by pbs , was released . cronkite chronicles , over archive footage , the events following world war ii that resulted in america 's rise as the dominant world power . prior to his death , '' uncle walter '' hosted a number of tv specials and was featured in interviews about the times and events that occurred during his career as america 's '' most trusted '' man . in july 2006 , the 90-minute documentary walter cronkite : witness to history aired on pbs . the special was narrated by katie couric , who assumed the cbs evening news anchor chair in september 2006 . cronkite provided the voiceover introduction to couric 's cbs evening news , which began on september 5 , 2006 . cronkite 's voiceover was notably not used on introducing the broadcast reporting his funeral – no voiceover was used on this occasion . tv and movie appearances . cronkite made a cameo appearance on a 1974 episode of the mary tyler moore show , in which he met with lou grant in his office . ted baxter , who at first tried to convince cronkite that he ( baxter ) was as good a newsman as eric sevareid , pleaded with cronkite to hire him for the network news , at least to give sport scores , and gave an example : '' the north stars 3 , the kings oh ! '' cronkite turned to grant and said , '' i 'm gon na get you for this ! '' cronkite later said that he was disappointed that his scene was filmed in one take , since he had hoped to sit down and chat with the cast . in the late 1980s and again in the 1990s , cronkite appeared on the news-oriented situation comedy murphy brown as himself . both episodes were written by the emmy award-winning team of tom seeley and norm gunzenhauser . he also continued hosting a variety of series . in the early 1980s , he was host of the documentary series world war ii with walter cronkite . in 1991 , he hosted the tv documentary dinosaur ! on a & e ( not related to the documentary dinosaur ! hosted by christopher reeve on cbs six years earlier ) , and a 1994 follow-up series , ape man : the story of human evolution . in 1995 , he narrated the world liberty concert held in the netherlands . cronkite routinely hosted the kennedy center honors from 1981 to 2002 . cronkite appeared briefly in the 2005 dramatic documentary the american ruling class written by lewis lapham ; the 2000 film thirteen days reporting on the cuban missile crisis ; and provided the opening synopsis of the american space program leading to the events in apollo 13 for the 1995 ron howard apollo 13 ( film ) . political activism . cronkite wrote a syndicated opinion column for king features syndicate . in 2005 and 2006 , he contributed to the huffington post . cronkite was the honorary chairman of the interfaith alliance . message from walter cronkite , the interfaith alliance . retrieved august 3 , 2012 . in 2006 , he presented the walter cronkite faith and freedom award to actor and activist george clooney on behalf of his organization at its annual dinner in new york . cronkite was a vocal advocate for free airtime for political candidates . he worked with the alliance for better campaigns and common cause , for instance , on an unsuccessful lobbying effort to have an amendment added to the bipartisan campaign reform act that would have required tv broadcast companies to provide free airtime to candidates . cronkite criticized the present system of campaign finance which allows elections to '' be purchased '' by special interests , and he noted that all the european democracies '' provide their candidates with extensive free airtime . '' '' in fact , '' cronkite pointed out , '' of all the major nations worldwide that profess to have democracies , only seven – just seven – do not offer free airtime '' this put the united states on a list with ecuador , honduras , malaysia , taiwan , tanzania , and trinidad and tobago . cronkite concluded that '' the failure to give free airtime for our political campaigns endangers our democracy . '' during the elections held in 2000 , the amount spent by candidates in the major tv markets approached 1 billion . '' what our campaign asks is that the television industry yield just a tiny percentage of that windfall , less than 1 percent , to fund free airtime . '' he was a member of the constitution project 's bipartisan liberty and security committee . he also supported the nonprofit world hunger organization heifer international . in 1998 , he supported president bill clinton during clinton 's impeachment trial . he was also a proponent of limited world government on the american federalist model , writing fundraising letters for the world federalist association ( now citizens for global solutions ) . in accepting the 1999 norman cousins global governance award at the ceremony at the united nations , cronkite said : it seems to many of us that if we are to avoid the eventual catastrophic world conflict we must strengthen the united nations as a first step toward a world government patterned after our own government with a legislature , executive and judiciary , and police to enforce its international laws and keep the peace . to do that , of course , we americans will have to yield up some of our sovereignty . that would be a bitter pill . it would take a lot of courage , a lot of faith in the new order . but the american colonies did it once and brought forth one of the most nearly perfect unions the world has ever seen . originally quoted for this book in walter cronkite . '' the case for democratic world government . '' earth island journal . vol . 15 , no . 2 . summer 2000 . p . 45 . cronkite contrasted his support for accountable global government with the opposition to it by politically active christian fundamentalists in the united states : even as with the american rejection of the league of nations , our failure to live up to our obligations to the united nations is led by a handful of willful senators who choose to pursue their narrow , selfish political objectives at the cost of our nation 's conscience . they pander to and are supported by the christian coalition and the rest of the religious right wing . their leader , pat robertson , has written that we should have a world government but only when the messiah arrives . any attempt to achieve world order before that time must be the work of the devil ! well join me . i 'm glad to sit here at the right hand of satan . in 2003 , cronkite , who owned property on martha 's vineyard , became involved in a long-running debate over his opposition to the construction of a wind farm in that area . in his column , he repeatedly condemned president george w . bush and the 2003 invasion of iraq . cronkite appeared in the 2004 robert greenwald film outfoxed , where he offered commentary on what he said were unethical and overtly political practices at the fox news channel . cronkite remarked that when fox news was founded by rupert murdoch , '' it was intended to be a conservative organization – beyond that ; a far right organization '' . in january 2006 , during a press conference to promote the pbs documentary about his career , cronkite said that he felt the same way about america 's presence in iraq as he had about their presence in vietnam in 1968 and that he felt america should recall its troops . cronkite spoke out against the war on drugs in support of the drug policy alliance , writing a fundraising letter and appearing in advertisements on behalf of the dpa . in the letter , cronkite wrote : '' today , our nation is fighting two wars : one abroad and one at home . while the war in iraq is in the headlines , the other war is still being fought on our own streets . its casualties are the wasted lives of our own citizens . i am speaking of the war on drugs . and i can not help but wonder how many more lives , and how much more money , will be wasted before another robert mcnamara admits what is plain for all to see : the war on drugs is a failure . '' . personal life . cronkite was married for nearly 65 years to mary elizabeth 'betsy ' maxwell cronkite , from march 30 , 1940 , until her death from cancer on march 15 , 2005 . . they had three children : nancy cronkite , kathy cronkite , and walter leland ( chip ) cronkite iii ( who is married to actress deborah rush ) . cronkite dated singer joanna simon from 2005 to 2009 . nypost.com/2009/08/23/walter-jilt-his-gal-pal a grandson , walter cronkite iv , now works at cbs . cronkite 's cousin is former mayor of kansas city and 2008 democratic nominee for missouri 's 6th congressional district kay barnes . cronkite was an accomplished sailor and enjoyed sailing coastal waters of the united states in his custom-built 48-foot sunward '' wyntje '' . cronkite was a member of the united states coast guard auxiliary , with the honorary rank of commodore . throughout the 1950s , he was an aspiring sports car racer , even racing in the 1959 12 hours of sebring . cronkite was reported to be a fan of the game diplomacy , which was rumored to be henry kissinger 's favorite game . . death . in june 2009 , cronkite was reported to be terminally ill . he died on july 17 , 2009 , at his home in new york city aged 92 . he is believed to have died from cerebrovascular disease . cronkite 's funeral took place on july 23 , 2009 , at st . bartholomew 's church in midtown manhattan , new york city . among many journalists who attended were , tom brokaw , connie chung , katie couric , charles gibson , matt lauer , dan rather , andy rooney , morley safer , diane sawyer , bob schieffer , meredith vieira , barbara walters , and brian williams . at his funeral , his friends noted his love of music , including , recently , drumming . he was cremated and his remains buried next to his wife , betsy , in the family plot in kansas city . '' friends recall walter cronkite ’ s private side '' , brian stelter , the new york times , july 23 , 2009 . . legacy . public credibility and trustworthiness . for many years , until a decade after he left his post as anchor , cronkite was considered one of the most trusted figures in the united states . for most of his 19 years as anchor , he was the '' predominant news voice in america . '' affectionately known as '' uncle walter , '' he covered many of the important news events of the era so effectively that his image and voice are closely associated with the cuban missile crisis , the assassination of john f . kennedy , the vietnam war , the apollo 11 moon landing , and the watergate scandal . usa today wrote that '' few tv figures have ever had as much power as cronkite did at his height . '' enjoying the cult of personality surrounding cronkite in those years , cbs allowed some good-natured fun-poking at its star anchorman in some episodes of the network 's popular situation comedy all in the family , during which the lead character archie bunker would sometimes complain about the newsman , calling him '' pinko cronkite . '' cronkite trained himself to speak at a rate of 124 words per minute in his newscasts , so that viewers could clearly understand him . in contrast , americans average about 165 words per minute , and fast , difficult-to-understand talkers speak close to 200 words per minute . statement from audiologist ray hull , phd , ray.hull wichita.edu , quoted in '' home make-over : how to design an efficient listening environment '' by alyssa banotai , advance for speech-language pathologists and audiologists ( april 16 , 2007 ) , p . 8 . . awards and honors . in 1968 , the faculty of the e . w . scripps school of journalism at ohio university voted to award cronkite the carr van anda award '' for enduring contributions to journalism . '' e.w . scripps school of journalism . in 1970 , cronkite received a '' freedom of the press '' george polk award and the paul white award from the radio television digital news association . in 1972 , in recognition of his career , princeton university 's american whig-cliosophic society awarded cronkite the james madison award for distinguished public service . 2002 letter to kofi annan in 1981 , the year he retired , former president jimmy carter awarded cronkite the presidential medal of freedom . in that year , he also received the s . roger horchow award for greatest public service by a private citizen , an award given out annually by jefferson awards , and the paul white award for lifetime achievement from the radio television digital news association . in 1985 , cronkite was honored with the induction into the academy of television arts & sciences hall of fame . in 1989 he received the four freedoms award for the freedom of speech in 1995 , he received the ischia international journalism award . in 1999 , cronkite received the rotary national award for space achievement 's corona award in recognition of a lifetime of achievement in space exploration . he was elected a fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences in 2003 . on march 1 , 2006 , cronkite became the first non-astronaut to receive nasa 's ambassador of exploration award . among cronkite 's numerous awards were four peabody award for excellence in broadcasting . in 2003 , cronkite was honored by the vienna philharmonic with the franz schalk gold medal , in view of his contributions to the new year 's concert and the cultural image of austria . minor planet 6318 cronkite , discovered in 1990 by eleanor helin is named in his honor . . cronkite school at arizona state university . a few years after cronkite retired , tom chauncey , an owner of ksaz-tv , the then-cbs affiliate in phoenix , contacted cronkite , an old friend , and asked him if he would be willing to have the journalism school at arizona state university named after him . cronkite immediately agreed . the asu program acquired status and respect from its namesake . cronkite was not just a namesake , but he also took the time to interact with the students and staff of the walter cronkite school of journalism and mass communication . cronkite made the trip to arizona annually to present the walter cronkite award for excellence in journalism to a leader in the field of media . '' the values that mr . cronkite embodies – excellence , integrity , accuracy , fairness , objectivity – we try to instill in our students each and every day . there is no better role model for our faculty or our students , '' said dean christopher callahan . the school , with approximately 1,700 students , is widely regarded as one of the top journalism schools in the country . it is housed in a new facility in downtown phoenix that is equipped with 14 digital newsrooms and computer labs , two tv studios , 280 digital student work stations , the cronkite theater , the first amendment forum , and new technology . the school 's students regularly finish at the top of national collegiate journalism competitions , such as the hearst journalism awards program and the society of professional journalists mark of excellence awards . in 2009 , students won the robert f . kennedy journalism award for college print reporting . in 2008 , the state-of-the-art journalism education complex in the heart of asu 's downtown phoenix campus was also built in his honor . the walter cronkite regents chair in communication seats the texas college of communications dean . . walter cronkite papers . the walter cronkite papers are preserved at the curatorial dolph briscoe center for american history at the university of texas at austin . occupying 293 linear feet ( almost 90 metres ) of shelf space , the papers document cronkite 's journalism career . amongst the collected material are cronkite 's early beginnings while he still lived in houston . they encompass his coverage of world war ii as a united press international correspondent , where he cemented his reputation by taking on hazardous overseas assignments . during this time he also covered the nuremberg trials serving as the chief of the united press bureau in moscow . the main content of the papers documents cronkite 's career with cbs news between 1950 and 1981 . the cronkite papers assemble a variety of interviews with u.s . presidents , including herbert hoover , harry truman , and ronald reagan . president lyndon johnson requested a special interview with cronkite while he was broadcasting live on cbs . between 1990 and 1993 , don carleton , executive director for the center for american history , assisted cronkite '' in memoriam : walter cronkite , 1916–2009 '' , center for american history . retrieved 2009-07-31 . as he compiled an oral history to write his autobiography , a reporter 's life , which was published in 1996 . the taped memoirs became an integral part of an eight-part television series cronkite remembers , which was shown on the discovery channel . as a newsman , cronkite devoted his attention to the early days of the space program , and the '' space race '' between the united states and the soviet union . the nasa honored cronkite on february 28 , 2006 . michael coats , director of nasa 's lyndon b . johnson space center in houston , presented cronkite with the ambassador of exploration award . cronkite was the first non-astronaut thus honored . nasa presented cronkite with a moon rock sample from the early apollo expeditions spanning 1969 to 1972 . cronkite passed on the moon rock to bill powers , president of the university of texas at austin , and it became part of the collection at the dolph briscoe center for american history . carleton said at this occasion , '' we are deeply honored by walter cronkite 's decision to entrust this prestigious award to the center for american history . the center already serves as the proud steward of his professional and personal papers , which include his coverage of the space program for cbs news . it is especially fitting that the archive documenting walter 's distinguished career should also include one of the moon rocks that the heroic astronauts of the apollo program brought to earth . '' . memorial at missouri western state university . on november 4 , 2013 , missouri western state university in st . joseph , missouri , dedicated the walter cronkite memorial . the nearly 6,000 square-foot memorial includes images , videos and memorabilia from cronkite 's life and the many events he covered as a journalist . the memorial includes a replica of the newsroom from which cronkite broadcast the news during the 1960s and 1970s . in 2014 , the memorial received the missouri division of tourism 's spotlight award . . books . the challenges of change ( 1971 ) . washington : public affairs press . eye on the world ( 1971 ) . new york : cowles book co . a reporter 's life ( 1996 ) . new york : alfred a . knopf .