Madame Bovary

plot synopsis . madame bovary takes place in provincial northern france , near the town of rouen in normandy . charles bovary is a shy , oddly dressed teenager arriving at a new school where his new classmates ridicule him . charles struggles his way to a second-rate medical degree and becomes an officier de santé in the public health service . he marries the woman his mother has chosen for him , the unpleasant but supposedly rich widow héloïse dubuc . he sets out to build a practice in the village of tôtes . one day , charles visits a local farm to set the owner 's broken leg and meets his patient 's daughter , emma rouault . emma is a beautiful , poetically dressed young woman who has received a '' good education '' in a convent . she has a powerful yearning for luxury and romance inspired by reading popular novels . charles is immediately attracted to her , and visits his patient far more often than necessary , until héloïse 's jealousy puts a stop to the visits . when héloïse unexpectedly dies , charles waits a decent interval before courting emma in earnest . her father gives his consent , and emma and charles marry . the novel 's focus shifts to emma . charles means well but is plodding and clumsy . after he and emma attend an elegant ball given by the marquis d'andervilliers , emma finds her married life dull and becomes listless . charles decides his wife needs a change of scenery and moves his practice to the larger market town of yonville ( traditionally identified with the town of ry ) . there , emma gives birth to a daughter , berthe , but motherhood proves a disappointment to emma . she becomes infatuated with léon dupuis , an intelligent young man she meets in yonville . léon is a law student who shares emma 's appreciation for literature and music and returns her esteem . concerned with maintaining her self-image as a devoted wife and mother , emma does not acknowledge her passion for léon and conceals her contempt for charles , drawing comfort from the thought of her virtue . léon despairs of gaining emma 's affection and departs for paris to continue his studies . one day , a rich and rakish landowner , rodolphe boulanger , brings a servant to the doctor 's office to be bled . he casts his eye over emma and imagines she will be easily seduced . he invites her to go riding with him for the sake of her health . charles , solicitous for his wife 's health and not at all suspicious , embraces the plan . emma and rodolphe begin an affair . she , consumed by her romantic fantasy , risks compromising herself with indiscreet letters and visits to her lover . after four years , she insists they run away together . rodolphe does not share her enthusiasm for this plan and on the eve of their planned departure , he ends the relationship with an apologetic , self-effacing letter placed at the bottom of a basket of apricots delivered to emma . the shock is so great that emma falls deathly ill and briefly returns to religion . when emma is nearly fully recovered , she and charles attend the opera , at charles ' insistence , in nearby rouen . the work being performed that evening was gaetano donizetti 's lucia di lammermoor , based on walter scott 's 1819 historical novel the bride of lammermoor . the opera reawakens emma 's passions , and she re-encounters léon who , now educated and working in rouen , is also attending the opera . they begin an affair . while charles believes that she is taking piano lessons , emma travels to the city each week to meet léon , always in the same room of the same hotel , which the two come to view as their home . the love affair is ecstatic at first , but léon grows bored with emma 's emotional excesses , and emma grows ambivalent about léon . emma indulges her fancy for luxury goods with purchases made on credit from the crafty merchant lheureux , who arranges for her to obtain power of attorney over charles ' estate . emma 's debt steadily mounts . when lheureux calls in bovary 's debt , emma pleads for money from several people , including léon and rodolphe , only to be turned down . in despair , she swallows arsenic and dies an agonizing death . charles , heartbroken , abandons himself to grief , preserves emma 's room as a shrine , and adopts her attitudes and tastes to keep her memory alive . in his last months , he stops working and lives by selling off his possessions . his remaining possessions are seized to pay off lheureux . when he finds rodolphe and léon 's love letters , he breaks down for good . he dies , and his young daughter berthe is placed with her grandmother , who soon dies . berthe then lives with an impoverished aunt , who sends her to work in a cotton mill . the book concludes with the local pharmacist homais , who had competed with charles ' medical practice , gaining prominence among yonville people and being rewarded for his medical achievements . characters . emma bovary is the novel 's eponymous protagonist ( charles 's mother and his former wife are also referred to as madame bovary , while their daughter remains mademoiselle bovary ) . she has a highly romanticized view of the world and craves beauty , wealth , passion , as well as high society . it is the disparity between these romantic ideals and the realities of her country life that drive most of the novel , leading her into two affairs and to accrue an insurmountable amount of debt that eventually leads to her suicide . she lives a life of the mind , and it is her introspection and analysis of her internal conflicts that marks the psychological growth of flaubert as an author . charles bovary , emma 's husband , is a very simple and common man . he is a country doctor by profession but is , as in everything else , not very good at it . he is in fact not qualified enough to be termed a doctor but is instead an officier de santé , or '' health officer '' . yet he is a healthy man who enjoys his work , riding about to attend to patients . he is outgoing and friendly , with a gift for remembering names and faces , and he is mostly called upon to perform first aid . he does this competently enough to earn the loyalty and friendship of his patients in tôtes ; however , when he moves to yonville to practise medicine there he is sabotaged by the pharmacist homais . charles adores his wife and finds her faultless , despite obvious evidence to the contrary . he never suspects her affairs and gives her complete control over his finances , thereby securing his own ruin . despite charles 's complete devotion to emma , she despises him as she finds him the epitome of all that is dull and common . rodolphe boulanger is a wealthy local man who seduces emma as one more in a long string of mistresses . though occasionally charmed by emma , rodolphe feels little true emotion towards her . as emma becomes more and more desperate , rodolphe loses interest and worries about her lack of caution . after his decision to escape with emma , he resigns and feels unable to handle it , especially the existence of her daughter , berthe . léon dupuis is a clerk who introduces emma to poetry and who falls in love with her . he leaves yonville when he despairs of emma reciprocating his feelings , but the two reconnect after emma 's affair with rodolphe boulanger collapses . they begin an affair , which is emma 's second . monsieur lheureux is a manipulative and sly merchant who continually convinces people in yonville to buy goods on credit and borrow money from him . having led many small businesspeople into financial ruin to support his business ambitions , lheureux lends money to charles and plays emma masterfully , leading the bovarys so far into debt as to cause their financial ruin and emma 's suicide . monsieur homais is the town pharmacist . he is vehemently anti-clerical and practises medicine without a licence . though he pretends to befriend charles , he actively undermines charles 's medical practice by luring away his patients and by setting charles up to attempt a difficult surgery , which fails and destroys charles 's professional credibility in yonville . justin is monsieur homais ' apprentice and second cousin . he had been taken into the house on charity and was useful at the same time as a servant . he harbors a crush on emma . at one point he steals the key to the medical supply room , and emma tricks him into opening a container of arsenic so she can '' kill some rats keeping her awake '' . she , however , consumes the arsenic herself , much to his horror and remorse . setting . the setting of the novel is important , first as it applies to flaubert 's realist style and social commentary , and , second , as it relates to the protagonist , emma . francis steegmuller estimated that the novel begins in october 1827 and ends in august 1846 . this corresponds with the july monarchy — the reign of louis philippe i , who strolled paris carrying his own umbrella as if to honor an ascendant bourgeois middle class . much of the time and effort that flaubert spends detailing the customs of the rural french people shows them aping an urban , emergent middle class . flaubert strove for an accurate depiction of common life . the account of a county fair in yonville displays this and dramatizes it by showing the fair in real time counterpoised with a simultaneous intimate interaction behind a window overlooking the fair . flaubert knew the regional setting , the place of his birth and youth , in and around the city of rouen in normandy . his faithfulness to the mundane elements of country life has garnered the book its reputation as the beginning of the movement known as literary realism . flaubert 's capture of the commonplace in his setting contrasts with the yearnings of his protagonist . the practicalities of common life foil emma 's romantic fantasies . flaubert uses this juxtaposition to reflect both setting and character . emma becomes more capricious and ludicrous in the light of everyday reality . yet her yearnings magnify the self-important banality of the local people . emma , though impractical , and with her provincial education lacking and unformed , still reflects a hopefulness regarding beauty and greatness that seems absent in the bourgeois class . style . the book was in some ways inspired by the life of a schoolfriend of the author who became a doctor . flaubert 's friend and mentor , louis bouilhet , had suggested to him that this might be a suitably '' down-to-earth '' subject for a novel and that flaubert should attempt to write in a '' natural way , '' without digressions . flaubert , oeuvres , vol 1 , bibliothèque de la pléiade , 1972 p.305 the writing style was of supreme importance to flaubert . while writing the novel , he wrote that it would be '' a book about nothing , a book dependent on nothing external , which would be held together by the internal strength of its style , '' an aim which , for the critic jean rousset , made flaubert '' the first in date of the non-figurative novelists , '' such as james joyce and virginia woolf . quoted in madame bovary : a reference guide , laurence m porter , eugene f gray , 2002 , p . 130 though flaubert avowed no liking for the style of balzac , the novel he produced became arguably a prime example and an enhancement of literary realism in the vein of balzac . the '' realism '' in the novel was to prove an important element in the trial for obscenity : the lead prosecutor argued that not only was the novel immoral , but that realism in literature was also an offence against art and decency . the realist movement was , in part , a reaction against romanticism . emma may be said to be the embodiment of a romantic : in her mental and emotional process , she has no relation to the realities of her world . although in some ways he may seem to identify with emma , flaubert frequently mocks her romantic daydreaming and taste in literature . the accuracy of flaubert 's supposed assertion that '' madame bovary , c'est moi '' ( '' madame bovary is me '' ) has been questioned . in his letters , he distanced himself from the sentiments in the novel . to edma roger des genettes , he wrote , '' tout ce que j'aime n ' y est pas '' ( '' all that i love is not there '' ) and to marie-sophie leroyer de chantepie , '' je n ' y ai rien mis ni de mes sentiments ni de mon existence '' ( '' i have used nothing of my feelings or of my life '' ) . for mario vargas llosa , '' if emma bovary had not read all those novels , it is possible that her fate might have been different . '' vargas llosa quoted in madame bovary has been seen as a commentary on the bourgeoisie , the folly of aspirations that can never be realized or a belief in the validity of a self-satisfied , deluded personal culture , associated with flaubert 's period , especially during the reign of louis philippe , when the middle class grew to become more identifiable in contrast to the working class and the nobility . flaubert despised the bourgeoisie . in his dictionary of received ideas , the bourgeoisie is characterized by intellectual and spiritual superficiality , raw ambition , shallow culture , a love of material things , greed , and above all a mindless parroting of sentiments and beliefs . for vargas llosa , '' emma 's drama is the gap between illusion and reality , the distance between desire and its fulfillment '' and shows '' the first signs of alienation that a century later will take hold of men and women in industrial societies . '' however , the novel is not simply about a woman 's dreamy romanticism . charles is also unable to grasp reality or understand emma 's needs and desires . literary significance and reception . long established as one of the greatest novels , the book has been described as a '' perfect '' work of fiction . henry james wrote : '' madame bovary has a perfection that not only stamps it , but that makes it stand almost alone : it holds itself with such a supreme unapproachable assurance as both excites and defies judgment . '' marcel proust praised the '' grammatical purity '' of flaubert 's style , while vladimir nabokov said that '' stylistically it is prose doing what poetry is supposed to do '' . quoted by malcolm bowie , introduction to madame bovary , translated by margaret mauldon , oup , 2004 p . vii similarly , in his preface to his novel the joke , milan kundera wrote , '' not until the work of flaubert did prose lose the stigma of aesthetic inferiority . ever since madame bovary , the art of the novel has been considered equal to the art of poetry . '' giorgio de chirico said that in his opinion '' from the narrative point of view , the most perfect book is madame bovary by flaubert '' . see excerpt on fondazionedechirico.org julian barnes called it the best novel that 's ever been written . the novel exemplifies the tendency of realism , over the course of the nineteenth century , to become increasingly psychological , concerned with the accurate representation of thoughts and emotions rather than of external things . in this way it precedes the french novelist marcel proust and the twentieth-century apotheosis james joyce . adaptations . film . madame bovary has had the following film adaptations : unholy love ( 1932 ) , directed by albert ray madame bovary ( 1934 ) , directed by jean renoir and starring max dearly and valentine tessier madame bovary ( 1937 ) , directed by gerhard lamprecht and starring pola negri , aribert wäscher and ferdinand marian madame bovary ( 1949 ) , directed by vincente minnelli and starring jennifer jones , james mason , van heflin , louis jourdan and gene lockhart madame bovary ( 1964 ) , a bbc tv film written by giles cooper madame bovary ( 1969 ) , directed by hans schott-schobinger and starring edwige fenech madame bovary ( 1975 ) , a bbc tv film that used the same script as the 1964 film save and protect ( 1989 ) , directed by alexandr sokurov madame bovary ( 1991 ) , directed by claude chabrol , and starring isabelle huppert in 1991 . jon fortgang , writing for film4 , praised the film as '' sumptuous period piece and pertinent tragic drama '' . maya memsaab ( 1993 ) , a hindi-language film , directed by ketan mehta and starring deepa sahi madame bovary ( 2014 ) , directed by sophie barthes and starring mia wasikowska , henry lloyd-hughes , paul giamatti , and ezra miller david lean 's film ryan 's daughter ( 1970 ) was a loose adaptation of the story , relocating it to ireland during the time of the easter rebellion . the script had begun life as a straight adaptation of madame bovary , but lean convinced writer robert bolt to re-work it into another setting . other adaptations . emmanuel bondeville 's opera madame bovary was produced in 1951 . posy simmonds ' 1999 graphic novel gemma bovery ( and gemma bovery ( film ) ) reworked the story into a satirical tale of english expatriates in france . a 2000 tv series adaptation by heidi thomas was made for the bbc , starring frances o'connor , hugh bonneville and hugh dancy . vale abraão ( 1993 ) ( abraham 's vale ) , directed by manoel de oliveira , is a close interpretation set in portugal , even referencing and discussing flaubert 's novel several times . the novel was loosely adapted in the christian video series veggietales under the name madame blueberry . . see also . delphine delamare the perpetual orgy i am not madame bovary ( originally titled i am not pan jinlian ) . references . external links . original text from project gutenberg madame bovary in english , translated by eleanor marx aveling 1886 , first english translation . les manuscrits de madame bovary – site with images and transcriptions of flaubert 's original manuscripts , plus 4500 pages deleted/censored material madame bovary , 13-part globe radio adaptation , aired on npr playhouse in the late 1980s . madame bovary , audio version 20px madame bovary ( original version ) with 7500+ english annotations at tailored texts madame bovary , bbc radio 4 discussion with andy martin , mary orr & robert gildea ( in our time , 12 jul . 2007 )