Cycle rickshaw

overview . the first cycle rickshaws were built in the 1880s , and they were first used widely in 1929 in singapore . six years later they outnumbered pulled rickshaws . by 1950 cycle rickshaws were found in every south and east asian country . by the late 1980s there were an estimated 4 million cycle rickshaws in the world . the vehicle is generally pedal-driven by a driver , though some are equipped with an electric motor to assist the driver . the vehicle is usually a tricycle , though some quadracycle models exist , and some bicycles with trailers are configured as cycle rickshaws . some cycle rickshaws have gas or electric motors . . passenger configuration . the configuration of driver and passenger seats varies . generally the driver sits in front of the passengers to pedal the rickshaw . there are some designs , though , where the cyclist driver sits behind the passengers . in many asian countries , like bangladesh , india and china , the passenger seat is located behind the driver , while in indonesia , malaysia , cambodia and vietnam the driver sits behind the passenger seat . in the philippines , the passenger seats are usually located beside the driver in a side car . similarly , in the trishaw in singapore and the sai kaa in burma the passengers sit alongside the driver . . nomenclature . the cycle rickshaw is known by a variety of other names , including : velotaxi ( used in germany ) bikecab cyclo ( used in vietnam and cambodia ) pedicab ( used in the united kingdom , united states ) and canada bike taxi ( used in buffalo , new york ) bicitaxi ( used in mexico ) taxi ecologico ( used in mexico ) trishaw beca ( used in malaysia ) becak ( used in indonesia ) helicak ( used in indonesia ) it 's another version of becak but with engines , not manual pedals traysikad , trisikad , sikad or padyak ( used in the philippines ) . country overview . cycle rickshaws are used in asian countries , but also in countries outside asia , such as large european and some north america cities . they are used primarily for their novelty value , as an entertaining form of transportation for tourists and locals , but they also have environmental benefits and may be quicker than other forms of transport if traffic congestion is high . cycle rickshaws used outside asia often are mechanically more complex , having multiple gears , more powerful brakes , and in some cases motorized bicycle to provide additional power . africa . . madagascar . in madagascar rickshaws , including cycle rickshaws or cyclo-pousse , are a common form of transportation in a number of cities . rickshaws are known as pousse-pousse , meaning push-push , reportedly for the pulled rickshaws that required a second person to push the vehicles up hills . cycles are more common in the hillier areas , like toamasina . . americas . . canada . in canada there are pedicabs in operation in victoria , british columbia and vancouver , british columbia . they are regulated in toronto and vancouver , british columbia . . mexico . in mexico , they are called bicitaxi or taxi ecologico ( literally '' ecological taxi '' ) . united states . in many major cities , pedicabs can be found rolling about city centers , nightlife districts , park lands , sports stadia , and tourist-heavy areas . myriad uses have been discovered in the states , including car-park-to-event transport at large events nationwide . thousands of pedicabs today operate on streets in locales including green bay and milwaukee , wi ; austin , tx ; manhattan , ny ; chicago ; san diego ; boston ; san francisco ; miami ; washington , d.c . ; denver ; portland , or ; seattle ; charleston ; new orleans ; nashville ; phoenix ; salt lake city ; philadelphia ; and dozens of other hot spots . manhattan sports the largest collection of pedicabs operating within city limits , and the city of new york itself has mandated that approximately 850 pedicabs always sport operating permits issued by the city . pedicabs in the united states seem to have gotten their start at the 1962 world 's fair in seattle . . asia . . bangladesh . cycle rickshaws ( রিকশা riksha ) are the most popular modes of transport in bangladesh and are available for hire throughout the country including the capital city dhaka , known as the '' rickshaw capital of the world '' . they were introduced here about 1938 and by the end of the 20th century there were 300,000+ cycle rickshaws in dhaka . approximately 400,000 cycle rickshaws run each day . cycle rickshaws in bangladesh are also more convenient than the other public modes of transports in the country namely auto rickshaws , cabs and buses . they are mostly convertible , decorated , rickshawart.org website of the social enterprise rickshawart in bangladesh . dhaka . rickshaws with folding hoods and are the only kind of vehicles that can be driven in many neighbourhoods of the city with narrow streets and lanes . however , increasing traffic congestion and the resulting collisions have led to the banning of rickshaws on many major streets in the city . urban employment in bangladesh also largely depend on cycle rickshaws . because of inflation and unemployment in the rural areas , people from villages crowd in the cities to become rickshaw drivers locally called the riksha-wala ( রিকশাওয়ালা ) . cambodia . cycle rickshaws are known as cyclo ( pronounced see-clo ) in cambodia , derived from the french cyclo . china . since the 1950s , when the pulled rickshaw was phased out , mid-city and large city passengers may travel using three-wheeled pedicabs , or cycle rickshaws . the chinese term for the conveyance is sanlunche ( 三轮车 ) . the vehicles may be pedal- or motor-powered . in shanghai , most of the vehicles are powered by electricity . tourists are warned to beware of over-charging vendors , especially who wear an '' old fashioned costume '' or are located near tourist locations . whilst many local tourism authorities still issue licences for rickshaw drivers to carry passengers , authorities in china are tightening rules in order to alleviate cheating of tourists and to reduce traffic congestion ( e.g . a typical chinese cycle-rickshaw will travel at less than 10kmh and is wide enough to fill an entire motor or bicycle lane and therefore are blamed as a major cause of traffic congestion ) , and have been banned in many cities already . india . the first attempt of improving the existing cycle rickshaws and then converting them to electric ones was done by the nimbkar agricultural research institute in the late 1990s . . service availability . cycle rickshaws were used in kolkata starting about 1930 and are now common in rural and urban areas of india . . ecocabs and similar service . navdeep asija started a dial-a-cycle rickshaw concept known as ecocabs , environmental friendly ecocabs . italy . pedicab service is available in florence , milan , rome , bari . the netherlands . pedicab service is available in amsterdam , the hague and in the caribbean , at willemstad . thomas lundy of amsterdam adapted his battery-electric assisted cycle rickshaw to become what he terms '' semi-solar powered '' , resulting in a video report on reuters . . norway . pedicab service is available in oslo , fredrikstad , bergen , porsgrunn and tønsberg . . poland . during world war ii , when poland was under nazi german occupation , the german authorities confiscated most privately owned cars and many of the streetcars and buses . because of that , public transport was partially replaced by cycle rickshaws , at first improvised and with time mass-produced by bicycle factories . cycle rickshaws became popular in warsaw and by the start of the warsaw uprising were a common sight on the city 's streets . pedicabs still can be found in most large cities in poland from łódź to warsaw . spain . alicante , barcelona , zaragoza , málaga san sebastián and seville have pedicab service . . united kingdom . cycle rickshaws operate in central london , including soho , piccadilly , leicester square , and covent garden . pedal me is a pedicab company using electric cargo bikes to transport passengers and cargo across central and inner london . rickshaws and pedicabs are found in the centre of edinburgh where vendors are hired like taxis and provide tours . pedicabs and their variants are also available in oxford . . oceania . . australia . two companies operate pedicabs in sydney . pedapod operate 'pod ' styled cabs from queen victoria buildings to circular quay . tikki tikki australia operate more advanced 'classic ' styled cabs from the central railway station to circular quay and up to kings cross and down to star city casino.tikki tikki also has pedicabs and rickshaws in london and vancouver pedicabs are also found in brisbane , melbourne , darwin , perth , gold coast , cairns , townsville , newcastle , and byron bay . '' step on it please - the clean getaway '' , smh . new zealand . new zealand has had pedicabs since the early 1990s . auckland currently has 19 bikes mainly run by bikeman and a few owner-operators . queenstown also has a fleet of danish-made rickshaws run by a local entrepreneur . economic , social and political aspects . economics . in many asian cities where they are widely used , cycle rickshaw driving provides essential employment for recent immigrants from rural areas , generally impoverished men . one study in bangladesh showed that cycle rickshaw driving was connected with some increases in income for poor agricultural labourers who moved to urban areas , but that the extreme physical demands of the job meant that these benefits decreased for long-term drivers . begum , sharifa and binayak sen ( 2005 ) . pulling rickshaws in the city of dhaka : a way out of poverty ? environment and urbanization 17 ( 2 ) :11-25 . in jakarta , most cycle rickshaw drivers in the 1980s were former landless agricultural labourers from rural areas of java . azuma , yoshifumi ( 2003 ) . urban peasants : beca drivers in jakarta . jakarta : pustaka sinar harapan . in 2003 , dhaka cycle rickshaw drivers earned an estimated average of tk 143 ( us 2.38 ) per day , of which they paid about tk 50 ( us 0.80 ) to rent the cycle rickshaw for a day . older , long-term drivers earned substantially less . a 1988–89 survey found that jakarta drivers earned a daily average of rp . 2722 ( us 1.57 ) . these wages , while widely considered very low for such physically demanding work , do in some situations compare favourably to jobs available to unskilled workers . gallagher , rob ( 1992 ) . the rickshaws of bangladesh . dhaka : the university press limited . in many cities , most drivers do not own their own cycle rickshaws ; instead , they rent them from their owners , some of whom own many cycle rickshaws . driver-ownership rates vary widely . in delhi , a 1980 study found only one per cent of drivers owned their vehicles , but ownership rates in several other indian cities were much higher , including fifteen per cent in hyderabad and twenty-two per cent in faridabad . a 1977 study in chiang mai , thailand found that 44 % of cycle rickshaw drivers were owners . in bangladesh , driver-ownership is usually highest in rural areas and lowest in the larger cities . most cycle rickshaws in that country are owned by individuals who have only one or two of them , but some owners in the largest cities own several hundred . . social aspects . in 2012 ole kassow , a resident of copenhagen , wanted to help the elderly get back on their bicycles , but he had to find a solution to their limited mobility . the answer was a cycle rickshaw , and he started offering free cycle rickshaw rides to residents of a nearby nursing home . he then got in touch with a civil society consultant at the city of copenhagen , dorthe pedersen , who was intrigued by the idea , and together they bought five cycle rickshaws and launched an organisation called cycling without age , which has now spread to all corners of denmark , and since 2015 to another 50 countries around the world . . legislation . some countries and cities have banned or restricted cycle rickshaws . they are often prohibited in congested areas of major cities . for example , they were banned in bangkok in the mid-1960s as not fitting the modern image of the city being promoted by the government . in dhaka and jakarta , they are no longer permitted on major roads , but are still used to provide transportation within individual urban neighbourhoods . they are banned entirely in pakistan . while they have been criticised for causing congestion , cycle rickshaws are also often hailed as environmentally-friendly , inexpensive modes of transportation . in taiwan , the road traffic security rules require pedicabs to be registered by their owners with the police before they can be legally driven on public roads , or risk an administrative fine of 300 new taiwan dollars ( twd ) . their drivers must carry the police registration documents or risk a fine of 180 twd , but no driver licence is required . the administrative fines are based on articles 69 and 71 of the act governing the punishment of violation of road traffic regulations . as taiwanese road traffic is now heavily motorised , most pedicabs have been replaced by taxicabs , but they can still be found at limited places , such as cijin district of kaohsiung city . electric-assist pedicabs were banned in new york city in january 2008 , along with all other forms of electric vehicles ; the city council decided to allow pedicabs propelled only by muscle power . the city of toronto , canada , has decided not to issue permits to electric-assist pedicabs . arts . as a key part of the urban landscape in many cities , cycle rickshaws have been the subject of films and other artwork , as well as being extensively decorated themselves . the cycle rickshaw in dhaka is especially well known as a major medium for bengali folk art , as plasticine cutouts and handpainted figures adorn many cycle rickshaws . kirkpatrick , joanna . ( 2003 ) transports of delight : the ricksha arts of bangladesh . indiana university press . multimedia cdrom . films featuring cycle rickshaws and their drivers include kickboxer and sammo hung 's 1989 martial arts film pedicab driver , which dealt with a group of pedicab drivers and their problems with romance and organised crime . cyclo , a 1995 film by vietnamese director tran anh hung , is centered on a cycle rickshaw driver . tollywood films with cycle rickshaw themes include orey rickshaw ( '' orey '' literally means '' hey '' , in a derogatory tone ) , which tells a story sympathising with the downtrodden , and rickshavodu ( '' rickshaw guy '' ) . gallery . file : beca ( 17 ) . jpg an extensively decorated trishaw in melaka . file : singapore raffles hall trishaw.jpg a trishaw and rider at the raffles hotel in singapore . file : a rickshaw puller in bangladesh.jpg a cycle rickshaw puller in chittagong , bangladesh . file : indonesia bike5.jpg a becak and its driver wait for a fare in bandung , indonesia . file : trishaws in downtown singapore - 20060529.jpg trishaws are used to ferry tourists around the city for sightseeing in singapore . file : cincinnati rickshaw.jpg cycle rickshaw in downtown cincinnati , ohio . file : rickshaws dhaka.jpg cycle rickshaws in dhaka , bangladesh . file : rickshaw parking at dhaka ( 9601873282 ) . jpg cycle rickshaw parking in bangladesh . file : rickshaw phnom penh.jpg a cycle rickshaw driver in phnom penh , cambodia . file : taiwan road sign art073.09.png taiwanese prohibitory sign p9 : no pedicabs . . see also . ; rickshaws auto rickshaw pulled rickshaw rickshaw rickshaw art ; designer george bliss ( pedicab designer ) ; other human-powered transport bicycle trailer boda-boda ( bicycle taxi ) freight bicycle quadracycle utility cycling ; cycles bicycle electric bicycle outline of cycling party bike tandem bicycle trailer bike tricycle . notes . references . external links . becak yogya