2001 in music

specific locations . 2001 in british music 2001 in norwegian music 2001 in south korean music . specific genres . classical music 2001 in country music 2001 in heavy metal music 2001 in hip hop music 2001 in latin music 2001 in jazz see also : 2001 in music ( uk ) record labels established in 2001 . events . january . january 9 – apple inc . introduces the itunes media player . january 12–21 – rock in rio 3 is held in rio de janeiro , brazil . headlining acts consist of sting , r.e.m . , ' n sync , iron maiden , neil young , red hot chili peppers and a new line-up of guns n ' roses . january 17 – bass player jason newsted leaves metallica after 14 years with the band . january 19–february 4 – the big day out festival takes place in australia and new zealand , headlined by rammstein ( in all venues ) and limp bizkit ( in auckland , the gold coast , and sydney ) . january 26 – a crowd crush occurs during a set by limp bizkit at the sydney big day out music festival . jessica michalik is killed and the band subsequently leaves the country after threats to their safety . february . february 1 cfxj ( flow 93.5 ) , canada 's first urban music station , goes to air for the first time as a testing signal ( its official debut is on march 1 . ) this is considered a breakthrough for canadian hip hop and r & b musicians . jennifer lopez becomes first female artist to have both a number one album ( j.lo ) and a number one movie ( the wedding planner ) in the same week . february 6 – don felder is fired from the eagles . felder sues the band for wrongful termination , and is countersued by don henley and glenn frey for breach of contract . the suits are settled out of court . february 13 – peter frampton receives the orville h . gibson lifetime achievement award . february 17 – manic street preachers become the first western rock band to play in cuba . ( fidel castro is in attendance . ) they did not tour however , meaning that the unsigned british rock band sandstone veterans are the only band from the western world to tour cuba . february 18 – james taylor weds for the third time , marrying caroline '' kim '' smedvig , director of public relations and marketing for the boston symphony orchestra . february 21 – the 43rd annual grammy awards are presented in los angeles , hosted by jon stewart . several artists win three awards each : steely dan ( who win album of the year for two against nature ) , u2 ( who win both record of the year and song of the year for '' beautiful day '' ) , dr . dre , eminem and faith hill . shelby lynne wins best new artist . february 28 – courtney love sues to get out of her contract with vivendi , on the grounds that music industry contracts are unfairly long compared to those in other industries . . march . march 1 – collin raye is awarded the artist humanitarian award from country radio broadcasters . the award was given in recognition of raye 's work on behalf of a number of different charitable organizations including childhelp , usa weekend 's make a difference day and the native american organization hecel oyakapi . march 8 – melanie chisholm announces she does not intend to do any more work with the spice girls . although the group denies it is splitting , it would not be active again until 2007 . march 9 janet jackson 's single '' all for you '' breaks several airplay records , becoming the first song to be added to every station in three mainstream radio formats within its first week of release . it was also the highest debut for a single not commercially available in both the united states and france , and the highest debut and largest opening airplay figure on the radio songs chart . eric singer replaces peter criss as the drummer for kiss as the band continues its farewell tour in yokohama , japan . singer dons the '' catman '' make-up , ending the band 's tradition of creating new make-up and personas for replacement members . march 13 – janet jackson is honored as the first ever mtv icon . the televised tribute became the highest rated show of the night . march 14 – the court of appeals in rome finds michael jackson '' not guilty '' of plagiarism , reversing a decision made in 1999 by a lower court . italian songwriter albano carrisi had claimed that jackson 's '' will you be there '' was a copy of his song '' i cigni di balaka . '' march 16 – sean combs is acquitted on all charges stemming from a december 1999 nightclub shooting in manhattan . however , an artist on his bad boy records label , shyne , is convicted of two counts of assault as well as reckless endangerment and gun possession . march 24 – john connolly of sevendust marries lori kirkley . march 26 – gorillaz release their first studio album gorillaz . the album reached number three in the uk , and was an unexpected hit in the us , hitting number 14 and selling over seven million copies worldwide by 2007 . it earned the group an entry in the guinness world records as the most successful virtual band . march 28 sergei rachmaninoff 's piano concerto no . 2 replaces max bruch 's violin concerto at 1 in the classic fm hall of fame . two big selling albums : hikaru utada 's distance and ayumi hamasaki 's a best are released on exactly the same date . their debut week sales are 3,002,720 and 2,874,870 , respectively , setting the world 's 1 and 2 one-week album sales records . march 31 – couple whitney houston and bobby brown were thrown out and banned for life from hollywood 's bel air hotel and arrested and jailed after destroying their room . property that was allegedly damaged included a tv and two doors . according to hotel workers , the walls and carpets were also stained by alcohol . the hotel closed down the room for five days for repairs . april–may . april 3 – mariah carey signs a blockbuster contract with virgin records , worth 80 million for four albums . april 4 – original zombies lead singer colin blunstone and keyboardist rod argent reunite for a two-part performance at london 's jazz cafe , the first time the two had performed together in over 30 years . april 14 – janet jackson 's '' all for you '' reaches number one on the billboard hot 100 and remains atop the chart for seven consecutive weeks . it becomes the longest reigning hit of the year . april 15 – the dutch dj tiësto releases his first solo album , in my memory , on black hole recordings . april 21 – the first top chinese music awards ceremony is held . april 24 – janet jackson releases her seventh studio album , all for you . it becomes her fifth consecutive album to open at number one , with sales exceeding 600,000 copies . it receives three grammy award nominations , winning for best dance recording . april 28 – the second coachella valley music and arts festival takes place in california as a single-day event . headlined by jane 's addiction , the lineup also features weezer , the roots , gang starr , iggy pop , the orb , the dandy warhols and mos def . may 1 huey lewis and the news makes a comeback with their album plan b , their first album of new material in a decade . the 4th ejcf is held in basel . the next time was in 2004 . may 12 – joey fatone of ' n sync injures his leg in a trap door during rehearsals for the new tour . the 46th eurovision song contest , held at parken stadium in copenhagen , denmark , is won by tanel padar and dave benton , backed by hip hop group 2xl . they represented estonia with the song '' everybody '' , marking the first victory for one of the baltic states and one of the former soviet republics . at 50 years old , benton also becomes the oldest contestant , as well as the first black person , to win eurovision . may 15 – charley pride 's a tribute to jim reeves is the first compact disc to have copy protection , '80s band the go go 's release their first album in 17 years : god bless the go go's may 22 – mötley crüe publishes their collective autobiography the dirt . june . june 1 – christina aguilera scores her fourth number one single on the billboard hot 100 for lady marmalade a collaboration with lil ' kim , mýa , and pink . the video wins the mtv video music award for video of the year . june 5 radiohead releases their 5th studio album , '' amnesiac '' drowning pool releases their 1st studio album , '' sinner '' . after the 9/11 attacks , the single '' bodies '' is put on the 2001 clear channel memorandum . june 9 – madonna kicks off her first concert tour in 8 years , the drowned world tour , in barcelona , spain . june 12 blink-182 release their fourth studio album take off your pants and jacket which would later sell 14 million copies worldwide . this was the band 's second successful album . electric light orchestra release zoom , their first album in 15 years . june 15 – bad religion drummer bobby schayer , who had been with the band since 1991 , is forced to give up music after experiencing a '' most unfortunate career-ending injury '' . this leads to his leaving bad religion for good ; he is replaced by current drummer brooks wackerman . by this time , bad religion were dropped from atlantic records and had returned to their original label epitaph , and founding guitarist brett gurewitz had just rejoined the band after a 7-year hiatus . june 16 – the los angeles radio station kroq-fm airs the 9th annual of the weenie roast show with blink-182 , coldplay , crazy town , the cult , disturbed , jane 's addiction , linkin park , the living end , new found glory , pennywise , papa roach , stabbing westward , staind , stone temple pilots , sum 41 and 311 . june 24 – jazz pianist john hicks marries flautist elise wood . . july . july 2 willy denzey makes his first appearance at les francofolies de la rochelle . napster shuts down its entire network in order to comply with a court injunction ordering it to halt the trading of copyrighted files . july 7 – janet jackson begins her all for you tour . july 9 – backstreet boys put their black & blue summer tour on hold to allow a . j . mclean to enter a rehabilitation facility to deal with alcoholism and depression . july 10 – dream street releases their debut album , dream street july 16 – mariah carey releases '' loverboy '' ; it eventually became the best-selling song of 2001 . july 17 – aaliyah releases her third studio album aaliyah . july 17–22 – the fourth yoyo a go go punk and indie rock festival opens in olympia , washington . july 19 – ol ' dirty bastard is sentenced to 2 to 4 years in prison for drug possession . july 21 – the first annual splendour in the grass music festival is held in byron bay , new south wales , headlined by powderfinger . july 24 – nsync releases their third studio album , celebrity . july 25 – mariah carey checks into a hospital for what a spokesperson terms '' extreme exhaustion '' . carey had exhibited several incidents of bizarre behavior during the previous week , including performing a strange striptease during an unscheduled visit to mtv 's total request live and posting a rambling message on her website in which she wrote , '' i do n't know what 's going on with life '' . july 30 – the strokes release their debut album '' is this it '' . august . august 3 – whitney houston signs the largest contract in music history with arista records , a six-album deal worth over 100 million . august 6 – death row records founder suge knight is released from prison after serving five years of a nine-year sentence for a parole violation . august 7 – aaron carter comes back with his third studio album ( second under jive records ) oh aaron . august 13 – two weeks before its official release , spider one of powerman 5000 pulls anyone for doomsday ? off the market because it sounds too much like their previous release tonight the stars revolt ! . later he releases the album on their website . two months later , al 3 & dorian 27 leave the band . august 15 – wilco signs a buy-out deal with reprise records after the label rejects the yankee hotel foxtrot album and the band refuses to make any changes . wilco leaves with the rights to the album in their possession . august 25 – a cessna 402 carrying 9 people , including r & b singer aaliyah , crashes in the bahamas , killing all aboard . september . september 4 – the second studio album from armenian-american band system of a down , toxicity , is released worldwide . after the 9/11 attacks , the single '' chop suey ! '' is put on the 2001 clear channel memorandum . september 5 – a performance of john cage 's as slow as possible on a specially-built organ in sankt-burchardi-church in halberstadt , germany , scheduled to last until the year 2640 begins with an 18-month pause . september 6 – at the 2001 mtv video music awards , britney spears performs her new single i 'm a slave 4 u in a very revealing outfit and featuring a number of exotic animals including a white and live albino burmese python on her shoulder , leading to a great deal of criticism from animal rights organisation peta . nevertheless , mtv named the performance as the most memorable moment in vma history . september 7-10 – the michael jackson : 30th anniversary special tribute concerts are held at madison square garden in new york city . september 10 – blink-182 start shooting a video for '' stay together for the kids '' , featuring the band playing in a derelict house . when they try to finish the video the following day , the 9–11 attacks on the world trade center in new york city occur , and the band abandon the attempt and decide to shoot a different video for the song . september 11 – bob dylan 's love and theft album was released on this day . the september 11 attacks result in the cancellation or postponement of many musical events , due to the halting of many commercial flights and the somber mood of communities around the world . mtv and vh1 suspend regular programming to carry a newsfeed from cbs , and the 2001 latin grammy awards broadcast is canceled . sting , who had planned to stream a performance in italy on the internet , reduces the webcast to one song , '' fragile '' . enya 's only time becomes backdrop for cnn the muchmusic video awards scheduled for september 23 are also canceled . gerard way witnesses the attacks and is inspired to start a band , which later becomes my chemical romance . mariah carey releases her infamous soundtrack glitter accompanied by the unsuccessful movie . the soundtrack 's lead single , loverboy , reaches no . 2 on the billboard hot 100 . september 14 – clear channel communications issues a controversial memorandum to its radio stations containing a list of 165 songs considered '' lyrically questionable '' in the aftermath of the september 11 attacks . the list includes '' knockin ' on heaven 's door '' , all songs by rage against the machine and john lennon 's '' imagine '' . september 21 – america : a tribute to heroes airs uninterrupted on all major networks . the solemn concert , only 10 days after the september 11 attacks , included performances by bruce springsteen , tom petty , celine dion , neil young , stevie wonder , alicia keys , dave matthews , faith hill , mariah carey , and others . september 25 – xm satellite radio is launched . september 29 the first international accordion festival begins at la villita in san antonio , texas , celebrating the multicultural traditions of the accordion with artists performing german , colombian , irish , argentinian tango , cajun-zydeco , dominican merengue and conjunto-tejano music . staff , '' hits of the week '' , houston chronicle ( september 29 , 2001 ) : houston section , p . & nbsp ; 2 . jennifer lopez weds back-up dancer cris judd . the marriage would end in june 2002 . october . october 2 – machine head release fourth studio album supercharger ( album ) october 6 burton c . bell gets into a fight with his bandmate dino cazares about a manager they fired . the event triggers the demise of fear factory . pop idol premieres on itv . october 9 – the first cd in the kidz bop series , consisting of top 40 hits sung by children , is released . october 10 – heavy metal band anthrax issues a press release in response to the 2001 anthrax attacks jokingly stating that they will be changing the name of the group to '' basket full of puppies '' . it concludes , '' we do n't want to change the name of the band , not because it would be a pain in the ass , but because we hope that no further negative events will happen and it wo n't be necessary . we hope and pray that this problem goes away quietly and we all grow old and fat together . '' the band has reported increased traffic to their website due to internet users going to anthrax.com looking for information about the disease . october 12 – wes borland leaves limp bizkit . october 16 – michael jackson releases special editions of his albums off the wall , thriller , bad and dangerous , to celebrate his thirtieth anniversary as a solo musician . october 20 the concert for new york city airs on vh1 , with performances by paul mccartney , the rolling stones , bon jovi the who , billy joel and others . volunteers for america benefit concert is held in atlanta , mc was drew carey with performances by edgar winter group , mark farner , jack blades , john waite , the knack , eddie money , peter frampton , survivor , kansas , journey , styx , reo speedwagon , bad company , lynyrd skynyrd , and others . october 21 united we stand : what more can i give benefit concert is held at rfk stadium in washington , d.c . , with performances by michael jackson , aerosmith , mariah carey , james brown , backstreet boys , ' n sync , and others . volunteers for america benefit concert is held at smirnoff music centre in dallas , texas , mc was drew carey with performances by edgar winter group , mark farner , jack blades , john waite , the knack , eddie money , peter frampton , survivor , kansas , journey , styx , reo speedwagon , bad company , and others . october 23 the backstreet boys release their first compilation album the hits : chapter one the first ipod is released by apple inc . incubus releases their third full-length major label album entitled morning view . it debuted on the billboard top 200 at the 2 spot ( 266,000 copies were sold in its first week ) . this was the highest ever placement for incubus . at the same time , '' wish you were here '' was at 2 on the modern rock charts , and '' drive '' sat at 48 on the hot 100 chart . october 25 – quarashi performs a live concert with the iceland symphony orchestra ( the band botnleðja also performed ) in the háskólabíó in reykjavík , iceland , which is notable for being the first time that a rap act performed a live concert with the iceland symphony orchestra . quarashi perform seven songs from their upcoming album , jinx . october 30 – michael jackson releases invincible , his first studio album since 1995 and his tenth studio album overall . while the album debuts at number one , its success is limited due to a feud between jackson and sony music entertainment over the rights to his back-catalog , culminating in jackson accusing the company of racial discrimination . the album would end up being jackson 's last , with later musical efforts being offset by a second series of child molestation allegations in 2003 , a trial over said allegations in 2005 , and his death on the eve of a comeback tour in june 2009 . october 31 – britney spears releases her third studio album britney . november–december . november 1 the governing body of the uk singles chart , chart information network ltd . ( cin ) , changes its name to the official uk charts company . britney spears starts her dream within a dream tour , in support her self-titled third studio album . the tour was accompanied by many extravagant special effect including a water screen that pumped two tons of water into the stage during the encore . the tour was commercial success , all the venues on the 2001 leg are largely sold out and grossed 43.7 million from 68 show . november 5 – in the uk , bmg becomes the first major label to release a compact disc with copy protection , natalie imbruglia 's white lilies island . within two weeks bmg announces they will re-issue the disc without the copy protection , due to complaints from consumers who were unable to play the cds in their personal computers . november 6 britney spears ' third album , britney debuts at 1 , making her the first female artist to have her first three albums enter the us charts at 1 . nu-metal band dope release their second studio album life ( dope album ) the soundtrack album of the nickelodeon movie jimmy neutron : boy genius is released . december 1 – mike turner quits our lady peace . december 4 – gospel music singer yolanda adams releases her eighth studio album believe . december 12 – surviving nirvana members krist novoselic and dave grohl sue courtney love in an effort to oust her from the board controlling the management of the band 's affairs , calling her '' irrational , mercurial , self-centered , unmanageable , inconsistent and unpredictable . '' the legal battle over the band 's legacy has blocked the release of a planned nirvana box set containing the unreleased track '' you know you 're right '' . . also in 2001 . area one music festival brings together a variety of acts including moby , incubus , outkast , new order , nelly furtado , the roots , rinocerose , paul oakenfold , and carl cox . the republic of france awards jean-yves thibaudet the honour of chevalier de l'ordre des arts et des lettres . deporitaz releases microwave this cd , his second album , on mp3.com . sean beasley joins dying fetus . bands formed . see musical groups established in 2001 . bands disbanded . see musical groups disestablished in 2001 . bands reformed . army of lovers devourment electric light orchestra ( with new members except for original members , jeff lynne and richard tandy ) level 42 the monkees maroon 5 roxy music zebra sunny day real estate . albums released . january–march . . release date unknown . 5 songs – the decemberists against me ! – against me ! at dawn – my morning jacket breaking benjamin – breaking benjamin do n't be frightened of turning the page – bright eyes first album – miss kittin & the hacker a melody of retreads and broken quills – filthy thieving bastards on the edge – iron fire polen – lynda thomas songs for a small room – fantastic something twilight – the handsome family undone – brian & jenn johnson yule ritual – hawkwind . top 5 selling albums of billboard year . hybrid theory – linkin park 1 – the beatles invincible – michael jackson all that you ca n't leave behind – u2 aaliyah – aaliyah . top 10 best selling albums 2001 ( soundscan ) . hybrid theory / linkin park ~ 4,810,000 hot shot / shaggy ~ 4,520,000 celebrity / nsync ~ 4,420,000 a day without rain / enya ~ 4,410,000 break the cycle / staind ~ 4,240,000 songs in a minor / alicia keys ~ 4,100,000 survivor / destiny 's child ~ 3,720,000 weathered / creed ~ 3,580,000 o brother , where art thou ? soundtrack ~ 3,460,000 now that 's what i call music ! 6 ~ 3,130,000 . popular songs . classical music . john adams – american berserk , for piano nancy 's fancy , for ensemble louis andriessen – passeggiata in tram in america e ritorno , for female italian voice , 3 trumpets , 3 trombones , electric guitar , electric violin , double bass , piano , and percussion de vleugels van de herinnering , for voice and piano fanfare om te beginnen , for sx groups of horns georges aperghis – le petit chaperon rouge , for chamber ensemble rasch , for violin and viola milton babbitt – a lifetime or so , for tenor and piano leonardo balada – cello concerto no . 2 new orleans osvaldas balakauskas – symphony no . 5 gerald barry – dead march , for large ensemble god save the queen , for solo boy 's voice , choir , and large ensemble snow is white , for piano quartet string quartet no . 3 ( six marches ) george benjamin – shadowlines , for piano luciano berio – sonata , for piano christophe bertrand – dikha , for clarinet/bass clarinet and electronics ektra , for solo flute full , for four vibraphones , piano , and eight amplified voices frank michael beyer – klangtore , for orchestra harrison birtwistle – fanfare , for brass and percussion saraband , for piano the shadow of night , for orchestra tenebrae david , for brass ensemble pierre boulez – incises , for piano ( revised version ) elliott carter concerto for cello and orchestra figment ii , for cello hiyoku , for two clarinets quartet , for oboe , violin , viola , and cello steep steps , for bass clarinet anna clyne – arclight , for tape manipura , for chamber ensemble one , for tape wish , for voice or voices john corigliano – symphony no . 2 for string orchestra george crumb – unto the hills for soprano , percussion quartet and piano peter maxwell davies – symphony no . 8 ( davies ) alexandra du bois – júdica me , for a cappella chorus preludes to solitude , for guitar string quintet : a requiem for the living for two violins , viola and two double basses songs ( 4 ) , for mezzo-soprano and orchestra joël-françois durand – athanor for orchestra péter eötvös – snatches of a conversation , for ensemble brian ferneyhough – in nomine à 3 , for piccolo , oboe , and clarinet stelae for failed time , for 12 voices and live electronics lorenzo ferrero two cathedrals in the south concertino for trumpet and orchestra moonlight sonata for five percussion instruments michael finnissy – the history of photography in sound alexandra fol – concerto for violin and orchestra requiem no . 1 , for chorus and orchestra , op . 19 joep franssens – harmony of the spheres , for mixed choir and string orchestra frans geysen – city of smiles , twenty solos for one recorder player , playing soprano to bass ehrung an m.c.e . ( e mc 2 ) , for alto recorder met vel , rand en tand , for three percussionists met zijn twaalven , for twelve recorders möbiusband 15 , for string quartet op de fles , for four players on 16 bottles philip glass – concerto , for cello and orchestra friedrich goldmann – concerto a 8 ( octet ) , for two oboes , two clarinets , two horns , and two bassoons drei strophen , for clarinet and violin study , for two pianos tombeau ( in memoriam iannis xenakis ) , for bass clarinet , bassoon , trombone , piano , viola , and cello howard goodall – in memoriam anne frank georg friedrich haas blumenstück de terrae fine , for violin solo flow and friction , for sixteenth-tone piano four-hands sodass ich 's hernach mit einem blick gleichsam wie ein schönes bild . im geist übersehe jeff hamburg – aychah , for choir and orchestra jonathan harvey – the summer cloud 's awakening , for choir , flute , cello , and electronics york höller ex tempore , for flute , oboe , clarinet ( doubling bass clarinet ) , percussion , violin , viola , cello , harp , and piano trias , for alto saxophone , percussion , and piano der ewige tag , for chorus , orchestra , and electronics mauricio kagel – piano trio no . 2 wojciech kilar – fanfare for the society of polish surgeons helmut lachenmann – grido ( string quartet ) györgy ligeti –études , book 3 , for piano james macmillan – the birds of rhiannon , for orchestra with optional chorus o bone jesu , for ssaattbb choir with soli robin maconie – songs for the caucasian chalk circle ( 15 ) , after brecht frederik magle – the hope for brass band , choir , organ and percussion . mesías maiguashca – la noche cíclica , for violin , cello , piano , marimba , and 4 envelope followers tomás marco – laberinto marino , for cello and orchestra anna mikhailova – sonata for piano songs ( 4 ) , for baritone and piano stuart mitchell – seven wonders suite , for choir and orchestra onutė narbutaitė – symphony no . 2 olga neuwirth – ecstaloop , for soprano , speaker , sampler , and ensemble incidental music for abenteuer in sachen haut , after dylan thomas , by peter carp locus.doublure.solus , for piano and orchestra ( or chamber ensemble ) michael obst – piano trio no . 1 transit , for orchestra henri pousseur – berceuses ( 4 ) , for unaccompanied voice or unison choir eclipticare , ou les périples constellés , for one , two , or three instruments , surrounded or not , each a '' consort '' sursauts , for violin ( doubling viola ) , trombone , and piano jaime reis – estátua de pessanha , piano , bass flute , and real-time video wolfgang rihm – jagden und formen , for chamber orchestra sechs gedichte von friedrich nietzsche , for voice and piano peter ruzicka – trans – requiem für giuseppe sinopoli vahram sargsyan – luys zvart joyful light , for female chorus bright sheng – distant birthday bells , for piano tibetan dance , for violin , clarinet , and piano stuart saunders smith – and cold for xylophone/narrator breath for mezzo-soprano and orchestra bells ( glockenspiel ) family portraits : ligeia ( daughter ) for soprano voice and piano light dew for solo double bass madness for xylophone/narrator minor for solo violin pond for xylophone/narrator sometime then for xylophone/narrator juan maría solare – les atavismes du crépuscule atavisms of twilight , for clarinet , alto saxophone , and trombone blind date , for two bass clarinets ( with theatral elements ) blues en mí blues in e / blues in me , for piano fastango for piano icarus , for flute , clarinet , violin , cello , and piano pasaje seaver , tango for piano red : a deconstructed blues ( music for marcel worms ) for piano winchmore hill for piano karlheinz stockhausen – stop und start , for six instrumental groups , nr . 18⅔ dennis tobenski – the passionate shepherd to his love , for mixed choir three poems of thomas hardy , for voice and piano stephen truelove – broken song , for solo horn preludium and chakratour , for string quartet three songs to poems by frank anderton , for soprano and piano michel van der aa – here to be found , for soprano , chamber orchestra , and soundtrack kevin volans – concerto for double orchestra zeno at 4 am , theatre piece for shadow puppets , actors , bass , string quartet , and chorus dafina zeqiri – dialog for violin and piano my mother for mixed chorus walter zimmermann – clinamen i–iv , for six orchestral groups la fleur inverse , for organ schatten der ideen 6 , 'blaupause , for piano die sorge geht über den fluss , for solo violin umbræ idearum ( schatten der ideen 4 ) , for piano and string quartet ellen taaffe zwillich – openings . opera . jason kao hwang – the floating box : a story in chinatown theo loevendie – johnny & jones sven-david sandström – jeppe : the cruel comedy david sawer – from morning to midnight michel van der aa – vuur . jazz . musical theater . atgof o ' r sêr – first performed by bryn terfel and cor rhuthun in north wales . commissioned for the national eisteddfod of wales at denbigh . a class act – broadway production opened at the ambassador theatre on march 11 and ran for 105 performances 42nd street – broadway revival opened at the ford center on may 2 mamma mia ! – broadway production opened at the winter garden theatre on october 18 and ran for 5773 performances . it was the eighth longest run in broadway musical history . the producers – broadway production opened at st . james theatre on april 19 and ran for 2502 performances . the show won a record twelve tony awards . urinetown – broadway production opened at the hudson theatre on september 20 and ran for 965 performances . musical films . beijing rocks carmen : a hip hopera gadar : ek prem katha , starring sunny deol , amisha patel and amrish puri glitter released september 21 , starring mariah carey and max beesley hedwig and the angry inch , directed by and starring john cameron mitchell love you hamesha , starring akshaye khanna and sonali bendre moulin rouge ! released may 18 , starring nicole kidman and ewan mcgregor on the road to emmaus , starring peter franzén one night the moon , starring paul kelly and kaarin fairfax rebelové , starring zuzana norisová and tomáš hanák rock star scratch . births . march 8 – zhavia ward , american singer , songwriter , musician april 10 – noa kirel , israeli singer october 30 – bella paige , australian singer november 13 – loona , korean singer , and member of loona november 22 – chenle , chinese singer and songwriter , member of nct dream december 18 – billie eilish , american singer , dancer , musician , activist and songwriter . deaths . january 4 – les brown , bandleader ( 89 ) january 5 – milan hlavsa , czech musician ( plastic people of the universe ) ( 49 ) january 7 – james carr , soul singer ( 58 ) january 10 – bryan gregory , guitarist ( the cramps ) ( 49 ) january 24 – leif thybo , danish composer and organist ( 78 ) february 4 j.j . johnson , jazz bebop trombonist ( 77 ) iannis xenakis , greek composer ( 78 ) february 7 – dale evans , american singer-songwriter and actress ( 88 ) february 10 – buddy tate , jazz musician ( 87 ) february 13 – george t . simon , music critic and original glenn miller orchestra drummer ( pneumonia ) february 19 – charles trenet french singer and songwriter ( 87 ) february 21 ronnie hilton , english singer ( 75 ) malcolm yelvington , rockabilly musician ( 82 ) february 22 – john fahey , guitarist , indie label owner ( 61 ) march 4 – glenn hughes , village people ( 50 ) march 12 – sir lancelot , calypso singer ( 98 ) march 18 – john phillips , singer-songwriter , co-founder of the mamas & the papas ( 65 ) march 20 – francis grasso , disc jockey ( 51 ) march 28 – moe koffman , canadian jazz singer ( 73 ) march 29 – john lewis , jazz pianist ( 80 ) april 6 – charles pettigrew , of charles & eddie ( 37 ) ( cancer ) april 9 – graziella sciutti , operatic soprano ( 73 ) april 11 sandy bull , folk musician ( 60 ) graciela naranjo , bolero singer and actress ( 84 ) sir harry secombe , entertainer ( 79 ) april 15 – joey ramone , lead singer of the ramones ( 49 ) ( lymphoma ) april 20 – giuseppe sinopoli , composer and conductor ( 54 ) ( heart attack ) may 3 – billy higgins , jazz drummer ( 64 ) may 5 – boozoo chavis , zydeco musician ( 70 ) may 10 – james e . myers , songwriter ( '' rock around the clock '' ) ( 81 ) may 12 – perry como , american crooner ( 88 ) may 16 – prince ital joe , reggae singer ( 38 ) ( car accident ) may 20 – renato carosone , italian musician and singer ( 81 ) june 4 – john hartford , bluegrass musician ( 64 ) june 7 – carole fredericks , singer june 13 – marcelo fromer , guitarist for brazilian band titãs ( 39 ) ( rammed by a motorcycle ) june 18 – davorin popović , lead singer for bosnian band indexi ( 55 ) june 21 – john lee hooker , blues musician ( 88 ) june 30 chet atkins , country musician ( 77 ) joe henderson , jazz saxophonist ( 64 ) july 3 delia derbyshire , english electronic composer ( 64 ) johnny russell , american singer-songwriter and guitarist ( 61 ) july 5 – ernie k-doe , r & b singer ( 65 ) july 7 – fred neil , folk singer-songwriter ( 65 ) july 15 – anthony ian berkeley , rapper ( brothers grym , gravediggaz ) ( 36 ) ( colon cancer ) july 18 – mimi fariña , singer-songwriter ( 56 ) ( neuroendocrine cancer ) july 23 – richie lee , singer and bassist ( acetone ) ( 34 ) ( suicide ) july 27 harold land , hard bop saxophonist ( 73 ) leon wilkeson , bassist for lynyrd skynyrd ( 49 ) august 2 – ronald townson , american singer and actor ( the 5th dimension ) ( 68 ) august 6 – larry adler , harmonica virtuoso ( 86 ) august 18 – roland cardon , belgian composer and multi-instrumentalist ( 72 ) august 25 – aaliyah , american singer , model , dancer and actress ( 22 ) ( plane crash ) august 27 – karl ulrich schnabel , pianist ( 92 ) august 29 – graeme strachan , lead singer of skyhooks ( 49 ) september 1 – ted mulry , lead singer with ted mulry gang ( 54 ) september 6 – carl crack , techno musician ( atari teenage riot ) ( 30 ) september 22 – isaac stern , violinist ( 81 ) october 3 – tatiana menotti , operatic soprano ( 92 ) october 5 – ivan hrušovský , slovak composer ( 74 ) october 10 – barry mccauley , operatic tenor ( 51 ) ( lung cancer ) october 17 – jay livingston , songwriter ( 86 ) november 17 – michael karoli , guitarist , violinist and composer ( 53 ) ( cancer ) november 21 – ralph burns , american songwriter , bandleader , composer , conductor , arranger and bebop pianist ( 79 ) november 24 – melanie thornton , singer ( la bouche ) ( 34 ) ( air crash ) november 28 – kal mann , american lyricist ( '' teddy bear '' , '' butterfly '' ) ( 84 ) november 29 – george harrison , musician and former member of the beatles ( 58 ) ( lung cancer ) december 13 – chuck schuldiner , vocalist and guitarist with death ( 34 ) ( cancer ) december 15 – rufus thomas , singer ( 84 ) december 16 – stuart adamson , guitarist with big country ( 43 ) ( suicide ) december 17 – débria brown , operatic soprano ( 65 ) december 18 – gilbert bécaud , singer-songwriter ( 74 ) december 22 – norman granz , american producer ( 83 ) december 29 – cássia eller , brazilian singer ( 39 ) . awards . the following artists are inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame : aerosmith , solomon burke , the flamingos , michael jackson , queen , paul simon , steely dan and ritchie valens inductees of the gma gospel music hall of fame include larry norman , and elvis presley . aria music awards . aria music awards of 2001 . grammy awards . grammy awards of 2001 . juno awards . juno awards of 2001 march 4 – bruce cockburn is inducted into the canadian music hall of fame . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 2001 . mercury music prize . stories from the city , stories from the sea – pj harvey wins . mtv video music awards . 2001 mtv video music awards . references .