Baked beans

origins and history in the americas . according to chef and food historian walter staib of philadelphia 's city tavern , baked beans had its roots as a native peoples dish in the americas long before the dish became known to western culture . native americans mixed beans , maple sugar , and bear fat in earthenware pots which they placed in underground '' bean holes '' which were lined in hot rocks to cook slowly over a long period of time . british colonists in new england were the first westerners to adopt the dish from the native peoples ; and were quick to embrace it largely because the dish was reminiscent of peas porridge and because the dish used ingredients native to the new world . they substituted molasses or sugar for the maple syrup , bacon or ham for the bear fat , and simmered their beans for hours in pots over the fire instead of underground . each colony in america had its own regional variations of the dish , with navy or white pea beans used in massachusetts , jacob 's cattle and soldier beans used in maine , and yellow-eyed beans in vermont . this variation likely resulted from the colonists receiving the dish from different native peoples who used different native beans . while some historians have theorized that baked beans had originated from the cassoulet or bean stew tradition in southern france , this is unlikely as the beans used to make baked beans are all native to south america and were introduced to europe around 1528 . however , it is likely that english colonists used their knowledge of cassoulet cooking to modify the cooking technique of the beans from the traditional native american version , by soaking the bean overnight and simmering the beans over a fire before baking it in earthen pots in order to decrease the cooking time . a dish which was a clear precursor to baked beans , entitled '' beans and bacon '' , was known in medieval england . the addition of onion and mustard to some baked beans recipes published in new england in the 19th century was likely based on traditional cassoulet recipes from staffordshire , england which utilized mustard , beans , and leeks . these ingredients are still often added to baked beans today . nineteenth century cookbooks published in new england , spread to other portions united states and canada , which familiarized other people with the dish . while many recipes today are stewed , traditionally dried beans were soaked over night , simmered until tender ( parboiled ) , and then slow-baked in a ceramic or cast-iron beanpot . originally baked beans were sweetened with maple syrup by native americans , a tradition some recipes still follow , but some english colonists modified the sweetening agent to brown sugar beginning in the 17th century . in the 18th century the convention of using american made molasses as a sweetening agent became increasingly popular in order to avoid british taxes on sugar . the molasses style of baked beans has become closely associated with the city of boston , and is often referred to as boston baked beans . today in the new england region , baked beans are flavored either with maple syrup ( northern new england ) , or with molasses ( boston ) , and are traditionally cooked with salt pork in a beanpot in a brick oven for six to eight hours . in the absence of a brick oven , the beans were cooked in a beanpot nestled in a bed of embers placed near the outer edges of a hearth , about a foot away from the fire . today , baked beans can be made in a slow cooker or in a modern oven using a traditional beanpot , dutch oven , or casserole dish . the results of the dish , commonly described as having a savory-sweet flavor and a brownish- or reddish-tinted white bean , however cooked are the same . a tradition in maine of '' bean hole '' cooking may have originated with the native penobscot people and was later practiced in logging camps . a fire would be made in a stone-lined pit and allowed to burn down to hot coals , and then a pot with 11 pounds of seasoned beans would be placed in the ashes , covered over with dirt , and left to cook overnight or longer . these beans were a staple of maine 's logging camps , served at every meal . , maine folklife center while baked beans was initially a new england region cuisine , the dish has become a popular item throughout the united states ; and is now a staple item served most frequently along various types of barbecue and at picnics . this is due in part to the ease of handling , as they can be served hot or cold , directly from the can , making them handy for outdoor eating . the tomato-based sweet sauce also complements many types of barbecue . the already-cooked beans may also be baked in a casserole dish topped with slices of raw bacon , which is baked until the bacon is cooked . additional seasonings are sometimes used , such as additional brown sugar or mustard to make the sauce more tangy . . history of commercial production and international consumption . canned beans , often containing pork , were among the first convenience foods , and it is in this form that they became exported and popularised by u.s . companies internationally in the early 20th century . the u.s . food and drug administration stated in 1996 , '' it has for years been recognized by consumers generally that the designation 'beans with pork , ' or 'pork and beans ' is the common or usual name for an article of commerce that contains very little pork . '' the included pork is typically a piece of salt pork that adds fat to the dish . canned baked beans with small pork sausages is also available . the first mass-produced commercial canning of baked beans in the united states began in 1895 by the pennsylvania-based h . j . heinz company . they were also the first company to sell baked beans outside of the united states , beginning with sales limited solely to fortnum & mason in 1886 when the item was considered a luxury . they later expanded to selling throughout the united kingdom in 1901 , and baked beans became a standard part of the english full breakfast soon after . originally , heinz baked beans were prepared in the traditional united states manner for sales in ireland and great britain . over time , the recipe was altered to a less sweet tomato sauce without maple syrup , molasses , or brown sugar in order to appeal to the tastes of the united kingdom . it is this version of baked beans which is most commonly used outside of the united states . baked beans are commonly eaten on toast or as part of a full breakfast united kingdom and ireland . today , baked beans are a staple convenience food in the uk , often eaten as part of the modern english breakfast and particularly on toast ( called simply '' beans on toast '' ) . heinz baked beans remains the best-selling brand in the uk . in america , the h . j . heinz co . continue to sell baked beans , although they are not always as widely distributed as competing american brands . despite their international fame , there are currently substantial differences between the heinz baked beans produced for the uk market ( descended from the original american recipe ) and the nearest currently equivalent american product ( heinz premium vegetarian beans ) . the american product contains brown sugar where the british beans do not , and the u.s . product contains 14 g of sugar per 16 oz tin compared to 7 g for the british version ( equating to 140 versus 90 calories ) . the u.s . beans have a mushier texture and are darker in color than their uk counterpart . this has resulted in a situation where the product is now imported back to the brand 's home country . for several years , uk heinz baked beans have been available in the u.s . , either in different-sized cans from those sold in the uk or in a 385-gram can ( the same can as the 415-gram can in the uk ) with an '' export '' label with american english spelling and the word '' baked '' dropped from the title on the label . these are sold in many u.s . specialty stores , attesting to the popularity of baked beans and their appeal to expatriates . bush , van camp , b & m , and heinz all produce pork-free baked beans labeled as vegetarian beans , making this american dish available to people who abstain from pork for religious , dietary , or ethical reasons . the baked bean museum of excellence is a museum located in port talbot , wales , united kingdom which is dedicated to baked beans . . around the world . traditional cuisines of many regions claim such recipes as typical specialities , for example : in poland , with the addition of bacon and/or sausage , these are known as breton beans ( fasolka po bretońsku ) . '' we can see certain influences from the west ( from france we took baked beans a la bretonne , surprisingly not known in today 's brittany ) in : culinary cultures of europe : identity , diversity and dialogue by darra goldstein , kathrin merkle , stephen mennell . 2005 in france these are known as à la brittany . jersey bean crock boston baked beans pork and beans , which despite the name often contain very little pork guernsey bean jar spanish cocido montañés cassoulet ( south-western france ) feijoada fasolada frijoles charros , pinto beans cooked with bacon and sometimes tomatoes , are popular in mexico and the american border states . greek fasolia gigandes gigandes plaki in the italian cuisine beans ( of various size and various types ) are widely used for several recipes also mixed with other ingredients : '' fagiolata '' generally stands for baked beans but there are also regional variations like '' fagioli all'uccelletto '' in florence ; '' minestra di fagioli '' ( beans soup normally cooked with vegetables ) '' pasta e fagioli '' ( meaning '' pasta and beans '' ) . new england baked beans quebec-style baked beans called fèves au lard are often prepared with maple syrup . bean-hole beans , traditionally from northern new england and quebec , cooked in a covered fire pit in the ground for up to two days british cuisine ( also popular in ireland ) claims beans on toast as a teatime favourite , the combination of cereal and legume forming an inexpensive complete protein ; compare rice and beans . variations of '' beans on toast deluxe '' can include extras as such as egg , grated cheese , marmite , or tuna , and baked beans sometimes form part of a full breakfast . beans cooked in barbecue sauce ( or a similarly flavoured sauce ) are a traditional side dish in an american barbecue . '' franks and beans '' , a recipe wherein hot dogs are cut up and cooked in the same sauce as the baked beans . in canada , this recipe is more commonly called '' beans and wieners '' . in the north of the netherlands brown beans are often stewed and served with lardons baked until crisp , pickled silverskin onions and gherkins , and sugar syrup or apple syrup . in the province of drenthe , this dish has a cultural significance due to the regional nostalgic novel and tv series bartje . in mexico and latin america baked beans are also popular : black beans ( frijoles negros ) and frijoles pintos ( pinto beans ) are the most common . chilean porotos con riendas in the balkans , they are known as prebranac . the traditional jewish shabbat dish cholent ( also known as hamin ) is made with meat , potatoes , beans and barley . turkish fasolia ( fasulye ) , usually served with rice iranian loobia chiti is made from pinto beans , usually served with olive oil and lemon juice . many unusual dishes are made with baked beans including the baked bean sandwich . these are slices of bread topped with beans and other additions , such as melted cheese . health . in 2002 , the british dietetic association allowed manufacturers of canned baked beans to advertise the product as contributing to the recommended daily consumption of five to six vegetables per person . this concession was criticised by cardiology , who pointed to the high levels of sugar and salt in the product . however , it has been proven that consumption of baked beans does indeed lower total cholesterol levels and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol , even in normo-cholesterolaemic individuals . susan m . shutler , gemma m . bircher , jacki a . tredger , linda m . morgan , ann f . walker and a . g . low ( 1989 ) . the effect of daily baked bean ( phaseolus vulgaris ) consumption on the plasma lipid levels of young , normo-cholesterolaemic men . british journal of nutrition , 61 , pp 257–265 . donna m . winham , andrea m . hutchins . baked bean consumption reduces serum cholesterol in hypercholesterolemic adults . nutrition research ( new york , n.y . ) 1 july 2007 ( volume 27 issue 7 pages 380–386 . some manufacturers produce a '' healthy '' version of the product with reduced levels of sugar and salt . . flatulence . baked beans are known on occasion to cause an increase in flatulence following consumption ; this is due to the fermentation of polysaccharides ( specifically oligosaccharides ) by gut flora , specifically methanobrevibacter smithii . the oligosaccharides pass through the small intestine largely undigested ; when they reach the large intestine , they are digested by the bacteria , producing gas . . see also . cassoulet list of legume dishes list of toast dishes pork and beans refried beans tavče gravče , a traditional macedonian dish . references .