Mary of Burgundy

early years . mary of burgundy was born in brussels at the ducal castle of coudenberg , to charles the bold , then known as the count of charolais , and his wife isabella of bourbon . her birth , according to the court chronicler georges chastellain , was attended by a clap of thunder ringing from the otherwise clear twilight sky . her godfather was louis xi of france , in exile in burgundy at that time ; he named her for his mother marie of anjou . reactions to the child were mixed : the baby 's grandfather , duke philip the good , was unimpressed , and '' chose not to attend the baptism as it was only for a girl '' , whereas her grandmother isabella of portugal was delighted at the birth of a granddaughter . her illegitimate aunt anne was assigned to be responsible for mary 's education and assigned jeanne de clito to be her governess , jeanne remained a constant friend to mary later in life and was one of her most constant companions . heiress presumptive . philip the good died in 1467 and mary 's father assumed control of the burgundian state . since her father had no living sons at the time of his accession , mary became his heir presumptive . her father controlled a vast and wealthy domain made up of the duchy of burgundy , the free county of burgundy , and the majority of the low countries . as a result , her hand in marriage was eagerly sought by a number of princes . the first proposal was received by her father when she was only five years old , in this case to marry the future king ferdinand ii of aragon . later she was approached by charles , duke of berry ; his older brother , king louis xi of france , was intensely annoyed by charles 's move and attempted to prevent the necessary papal dispensation for consanguinity . as soon as louis succeeded in producing a male heir who survived infancy , the future king charles viii of france , louis wanted him to be the one to marry mary , even though he was thirteen years younger than mary . nicholas i , duke of lorraine , was a few years older than mary and controlled a duchy that lay alongside burgundian territory , but his plan to combine his domain with hers was ended by his death in battle in 1473 . reign . mary assumed the rule of her father 's domains upon his defeat in battle and death on 5 january 1477 . king louis xi of france seized the opportunity to attempt to take possession of the duchy of burgundy proper and also the regions of franche-comté , picardy and artois . the king was anxious that mary should marry his son charles and thus secure the inheritance of the low countries for his heirs , by force of arms if necessary . burgundy , fearing french military power , sent an embassy to france to negotiate a marriage between mary and the six-year-old dauphin ( later king charles viii ) , but returned home without a betrothal ; the french king 's demands of cession of territories to the french crown were deemed unacceptable . the great privilege . mary was compelled to sign a charter of rights known as the great privilege in ghent on 10 february 1477 on the occasion of her formal recognition as her father 's heir ( the '' joyous entry '' ) . under this agreement , the provinces and towns of flanders , brabant , hainaut , and holland recovered all the local and communal rights that had been abolished by the decrees of the dukes of burgundy in their efforts to create a centralised state on the french model out of their disparate holdings in the low countries . in particular , the parliament of mechelen ( established formally by charles the bold in 1470 ) was abolished and replaced with the pre-existing authority of the parliament of paris , which was considered an amenable counterweight to the encroaching centralisation undertaken by both charles the bold and philip the good . the duchess also had to undertake not to declare war , make peace , or raise taxes without the consent of these provinces and towns and only to employ native residents in official posts . such was the hatred of the people for the old regime that in spite of the duchess 's entreaties , two of her father 's most influential councilors , the chancellor hugonet and the guy of brimeu , were executed in ghent after it was discovered that they were in correspondence with the king of france . marriage . mary soon made her choice among the many suitors for her hand by selecting archduke maximilian of austria , the future holy roman emperor maximilian i , who became her co-ruler . the marriage took place at ghent on 19 august 1477 . mary 's marriage into the house of habsburg initiated two centuries of contention between france and the habsburgs , a struggle that climaxed with the war of the spanish succession in the years 1701–1714 . in the netherlands , affairs now went more smoothly ; the french aggression was temporarily checked , and internal peace was in large measure restored . death and legacy . in 1482 , a falcon hunt in the woods near wijnendale castle was organised by adolph of cleves , lord of ravenstein , who lived in the castle . mary loved riding and was hunting with maximilian and knights of the court when her horse tripped , threw her in a ditch , and then landed on top of her , breaking her back . she died several weeks later on 27 march from internal injuries , having made a detailed will . she was buried in the church of our lady , bruges on 3 april , 1482 . her two-year-old daughter , margaret of austria , was sent in vain to france , to marry the dauphin , in an attempt to please louis xi and persuade him not to invade the territories owned by mary . louis was swift to re-engage hostilities with maximilian and forced him to agree to the treaty of arras ( 1482 ) , by which franche-comté and artois passed for a time to french rule , only to be recovered by the treaty of senlis of 1493 , which established peace in the low countries . mary 's marriage into the house of habsburg proved to be a disaster for france because the burgundian inheritance later brought it into conflict with spain and the holy roman empire . family . image : grafmarg.jpg thumb right mary 's tomb effigy in the church of our lady , bruges mary 's son philip succeeded to her dominions under the guardianship of his father . her children were as follows : philip i of castile ( 22 july 1478 – 25 september 1506 ) , who succeeded his mother as philip iv of burgundy and became philip i of castile through his marriage to joanna of castile ( known to history as '' juana la loca '' ) . margaret ( 10 january 1480 – 1 december 1530 ) , married firstly to juan , prince of asturias , the son and heir of king ferdinand ii of aragon and queen isabella i of castile , and secondly to philibert ii , duke of savoy . francis ( 2 september 1481 – 26 december 1481 ) . ancestry . . titles . 250px philip the good arms.svg arms before 1477 coat of arms of mary of burgundy as consort to maximilan of hapsburg ( shield ) . svg arms after 1477 . see also . dukes of burgundy family tree list of horse accidents duchesse de bourgogne beer hours of mary of burgundy . references . sources .