Famicom Disk System

history . by 1985 , nintendo 's family computer was dominating the japanese home video game market , selling over three million units within a year and a half . because of its success , the company had difficulty with keeping up demand for new stock , often getting flooded with calls from retailers asking for more systems . retailers also requested for cheaper games ; the cost of chips and semiconductors made cartridges expensive to make , and often cost a lot of money for both stores and consumers to purchase . chip shortages also created supply issues . to satisfy these requests , nintendo began thinking of ways to potentially lower the cost of games . it turned towards the home computer market for inspiration ; nintendo specifically looked to floppy disks which were quickly becoming the standard for storage media for personal computers . floppy disks were cheap to produce and rewritable , allowing games to be easily produced during the manufacturing process . seeing its potential , nintendo began work on a disk-based peripheral for the famicom . for its proprietary diskette platform , which they dubbed the '' disk card '' , nintendo chose to base it on mitsumi 's quick disk media format , a cheaper alternative to floppy disks for japanese home computers . the disk card format presented a number of advantages over cartridges , such as increased storage capacity that allowed for larger games , additional sound channels , and the ability to save player progress . the add-on itself was produced by masayuki uemura and nintendo research & development 2 , the same team that designed the famicom itself . following several delays , the famicom disk system was released on february 21 , 1986 , at a retail price of ¥15000 ( us 80 ) . the same day , nintendo released the legend of zelda as a launch title , alongside disk re-releases of earlier famicom games . marketing material for the disk system featuring a yellow mascot character named diskun , or mr . disk . the famicom disk system sold over 300,000 units within three months , jumping to over 2 & nbsp ; million by the end of the year . nintendo remained confident the disk system would be a sure-fire success , and ensured that all future first-party releases would be exclusive to the peripheral . coinciding with the disk system 's release , nintendo installed several '' disk writer '' kiosks in various toy and electronic stores across the country . these kiosks allowed customers to bring in their disk games and have a new game rewritten onto them for a ¥500 fee ; blank disks could also be purchased for ¥2000 . nintendo also introduced special high-score tournaments for specific disk system games , where players could submit their scores directly to nintendo via '' disk fax '' machines found in retail stores . winners would receive exclusive prizes , including famicom-branded stationary sets and a gold-colored punch-out ! ! cartridge . nintendo of america announced plans to release the disk system for the famicom 's international counterpart , the nintendo entertainment system , however these plans were eventually scrapped . despite the famicom disk system 's success and advantages over the famicom itself , it also imposed many problems of its own . most common was the quality of the disk cards ; nintendo removed the shutters on most disk system games to reduce costs , instead placing them in a wax sleeve and clear plastic shell . the disks themselves are fragile , and the lack of a shutter made them collect dust and eventually become unplayable as a result . piracy was also rampant , with disk copying devices and bootleg games becoming commonplace in stores and in magazine advertisements . third-party developers for the disk system were also angered towards nintendo 's strict licensing terms , requiring that it receive 50 % copyright ownership of any and all software released — this led to several major developers , such as namco and hudson soft , refusing to produce games for it . four months after the disk system was released , capcom released a famicom conversion of ghosts ' n goblins on a 128k cartridge , which as a result made consumers and developers less impressed with the disk system 's technological features . retailers disliked the disk writer kiosks for taking up too much space and for generally being unprofitable . the disk system 's vague error messages , long loading times , and the poor quality of the rubber drive belt that spun the disks are also cited as attributing to its downfall . by 1989 , advancements in technology made cartridge games much cheaper and easier to produce , leaving the famicom disk system obsolete . retailers were critical of nintendo simply abandoning the disk writers and leaving stores with large kiosks that took up vital space , while companies began to release or move their games from the disk system to a standard cartridge ; towards the end of development , squaresoft ported final fantasy over to the famicom as a cartridge game , with its own battery backup save feature . nintendo officially discontinued the famicom disk system in 1990 , selling around 4.4 & nbsp ; million units total . disk writing services were still kept in operation until 2003 , while technical services were serviced up until 2007 . hardware versions . sharp released the twin famicom , a famicom model that features a built-in disk system . disk writer and disk fax kiosks . widespread copyright violation in japan 's predominantly personal-computer-based game rental market inspired corporations to petition the government to ban the rental of all video games in 1984 . with games then being available only via full purchase , demand rose for a new and less expensive way to access more games . in 1986 , as video gaming had increasingly expanded from computers into the video game console market , nintendo advertised a promise to install 10,000 famicom disk writer kiosks in toy and hobby stores across japan within one year . these jukebox style stations allowed users to copy from a rotating stock of the latest games to their disks and keep each one for an unlimited time . to write an existing disk with a new game from the available roster was ( then about and 1/6 of the price of many new games ) . instruction sheets were given by the retailer , or available by mail order for . some game releases , such as kaettekita mario bros . ( lit . the return of mario bros . ) , are exclusive to these kiosks . in 1987 , disk writer kiosks in select locations were also provisioned as disk fax systems as nintendo 's first online concept . players could take advantage of the dynamic rewritability of blue floppy disk versions of disk system games ( such as famicom grand prix : f1 race and golf japan course ) in order to save their high scores at their leisure at home , and then bring the disk to a retailer 's disk fax kiosk , which collated and transmitted the players ' scores via fax to nintendo . players participated in a nationwide leaderboard , with unique prizes . the kiosk service was very popular and remained available until 2003 . in subsequent console generations , nintendo would relaunch this online national leaderboard concept with the home satellite-based satellaview subscription service in japan from 1995-2000 for the super famicom . it would relaunch the model of games downloadable to rewritable portable media from store kiosks , with the nintendo power service in japan which is based on rewritable flash media cartridges for super famicom and game boy from 1997–2007 . calling the disk writer '' one of the coolest things nintendo ever created '' , kotaku says modern '' digital distribution could learn from disk writer '' , and that the system 's premise of game rental and achievements would still be innovative in today 's retail and online stores . nintendolife said it '' was truly ground-breaking for its time and could be considered a forerunner of more modern distribution methods such as xbox live arcade , playstation network , and steam '' . technology . the device is connected to the famicom console by plugging its ram adapter cartridge into the system 's cartridge port , and attaching that cartridge 's cable to the disk drive . the ram adapter contains 32 & nbsp ; kilobytes ( kb ) of ram for temporarily caching program data from disk , 8 & nbsp ; kb of ram for tile and sprite data storage , and an asic named the 2c33 . the asic acts as a disk controller , plus single-cycle table-lookup synthesis sound hardware . finally , embedded in the 2c33 is an 8kb bios rom . the disk cards used are double-sided , with a total capacity of 112 & nbsp ; kb per disk . many games span both sides of a disk and a few span multiple disks , requiring the user to switch at some point during gameplay . the disk system is capable of running on six c-cell batteries or the supplied ac adapter . batteries usually last five months with daily game play . the inclusion of a battery option is due to the likelihood of a standard set of ac plugs already being occupied by a famicom and a television . the disk system 's disk cards are somewhat proprietary 71 & nbsp ; mm × 76 & nbsp ; mm ( 2.8 × 3 in ) 56k-per-side double-sided floppy . they are a slight modification of mitsumi 's quick disk 89 & nbsp ; mm 2.8 in square disk format which is used in a handful of japanese computers and various synthesizer keyboards , along with a few word processors . quickdisk drives are in a few devices in europe and north america . mitsumi already had close relations with nintendo , as it manufactured the famicom and nes consoles , and possibly other nintendo hardware . modifications to the standard quick disk format include the '' nintendo '' moulding along the bottom of each disk card . in addition to branding the disk , this acts as a rudimentary form of copy protection - a device inside the drive bay contains raised protrusions which fit into their recessed counterparts , ostensibly ensuring that only official disks are used . if a disk without these recessed areas is inserted , the protrusions can not raise , and the system will not allow the game to be loaded . this was combined with technical measures in the way data was stored on the disk to prevent users from physically swapping copied disk media into an official shell . however , both of these measures were defeated by pirate game distributors ; in particular , special disks with cutouts alongside simple devices to modify standard quick disks were produced to defeat the physical hardware check , enabling rampant piracy . an advertisement containing a guide for a simple modification to a quick disk to allow its use with a famicom disk system was printed in at least one magazine . games . image : famicom zelda disk.png thumb a zelda no densetsu ( legend of zelda ) disk card . image : fsc-tdre disk 20060830.jpg right thumb a blue 3d hot rally disk card with shutter . there are about 200 games in the famicom disk system 's library . some are fds exclusives , some are disk writer exclusives , and many were re-released years later on the cartridge format such as the legend of zelda for nes in 1987 and for famicom in 1994 . the most notable fds originals include the legend of zelda , zelda ii : the adventure of link , kid icarus , ice hockey , and akumajō dracula ( castlevania ) . square co . , ltd . had a branch called disk original group , a software label that published disk system games from japanese pc software companies . the venture was largely a failure and almost pushed a pre-final fantasy square into bankruptcy . final fantasy was to be released for the fds , but a disagreement over nintendo 's copyright policies caused square to change its position and release the game as a cartridge . nintendo released a disk version of super mario bros . in addition to the cartridge version . the western-market super mario bros . 2 originated from a disk-only game called yume kōjō : doki doki panic . nintendo utilized the cheaper and more dynamic disk medium for a disk writer exclusive cobranded advertisement-based game , a genre now called advergames . kaettekita mario bros . ( lit . the return of mario bros . ) is a remastered version of mario bros . with enhanced jump controls and high score saving , plus a new slot machine minigame branded for the nagatanien food company . the final fds game release was janken disk jō in december 1992 , a rock paper scissors game featuring the disk system mascot , disk-kun . legacy . the famicom disk system briefly served as an enabling technology for the creation of a new wave of home console video games and a new type of video game experience , mostly due to tripling the size of cheap game storage compared to affordable cartridge roms , and by storing gamers ' progress within their vast new adventures . these games include the open world design and enduring series launches of the legend of zelda ( 1986 ) and metroid ( 1986 ) , with its launch game zelda considered to be one of the greatest games of all time due mostly to its expansiveness . almost one decade ahead of nintendo 's satellaview service , the fds 's writable and portable storage technology served as an enabling technology for the innovation of online leaderboards and contests via the in-store disk fax kiosks , which are now seen as the earliest forerunners of modern online game and distribution . within its library of 200 original games , some are fds-exclusive and many were re-released one or two years later on cartridges for famicom and nes , though without the fds 's additional sound channel . see also . 64dd . notes . references .