Spanglish

history and distribution . in the late 1940s , the puerto rican journalist , poet , and essayist salvador tió coined the terms espanglish for spanish spoken with some english terms , and the less commonly used inglañol for english spoken with some spanish terms . after puerto rico became a united states territory in 1898 , spanglish became progressively more common there as the united states army and the early colonial administration tried to impose the english language on island residents . between 1902 and 1948 , the main language of instruction in public schools ( used for all subjects except for spanish class ) was english . currently puerto rico is nearly unique in having both english and spanish as its official languages ( see also new mexico ) . consequently , many american english words are now found in the vocabulary of puerto rican spanish . spanglish may also be known by different regional names . spanglish does not have one unified dialect—specifically , the varieties of spanglish spoken in new york , florida , texas , and california differ . monolingual speakers of standard spanish may have difficulty in understanding it . ardila 2005 , pg . 61 . it is common in panama , where the 96-year ( 1903–1999 ) u.s . control of the panama canal influenced much of local society , especially among the former residents of the panama canal zone , the zonians . many puerto ricans living on the island of st . croix speak in informal situations a unique spanglish-like combination of puerto rican spanish and the local virgin islands creole , which is very different from the spanglish spoken elsewhere . a similar situation exists in the large puerto rican-descended populations of new york city and boston . spanglish is spoken commonly in the modern united states , reflecting the growth of the hispanic-american population due to immigration . according to the u.s . census bureau , the population of hispanics grew from 35.3 million to 53 million between 2000 and 2012 . guzman , b . 2000 & us census 2012 hispanics have become the largest minority ethnic group in the us . more than 60 % are of mexican descent . mexican americans form one of the fastest-growing groups , increasing from 20.6 million to 34.5 million between 2000 and 2012 . around 58 % of this community chose california , especially southern california , as their new home . spanglish is widely used throughout the heavily mexican-american and other hispanic communities of southern california . rothman , jason & rell , amy beth , pg . 1 the use of spanglish has become important to hispanic communities throughout the united states in areas such as miami , new york city , texas , and california . in miami , the afro-cuban community makes use of a spanglish familiarly known as '' cubonics , '' a portmanteau of the words cuban and ebonics , a slang term for african american vernacular english that is itself a portmanteau of ebony and phonics . '' spanglish is known as bilingualism/semi-lingualism . the acquisition of the first language is interrupted or unstructured language input follows from the second language . this can also happen in reverse . many mexican-americans ( chicanos ) , immigrants and bilinguals express themselves in various forms of spanglish . for many , spanglish serves as a basis for self-identity , but others believe that it should not exist . spanglish is difficult , because if the speaker learned the two languages in separate contexts , they use the conditioned system , in which the referential meanings in the two languages differ considerably . those who were literate in their first language before learning the other , and who have support to maintain that literacy , are sometimes those least able to master their second language . spanglish is part of receptive bilingualism . receptive bilinguals are those who understand a second language but do n't speak it . that is when they use spanglish . receptive bilinguals are also known as productively bilingual , since , to give an answer , the speaker exerts much more mental effort to answer in english , spanish , or spanglish . without first understanding the culture and history of the region where spanglish evolved as a practical matter an in depth familiarizing with multiple cultures . this knowledge , indeed the mere fact of one 's having that knowledge , often forms an important part of both what one considers one 's personal identity and what others consider one 's identity . other places where similar mixed codes are spoken are gibraltar ( llanito ) , belize ( kitchen spanish ) , aruba , bonaire , and curaçao ( along with dutch and papiamento ) . spanglish is also spoken among the spanish-speaking community in australia . it is common to hear expressions among spanish-speaking minorities in cities like sydney and melbourne , like : vivo en un flat pequeño ; voy a correr con mis runners ; la librería de la city es grande , or words such as el rubbish bin , la vacuum cleaner , el tram , el toilet or el mobile . the same situation happens within the spanish-speaking community of new zealand . . usage . spanglish patterns . spanglish is informal and lacks documented structure and rules , although speakers can consistently judge the grammaticality of a phrase or sentence . from a linguistic point of view , spanglish often is mistakenly labeled many things . spanglish is not a creole or dialect of spanish because , though people claim they are native spanglish speakers , spanglish itself is not a language on its own , but speakers speak english or spanish with a heavy influence from the other language . the definition of spanglish has been unclearly explained by scholars and linguists despite being noted so often . spanglish is the fluid exchange of language between english and spanish , present in the heavy influence in the words and phrases used by the speaker . montes-alcala , cecilia , pg . 98 . spanglish is currently considered a hybrid language by linguists —many actually refer to spanglish as '' spanish-english code-switching '' , though there is some influence of lexicalization as well . individuals '' communicate their thoughts and ideas using a combination of spanish and english , often referring to this hybrid language practice as spanglish '' . martinez , ramon antonio . viewing page 124 . vol . vol . 45 . austin : national council of teachers of english , 2010 . 124-49 . print . no . 2 . the inception of spanglish is due to the influx of native spanish speaking latin american people into north america , specifically the united states of america . as mentioned previously , the phenomenon of spanglish can be separated into two different categories : code-switching , and lexicalization . codeswitching has sparked controversy because it is seen '' as a corruption of spanish and english , a 'linguistic pollution ' or 'the language of a '' raced '' , underclass people ' '' . bonnie urciuoli , exposing prejudice : puerto rican experiences of language , race , and class ( boulder , colo . : westview press , 1996 ) , p . 38 , cited by arlene dávila , latinos inc . : the marketing and making of a people ( berkeley : university of california press , 2012 ) , p . 168 , and quoted in turn by viviana rojas and juan piñón , '' spanish , english or spanglish ? media strategies and corporate struggles to reach the second and later generations of latinos . '' international journal of hispanic media . n.p . , aug . 2014 . web . 04 oct . 2015 . for example , a fluent bilingual speaker addressing another bilingual speaker might engage in code switching with the sentence , '' i 'm sorry i can not attend next week 's meeting porque tengo una obligación de negocios en boston , pero espero que i 'll be back for the meeting the week after '' —which means , '' i 'm sorry i can not attend next week 's meeting because i have a business obligation in boston , but i hope to be back for the meeting the week after '' . calques . calques are translations of entire words or phrases from one language into another . they represent the simplest forms of spanglish , as they undergo no lexical or grammatical structural change . the use of calques is common throughout most languages , evident in the calques of arabic exclamations used in spanish . montes-alcala , pg . 107 examples : '' to call back '' → llamar p'atrás ( volver a llamar ) '' it 's up to you . '' → está p'arriba de ti . ( depende de ti . ) '' to run for governor '' → correr para gobernador ( presentarse para gobernador ) . semantic extensions . semantic extension or reassignment refers to a phenomenon where speakers use a word of language a ( typically spanish in this case ) with the meaning of its cognate in language b ( typically english ) , rather than its standard meaning in language a . in spanglish this usually occurs in the case of '' false friends '' ( similar to , but technically not the same as false cognates ) , where words of similar form in spanish and english are thought to have like meanings based on their cognate relationship . montes-alcala , pg . 105 examples : guillermo gómez-peña uses spanglish in his performances . matt de la peña 's novel mexican whiteboy ( 2008 ) features flourishes of spanglish . junot díaz 's the brief wondrous life of oscar wao also uses spanglish words and phrases . pedro pietri wrote the poem el spanglish national anthem . ( 1993 ) ilan stavans spanglish : the making of a new american language . ( 2004 ) piri thomas wrote the autobiography down these mean streets ( 1967 ) using spanglish phrases . yoss ' science fiction novel super extra grande ( 2009 ) is set in a future where latin americans have colonized the galaxy and spanglish is the lingua franca among the galaxy 's sentient species . h . g . wells 's future history the shape of things to come ( 1933 ) predicted that in the 21st century english and spanish would '' become interchangeable languages '' . h.g.wells , the shape of things to come , ch . 12 germán valdés , a mexican comedian , ( known as tin tan ) made heavy use of spanglish . he dressed as a pachuco . ; music the use of spanglish by incorporating english and spanish lyrics into music has risen in the united states over time . in the 1980s 1.2 % of songs in the billboard hot 100 contained spanglish lyrics , eventually growing to 6.2 % in the 2000s . the lyrical emergence of spanglish by way of latin american musicians has grown tremendously , reflective of the growing hispanic population within the united states . pisarek & valenzuela 2012 mexican rock band molotov , whose members use spanglish in their lyrics . american progressive rock band the mars volta , whose song lyrics frequently switch back and forth between english and spanish . ska punk pioneers sublime , whose singer bradley nowell grew up in a spanish-speaking community , released several songs in spanglish . shakira ( born shakira isabel mebarak ripoll ) , a colombian singer-songwriter , musician and model . sean paul ( born sean paul ryan francis henriques ) , a jamaican singer and songwriter . ricky martin ( born enrique martín morales ) , a puerto rican pop musician , actor and author . pitbull ( born armando christian pérez ) , a successful cuban-american rapper , producer and latin grammy award-winning artist from miami , florida that has brought spanglish into mainstream music through his multiple hit songs . enrique iglesias , a spanish singer-songwriter with songs in english , spanish and spanglish ; spanglish songs include bailamos and bailando . rapper silento , famous for his song '' watch me ( whip/nae nae ) '' , recorded a version in spanglish .