Ichiyō Higuchi

early life . natsuko higuchi was born in chiyoda-ku , tokyo , on may 2 , 1872 , the youngest daughter of noriyoshi higuchi , a samurai from the nearby yamanashi prefecture . her parents were from a peasant community but her father had managed to procure samurai status in 1867 . despite only enjoying the position for a short time before the samurai were abolished with the meiji restoration , growing up in a samurai household was a formative experience for her . in 1886 , she began studying waka poetry at one of the best of the poetic conservatories , the haginoya , and became a student of nakajima utako . here she received weekly poetry lessons and lectures on japanese literature . there were also monthly poetry competitions in which all students , past and present , were invited to participate . poetry taught at this school was that of the conservative court poets of the heian period . she always felt awkward among the other students , the great majority of whom came from the upper-class . it did not help that she was nearsighted , modest , small , and with thin hair . her compulsion to write became evident by 1891 when she began to keep a diary in earnest . it would become hundreds of pages long , covering the five years left in her life . with her feelings of social inferiority , her timidity , and the increasing poverty of her family , her diary was the place where she could assert herself . her journals were also a place for her to assert objectivity and included her views on literary art and well as others ' views on her work . efforts to become a writer . in 1889 , her father died and she was named as head of the family , an unusual position at the time . finances were very tight and she , her mother , and younger sister made ends meet by doing needlework , washing , and other jobs . in 1892 , after seeing the success of a classmate , kaho tanabe , who wrote a novel , who wrote yabu no uguisu ( '' songbirds in the grove '' , 1888 ) . higuchi decided to become a novelist to support her family . her initial efforts at writing fiction were in the form of a short story . in 1891 she met her future advisor who would help , she assumed , this poet-turned-fiction-writer and connect her with editors : tosui nakarai . she fell in love with him right away , not knowing that , at 31 , he had a reputation as a womanizer . nor did she realize that he wrote popular literature which aimed to please the general public and in no way wished to be associated with serious literature . her mentor did not return her passionate , if discreet , love for him , and instead treated her as a younger sister . this failed relationship would become a recurrent theme in higuchi 's fiction . eventually , she got the break she was so eager for : her first stories were published in a minor newspaper under her pen name , ichiyo higuchi . the stories from this first period ( 1892–1894 ) suffered from the excessive influence of heian poetry . higuchi felt compelled to demonstrate her classical literary training . the plots were thin , there was little development of character and they were loaded down by excessive sentiment , especially when compared to what she was writing concurrently in her diary . but she was developing rapidly . several of her trademark themes appear ; for example , the triangular relationship among a lonely , beautiful , young woman who has lost her parents , a handsome man who has abandoned her ( and remains in the background ) , and a lonely and desperate ragamuffin who falls in love with her . another theme higuchi repeated was the ambition and cruelty of the meiji middle class . the story '' umoregi '' ( '' in obscurity '' ) signaled higuchi 's arrival as a professional writer . it was published in the prestigious journal miyako no hana in 1892 , only nine months after she had started writing in earnest . her work was noticed and she was recognized as a promising new author . last years . in 1893 , higuchi , her mother and her sister abandoned their middle-class house and , with a grim determination to survive , moved to a poor neighborhood where they opened a stationery store that before long failed . their new dwelling was a five-minute walk from tokyo 's ill-famed red-light district , the yoshiwara . her experience living in this neighborhood would provide material for several of her later stories , especially '' takekurabe '' , ( literally , '' comparing heights '' ; '' child 's play '' in the robert lyons danly translation ; also called '' growing up '' in the edward seidensticker translation ) . the stories of her mature period ( 1894–1896 ) were not only marked by her experience living near the red-light district and greater concern over the plight of women , but also by the influence of ihara saikaku , a 17th-century writer , whose stories she had recently discovered . his distinctiveness lay in great part in his acceptance of low-life characters as worthwhile literary subjects . what higuchi added was a special awareness of suffering and sensitivity . to this period belong '' ōtsugomori '' ( '' on the last day of the year '' ) , '' nigorie '' ( '' troubled waters '' ) , '' wakare-michi '' ( '' separate ways '' ) , '' jūsan'ya '' ( '' the thirteenth night '' ) and '' takekurabe '' ( '' child 's play '' ) . the last two are considered her best work . with these last stories , her fame spread throughout the tokyo literary establishment . she was commended for her traditional style , and was called '' the last woman of the old meiji '' in reflection of her evocation of the past . { in her modest home , she was visited by other writers , students of poetry , admirers , the curious , critics , and editors requesting her collaboration . due to constant interruptions and frequent headaches , higuchi stopped writing . as her father and one of her brothers had before her , she contracted tuberculosis . she died on november 23 , 1896 . she was 24 . higuchi 's likeness adorns the japanese 5000 yen banknote as of fall 2004 , becoming the third woman to appear on a japanese banknote , after empress jingū in 1881 and murasaki shikibu in 2000 . her best-known stories have been made into movies . selected works . the year refers to the date of first publication . 1892 : yamizakura , flowers at dusk ) 1892 : wakarejimo 1892 : tamadasuki 1892 : samidare 1892 : kyōtsukue 1892 : umoregi 1893 : aketsukiyo 1893 : yuki no hi , a snowy day ) 1893 : koto no ne , the sound of the koto ) 1894 : hanagomorie 1894 : yamiyo , encounters on a dark night ) 1894 : ōtsugomori , on the last day of the year or the last day of the year ) 1895 : takekurabe , child 's play , growing up , they compare heights or teenagers vying for tops ) 1895 : noki moru tsuki 1895 : yukugumo 1895 : utsusemi 1895 : nigorie , troubled waters , muddy water or in the gutter ) 1895 : jūsan'ya , the thirteenth night ) 1896 : kono ko 1896 : wakare-michi , separate ways or the parting of the ways ) 1896 : ware-kara . notes . references . citations . . bibliography . . further reading . english : compernolle , timothy j . van . '' happiness foreclosed : sentimentalism , the suffering heroine , and social critique in higuchi ichiyō 's 'jūsan'ya . ' '' journal of japanese studies 30 , no . 2 ( 2004 ) : p . & nbsp ; 353–381 . available at jstor . japanese : ikuta , hanayo . ichiyō to shigure—denki : higuchi ichiyō/hasegawa shigure denki sōsho . tokyo : ōzorasha , 1992 . external links . e-texts of higuchi ichiyō 's works at aozora bunko j'lit authors : ichiyo higuchi books from japan higuchi ichiyō 's grave