Slaithwaite

history . between 1195 and 1205 , roger de laci , constable of chester , gave the manor of slaithwaite to henry teutonicus ( lord tyas ) . it remained in the tyas family until the end of the 14th century when it was came into the kaye family . it eventually joined the estates of the earl of dartmouth , a descendant of the kayes , and was part of the upper division of the wapentake of agbrigg . it included the township of lingarths ( lingards ) and constituted the chapelry of slaithwaite , in the patronage of the vicar of huddersfield . in the early 19th century , a local spring was discovered to contain sulfur properties and minerals , similar to those found in harrogate . sometime after 1820 a bathing facility was built , along with a gardens and pleasure ground , with some visitor cottages . a free school was founded in 1721 and rebuilt twice : first in 1744 , and again in 1842 . in the 1848 edition of a topographical dictionary of england , samuel lewis ( the editor ) wrote : '' the lands are in meadow and pasture , with a small portion of arable ; the scenery is bold and romantic . in the quarries of the district are found vegetable fossils , especially firs and other mountain trees . the village is beautifully seated in the valley of the river colne ; the inhabitants are chiefly employed in the woollen manufacture , in the spinning of cotton and silk , and in silk-weaving '' slaithwaite hall , thought to date from the mid-15th century , is located on a nearby hillside . it is one of a number of cruck-framed buildings clustered in this area of west yorkshire . after many years divided into cottages , the building has been extensively restored and is now a single dwelling . legend has it that local smugglers caught by the excise men tried to explain their nocturnal activities as 'raking the moon from the canal ' and definitely not as 'fishing out smuggled brandy' . slaithwaite moonraking . org a '' moonraker '' is now the official nickname for a native of the village . similar stories and nicknames exist for the neighbouring villages of golcar ( '' lillies '' ) , marsden ( '' cuckoos '' ) and linthwaite ( '' leadboilers '' ) . the legend is also known in wiltshire , where the locals are also known as 'moonrakers' . an apocryphal story associated with slaithwaite is that in the 19th century , when tenants came to the village to pay their annual rent , the 5th earl of dartmouth would provide 'rent dinners ' and that the shoulder of mutton was the most favoured with the tables of hot roast beef , mutton and tongue ( cooked together in the set pot ) being available there at that time . economy . recent projects have seen a major restoration of the canal . that required a full re-excavation and new lock gates . following the emergence of the railway network they were little used and closed down then filled in during 1956 . the refurbishment has revitalised the high street area and slaithwaite is currently the only village in england with a canal running alongside its main street . there are several significant local employers , including thornton & ross ( a pharmaceuticals manufacturer ) , shaw pallets and spectrum yarns – one of a small number of remaining textiles businesses in the colne valley , once a major centre for wool and yarn . churches . the church of st james in slaithwaite is the parish church ; it is grouped with st bartholomew 's in marsden and the mission church at shred . the present church stands on high ground and was constructed c . 1789 to replace the original church which had suffered from flooding . st james , slaithwaite with east scammonden ; achurchnearyou.com st james , slaithwaite there is also a methodist church . slaithwaite methodist church , huddersfield methodist circuit . shopping and entertainment . there are several traditional public houses in slaithwaite , including the commercial , the shoulder of mutton , the swan , and the 'silent woman ' which came to the attention of the world media on 23 september 2007 , when a man walked into the pub and ordered a pint of beer a few minutes after he had murdered his son and attacked his daughter with a knife . alternative dining and drinking venues are the little bridge , vanilla bean , om is where the heart is , ashbys and jax bar tapas . there is a new pub and restaurant called nobles on manchester road . slaithwaite has a vibrant centre with many independent shops , a post office , restaurants and cafes . of particular note is the local butcher , e . grange & son ( master pie makers ) , selling their own brand of pork pies , which have won some awards . other shops include the community-owned cooperative the 'green valley grocer ' , the workers ' cooperative the 'handmade bakery , ' the 'chocolate corner ' gift shop and cafe , and mystical moments – which hit national headlines in august 2016 as the magic wand shop ' . transport . more modern transport is provided by the slaithwaite railway station , which has direct trains to huddersfield and manchester . the colne valley defines local geography by channelling the railway line , the canal and the a62 : each of which has at one time been the primary means of transport across the pennines . the small humpback bridge over the canal is called 'tim brig ' ; it is said to be named after a local inn keeper who used the bridge during smuggling operations with the narrowboats passing through . there are several bus links from slaithwaite to several places in the huddersfield area . services run by first west yorkshire go from slaithwaite to marsden , oldham and manchester and to huddersfield . other bus services are to holmfirth , blackmoorfoot and surrounding villages . file : narrow canal.jpg huddersfield narrow canal at slaithwaite file : slawit_2.jpg canal lock in slaithwaite file : slaithwaite , viewed from laund road.jpg slaithwaite , viewed from laund road . culture . in february , on alternate years , slaithwaite celebrates a 19th-century legend of moonraking with the slaithwaite moonraking festival , with a week of lantern making and a programme of storytelling . the week-long celebration , which always takes place during the school half term week , ends with a parade of lanterns around the village , and a festival finale by the canal in the centre of the village . a heritage lottery funded project 'wild about wool ' , that is collating memories of the industrial heritage of the colne valley , is linked to the festival . 'wool ' was also the theme of the festival held in february 2011 . the slaithwaite philharmonic orchestra was founded here in 1891 . an 80-strong amateur orchestra , the orchestra also plays an annual season of concerts in huddersfield . slaithwaite brass band slaithwaite brass band have been making music here since 1892 . they perform at many concerts and events throughout the year and have had many successes over the years including being the first band to gain the grand shield twice . parts of both slaithwaite and marsden were used to create the village called 'skelthwaite ' in the british tv show where the heart is . sport . rugby league is the main sport played in the village . slaithwaite saracens compete in the pennine rugby league premier division , as champions of division one . they achieved the huddersfield double by also winning the huddersfield holliday cup . cricket is also very popular in the village . slaithwaite cricket & bowling club , situated on hill top , during the summer becomes the heart of the community . it is a thriving club with many successful teams including winning second xi premiership championship in the 2010 season . the village also has its own running club named slaithwaite striders , which has a mixture of all abilities , meeting weekly to run and enjoy the surrounding roads , paths and of course the views . notable people born in slaithwaite . william crowther , mayor of auckland , born at slaithwaite-cum-lingards , 1832 . haydn wood , ( composer ) was born here on 25 march 1882 . see also . listed buildings in colne valley ( central area ) . references . further reading . charles augustus hulbert annals of the church in slaithwaite 1864 . -- do . -- extracts from the diary of . robert meeke , founder of the slaithwaite free school in 1721 . to which are added notes , illustr . and a brief sketch of his life by h . j . morehouse . also a continuation of the history of slaithwaite free school by c . a . hulbert 1875 . external links . st james , slaithwaite ( church of england )