Single malt Scotch

definitions . '' malt '' indicates that the whisky is distilled from a '' malted '' barley . malting calls for soaking the grains in water for several days until it germinates . heat is then applied to stop the germination , often , using peat as the fuel . other grains , such as rye or wheat , can be malted for other types of whisky , but barley must be used for single malt scotch . the dry malt is ground into flour ( grist ) and mixed with hot water ; this mashing process converts the starch into sugar . later , yeast is added to increase the process of fermentation . finally , impurities such as methanol are removed during distillation ; that also increases the alcohol content . difference between single malt and blended scotch whisky '' single '' indicates that all the spirits in the bottle come from a single distillery.that distillery may combine single malt whiskies of several ages in a bottle . another term is sometimes seen , '' double malt scotch '' or '' triple malt '' . this designation indicates that the whisky was aged in two or three types of casks , but was not blended ; hence , it still falls into the single malt category . the more common term for this type of whisky is '' double wood '' or '' triple wood '' . examples include the balvenie 12 years old doublewood and laphroaig triple wood . the scotch whisky guide many companies use malt whisky purchased from multiple distilleries , and these whiskies combined into '' blended malt '' . until the scotch whisky regulations 2009 ( swr 2009 ) , the word '' blended '' only appeared ( in the context of scotch whisky ) on bottles of whisky that contained a mixture of both barley and non-barley grain whisky , but this is no longer the case . under the terminology established by the swr 2009 , the term '' blended malt scotch whisky '' replaced the term '' vatted malt '' to describe a mixture of single malt scotch whiskies ( malted barley whisky ) . only about 10 % of the scotch whiskies on the market are defined as single malt . the other 90 % is made by combining numerous whiskies , typically two-thirds grain whisky ( non-barley ) and one-third malt whisky , from several , or numerous , distilleries in scotland . the resulting products are labeled '' blended scotch whisky '' , without the word '' malt '' . nearly 90 % of scotch whisky sold each year is a blended type . nonetheless , in 2018 , single malt scotch made up nearly 28 % of the £4.7 billion of whisky exported from scotland . hmrc data shows scotch exports hit record high in 2018 for any scotch whisky , whether malt or blended , the age statement on a bottle refers to the number of years the whisky spent maturing in casks . very few whiskies are bottled from a single cask . the mixing of spirits with different amounts of ageing is allowed ; the age statement of the resulting mix reflects the age of the youngest whisky in the bottle . age statement . history . distillation of whisky has been performed in scotland for centuries . the earliest written record of whisky production in scotland from malted barley is an entry on the 1494 exchequer rolls , which reads '' eight bolls of malt to friar john cor , by order of the king , wherewith to make aqua vitae . '' in the following centuries , the various governments of scotland began taxing the production of whisky , to the point that most of the spirit was produced illegally . however , in 1823 , parliament passed the excise act making commercial distillation legal and profitable . punishments were imposed on landowners when unlicensed distilleries were found on their properties . an upper drummin farmer in the glen livet valley , george smith , working under landlord the duke of gordon , was the first person in scotland to take out a licence for a distillery under the new law , founding what would become the glenlivet distillery in 1824 , making single malt scotch . the glenlivet history the glenlivet single malt whisky in the 1830s , aeneas coffey patented a refined version of a design originally created by robert stein , based on early innovations by sir anthony perrier , for a column still . a comprehensive yet concise history of scotch whisky this new method produced whisky much more efficiently than the traditional pot still . the history of whisky and whiskey the new type of still allowed for continuous distillation , without the need for cleaning after each batch was made . this process made manufacturing more affordable by performing the equivalent of multiple distillation steps . the difference between pot versus column stills , explained the new still dramatically increased production ; the whisky was less intense and smoother , though less flavoursome . quickly , merchants began blending the malt whisky with grain whisky distilled in the continuous stills , making the first blended scotch whisky . the blended scotch proved quite successful , less expensive to produce than malt , and exhibited more flavour and character than grain . the combination allowed the single malt producers to expand their operations , or to sell their products to other distillers who were making the blended products . after the 1850s , blended scotch became far more popular than single malt whisky which eventually became a niche product for connoisseurs . the secret history of single malts a 2016 report stated that only 20 % of the scotch whisky was made by companies owned in scotland . the owners of the majority of products are diageo , a london-based company , and pernod ricard of france while japanese company suntory owns morrison-bowmore . where is whisky produced independent distilleries owned by scots companies make a substantial amount of whisky too , particularly william grant & sons , the largest of these . grant produces 8 % of all scotch whisky , with brands including glenfiddich and balvenie . top 15 scotch whisky companies glenfiddich is the best-selling single malt scotch in the world ; world 's bestselling single malt whisky undergoes risky change roughly 14 million bottles are sold annually . in recent times , single malt has made up about 26 % of the whisky exported to other countries ; bulk spirits constituted about 5 % and the balance has been blended whisky . the top importers of scotch whisky are the us ( 21 % ) , france ( 11 % ) and singapore ( 6 % ) . . economic benefits . the scotch whisky association estimated in 2019 that scotland 's whisky industry supported 40,000 jobs . the industry 's contribution to the economy of the uk was estimated as £5.5 billion in 2018 ; the industry provided £3.8 billion in direct gva ( gross value added ) to scotland . whisky tourism has also become significant and accounts for £68.3 million per year . one factor may have negatively affected sales , an extra 3.9 % duty on spirits imposed by the uk in 2017 . by 2020 , another factor may affect exports : the 25 % increase in tariffs imposed by the u.s . in october 2019 . by year-end 2017 , however , exports totaled a record-breaking £4.37 billion , an increase of 8.9 % over 2016 . of that total , single malt scotch accounted for £1.17 billion in exports , a 14 % increase over 2016 . exports in 2018 again increased , by 7.8 % by value , and 3.6 % in number of bottles , in spite of the duty imposed in 2017 ; exports grew to a record level , £4.7 billion . the us tariffs were not yet in place at that time , however . of the total exports in 2018 , single malt accounted for £1.3 billion . whisky tourism has also become significant and accounts for £68.3 million per year . ( the percentage contribution to this industry by single malt scotch distilleries has not been released . ) the tourism has been a real plus to the economy , and of significant value especially in remote rural areas , according to fiona hyslop msp , cabinet secretary for culture , tourism and external affairs . '' the scottish government is committed to working with partners like the scotch whisky association to increase our tourism offer and encourage more people to visit our distilleries , '' the secretary added . record number of visitors for scotch distilleries scotch whisky tourism at all-time high . regions . image : scotch regions.svg thumb right 300px single malt scotch geography flavour , aroma , and finish differ widely from one single malt to the next . single malt scotch whiskies are categorised into the following whisky-producing regions : highland single malts , island single malts ( a sub-section of the highland region ) , speyside single malts , islay single malts , lowland single malts , and campbeltown single malts . independent bottlers . independent bottlers buy casks of single malts and either bottle them immediately or store them for future use . many of the independents began as stores and merchants who bought the whisky in bulk and bottled it for individual sales . many distilleries do not bottle their whisky as a single malt , so independent bottlings are the only way the single malt gets to market . the bottling process is generally the same , but independents generally do not have access to the distillery 's water source , so another source is used to dilute the whisky . additionally , independents are generally less concerned with maintaining a particular style , so more single year and single cask bottlings are produced . established independent bottlers include duncan taylor , master of malt , murray mcdavid , douglas laing & co , signatory , hart brothers , cadenhead 's , and blackadder .