Flamingo

description . flamingos usually stand on one leg , with the other being tucked beneath the body . the reason for this behaviour is not fully understood . one theory is that standing on one leg allows the birds to conserve more body heat , given that they spend a significant amount of time wading in cold water . however , the behaviour also takes place in warm water and is also observed in birds that do not typically stand in water . an alternative theory is that standing on one leg reduces the energy expenditure for producing muscular effort to stand and balance on one leg . a study on cadavers showed that the one-legged pose could be held without any muscle activity , while living flamingos demonstrate substantially less body sway in a one-legged posture . as well as standing in the water , flamingos may stamp their webbed feet in the mud to stir up food from the bottom . flamingos are capable flyers , and flamingos in captivity often require wing clipping to prevent escape . a pair of african flamingos which had not yet had their wings clipped escaped from the wichita , kansas zoo in 2005 . one was spotted in texas 14 years later . it had been seen previously by birders in texas , wisconsin and louisiana . fugitive flamingo spotted in texas 14 years after escaping a kansas zoo during storm , wichita eagle , kaitlyn alanis , may 27 , 2019 . retrieved may 29 , 2019 . young flamingos hatch with grayish-red plumage , but adults range from light pink to bright red due to aqueous bacteria and beta-carotene obtained from their food supply . a well-fed , healthy flamingo is more vibrantly colored , thus a more desirable mate ; a white or pale flamingo , however , is usually unhealthy or malnourished . captive flamingos are a notable exception ; they may turn a pale pink if they are not fed carotene at levels comparable to the wild . the greater flamingo is the tallest of the six different species of flamingos , standing at with a weight up to , and the shortest flamingo species ( the lesser ) has a height of and weighs . flamingos can have a wingspan as small as to as big as . bradford , alina . 2014 . flamingo facts : food turns feathers pink . september 18 . accessed march 2018 . flamingoes can open their bills by raising the upper jaw as well as by dropping the lower . , page 409 . . behavior and ecology . feeding . flamingos filter-feed on brine shrimp and cyanobacteria as well as insect larvae , small insects , mollusks and crustaceans making them omnivores . their bills are specially adapted to separate mud and silt from the food they eat , and are uniquely used upside-down . the filtering of food items is assisted by hairy structures called lamellae , which line the mandibles , and the large , rough-surfaced tongue . the pink or reddish color of flamingos comes from carotenoids in their diet of animal and plant plankton . american flamingos are a brighter red color because of the beta carotene availability in their food while the lesser flamingos are a paler pink due to ingesting a smaller amount of this pigment . these carotenoids are broken down into pigments by liver enzymes . the source of this varies by species , and affects the color saturation . flamingos whose sole diet is blue-green algae are darker than those that get it second-hand by eating animals that have digested blue-green algae ) . . vocalization sounds . flamingos are considered very noisy birds with their bird vocalization ranging from grunting or growling to nasal honking . vocalizations play an important role in parent-chick recognition , ritualized displays , and keeping large flocks together . variations in vocalizations exist in the voices of different species of flamingos . . lifecycle . flamingos are very social birds ; they live in colonies whose population can number in the thousands . these large colonies are believed to serve three purposes for the flamingos : avoiding predators , maximizing food intake , and using scarcely suitable nesting sites more efficiently . before breeding , flamingo colonies split into breeding groups of about 15 to 50 birds . both males and females in these groups perform synchronized ritual displays . ogilvie , malcolm ; carol ogilvie ( 1986 ) . flamingos . gloucester , uk : alan sutton publishing limited . the members of a group stand together and display to each other by stretching their necks upwards , then uttering calls while head-flagging , and then flapping their wings . studer-thiersch , a . ( 1975 ) . '' basle zoo '' , pp . 121–130 in n . duplaix-hall and j . kear , editors . flamingos . berkhamsted , united kingdom : t . & a . d . poyser , . the displays do not seem directed towards an individual , but occur randomly . these displays stimulate '' synchronous nesting '' ( see below ) and help pair up those birds that do not already have mates . flamingos form strong pair bonds , although in larger colonies , flamingos sometimes change mates , presumably because more mates are available to choose . studer-thiersch , a . ( 2000 ) . '' what 19 years of observation on captive great flamingos suggests about adaptations to breeding under irregular conditions . '' waterbirds : the international journal of waterbird biology 23 ( special publication i : conservation biology of flamingos ) : 150–159 . flamingo pairs establish and defend nesting territories . they locate a suitable spot on the mudflat to build a nest ( the female usually selects the place ) . copulation usually occurs during nest building , which is sometimes interrupted by another flamingo pair trying to commandeer the nesting site for their use . flamingos aggressively defend their nesting sites . both the male and the female contribute to building the nest , and to protecting the nest and egg . same-sex pairs have been reported . after the chicks hatch , the only parental expense is feeding . both the male and the female feed their chicks with a kind of crop milk , produced in glands lining the whole of the upper digestive tract ( not just the crop ) . the hormone prolactin stimulates production . the milk contains fat , protein , and red and white blood cells . ( pigeons and doves—columbidae—also produce crop milk ( just in the glands lining the crop ) , which contains less fat and more protein than flamingo crop milk . ) for the first six days after the chicks hatch , the adults and chicks stay in the nesting sites . at around 7–12 days old , the chicks begin to move out of their nests and explore their surroundings . when they are two weeks old , the chicks congregate in groups , called '' microcrèches '' , and their parents leave them alone . after a while , the microcrèches merge into '' crèches '' containing thousands of chicks . chicks that do not stay in their crèches are vulnerable to predators . . status and conservation . in captivity . the first flamingo hatched in a european zoo was a chilean flamingo at zoo basel in switzerland in 1958 . since then , over 389 flamingos have grown up in basel and been distributed to other zoos around the globe . greater , an at least 83-year-old greater flamingo , believed to be the oldest in the world , died at the adelaide zoo in australia in january 2014 . zoos have used mirrors to improve flamingo breeding behaviour . the mirrors are thought to give the flamingos the impression that they are in a larger flock than they actually are . . relationship with humans . ancient rome considered their tongues a delicacy . in the americas , the moche people of ancient peru worshipped nature . benson , elizabeth ( 1972 ) the mochica : a culture of peru . new york , ny : praeger press . they placed emphasis on animals , and often depicted flamingos in their art . flamingos are the national bird of the bahamas . andean miners have killed flamingos for their fat , believing that it would cure tuberculosis . in the united states , pink plastic flamingo statues are popular lawn ornaments . . references . external links . flamingo resource centre flamingo videos and photos on the internet bird collection