Ville Valo

collaborations and guest appearances . valo has collaborated with many different artists during his career , often under different pseudonyms . between 1997 and 2004 , valo performed back-up vocals on five albums by the 69 eyes , and appeared in the music video for the song '' wasting the dawn '' . in 1999 , he sang back-up on tehosekoitin 's album freak out , and performed three songs with finnish schlager band agents . freak out album sleeve notes . in 2000 , valo contributed a track for the tuomari nurmio tribute album tuomarin todistajat , and in 2001 , he played drums on daniel lioneye 's album the king of rock ' n roll and sang back-up on five fifteen 's album death of a clown . tuomarin todistajat album sleeve notes . juho k . juntunen ( 2002 ) . '' him - synnin viemää '' p.185 . wsoy in 2002 and 2004 , valo sang back-up on two albums by the skreppers . juho k . juntunen ( 2002 ) . '' him - synnin viemää '' p.265 . wsoy in 2004 , he also collaborated with lowe motor corporation and apocalyptica , performing the song '' bittersweet '' with the latter , which also featured lauri ylönen of the rasmus . in 2005 , valo was featured on the album hefty fine by the bloodhound gang , and performed at the roadrunner united concert in new york city . in 2006 , valo played bass and sang back-up on welcome to carcass cuntry by jeff walker ( musician ) , and made guest appearances on albums by cradle of filth and isabelle 's gift . he also performed two songs for the finnish compilation album synkkien laulujen maa , one of which was a duet with kari tapio . in august 2006 , valo joined anathema 's daniel cavanagh on stage twice for a performance of '' inner silence '' . in 2007 , valo made a guest appearance on manna 's album sister , and performed the song '' summer wine '' with polish-german actress and singer natalia avelon for the film eight miles high . the song eventually went platinum in germany . in 2008 , valo sang back-up on save nuta 's cover of '' rock ' n ' roll high school '' by the ramones . the track was a collaborative effort by several prominent finnish musicians to save youth centers across the country . in 2010 , valo sang back-up vocals on anathema 's we 're here because we 're here album , and remixed three songs with his brother jesse valo for the him album swrmxs . swrmx album sleeve notes . that same year he also mixed him bassist mige 's solo album cimmerica , which was released under the pseudonym mz . cimmerica album sleeve notes . in 2014 , valo was featured on the track '' whisper in the chaos '97 '' by lullacry , which was released on their compilation album legacy 1998–2014 . at the 2014 helldone festival , valo rejoined daniel lioneye on drums and made his live solo debut under the pseudonym rambo rimbaud . in 2016 , valo made guest appearances on releases by teho majamäki , mgt , the mission and andy mccoy . on 4 july 2016 , he released his first solo single '' olet mun kaikuluotain '' , a cover of '' annie 's song '' by john denver , with finnish lyrics by hector . the song 's music video would go on to win video of the year at the emma gala . in 2017 , valo provided the soundtrack for the virtual reality game downward spiral : prologue by 3rd eye studios . he would go on to score the 2018 sequel downward spiral : horus station as well . in 2018 , valo sang back-up on andy mccoy 's soul satisfaction ep and reunited with agents to perform previously unreleased songs by finnish singer-songwriter rauli somerjoki . the first single '' orpolapsi kiurun '' was released on 21 september 2018 . ville valo and agents performed at the annual emma gala on 2 february 2019 , and released their self-titled album on 15 february . the album went gold in less than a week and debuted at number one on the finnish album chart . the group began their finnish tour in march , which concluded in august . on 20 march 2020 , ville valo released a three-song ep titled gothica fennica vol . 1 , under the pseudonym vv . . other work . valo has also done some work outside of music , mainly a few appearances in tv and film . in 1998 , he played the role of '' lippumies '' in the ilppo pohjola directed short film asphalto . valo has often collaborated with skateboarder and jackass member bam margera , appearing in his films cky 3 , haggard : the movie , 411 productions presents : 61 : the bam issue , jackass number two and bam margera presents : where the ♯ & % is santa ? , as well as the tv series viva la bam . in 2008 , valo voiced the character '' moto moto '' in the finnish dub of madagascar : escape 2 africa . when asked about the possibility of becoming an actor , valo responded : '' i 've had offers in the past . nothing too big , nothing too interesting . but i 'm not an actor . i 've always felt that we need to sell about 80 million copies more for me to become an actor , a painter , an opera singer or a tv personality . '' in 2005 , valo designed a limited line of coca-cola light cans , with the proceeds going to the red cross . . personal life . valo currently resides in helsinki , finland . he previously lived in a 19th-century tower house designed by carl ludvig engel in munkkiniemi , which he bought in 2006 . in 2015 , the house was put back on sale . valo is asthmatic and irreligion . he has been a vegetarian since he was a teenager and currently has an '' almost vegan '' diet . valo dated finnish television host and model jonna nygrén in the early 2000s . the two got engaged in 2005 but broke up in spring 2006 . the couple reunited in the summer of 2006 but broke up again in 2007 . in 2009 , valo was involved in a relationship with an undisclosed partner , which served as the main inspiration for him 's 2010 album screamworks : love in theory and practice . in march 2012 , valo was linked to parisian model sandra mittica . in april 2015 , the couple were reported to have ended their relationship . since september 2016 , valo has been linked to finnish model christel karhu . in 2004 , valo was invited to the presidential independence day reception at finland 's presidential palace but was unable to attend due to a fever . he attended later in 2006 . . substance abuse and legal troubles . on more than one occasion valo has been reported to have performed intoxicated . in 2000 , he nearly fell off the balcony of a hotel while under the influence , but was stopped by friends . during a 2005 us tour , valo 's drink was spiked in minneapolis . he suffered minor injuries and was robbed of his jacket , asthma medicine , cigarettes , credit cards and cell phone . in february 2006 , valo was reportedly arrested at his home in finland after allegedly threatening to kill his neighbor and resisting arrest . he elaborated on the incident stating : '' it was a guy just talking a lot of bull about me and my fiancée . and i got pissed off , i went to his door . i kicked the door , he opened the door and i told him that if he was ever gon na talk badly about me and my girl , he was gon na end up being dead , and i punched him in the face , and that 's the whole thing . '' during the making of him 's 2007 album venus doom , valo 's alcohol abuse worsened to the point where he was vomiting and defecating blood . metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 21 according to valo , he neither slept nor ate for weeks . things came to a head when valo suffered a nervous breakdown during the recording process . he was able to recuperate , until he suffered a relapse during the album 's mixing stage . valo was eventually admitted to the promises treatment centers in malibu by the band 's manager seppo vesterinen . following his time in rehab , him released screamworks : love in theory and practice , which was the band 's first album valo recorded entirely sober . since then , he has relapsed , but valo has said that he tries to balance his drinking , stating : '' i 'm an on and off guy . if i drink , i drink properly for long stretches of time . and if i do n't drink , i do n't drink at all . '' metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 23 . tattoos . valo is known to sport several tattoos . he has a total of five heartagram tattoos ; one on the back of his neck , one on his lower stomach , one around his left nipple , one on his lower back , made to resemble a hexagram , and one on his right leg as the topper on a scepter of a pope with an astronaut 's head , called the '' cosmic pope '' . metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 29 metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 31 the heartagram around valo 's left nipple was done by kat von d to cover up the initial of a former girlfriend . valo 's left arm is covered with a full sleeve-tattoo , while his right arm has portraits of timo k . mukka , charles baudelaire and charles bukowski . metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 30 on his right wrist , valo has a heart surrounded by lettering , including the acronym '' dilligaf '' ( '' do i look like i give a fuck ? '' ) , which he got together with his then-fiancée jonna nygrén . on his bicep , valo has a monogram of venus doom , as well as an hourglass , and an eye with a skull inside the pupil . metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 28 after getting engaged to jonna nygrén , valo tattooed the letter '' j '' on his left ring finger but stated later on that he had removed it himself , using lit cigarettes . on his chest , valo has a portrait of maya deren , and beneath it , a hexagram with malachim lettering . on his stomach , valo has a portrait of klaus kinski sucking his thumb , while lying on a naked woman . on his back , valo has the eyes of edgar allan poe , which were done by kat von d and her then-husband oliver peck . on his lower back , valo has the estonian letter for '' night '' , which he shares with his brother . the letter also has a minus sign inside one of the umlauts , which was done as a tribute to late type o negative singer peter steele . on his left leg , valo also has an egyptian symbol for '' flame '' . . artistry and influences . many of valo 's songs deal with themes of love . while talking about his songwriting , valo stated : '' i feel like there is no subject more important for a song than relationships . it 's the only thing than moves me . '' he also takes some inspiration from literature , explaining : '' as a guy who writes songs , i get excited about an idea , or a book , or a sentence . i do n't necessarily get excited about the whole of tolkien , i just get excited about uruk-hai . just a little detail that just makes my mind work overdrive . '' valo and the rest of him referred to their music as '' love metal '' , the idea of which was to combine more melodic and melancholic elements , with heavier influences . valo has described him 's music as '' sentimental , hard-hitting rock '' . some of valo 's favorite artists and musical influences include black sabbath , type o negative , neil young , the sisters of mercy , fields of the nephilim , johnny cash , depeche mode , elvis presley , rauli somerjoki and tapio rautavaara . some of his non-musical influences include edgar allan poe , h.p . lovecraft , timo k . mukka , charles baudelaire and charles bukowski , metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 33 as well as austin osman spare , maya deren and shigeo fukuda . metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 35 metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 37 much of him 's success has been attributed to valo 's songwriting ability , as well as his image and charisma . in 2004 , metal hammer magazine described valo as one of the few new '' rockstars '' in music , stating : '' him were like no other band . they had a special something , but more importantly they had a special someone . ville shone like a star with his blend of mick jagger posturing and brandon lee 's dark charms in the crow '' . metal hammer : a brief history of him pg . 8 metal hammer : a brief history of him pg . 9 helsingin sanomat described valo 's image as utilizing '' the tried and true james dean formula , where sensitivity and edginess combined . '' valo possesses a baritone voice type with a five octave range , and was found by vvn music to possess the eight-highest vocal range of any known singer in popular music . valo was ranked number 80 in hit paraders top 100 metal vocalists of all time . loudwire ranked him as the fourteenth greatest metal frontman of the 21st century , stating : '' his baritone voice is undeniably gorgeous , his vampiric charisma is almost hypnotic , male fans desperately attempt to emulate him and female fans scream ballistically as if he was the second coming of elvis . '' in 2004 and 2005 , valo was awarded the golden god award and the icon award , respectively , at the metal hammer golden gods awards . in 2004 , kerrang ! magazine named him the biggest sex symbol in the world , and in 2011 , valo was voted the '' hottest dude in hard rock and metal '' by the readers of revolver magazine . in 2018 , valo was voted '' finland 's hottest guy '' in a poll by mtv . regarding these accolades , valo has stated : '' to be honest , i do n't know what a sex symbol is . compliments are nice , but i 've always liked compliments on the music more . '' metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 20 on his twentieth birthday , valo created the heartagram , which would eventually become the symbol of him . a combination of a heart and a pentagram , the heartagram is meant to represent the juxtaposition of '' the soft and the hard , the male and the female , the yin and the yang '' . metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 76 metal hammer presents him : tears on tape fanpack magazine - pg . 77 musically the heart is meant to represent the softer side of the band , while the pentagram conveys the heavier elements of their sound . since its creation , valo has stated that the heartagram '' is probably the best thing he 's ever come-up with '' , and that it 's '' worth a lot more than money '' and '' bigger than the band '' . he noted in 2016 , '' there are a lot of people who have heartagram tattoos now . kat von d has one , steve-o has a dickagram , which is like a heartagram but ends with a dick . it 's started to have a life of its own : there are a lot of people who have them who do n't actually know what it was , do n't relate it to the band , and in that sense , i consider that to be my greatest achievement . so it 'll be nice to have it on my tombstone . and it 'll be nice to see where it 's going to go next . '' . discography . him . greatest lovesongs vol . 666 ( 1997 ) razorblade romance ( 2000 ) deep shadows and brilliant highlights ( 2001 ) love metal ( 2003 ) dark light ( 2005 ) venus doom ( 2007 ) screamworks : love in theory and practice ( 2010 ) tears on tape ( 2013 ) . ville valo & agents . ville valo & agents ( 2019 ) . vv . gothica fennica , vol . 1 ( ep ) ( 2020 ) . filmography . asphalto ( 1998 ) as '' lippumies '' cky 3 ( 2001 ) as himself haggard : the movie ( 2003 ) as himself viva la bam ( 2003-2005 ) as himself 411 productions presents : 61 : the bam issue ( 2004 ) as himself jackass number two ( 2006 ) as himself bam margera presents : where the ♯ & % is santa ? ( 2008 ) as himself madagascar : escape 2 africa ( 2008 ) as '' moto moto '' ( finnish dub ) . awards . metal hammer golden gods awards - 2004 ville valo golden god award - 2005 ville valo icon award bmi awards - 2007 '' wings of a butterfly '' bmi pop award emma-gaala - 2017 '' olet mun kaikuluotain '' video of the year . references . external links .