Max Beckmann

life . max beckmann was born into a middle-class family in leipzig , saxony . from his youth he pitted himself against the old masters . his traumatic experiences of world war i , in which he volunteered as a medical orderly , coincided with a dramatic transformation of his style from academically correct depictions to a distortion of both figure and space , reflecting his altered vision of himself and humanity . schulz-hoffmann and weiss 1984 , p . 69 . he is known for the self-portraits painted throughout his life , their number and intensity rivaled only by those of rembrandt and picasso . well-read in philosophy and literature , beckmann also contemplated mysticism and theosophy in search of the '' self '' . as a true painter-thinker , he strove to find the hidden spiritual dimension in his subjects ( beckmann 's 1948 letters to a woman painter provides a statement of his approach to art ) . beckmann enjoyed great success and official honors during the weimar republic . in 1925 he was selected to teach a master class at the städelschule academy of fine art in frankfurt . some of his most famous students included theo garve , leo maillet and marie-louise von motesiczky . in 1927 he received the honorary empire prize for german art and the gold medal of the city of düsseldorf ; the national gallery in berlin acquired his painting the bark and , in 1928 , purchased his self-portrait in tuxedo . rainbird 2003 , p . 272 . by the early 1930s , a series of major exhibitions , including large retrospectives at the städtische kunsthalle mannheim ( 1928 ) and in basel and zurich ( 1930 ) , together with numerous publications , showed the high esteem in which beckmann was held . max beckmann museum of modern art , new york . his fortunes changed with the rise to power of adolf hitler , whose dislike of modern art quickly led to its suppression by the state . in 1933 , the nazi government called beckmann a '' cultural bolshevik '' and dismissed him from his teaching position at the art school in frankfurt . in 1937 the government confiscated more than 500 of his works from german museums , putting several on display in the notorious degenerate art exhibition in munich . rainbird 2003 , p . 274 . the day after hitler 's radio speech about degenerate art in 1937 , beckmann left germany with his second wife , quappi , for the netherlands . michael kimmelman ( june 27 , 2003 ) , '' chuckling darkly at disaster '' , the new york times . for ten years , beckmann lived in self-imposed exile in amsterdam , failing in his desperate attempts to obtain a visa for the united states . in 1944 the germans attempted to draft him into the army , although the sixty-year-old artist had suffered a heart attack . the works completed in his amsterdam studio were even more powerful and intense than the ones of his master years in frankfurt . they included several large triptychs , which stand as a summation of beckmann 's art . in 1948 , beckmann moved to the united states . metmuseum.org during the last three years of his life , he taught at the art schools of washington university in st . louis ( with the german-american painter and printmaker werner drewes ) and the brooklyn museum . he came to st . louis at the invitation of perry t . rathbone , who was director of the saint louis art museum . stephen kinzer ( august 12 , 2003 ) , '' as max beckmann gets a new york spotlight , st . louis shares in the glow '' , new york times . rathbone arranged for washington university in st . louis to hire beckmann as an art teacher , filling a vacancy left by philip guston , who had taken a leave . the first beckmann retrospective in the united states took place in 1948 at the city art museum , saint louis . max beckmann guggenheim collection . in st . louis , morton d . may became his patron and , already an avid amateur photographer and painter , a student of the artist . may later donated much of his large collection of beckmann 's works to the st . louis art museum . beckmann also helped him learn to appreciate oceanian and african art . robert mcdonald ( february 7 , 1987 ) , art review : '' german masterpieces dazzle at san diego museum of art '' , los angeles times . after stops in denver and chicago , he and quappi took an apartment at 38 west 69th street in manhattan . in 1949 he obtained a professorship at the brooklyn museum art school . he suffered from angina pectoris and died after christmas 1950 , struck down by a heart attack at the corner of 69th street and central park west in new york , not far from his apartment building . '' max beckman , 66 , noted artist , dies '' . december & nbsp ; 28 , 1950 . new york times . '' max beckmann & nbsp ; . died yesterday of a heart attack near his home , 38 & nbsp ; west sixty-ninth street . '' as the artist 's widow recalled , he was on his way to see one of his paintings at the metropolitan museum of art . rainbird 2003 , p . 283 . beckmann had a one-man show at the venice biennale of 1950 , the year of his death . . themes . unlike several of his avant-garde contemporaries , beckmann rejected abstract art ; instead , he took up and advanced the tradition of figurative painting . he greatly admired not only cézanne and van gogh , but also blake , rembrandt , and rubens , as well as northern european artists of the late middle ages and early renaissance , such as bosch , bruegel , and matthias grünewald . his style and method of composition are partially rooted in the imagery of medieval stained glass . engaging with the genres of portraiture , landscape , still life , and history painting , his diverse body of work created a very personal but authentic version of modernism , one with a healthy deference to traditional forms . beckmann reinvented the religious triptych and expanded this archetype of medieval painting into an allegory of contemporary humanity . from his beginnings in the fin de siècle to the period after world war ii , beckmann reflected an era of radical changes in both art and history in his work . many of beckmann 's paintings express the agonies of europe in the first half of the 20th century . some of his imagery refers to the decadent glamor of the weimar republic 's cabaret culture , but from the 1930s on , his works often contain mythologized references to the brutalities of the nazis . beyond these immediate concerns , his subjects and symbols assume a larger meaning , voicing universal themes of terror , redemption , and the mysteries of eternity and fate . schulz-hoffmann and weiss 1984 , pp . 270–272 . his self-portrait with horn ( 1938 ) , painted during his exile in amsterdam , demonstrates his use of symbols . musical instruments are featured in many of his paintings ; in this case , a horn that the artist holds as if it were a telescope by which he intends to explore the darkness surrounding him . the tight framing of the figure within the boundaries of the canvas emphasize his entrapment . art historian cornelia stabenow terms the painting '' the most melancholy , but also the most mystifying , of his self-portraits '' . schulz-hoffmann and weiss 1984 , p . 272 . . legacy . many of beckmann 's late paintings are displayed in american museums . he exerted a profound influence on such american painters as philip guston and nathan oliveira . schulz-hoffmann and weiss 1984 , pp . 161–162 . his posthumous reputation perhaps suffered from his very individual artistic path ; like oskar kokoschka , he defies the convenient categorization that provides themes for critics , art historians and curators . other than a major retrospective at new york 's museum of modern art , the boston museum of fine arts and the art institute of chicago in 1964–65 ( with an excellent catalogue by peter selz ) , and moma 's prominent display of the triptych departure , his work was little seen in much of the united states for decades . his 1984 centenary was marked in the new york area only by a modest exhibit at nassau county 's suburban art museum . the saint louis art museum holds the largest public collection of beckmann paintings in the world and held a major exhibition of his work in 1998 . since the late 20th century , beckmann 's work has gained an increasing international reputation . there have been retrospectives and exhibitions at the museum of modern art ( 1995 ) and the guggenheim museum ( 1996 ) in new york , and the principal museums of rome ( 1996 ) , valencia ( 1996 ) , madrid ( 1997 ) , zurich ( 1998 ) , munich ( 2000 ) , frankfurt ( 2006 ) and amsterdam ( 2007 ) . in spain and italy , beckmann 's work has been accessible to a wider public for the first time . a large-scale beckmann retrospective was exhibited at the centre pompidou in paris ( 2002 ) and tate modern in london ( 2003 ) . in 2011 , the städel in frankfurt devoted an entire room to the artist in its newly fitted permanent exhibition of modern art . catherine hickley ( december 9 , 2011 ) , review : '' vampires , ghosts haunted max beckmann during u.s . exile '' , bloomberg . in 1996 , piper , beckmann 's german publisher , released the third and last volume of the artist 's letters , whose wit and vision rank him among the strongest writers of the german tongue . his essays , plays and , above all , his diaries are also unique historical documents . a selection of beckmann 's writings was issued in the united states by university of chicago press in 1996 . in 2003 , stephan reimertz , parisian novelist and art historian , published a biography of max beckmann . it presents many photos and sources for the first time . the biography reveals beckmann 's contemplations of writers and philosophers such as dostoyevsky , schopenhauer , nietzsche , and richard wagner . the book has not yet been translated into english . in 2015 , the saint louis art museum published max beckmann at the saint louis art museum : the paintings , by lynette roth . it is a comprehensive look at the beckmann paintings at slam , the largest collection of them in the world , and places both artist and works in a broader context . art market . although beckmann is considered one of the towering figures of 20th-century art , he has never been a household name , and his works have mostly appealed to a niche market of german and austrian collectors . in 1921 beckmann signed an exclusive contract with the print-dealer j . b . neumann in berlin . in 1938 he had the first of numerous exhibitions at curt valentin ’ s buchholz gallery , new york . today , his large paintings routinely sell for more than 1 million , and his self-portraits generally command the highest prices . in 2001 , ronald lauder paid 22.5 million at sotheby 's new york for beckmann 's self-portrait with horn ( 1938 ) , and displayed it at the neue galerie in new york . in 2017 , an anonymous bidder paid the record sum of 45.8 million for beckmann 's hölle der vögel ( birds ' hell ) at christie 's london . this is also a new world record for a german expressionism artwork . rediscovered works . several important works by beckmann were discovered in the munich flat of cornelius gurlitt in 2012 , and are the subject of intense scrutiny by the german police and art historians for their provenance and sale during the nazi period . see also . beckmann and theosophy expressionism new objectivity . notes . references . von erffa , hans martin ( ed . ) : göpel , barbara und erhard ( 1976 ) . max beckmann : katalog der gemälde . ( 2 vls ) bern . hofmaier , james ( 1990 ) . max beckmann : catalogue raisonné of his prints . ( 2 vls ) bern . von wiese , stephan ( 1978 ) . max beckmann : das zeichnerische werk 1903–1925 . düsseldorf . stephan reimertz ( 2003 ) . max beckmann : biography . munich . belting , hans ( 1989 ) . max beckmann : tradition as a problem of modern art . preface by peter selz . new york . lackner , stephan ( 1969 ) . max beckmann : memoirs of a friendship . coral gables . lackner , stephan ( 1977 ) . max beckmann . new york . michalski , sergiusz ( 1994 ) . new objectivity . cologne : benedikt taschen . rainbird , sean , ed . ( 2003 ) . max beckmann . new york : museum of modern art . schulz-hoffmann , carla ; weiss , judith c . ( 1984 ) . max beckmann : retrospective . munich : prestel . selz , peter ( 1964 ) . max beckmann . new york . anabelle kienle : max beckmann in amerika ( petersberg : michael imhof verlag 2008 ) , . françoise forster-hahn : max beckmann in kalifornien . exil , erinnerung und erneuerung ( münchen / berlin : deutscher kunstverlag 2007 ) , . external links . max beckmann at the guggenheim max beckmann at the thyssen-bornemisza museum , madrid finding aid to max beckmann diaries at columbia university . rare book & manuscript library .