Communication channel

examples . examples of communications channels include : a connection between initiating and terminating nodes of a circuit . a single path provided by a transmission medium via either physical separation , such as by multipair cable or electrical separation , such as by frequency-division or time-division multiplexing . a path for conveying electrical or electromagnetic signals , usually distinguished from other parallel paths . a storage which can communicate a message over time as well as space the portion of a storage medium , such as a track or band , that is accessible to a given reading or writing station or head . a buffer from which messages can be 'put ' and 'got ' . see actor model and process calculi for discussion on the use of channels . in a communications system , the physical or logical link that connects a data source to a data sink . a specific radio frequency , pair or band of frequencies , usually named with a letter , number , or codeword , and often allocated by international agreement . examples : marine vhf radio uses some 88 channels in the vhf band for two-way fm voice communication . channel 16 , for example , is 156.800 & nbsp ; mhz . in the us , seven additional channels , wx1 - wx7 , are allocated for weather broadcasts . television channels such as north american tv channel 2 55.25 & nbsp ; mhz , channel 13 211.25 & nbsp ; mhz . each channel is 6 & nbsp ; mhz wide . this was based on the bandwidth required by older analog television signals . since 2006 television broadcasting has switched to digital modulation ( digital television ) which uses image compression to transmit a television signal in a much smaller bandwidth , so each of these '' physical channels '' has been divided into multiple '' virtual channels '' each carrying a dtv channel . wi-fi uses 13 channels from 2412 & nbsp ; mhz to 2484 & nbsp ; mhz in 5 & nbsp ; mhz steps , in the ism bands . the radio channel between an amateur radio repeater and a ham uses two frequencies often 600 & nbsp ; khz ( 0.6 & nbsp ; mhz ) apart . for example , a repeater that transmits on 146.94 & nbsp ; mhz typically listens for a ham transmitting on 146.34 & nbsp ; mhz . all of these communications channels share the property that they transfer information . the information is carried through the channel by a signal . channel models . a channel can be modelled physically by trying to calculate the physical processes which modify the transmitted signal . for example , in wireless communications , the channel can be modelled by calculating the reflection of every object in the environment . a sequence of random numbers might also be added to simulate external interference and/or electronic noise in the receiver . statistically , a communication channel is usually modelled as a triple consisting of an input alphabet , an output alphabet , and for each pair ( i , o ) of input and output elements a transition probability p ( i , o ) . semantically , the transition probability is the probability that the symbol o is received given that i was transmitted over the channel . statistical and physical modelling can be combined . for example , in wireless communications the channel is often modelled by a random attenuation ( known as fading ) of the transmitted signal , followed by additive noise . the attenuation term is a simplification of the underlying physical processes and captures the change in signal power over the course of the transmission . the noise in the model captures external interference and/or electronic noise in the receiver . if the attenuation term is complex it also describes the relative time a signal takes to get through the channel . the statistics of the random attenuation are decided by previous measurements or physical simulations . channel models may be continuous channel models in that there is no limit to how precisely their values may be defined . communication channels are also studied in a discrete-alphabet setting . this corresponds to abstracting a real-world communication system in which the analog → digital and digital → analog blocks are out of the control of the designer . the mathematical model consists of a transition probability that specifies an output distribution for each possible sequence of channel inputs . in information theory , it is common to start with memoryless channels in which the output probability distribution only depends on the current channel input . a channel model may either be digital ( quantified , e.g . binary ) or analog . digital channel models . in a digital channel model , the transmitted message is modelled as a digital signal at a certain protocol layer . underlying protocol layers , such as the physical layer transmission technique , is replaced by a simplified model . the model may reflect channel performance measures such as bit rate , bit errors , latency/delay , delay jitter , etc . examples of digital channel models are : binary symmetric channel ( bsc ) , a discrete memoryless channel with a certain bit error probability binary error burst channel model , a channel '' with memory '' binary erasure channel ( bec ) , a discrete channel with a certain bit error detection ( erasure ) probability packet erasure channel , where packets are lost with a certain packet loss probability or packet error rate arbitrarily varying channel ( avc ) , where the behavior and state of the channel can change randomly z-channel ( information theory ) ( binary asymmetric channel ) , where each 0 bit is transmitted correctly , but each 1 bit has probability p of being transmitted incorrectly as a 0 . analog channel models . in an analog channel model , the transmitted message is modelled as an analog signal . the model can be a linear or non-linear , time-continuous or time-discrete ( sampled ) , memoryless or dynamic ( resulting in burst errors ) , time-invariant or time-variant ( also resulting in burst errors ) , baseband , passband ( rf signal model ) , real-valued or complex-valued signal model . the model may reflect the following channel impairments : noise model , for example additive white gaussian noise ( awgn ) channel , a linear continuous memoryless model phase noise model interference model , for example crosstalk ( co-channel interference ) and intersymbol interference ( isi ) distortion model , for example a non-linear channel model causing intermodulation distortion ( imd ) frequency response model , including attenuation and phase-shift group delay model modelling of underlying physical layer transmission techniques , for example a complex-valued equivalent baseband model of modulation and frequency response radio frequency propagation model , for example log-distance path loss model fading model , for example rayleigh fading , ricean fading , log-normal shadow fading and frequency selective ( dispersive ) fading doppler shift model , which combined with fading results in a time-variant system ray tracing models , which attempt to model the signal propagation and distortions for specified transmitter-receiver geometries , terrain types , and antennas mobility models , which also causes a time-variant system . types . digital ( discrete ) or analog ( continuous ) channel transmission medium , for example a fibre channel multiplexing computer network virtual channel simplex communication , duplex communication or half duplex communication channel return channel uplink or downlink ( upstream or downstream channel ) broadcast channel , unicast or multicast . channel performance measures . these are examples of commonly used channel capacity and performance measures : spectral bandwidth in hertz symbol rate in baud , pulses/s or symbols/s digital bandwidth bit/s measures : gross bit rate ( signalling rate ) , net bit rate ( information rate ) , channel capacity , and maximum throughput channel utilization link spectral efficiency signal-to-noise ratio measures : signal-to-interference ratio , eb/no , carrier-to-interference ratio in decibel bit-error rate ( ber ) , packet-error rate ( per ) latency in seconds : propagation time , transmission time delay jitter . multi-terminal channels , with application to cellular systems . : see also network topology in networks , as opposed to point-to-point communication , the communication media is shared between multiple nodes ( terminals ) . depending on the type of communication , different terminals can cooperate or interfere on each other . in general , any complex multi-terminal network can be considered as a combination of simplified multi-terminal channels . the following channels are the principal multi-terminal channels which was first introduced in the field of information theory : a point-to-multipoint channel , also known as broadcasting medium ( not to be confused with broadcasting channel ) : in this channel , a single sender transmits multiple messages to different destination nodes . all wireless channels except radio links can be considered as broadcasting media , but may not always provide broadcasting service . the downlink of a cellular system can be considered as a point-to-multipoint channel , if only one cell is considered and inter-cell co-channel interference is neglected . however , the communication service of a phone call is unicasting . multiple access channel : in this channel , multiple senders transmit multiple possible different messages over a shared physical medium to one or several destination nodes . this requires a channel access scheme , including a media access control ( mac ) protocol combined with a multiplexing scheme . this channel model has applications in the uplink of the cellular networks . relay channel : in this channel , one or several intermediate nodes ( called relay , repeater or gap filler nodes ) cooperate with a sender to send the message to an ultimate destination node . relay nodes are considered as a possible add-on in the upcoming cellular standards like 3gpp long term evolution ( lte ) . interference channel : in this channel , two different senders transmit their data to different destination nodes . hence , the different senders can have a possible crosstalk or co-channel interference on the signal of each other . the inter-cell interference in the cellular wireless communications is an example of the interference channel . in spread spectrum systems like 3g , interference also occur inside the cell if non-orthogonal codes are used . a unicasting channel is a channel that provides a unicasting service , i.e . that sends data addressed to one specific user . an established phone call is an example . a broadcasting channel is a channel that provides a broadcasting service , i.e . that sends data addressed to all users in the network . cellular network examples are the paging service as well as the multimedia broadcast multicast service . a multicast channel is a channel where data is addressed to a group of subscribing users . lte examples are the physical multicast channel ( pmch ) and multicast broadcast single frequency network ( mbsfn ) . from the above 4 basic multi-terminal channels , multiple access channel is the only one whose capacity region is known . even for the special case of the gaussian scenario , the capacity region of the other 3 channels except the broadcast channel is unknown in general . see also . channel capacity channel access method traffic generation model . references . c . e . shannon , a mathematical theory of communication , bell system technical journal , vol . 27 , pp . & nbsp ; 379–423 and 623–656 , ( july and october , 1948 ) amin shokrollahi , ldpc codes : an introduction