Mains electricity

terminology . in the us , mains electric power is referred to by several names including '' utility power '' , '' household power '' , '' household electricity '' , '' house current '' , '' powerline '' , '' domestic power '' , '' wall power '' , '' line power '' , '' ac power '' , '' city power '' , '' street power '' . in the uk , mains electric power is generally referred to as '' the mains '' . more than half of power in canada is hydroelectricity , and mains electricity is often referred to there as '' hydro '' . this is also reflected in names of current and historical electricity monopolies such as hydro-québec , bc hydro , manitoba hydro , newfoundland and labrador hydro , and hydro one . power systems . for a list of voltages , frequencies , and wall plugs by country , see mains electricity by country worldwide , many different mains power systems are found for the operation of household and light commercial electrical appliances and lighting . the different systems are primarily characterized by their voltage frequency plugs and sockets ( receptacles or outlets ) earthing system ( grounding ) protection against overcurrent damage ( e.g . , due to short circuit ) , electric shock , and fire hazards parameter tolerances . all these parameters vary among regions . the voltages are generally in the range 100–240 v ( always expressed as root-mean-square voltage ) . the two commonly used frequencies are 50 & nbsp ; hz and 60 & nbsp ; hz . single-phase or three-phase power is most commonly used today , although two-phase systems were used early in the 20th century . foreign enclaves , such as large industrial plants or overseas military bases , may have a different standard voltage or frequency from the surrounding areas . some city areas may use standards different from that of the surrounding countryside ( e.g . in libya ) . regions in an effective state of anarchy may have no central electrical authority , with electric power provided by incompatible private sources . many other combinations of voltage and utility frequency were formerly used , with frequencies between 25 & nbsp ; hz and 133 & nbsp ; hz and voltages from 100 & nbsp ; v to 250 & nbsp ; v . direct current ( dc ) has been almost completely displaced by alternating current ( ac ) in public power systems , but dc was used especially in some city areas to the end of the 20th century . the modern combinations of 230 & nbsp ; v/50 & nbsp ; hz and 120 & nbsp ; v/60 & nbsp ; hz , listed in iec 60038 , did not apply in the first few decades of the 20th century and are still not universal . industrial plants with three-phase power will have different , higher voltages installed for large equipment ( and different sockets and plugs ) , but the common voltages listed here would still be found for lighting and portable equipment . common uses of electricity . electricity is used for lighting , heating , cooling , electric motors and electronic equipment . the us energy information administration ( eia ) has published : estimated us residential electricity consumption by end use , for the year 2016 how is electricity used in u.s . homes ? , us energy information administration , 21 april 2015 , ( retrieved 26 july 2015 ) . cenelec harmonisation document hd 472 s1:1988 british standard bs 7697 : nominal voltages for low voltage public electricity supply systems – ( implementation of hd 472 s1 ) no change in voltage was required by either the central european or the uk system , as both 220 & thinsp ; v and 240 & thinsp ; v fall within the lower 230 & nbsp ; v tolerance bands ( 230 & nbsp ; v ±6 % ) . some areas of the uk still have 250 & nbsp ; volts for legacy reasons , but these also fall within the 10 % tolerance band of 230 & nbsp ; volts . in practice , this allowed countries to have supplied the same voltage ( 220 or 240 & thinsp ; v ) , at least until existing supply transformers are replaced . equipment ( with the exception of filament bulbs ) used in these countries is designed to accept any voltage within the specified range . in the united states ansi c84.1 : american national standard for electric power systems and equipment – voltage ratings ( 60 hertz ) , nema ( costs 95 for access ) and canada , csa can3-c235-83 : preferred voltage levels for ac systems , 0 to 50 & thinsp ; 000 & nbsp ; v national standards specify that the nominal voltage at the source should be 120 & nbsp ; v and allow a range of 114 & nbsp ; v to 126 & nbsp ; v ( rms ) ( −5 % to +5 % ) . historically 110 & nbsp ; v , 115 & nbsp ; v and 117 & nbsp ; v have been used at different times and places in north america . mains power is sometimes spoken of as 110 & nbsp ; v ; however , 120 & nbsp ; v is the nominal voltage . in 2000 , australia converted to 230 & nbsp ; v as the nominal standard with a tolerance of +10 % /−6 % , this superseding the old 240 & nbsp ; v standard , as2926-1987 . as in the uk , 240 & nbsp ; v is within the allowable limits and '' 240 volt '' is a synonym for mains in australian and british english . in japan , the electrical power supply to households is at 100 & nbsp ; v . eastern and northern parts of honshū ( including tokyo ) and hokkaidō have a frequency of 50 & nbsp ; hz , whereas western honshū ( including nagoya , osaka , and hiroshima ) , shikoku , kyūshū and okinawa operate at 60 & nbsp ; hz . the boundary between the two regions contains four back-to-back high-voltage direct current ( hvdc ) substations which interconnect the power between the two grid systems ; these are shin shinano , sakuma dam , minami-fukumitsu , and the higashi-shimizu frequency converter . to accommodate the difference , frequency-sensitive appliances marketed in japan can often be switched between the two frequencies . history . the world 's first public electricity supply was a water wheel driven system constructed in the small english town of godalming in 1881 . it was an alternating current ( ac ) system using a siemens alternator supplying power for both street lights and consumers at two voltages , 250 & nbsp ; v for arc lamps , and 40 & nbsp ; v for incandescent lamps . the world 's first large scale central plant—thomas edison ’ s holborn viaduct power station in london—started operation in january 1882 , providing direct current ( dc ) at 110 & nbsp ; v . the holborn viaduct station was used as a proof of concept for the construction of the much larger pearl street station in manhattan , the world 's first permanent commercial central power plant . the pearl street station also provided dc at 110 & nbsp ; v , considered to be a '' safe '' voltage for consumers , beginning september 4 , 1882 . ac systems started appearing in the us in the mid-1880s , using higher distribution voltage stepped down via transformers to the same 110 & nbsp ; v customer utilization voltage that edison used . in 1883 edison patented a three–wire distribution system to allow dc generation plants to serve a wider radius of customers to save on copper costs . by connecting two groups of 110 & nbsp ; v lamps in series more load could be served by the same size conductors run with 220 & nbsp ; v between them ; a neutral conductor carried any imbalance of current between the two sub-circuits . ac circuits adopted the same form during the war of the currents , allowing lamps to be run at around 110 & nbsp ; v and major appliances to be connected to 220 & nbsp ; v . nominal voltages gradually crept upward to 112 & nbsp ; v and 115 & nbsp ; v , or even 117 & nbsp ; v . after world war ii the standard voltage in the u.s . became 117 & nbsp ; v , but many areas lagged behind even into the 1960s . in 1967 the nominal voltage rose to 120 & nbsp ; v , but conversion of appliances was slow . today , virtually all american homes and businesses have access to 120 and 240 & nbsp ; v at 60 & nbsp ; hz . both voltages are available on the three wires ( two '' hot '' legs of opposite phase and one '' neutral '' leg ) . in 1899 , the berliner elektrizitäts-werke ( bew ) , a berlin electrical utility , decided to greatly increase its distribution capacity by switching to 220 & nbsp ; v nominal distribution , taking advantage of the higher voltage capability of newly developed metal filament lamps . the company was able to offset the cost of converting the customer 's equipment by the resulting saving in distribution conductors cost . this became the model for electrical distribution in germany and the rest of europe and the 220 & nbsp ; v system became common . north american practice remained with voltages near 110 & nbsp ; v for lamps . thomas p . hughes , networks of power : electrification in western society 1880–1930 , the johns hopkins university press , baltimore 1983 p . 193 in the first decade after the introduction of alternating current in the us ( from the early 1880s to about 1893 ) a variety of different frequencies were used , with each electric provider setting their own , so that no single one prevailed . the most common frequency was 133⅓ & nbsp ; hz . the rotation speed of induction generators and motors , the efficiency of transformers , and flickering of carbon arc lamps all played a role in frequency setting . around 1893 the westinghouse electric company in the united states and aeg in germany decided to standardize their generation equipment on 60 & nbsp ; hz and 50 & nbsp ; hz respectively , eventually leading to most of the world being supplied at one of these two frequencies . today most 60 & nbsp ; hz systems deliver nominal 120/240 & nbsp ; v , and most 50 & nbsp ; hz nominally 230 & nbsp ; v . the significant exceptions are in brazil , which has a synchronized 60 & nbsp ; hz grid with both 127 & nbsp ; v and 220 & nbsp ; v as standard voltages in different regions , and japan , which has two frequencies : 50 & nbsp ; hz for east japan and 60 & nbsp ; hz for west japan . voltage regulation . to maintain the voltage at the customer 's service within the acceptable range , electrical distribution utilities use voltage regulator at electrical substations or along the distribution line . at a substation , the step-down transformer will have an automatic on-load tap changer , allowing the ratio between transmission voltage and distribution voltage to be adjusted in steps . for long ( several kilometres ) rural distribution circuits , automatic voltage regulators may be mounted on poles of the distribution line . these are autotransformers , again , with on-load tap changers to adjust the ratio depending on the observed voltage changes . at each customer 's service , the step-down transformer has up to five taps to allow some range of adjustment , usually ±5 % of the nominal voltage . since these taps are not automatically controlled , they are used only to adjust the long-term average voltage at the service and not to regulate the voltage seen by the utility customer . power quality . the stability of the voltage and frequency supplied to customers varies among countries and regions . '' power quality '' is a term describing the degree of deviation from the nominal supply voltage and frequency . short-term surges and drop-outs affect sensitive electronic equipment such as computers and flat panel displays . longer-term power outages , brown-outs and black outs and low reliability of supply generally increase costs to customers , who may have to invest in uninterruptible power supply or stand-by generator sets to provide power when the utility supply is unavailable or unusable . erratic power supply may be a severe economic handicap to businesses and public services which rely on electrical machinery , illumination , climate control and computers . even the best quality power system may have breakdowns or require servicing . as such , companies , governments and other organizations sometimes have backup generators at sensitive facilities , to ensure that power will be available even in the event of a power outage or black out . power quality can also be affected by distortions of the current or voltage waveform in the form of harmonics of the fundamental ( supply ) frequency , or non-harmonic intermodulation such as that caused by rfi or emi interference . in contrast , harmonic distortion is usually caused by conditions of the load or generator . in multi-phase power , phase shift distortions caused by imbalanced loads can occur . see also . energy meter . references . pt : eletricidade doméstica