Dinas Emrys

description . little remains of the structures that once stood on the hill . such remains as are visible today , including three series of ramparts and other walls and some foundations , mostly date to the middle ages . archaeologist h . n . savory described the fortifications as consisting of stone walls between thick , which exploited every irregularity in the rocky hill-top , enclosing an irregular area of about a in size . the original means of access was by a steep path on the western side of the hillfort . the present entrance from the north-east is a later addition . savory excavations in 1910 and 1954–56 revealed several periods of habitation at the site . the earliest elements date to the iron age , perhaps to the 1st or 2nd century . a pool within the enclosure , thought to be an artificial construction , may date to this phase . it is perhaps connected to the pool found in the popular tale of vortigern and the dragons . other traces suggest habitation into the 5th century , which would put it in the time frame for vortigern and ambrosius aurelianus . it has long been known that there is a pool inside the fort , but when the archaeologist dr h . n . savory excavated the hillfort between 1954 and 1956 , he was surprised to find that not only were the fortifications of about the right time frame for either vortigern or ambrosius , but that there was a platform above the pool as described in the historia britonum . however , he found the platform to date much later than the accepted floruit of either personage . literary tradition . while it is of interest to archaeologists because it is an example of a hillfort whose fortifications entirely postdate the roman period , this hill is also of interest to enthusiasts about the legends of king arthur . this is the setting of the famous exchange of the warlord vortigern and the youthful merlin , as told in the historia britonum . historia britonum by nennius ( translated by j.a.giles ) , the avalon project , ch.40 according to legend , when vortigern fled into wales to escape the anglo-saxon invaders , he chose this lofty hillfort as the site for his royal retreat . every day his men would work hard erecting the first of several proposed towers ; but the next morning they would return to find the masonry collapsed in a heap . this continued for many weeks until vortigern was advised to seek the help of a young boy not conceived by a mortal man . the king sent his soldiers out across the land to find such a lad . the boy they found was called myrddin emrys ( merlin ambrosius ) . vortigern , following the advice of his councillors , was planning to kill the boy in order to appease supernatural powers that prevented him from building a fortress here . merlin scorned this advice , and instead explained that the hillfort could not stand due to a hidden pool containing two vermes ( dragons ) . he explained how the white dragon of the saxons though winning the battle at present , would soon be defeated by the welsh red dragon . after vortigern 's downfall , the fort was given to high-king ambrosius aurelianus , known in welsh as emrys wledig , hence its name . historia britonum by nennius ( translated by j.a.giles ) , the avalon project , ch.40-43 . origin and confinement of the dragons . 220px the earliest sources regard the two dragons as distinctly different , and in a metaphor of the adventus saxonum describes one as being native to the island of britain ( it had arrived first ) which was then joined by another new and alien dragon that fought it for supremacy . as to how the dragons became confined there , the story of lludd and llefelys in the mabinogion gives details . according to the legend , when lludd ruled britain 100 & nbsp ; bc ) , a hideous scream , whose origin could not be determined , was heard each may eve . this scream so perplexed the britons that it caused infertility , panic and mayhem throughout the realm . in need of help lludd sought counsel on this and other matters from his brother llefelys , a king of gaul . llefelys furnished the information that the scream was caused by battling dragons . the scream would be uttered by the dragon of the britons when it was fighting another alien dragon and was being defeated . lludd heeded the advice given to him by llefelys and captured both dragons in a cauldron filled with mead when they had transformed themselves , as apparently dragons did , into pigs . the captured dragons were buried at the place later called dinas emrys , as it was regarded as the safest place to put them . gantz , jeffrey ( translator ) ( 1987 ) . the mabinogion . new york : penguin . the main entrance to the fort is on the northern side of the hill and traces of a ruined medieval tower 36 feet by 24 feet have been found on the summit . nearby is a circle of tumbled stones about 30 feet in diameter which is said to be where the dragons were hidden . before dinas emrys was so-named the fort was known as dinas ffaraon dandde . vortigern studies , saints on the move ( robert vermaat ) . other local legends . according to local legend myrddin hid treasure in a cave at dinas emrys . the discoverer of the treasure will be 'golden-haired and blue-eyed ' . when that lucky person is near to dinas emrys a bell will ring to invite him or her into the cave , which will open of its own accord as soon as that person 's foot touches it . a young man who lived near beddgelert once searched for the treasure , hoping to give himself a good start in life . he took a pickaxe and climbed to the top of the hill . when he began to dig in earnest on the site of the tower , some terrible unearthly noises began to rumble under his feet . the dinas began to rock like a cradle and the sun clouded over so it became pitch dark . lightning flashed in the sky and thunder clapped over his head . he dropped the pickaxe and ran home . when he arrived , everything was calm again , but he never returned to collect his pickaxe . not far from dinas emrys is cell y dewiniaid – '' the grove of the magicians '' . there is a field here that once had a thick grove of oak trees at its north end . local tradition holds that vortigern 's wise men used to meet here to discuss the great events of their times . an adjacent field is where they were buried and at one time a stone marked the site of each grave . a white thorn tree annually decorated each resting place with falling white blossoms . celtic folklore , by john rhys , p . 142 . actual archaeological findings . 220px 220px it has long been known that there is a pool inside the fort , but when the archaeologist dr h . n . savory excavated the hillfort between 1954 and 1956 , he was surprised to find that not only were the fortifications of about the right time frame for either vortigern or ambrosius , but that there was a platform above the pool as described in the historia britonum . however , he found the platform to date much later than the accepted floruit of either personage . savory described the fortifications as consisting of stone walls between thick , which exploited every irregularity in the rocky hill-top , enclosing an irregular area of about a in size . the original means of access was by a steep path on the western side of the hillfort . the present entrance from the north-east is a later addition . cylch blodeuwedd : druidic grove in north-west wales : where the dragons slept – dinas emrys the walls had been '' poorly built of stone two or three times '' , possibly inspiring the legend 's reference to the building collapsing several times during construction . dinas ffareon ( dinas emrys ) sarah woodbury the most conspicuous object currently on the hill is the base of a rectangular tower . it is generally accepted that this is part of an undocumented castle built by the princes of gwynedd in the eleventh century . dinas affaraon/ffaraon . dinas affaraon or dinas ffaraon is a placename mentioned in some medieval welsh literature , where it is said to be the original name of dinas emrys . dinas ffaraon ( fortress of pharaoh ) or dinas ffaraon dande ( fortress of fiery pharaoh ) is mentioned in the tale '' lludd and llefelys '' as the place where king lludd of britain traps and buries two dragons who are ravaging the land . the text explains that the site was later named '' dinas emreis '' . koch , p . 598 this tale is a prequel to the older story involving the hero emrys ( ambrosius aurelianus ) or myrddin emrys ( merlin ) . bromwich , p . 416 . in sources such as the historia brittonum and geoffrey of monmouth 's historia regum britanniae , a tower built on the spot continually collapses until emrys reveals the buried dragons as the cause ; once they are released the tower is successfully constructed is named for him . the name '' dinas emrys '' has been associated with a roman ruin in snowdonia , a localization that possibly dates as early as the historia brittonum . . see also . list of hillforts in wales . footnotes .