Dulwich College

scouts . dulwich college has a scout troop which has two patrols within it . it runs from year 6 to year 13 with both scouts and explorers . the troop is called the 25th camberwell and has been running for over 80 years . . dulwich college union . dulwich college has a large union for clubs and societies containing over 50 societies . there is a wide range of clubs ranging from rocketry to history and the college used to have a chicken society in which boys tended to the college 's chickens . the clubs , and union , are run by boys in year 12 and 13 and contribute to their the duke of edinburgh 's awards . most of these clubs and societies have their own personalised ties . debating . within the dulwich college union debating plays a large role . the dulwich college society runs during the school terms but competes both nationally and internationally . the society runs from year 7 to 13 and has around 50 members . it has recently enjoyed great success , winning the oxford union debating competition in 2014 , 2015 and 2016 , the cambridge union schools debating competition in 2014 and 2015 , and the esu ( english speaking union ) schools mace debating competition , also in 2014 and 2015 . it has also represented team england and competed internationally against other national teams . it has also competed in texas , singapore and stuttgart . dulwich college is , therefore , ranked as one of the top debating schools in the uk and one of the best in the world . . school magazine . the dulwich college school magazine is called the alleynian , named after the school 's founder edward alleyn . this magazine was first published in 1873 , although the school 's first magazine under the name the dulwich college magazine for school news and general reading had been published in 1864 but only lasted for fourteen issues after its editor left for cambridge university . the alleynian was edited at one point by p.g.wodehouse in his last year at the school . hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 82 , ( heinemann : london ) . old alleynians . old boys of dulwich college are called '' old alleynians '' , after the founder of the school . this is often abbreviated to '' o.a . '' as post-nominal letters in brackets in school publications or publications specifically concerning the school . the term should not be confused with '' alleyn 's old boys '' used for alumni of alleyn 's school . current pupils of the school are known as alleynians . prior to around 1880 , the terms '' alleynian '' and '' old alleynian '' were not used and the pupils and ex-pupils were known as dulwichians . hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 49 , ( heinemann : london ) notable old alleynians include sir ernest shackleton , p g wodehouse , raymond chandler , sir edward george , bob monkhouse , michael ondaatje , david thomson , chiwetel ejiofor , nigel farage , the cricketer trevor bailey , c . s . forester and the architect c . f . a . voysey . headmastership of dulwich college . the head master of dulwich college is styled the master of dulwich college , as laid out in the 1882 scheme of the charity commissioners . this continued a tradition of the head of the college of god 's gift being called the master since its foundation in 1619 . the foundation originally had a governing body consisting of a master , warden , four fellows , and six assistants made up of the two churchwardens of each of the three parishes of st botolph 's , bishopsgate , of st saviour 's , southwark , and of st giles ' , cripplegate . the master was most senior , followed by the warden and on vacancy of the mastership , the warden succeeded . by the 1857 dulwich college act the master , warden and fellows were pensioned and the governance of the foundation switched to a body of nineteen governors . however , the position of master continued as the title of the headmaster of the new upper school , with an undermaster as deputy . the 1882 act ( as a result of the charity commissioners scheme ) abolished the office of undermaster . ormiston , t . l . , ( 1926 ) , dulwich college register , pp . 3–5 , ( j j keliher & co ltd : london ) masters of alleyn 's college of god 's gift at dulwich ( both upper and lower schools ) rev . alfred james carver ( appointed 1858 ; retired 1883 ) ormiston , t . l . , ( 1926 ) , dulwich college register , page 53 , ( j j keliher & co ltd : london ) masters of dulwich college james edward cowell welldon ( appointed 1883 ; retired 1885 ) arthur herman gilkes ( appointed 1885 ; retired 1914 ) george smith ( appointed 1914 ; retired 1928 ) hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 97 , ( heinemann : london ) walter reynolds booth ( appointed 1928 ; retired 1941 ) christopher h . gilkes ( appointed 1941 ; died 1953 ) hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 127 , ( heinemann : london ) c . thomas ( deputy master , took over the mastership in 1953 for the year it took to find a permanent replacement ) hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 157 , ( heinemann : london ) ronald groves ( appointed 1954 ; retired 1966 ) charles w . lloyd ( appointed 1966 ; retired 1975 ) david emms ( appointed 1975 ; retired 1986 ) hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 197 , ( heinemann : london ) anthony verity ( appointed 1986 ; resigned 1995 ) the cumberland news christopher field ( the deputy master who became acting master during 1996 . ) graham g . able ( appointed 1997 ; retired 2009 ) joseph a . f . spence ( appointed 2009 ) . collections . the school has a very extensive archive , especially of material relating to drama and the arts , much of which is from edward alleyn 's ( the founder ) own library . apart from diaries kept by alleyn and his partner philip henslowe are many other documents relating to the college and foundation . there are also 12 volumes of unpublished music by john reading ; two of the three volumes of the first folio shakespeare ; a mercator atlas ; first editions of poetry by john donne , edmund spenser and dryden ; a book of hours from the fifteenth century and even a copy of the first book to be printed in london in 1480 . other interesting artefacts held by the college include the '' james caird '' , the whaler in which ernest shackleton made his intrepid voyage for survival to south georgia from elephant island in 1916 , dulwich college website – the 'james caird ' as well as other items such as sledges from the earlier nimrod expedition . above the fireplace in the masters ' library are two panels depicting pietas ( duty ) and liberalitas ( generosity ) bought by edward alleyn in 1618 from elizabeth i 's state barge . they are reputed to have originally come from francis drake 's golden hinde . hodges , s , ( 1981 ) , god 's gift : a living history of dulwich college , page 118 , ( heinemann : london ) . in culture and cultural influence . painting of the college . in 1870 , the buildings of the new college were painted by the impressionist artist , camille pissarro . pissarro was at the time living in upper norwood having fled from france at the time of the franco-prussian war and was entranced by the london landscapes . . other cultural influence . the school lent its name to a locomotive in the southern railway v class . this class was known as the schools class because all 40 locomotives were named after prominent english public schools . the nameplate from 907 , dulwich , is now displayed by the model railway society within dulwich college . see also . alleyn 's college of god 's gift dulwich international college dulwich college beijing dulwich college seoul dulwich college shanghai dulwich college singapore dulwich college suzhou dulwich international high school suzhou dulwich international high school zhuhai edward alleyn graham able list of old alleynians list of victoria crosses by school