Joseph Addison

life and writing . background . addison was born in milston , wiltshire , but soon after his birth his father , lancelot addison , was appointed dean of lichfield and the family moved into the cathedral close . his father was a scholarly english clergyman . he was educated at charterhouse school , london , where he first met richard steele , and at the queen 's college , oxford . he excelled in classics , being specially noted for his latin verse , and became a fellow of magdalen college . in 1693 , he addressed a poem to john dryden , and his first major work , a book of the lives of english poets , was published in 1694 . his translation of virgil 's georgics was published in the same year . dryden , lord somers and charles montague , 1st earl of halifax , took an interest in addison 's work and obtained for him a pension of £300 a year to enable him to travel to europe with a view to diplomatic employment , all the time writing and studying politics . while in switzerland in & nbsp ; 1702 , he heard of the death of william & nbsp ; iii , an event which lost him his pension , as his influential contacts , halifax and somers , had lost their employment with the crown . political career . addison returned to england at the end of 1703 . for more than a year he remained unemployed , but the battle of blenheim in 1704 gave him a fresh opportunity to distinguish himself . the government , specifically lord treasurer godolphin , commissioned addison to write a commemorative poem about the battle , and he produced the campaign , which was received with such satisfaction that he was appointed commissioner of appeals in halifax 's government . deighton , ken ( ed . ) . coverley papers from the spectator . new york , 1964 : macmillan . his next literary venture was an account of his travels in italy , remarks on several parts of italy , & c . , in the years 1701 , 1702 , 1703 , published in 1705 by jacob tonson . in 1705 , with the whigs in power , addison was made under-secretary of state and accompanied lord halifax on a diplomatic mission to hanover , germany . a biography of addison states : '' in the field of his foreign responsibilities addison 's views were those of a good whig . he had always believed that england 's power depended upon her wealth , her wealth upon her commerce , and her commerce upon the freedom of the seas and the checking of the power of france and spain . '' peter smithers , the life of joseph addison ( oxford : clarendon press , 1954 ) , p . 382 . in 1708 and 1709 , addison was a member of parliament for the borough of lostwithiel . he was soon appointed secretary to the new lord lieutenant of ireland , lord wharton . under the direction of wharton , he was an mp in the irish house of commons for cavan borough from 1709 until 1713 . in 1710 , he represented malmesbury , in his home county of wiltshire , holding the seat until his death in 1719 . magazine founder . he met jonathan swift in ireland and remained there for a year . later , he helped form the kitcat club and renewed his friendship with richard steele . in & nbsp ; 1709 , steele began to publish the tatler , and addison became a regular contributor . in 1711 they began the spectator ; its first issue appeared on 1 & nbsp ; march & nbsp ; 1711 . this paper , which was originally a daily , was published until 20 & nbsp ; december & nbsp ; 1714 , interrupted for a year by the publication of the guardian in 1713 . his last publication was the freeholder , a political paper , in 1715–16 . plays . he wrote the libretto for thomas clayton 's opera rosamond , which had a disastrous premiere in london in 1707 . mcgeary , thomas ( 1998 ) . '' thomas clayton and the introduction of italian opera to england '' , philological quarterly , vol . 77 in 1713 addison 's tragedy cato was produced , and was received with acclamation by both whigs and tories . he followed this effort with a comedic play , the drummer ( 1716 ) . cato . in 1712 , addison wrote his most famous work , cato , a tragedy . based on the last days of cato the younger , it deals with conflicts such as individual liberty versus government tyranny , republicanism versus monarchism , logic versus emotion , and cato 's personal struggle to retain his beliefs in the face of death . it has a prologue written by alexander pope and an epilogue by samuel garth . joseph addison , cato : a tragedy , and selected essays . ed . christine dunn henderson & mark e . yellin . indianapolis : liberty fund , 2004 . the play was a success throughout the british empire . it continued to grow in popularity , especially in america , for several generations . it is cited by some historians as a literary inspiration for the american revolution , being known to many of the founding fathers . general george washington sponsored a performance of cato for the continental army during the difficult winter of 1777–78 at valley forge . according to john j . miller , '' no single work of literature may have been more important than cato '' for the leaders of the american revolution . john j . miller , '' on life , liberty , and other quotable matters , '' wall street journal , 2 july 2011 . scholars have identified the inspiration for several famous quotations from the american revolution in cato . these include : patrick henry 's famous ultimatum : '' give me liberty or give me death ! '' : ( supposed reference to act & nbsp ; ii , scene & nbsp ; 4 : '' it is not now time to talk of aught/but chains or conquest , liberty or death . '' ) . richard , carl j . ( 2009 ) . greeks & romans bearing gifts : how the ancients inspired the founding fathers , p . 151 . rowman & littlefield publishers . nathan hale 's valediction : '' i regret that i have but one life to give for my country . '' : ( supposed reference to act & nbsp ; iv , scene & nbsp ; 4 : '' what a pity it is/that we can die but once to serve our country . '' ) . washington 's praise for benedict arnold in a letter : '' it is not in the power of any man to command success ; but you have done more—you have deserved it . '' : ( clear reference to act & nbsp ; i , scene & nbsp ; 2 : '' 't is not in mortals to command success ; but we 'll do more , sempronius , we 'll deserve it . '' ) . in 1789 , edmund burke quoted the play in a letter to charles-jean-françois depont entitled reflections on the revolution in france , saying that the french people may yet be obliged to go through more changes and '' to pass , as one of our poets says , 'through great varieties of untried being , ' '' before their state obtains its final form . burke , edmund ( 1872 ) reflections on the revolution in france , and on the proceedings of certain societies in london relative to that event , p . 232 . seeley , jackson , and halliday . the poet referred to is addison and the passage quoted is from cato ( v.i . & nbsp ; ii ) : '' through what variety of untried being , through what new scenes and changes must we pass ! '' though the play has fallen from popularity and is now rarely performed , it was popular and often cited in the eighteenth century , with cato being an example of republican virtue and liberty . john trenchard and thomas gordon were inspired by the play to write an epistolary exchange entitled cato 's letters , concerning individual rights , using the name '' cato '' . the action of the play involves the forces of cato at utica , awaiting the attack of caesar immediately following his victory at thapsus ( 46 bc ) . the noble sons of cato , portius and marcus , are both in love with lucia , the daughter of lucius , an ally of cato . juba , prince of numidia , one of cato 's warriors , loves cato 's daughter marcia . meanwhile , sempronius , a senator , and syphax , a general of the numidians , are conspiring secretly against cato , hoping to prevent the numidian army from supporting him . in the final act , cato commits suicide , leaving his followers to make their peace with the approaching army of caesar—an easier task after cato 's death , since he was caesar 's most implacable enemy . hymn . addison wrote the popular church hymn '' the spacious firmament on high '' , publishing it in the spectator in 1712 . it is sung either to the tune known as '' london ( addison 's ) '' by john sheeles , written c . 1720 , or to '' creation '' by joseph haydn , 1798 . . marriage and death . the later part of addison 's life was not without its troubles . in & nbsp ; 1716 , he married charlotte , dowager countess of warwick , after working for a time as a tutor for her son . he then lived at bilton hall in warwickshire . his political career continued , and he served as secretary of state for the southern department from 1717 to 1718 . his political newspaper the freeholder was much criticised , and alexander pope in his epistle to dr arbuthnot made addison an object of derision , naming him '' atticus '' , and comparing him to an adder , '' willing to wound , and yet afraid to strike '' . his wife was arrogant and imperious ; his stepson , edward rich , was an unfriendly rake . addison 's shyness in public limited his effectiveness as a member of parliament . he eventually fell out with steele over the peerage bill . in 1718 , addison was forced to resign as secretary of state because of his poor health , but he remained an mp until his death at holland house , london , on 17 june 1719 ( aged 47 ) . he was buried in westminster abbey . after his death , an apocryphal story circulated that addison , on his deathbed , had sent for his wastrel stepson to witness how a christian man meets death . on 6 april 1808 , middletown , a town in upstate new york , was renamed addison in his honour . contribution . it is as an essayist that addison is remembered today . he began writing essays quite casually . in april 1709 , his childhood friend richard steele started the tatler . addison contributed 42 essays to the tatler , while steele wrote & nbsp ; 188 . regarding addison 's help , steele remarked , '' when i had once called him in , i could not subsist without dependence on him '' . memoirs of the life and writings of sir richard steele , p . 148 . haskell house publishers , first published 1865 . the tatler was discontinued on 2 january 1711 . the spectator began publication on 1 march of that year , and it continued – being issued daily , and achieving great popularity – until 6 december 1712 . it exercised an influence over the reading public of the time , and addison soon became the leading partner in it , contributing 274 essays out of a total of 635 ; steele wrote 236 . addison also assisted steele with the guardian , which began in 1713 . addison is the originator of the quote , '' reading is to the mind what exercise is to the body . ” the quote can be found in issue 147 of the tatler . the breezy , conversational style of the essays later prompted bishop richard hurd to reprove addison for what he called an '' addisonian termination '' , or preposition stranding , a grammatical construction that ends a sentence with a preposition . william rose benet , the reader 's encyclopedia , s.v . '' addisonian termination '' . he wrote an essay entitled dialogues on medals which was translated to the french by eighteenth-century priest and journalist simon-jérôme bourlet de vauxcelles ( 1733–1802 ) . his essay '' adventures of a shilling '' ( 1710 ) is a brief , early example of an novel of circulation , a genre that would become more common later in the century . he also left an incomplete work , of the christian religion . timeline . imagesize width:450 height:450 plotarea left:50 right:0 bottom:10 top:10 dateformat yyyy period from:1670 till:1720 timeaxis orientation : vertical scalemajor unit : year increment:5 start:1670 scaleminor unit : year increment:1 start:1670 plotdata color : red mark : ( line , black ) align : left fontsize : s shift : ( 25,0 ) shift text to right side of bar there is no automatic collision detection , so shift texts up or down manually to avoid overlap at:1672 text : born in milston , wiltshire at:1687 text : educated at oxford at:1699 text : received traveling pension at:1704 text : '' the campaign '' leads to political office at:1708 shift : ( 25 , -10 ) text : went to ireland at:1709 text : assisted richard steele in tatler at:1711 text : spectator started at:1716 shift : ( 25 , -10 ) text : married lady warwick at:1717 text : secretary of state at:1719 text : died at holland house . albin schram letters . in 2005 , an austrian banker and collector named albin schram died , and in his laundry room a collection of a thousand letters was found , some of them of interest to historians . two of them were written by joseph addison . the first reported on a debate in the house of commons about a grant to john churchill , 1st duke of marlborough , and his heirs , following the battle of ramillies . the letter was written on the day of the debate , probably to george stepney . addison explains that the motion was opposed by misters annesley , ward , and casar , and sir william vevian . '' one said that this was showing no honour to his grace but to a posterity that he was not concern 'd in . casar . hoped ye duke tho he had ben victorious over the enemy would not think of being so over a house of commons : wch was said in pursuance to a motion made by some of the craftier sort that would not oppose the proposition directly but turn it off by a side-wind pretending that it being a money affaire it should be refer 'd to a committee of the whole house wch in all probability would have defeated the whole affaire . '' following the duke of marlborough 's successful campaign of 1706 , the duke and george stepney became the first english regents of the anglo-dutch condominium for governing the southern netherlands . it was stepney who formally took possession of the principality of mindelheim in the duke 's name on 26 may , after the battle of ramillies . upon marlborough 's return to london in november , parliament accepted the duke 's request that a grant of £5,000 'out of ye post-office ' be made in perpetuity to his heirs . a second letter , written to richard steele , was also found , concerning the tatler and other matters . ' i very much liked your last paper upon the courtship that is usually paid to the fair sex . i wish you had reserved the letter in this days paper concerning indecencies at church for an entire piece . it wd have made as good a one as any you have published . your reflections upon almanza are very good . ' the letter concludes with references to impeachment proceedings against addison 's friend henry sacheverell ( ' i am much obliged to you for yor letters relating to sackeverell ' ) , and the light house petition : ' i am something troubled that you have not sent away ye letters received from ireland to my lord lieutenant , particularly that from mr forster the attorney general with the enclosed petition about the light house , which i hope will be delivered to the house before my return . ' . analysis . addison 's character has been described as kind and magnanimous , albeit somewhat cool and unimpassioned , with a tendency for convivial excess . his appealing manners and conversation contributed to his general popularity . he often put his friends under obligations for substantial favours , but he showed great forbearance toward his few enemies . his essays are noted for their clarity and elegant style , as well as their cheerful and respectful humour . william thackeray portrayed addison and steele as characters in his novel the history of henry esmond . thomas macaulay wrote this generous tribute to addison in 1866 : '' as a man , he may not have deserved the adoration which he received from those who , bewitched by his fascinating society , and indebted for all the comforts of life to his generous and delicate friendship , worshiped him nightly , in his favourite temple at button ’ s . but , after full inquiry and impartial reflection , we have long been convinced that he deserved as much love and esteem as can be justly claimed by any of our infirm and erring race . some blemishes may undoubtedly be detected in his character ; but the more carefully it is examined , the more it will appear , to use the phrase of the old anatomists , sound in the noble parts , free from all taint of perfidy , of cowardice , of cruelty , of ingratitude , of envy . men may easily be named , in whom some particular good disposition has been more conspicuous than in addison . but the just harmony of qualities , the exact temper between the stern and the humane virtues , the habitual observance of every law , not only of moral rectitude , but of moral grace and dignity , distinguish him from all men who have been tried by equally strong temptations , and about whose conduct we possess equally full information . '' – lord macaulay essay on the life and writings of addison , essays vol . v ( 1866 ) hurd and houghton . see also . addison 's walk . references . . external links . joseph addison 's grave , westminster abbey history of henry esmond - thackery poems by joseph addison