River Derwent, Derbyshire

etymology . derwent is derived from brittonic river name , latinised as , meaning '' ( belonging/pertaining to the ) forest of oak trees '' ; the old river name survived in medieval welsh poetry , such as ( '' dinogad 's smock '' ) attached to the larger poem , as . delamarre , xavier , dictionnaire de la langue gauloise , 2nd ed . , editions errance , paris , 2003 , p . 141 gruffydd , r . g . , '' where was rhaeadr derwennydd ( canu aneirin line 1114 ) ? ' , in a . t . e . matonis and d . f . melia ( eds . ) , celtic language , celtic culture : a festschrift for eric p . hamp , van nuys , calif . , 1990 , pp . 261-6 . charles-edwards , t . m . , wales and the britons , 350-1064 , oxford university press , oxford , 2013 , pp . 369-370 . course . the river derwent rises at swains greave above sea level ) on the eastern flank of bleaklow , opposite howden moors , and some east of glossop . it flows through the upper derwent valley , and for most of its first forms the county boundary between derbyshire , on its west bank , and south yorkshire , on the east bank . some into its journey it passes through three consecutive reservoirs : howden , the highest , derwent and ladybower reservoir . derwent reservoir is named after the now-submerged town of derwent , which was named after the river . once past howden reservoir , both banks of the river are in derbyshire , and the river remains in the county to its mouth . howden reservoir is also fed by the river westend , whilst ladybower reservoir is also fed by the river ashop . the former confluences of the two tributaries with the derwent are now submerged below the respective reservoirs . further south , the derwent passes the village of bamford , where it is joined by the river noe . below this confluence , it flows through hathersage , grindleford , calver and baslow , and through the estate of chatsworth house , before it is joined by the river wye at rowsley . after passing through darley dale , the derwent reaches matlock , where , at an oxbow , it collects the bentley brook . it then flows past the villages of matlock bath , cromford , whatstandwell , and ambergate , where it is joined by the river amber . below ambergate , the river flows through the town of belper and the villages of milford and duffield , where it is joined by the river ecclesbourne . it then enters the city of derby near darley abbey and flows through the centre of the city . the river ends at derwent mouth , east of shardlow , where it joins the river trent at a height of above sea level ; a total drop of . its course meanders somewhat , especially in its lower reaches , adding to its apparent length of . its waters ultimately reach the north sea via the humber . . natural history . the river derwent is the habitat for many different animals such as otters , birds , insects , fish and crayfish . it is also a habitat for many wild flowers , as exemplified by the lower derwent trail . . river uses . the lower river from derwent mouth upstream as far as derby was made navigable under an act of parliament of 1720 , and this stretch opened to navigation in 1721 . traffic ceased about 1795 and the navigation was acquired by the owners of the competing derby canal . the river is no longer considered navigable , although the upper river is widely used by kayakers and canoeing who enjoy the fast-flowing water and the slalom course at matlock bath . the river was also used to power the many textile mills that were built along the derwent between matlock bath and derby . initially , the need for water power was quite modest , for example lombe 's mill in derby , which is considered to be the forerunner of the later cotton mills , only needed to use the power provided by a small mill stream , and richard arkwright 's cromford mill , the world 's first water-powered cotton spinning mill , only used a small tributary of the derwent in conjunction with a lead mine sough . the later mills at belper , darley abbey and masson mill were much larger and needed to harness the full power of the river to drive their complex machinery . this required the construction of large weirs across the derwent that still remain as significant features in the riverscape . these sites were all important in the development of the industrial revolution , and arkwright 's innovation , along with several local competitors , is recognised today by the designation of the area as the derwent valley mills . the power of the derwent is still harnessed at a number of these historic mill sites , producing hydro-electricity from turbines instead of driving mill wheels , with a recent development being the construction of a hydro-electric station at longbridge weir , adjacent to the riverside gardens in derby . howden and derwent reservoirs in the upper valley were both completed in 1916 to supply the cities of sheffield , nottingham , derby , and leicester . the adjacent ladybower reservoir was completed in 1945 to cover increasing demand . treated water from these reservoirs flows down the derwent valley aqueduct parallel to the river . the river also indirectly supplies carsington reservoir , with the water taken from the river by a pumping station at ambergate in times of high flow . when flows are low , water is released back into the river via the same route of tunnels and aqueducts , thus allowing greater abstraction rates downstream at little eaton in the drier summer months . today all these reservoirs are managed by severn trent . the valley of the derwent provides an important communications route . between derby and rowsley the valley is followed by the a6 road , which was the main road from london to manchester until the creation of the motorway network , and is still a busy single-carriageway road . the former midland railway 's lines from derby to sheffield and manchester also followed the derwent , the former as far as ambergate and the latter as far as rowsley . the sheffield line still operates as part of the midland main line , but the manchester line was severed north of matlock in 1968 , and the section from ambergate to matlock now forms the derwent valley line , a single-track branch line . between ambergate and cromford , the river , road and railway are also paralleled by the cromford canal . the terminus was once connected to manchester across the high peak by the early cromford and high peak railway . . tributaries . alphabetical listing of tributaries , extracted from the water framework directive list of water bodies for the derbyshire derwent : river amber river ashop bar brook , which joins the derwent near baslow black brook , near belper bottle brook , at little eaton bentley brook chaddesden brook , in derby river ecclesbourne highlow brook , near hathersage hood brook , also near hathersage lea brook , near high peak junction ladybower brook ( highshore clough catchment ) , flows into ladybower reservoir markeaton brook , joins the derwent in derby river noe river westend river wye . naming . the river derwent provides the name for the oldest hockey club in derbyshire . derwent hockey club was established in 1897 and played its matches on the banks of the derwent in darley dale , before relocating to wirksworth . it also gives its name to derwent rowing club in derby , founded in 1857 . . gallery . file : boggy ground in swains greave - geograph.org.uk - 1495447.jpg boggy ground in swains greave , on bleaklow image : upper derwent from oaken bank.jpg the river in its highest stretch , on howden moor close to the source image : island in derwent reservoir , with howden dam behind.jpg derwent reservoir , with river water cascading over howden dam , and howden moor in the background image : river derwent at calver.jpg the river at calver image : chatsworthweir.jpg weir in the river at chatsworth house image : river derwent at matlock bath.jpg the river at matlock bath , as seen from the heights of abraham cable car image : derwent valley upstream of whatstandwell.jpg the valley of the derwent upstream of whatstandwell image : riverderwent.jpg the river just south of duffield image : derby council house and river derwent.jpg the river outside the council house , derby . see also . 2019 united kingdom floods list of rivers of england rivers of the united kingdom list of crossings of the river derwent , derbyshire handyside bridge . references . external links . web page on river derwent from derbyshireuk