AVUS

circuit . the highway is located in the southwestern districts of berlin , linking the stadtring at the funkturm junction in charlottenburg with nikolassee . it runs through the grunewald forest along the historic königsweg road from charlottenburg to potsdam and the parallel berlin-blankenheim railway line . while normal for a road , it is unusually shaped for a race track as it is essentially two long straights in the form of a dual carriageway , with a hairpin corner at each end . the north curve featured a steep banking from 1937 to 1967 . while the original layout was long , the southern turn was moved several times , to shorten the track to , then without the banking , and finally . history . s . race track . at the time of opening , avus was & nbsp ; km ( 12 & nbsp ; miles ) long – each straight being approximately half that length , and joined at each end by flat , large-radius curves , driven counter-clockwise . while the grand prix motor racing scene still evaded german tracks , the circuit from 1922 was also the site of motorcycle races . on 11 july 1926 the track played host to the first international german grand prix for sports cars , organised by the automobilclub von deutschland , the former kac . the 1921 roadway turned out to be insufficient : already , in practice two days before , the young italian driver enrico platé ( not to be confused with the argentinian driver and team owner of the same name ) was involved in a crash that killed his mechanic . during the race , in heavy rain , two track marshals died when adolf rosenberger lost control and hit the indicator board and the timekeeper 's box , with a third employee succumbing to his injuries in hospital a few hours later . the grand prix was won by his fellow team-member , the so-far unknown mercedes-benz salesman rudolf caracciola , from dresden , driving a private , eight-cylinder '' monza '' kompressor type . the fastest lap of 161 & nbsp ; km/h ( 100 & nbsp ; mph ) was set by ferdinando minoia in an om . from 1927 the german grand prix was relocated to the new and more secure nürburgring circuit in the western german eifel range , while the avus received a new asphalt surface and served as an experimental track for rocket cars . on 23 may 1928 fritz von opel ( '' rocket fritz '' ) achieved a speed record of in an opel rak2 . due to the great depression annual auto races were not resumed until 1931 , when caracciola again won in a mercedes-benz ssk , succeeded by manfred von brauchitsch the next year after caracciola had switched to alfa romeo . the competition on 22 may 1932 saw further notable participants like the earl howe , hans stuck and sir malcolm campbell . the czechoslovak driver , prince george christian of lobkowicz , died when his bugatti type 54 crashed in the southern hairpin . the following events were won by achille varzi ( 1933 ) and guy moll ( 1934 ) , to the great annoyance of the new nazi rulers , who declared the victory of german drivers and cars a matter of national pride . they strongly backed the construction of the new silver arrows ( silberpfeile ) generation of mercedes-benz and auto union . in 1935 luigi fagioli won the race in a mercedes-benz w25 ; however , the track was no longer adequate for cars reaching average race speeds of far over . in an effort to make avus the '' world 's fastest race track '' , the 1936 season was skipped and while the track hosted the cycling road race , the marathon and 50 & nbsp ; km walk athletic events of the 1936 summer olympics , the north curve was turned into a steeply banked turn ( 43° ) made of bricks . it became dubbed the wall of death , especially as it had no retaining barrier , so cars that missed the turn easily flew off it . the silver arrows raced only once on the banked version , in 1937 . as the avus race did not count towards the championship , non-gp cars were allowed , which permitted the use of streamlined cars , similar to the cars used for high speed record attempts . this race was run in two heats ; during qualifying for the second heat , luigi fagioli stuck his auto union type c on pole position , with a time of 4 minutes and 8.2 seconds at an average speed of 284.31 & nbsp ; km/h ( 176.7 & nbsp ; mph ) - which was the fastest motor racing lap in history until this time was bettered by tony bettenhausen in qualifying for the 1957 race of two worlds at monza . it was also bettered by four drivers during the 1971 indianapolis 500 . mercedes driver hermann lang 's average race speed of about was the fastest road race in history for nearly five decades , and was not matched on a high-speed banked-circuit until the mid-1980s at the 1986 indianapolis 500 . '' 1986 indianapolis 500 '' . racing-reference.info . racing reference . no major race was held after 1937 as , in early 1938 , the popular german race driver bernd rosemeyer was killed in a land speed record attempt on a straight section of the autobahn frankfurt–darmstadt ( present-day bundesautobahn 5 ) , at which point the high-speed avus was considered too dangerous for the fast grand prix race cars . furthermore , it was to be connected to the growing reichsautobahn network in 1940 by extending it south towards the berliner ring , therefore the original hairpin at nikolassee was demolished and replaced by a junction . a planned banked south turn was never built ; the cleared grounds in the grunewald forest were used as a proving ground ( '' keerans range '' ) by the american occupation forces after world war ii . post-war . the first avus race after the war was held on 1 july 1951 for formula two and formula three cars , won by east german driver paul greifzu . for post-war racing , the original extremely long straights were shortened by the introduction of a new south turn roughly in the middle ( just before the hüttenweg exit , where it can still be seen ) , reducing the track length to 8.3 & nbsp ; km ( just over 5 miles ) . after world war ii , the berlin wall , with its checkpoint bravo at dreilinden/drewitz , came no closer than about one mile ( 1.6 & nbsp ; km ) to the former south turn . it is a common yet incorrect belief that the berlin wall cut the avus in half . it was not until 19 september 1954 that this shorter track hosted a non-championship formula one race . this '' grand prix of berlin '' was mainly a show dominated by the mercedes-benz w196 drivers karl kling ( the winner ) and juan manuel fangio . no serious competition was present , as many teams had refused to show up and the german grand prix was still held on the nürburgring . finally avus hosted its only world championship formula one race with the 1959 german grand prix on 2 august , won by tony brooks . this race weekend also saw the death of french driver jean behra in a supporting sports car race , as his porsche rsk flew over the top of the north turn banking , as there was no wall or fence . german driver and journalist richard von frankenberg had previously walked away from a similar spectacular crash at the same site , but behra would have no such luck as his body impacted a flagpole head-first after he was flung from his car . after 1961 , grand prix racing did not race on banked circuits anymore . the banked sections at autodromo nazionale monza and autodrome de linas-montlhéry were considered dangerous by international racing standards . they were used in connection with chicanes for some time , then abandoned . the avus banking was dismantled in 1967 to give way to an expanded intersection under the funkturm tower . from the top of this tower , one can see that the avus is not perfectly straight . the old banked circuit can be seen in the film a dandy in aspic ( 1968 ) featuring period racing cars . racing was continued with a flat north turn , but avus only held national touring cars dtm and formula 3 events . the length of the track was roughly cut in half twice in the 1980s and 1990 as racing on straights became unpopular . also , chicanes were added to reduce entry speed into the north curve . yet , some incidents and accidents occurred . the bmw of dieter quester rolled over when exiting the last corner , and crossed the finish line sliding on its roof , with sparks flying , for a podium finish . the car of john winter hit a barrier and exploded into a fireball in north curve , which he survived . in 1995 , the race 2 of dtm had to be cancelled , after a multi-car pileup blocked the circuit ; later that september , british driver kieth o'dor was killed in a super touring car event when his car spun and was rammed sideways . search results . avus today . after the fall of the berlin wall , the closure of the avus for race events became increasingly problematic over traffic and associated environmental concerns . after the last races in 1998 , a farewell event with veterans was held in 1999 . since 2000 , the new eurospeedway lausitz in brandenburg is considered the replacement venue for competition . the round race control tower at the north end still remains with its prominent mercedes-benz and bosch sponsorship insignia . it is used as a ( now closed ) public restaurant and motel . the old wooden grandstand is protected as a historic monument . see also . list of formula one circuits eurospeedway lausitz . references . external links . 1936 summer olympics official report . volume 2 . pp . & nbsp ; 644–7 , 682-5 , 932-5 . forix about the avus track historic purpose built grand prix circuits on google maps