Nimitz-class aircraft carrier

1990–2000 . the two most significant deployments the & nbsp ; nimitz class was involved in during the 1990s were the & nbsp ; gulf war & nbsp ; and its aftermath , and operation southern watch in southern iraq . all active vessels were engaged in both of these to some extent , with operation southern watch continuing until 2003 . lambeth , p . 6 most carriers in operation in operation desert shield and operation desert storm played supporting roles , with only theodore roosevelt playing an active part in combat operations . throughout the 1990s and more recently , nimitz-class carriers have been deployed as part of humanitarian missions . while deployed in the gulf war , abraham lincoln was diverted to the pacific ocean to participate alongside 22 other ships in operation fiery vigil , evacuating civilians following the eruption of mount pinatubo on luzon island in the philippines . in october 1993 , abraham lincoln deployed to somalia to assist un humanitarian operations there , spending four weeks flying patrols over the area around mogadishu while supporting u.s . troops during operation restore hope . the same ship also participated in operation vigilant sentinel in the persian gulf in 1995 . theodore roosevelt flew patrols in support of the kurds over northern iraq as part of operation provide comfort in 1991 . in 1996 , george washington played a peacekeeping role in operation decisive endeavor in bosnia and herzegovina . in 1999 , theodore roosevelt was called to the ionian sea to support operation allied force alongside other nato militaries . . 2001–present . harry s . trumans maiden voyage was in november 2000 . the carrier 's air wing flew 869 combat sorties in support of operation southern watch , including a strike on iraqi air defense sites on 16 february 2001 , in response to iraqi surface-to-air missile fire against united nations coalition forces . after the september 11 attacks , carl vinson and theodore roosevelt were among the first warships to participate in operation enduring freedom in afghanistan . carl vinson sailed towards the persian gulf intending to support operation southern watch in july 2001 . this changed in response to the attacks , and the ship changed course to travel towards the north arabian sea , where she launched the first airstrikes in support of the operation on 7 october 2001 . following the attacks , john c . stennis and george washington participated in operation noble eagle , carrying out homeland security operations off the west coast of the united states . all active ships have been involved to some extent in iraq and afghanistan since that time . this included the invasion in 2003 , as well as providing subsequent support for operation iraqi freedom since then . the carriers have also provided aid after natural disasters . in 2005 , abraham lincoln supported operation unified assistance in indonesia after the december 2004 tsunami , and harry s . truman provided aid after hurricane katrina later in 2005 . the ronald reagan carrier strike group performed humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations in the philippines in june 2008 after typhoon fengshen , which killed hundreds from the central island regions and the main island of luzon . in january 2010 carl vinson operated off haiti , providing aid and drinking water to earthquake survivors as part of the u.s . led operation unified response , alongside other major warships and hospital ship . . refueling complex overhaul . in order to refuel their nuclear power plants , the carriers each undergo a refueling and overhaul ( rcoh ) once in their service lives . this is also the most substantial overhaul the ships undergo while in service and involves bringing the vessels ' equipment up to the standards of the newest ships . the ship is placed in dry dock , and essential maintenance is carried out including painting of the hull below the waterline and replacement of electrical and mechanical components such as valves . because of the large time periods between the ships ' constructions , the armament and designs of the newer ships are more modern than those of the older ships . in rcoh , the older ships are refitted to the standards of the newer ships , which can include major upgrades to the flight deck , aircraft catapults and combat systems as well as other upgrades such as improved radar systems , although precise details can vary significantly between the ships . the improvements normally take around four years to complete . the rcoh for uss theodore roosevelt took four years to complete ( 2009–2013 ) and cost about us 2.6 billion . planned incremental availability is a similar procedure , although it is less substantial and does not involve refueling of the nuclear power plants . . symbolic and diplomatic roles . because of their status as the largest warships in the u.s . navy , the deployment of an aircraft carrier can fulfill a symbolic role , not just in terms of a deterrent to an enemy , but often as a diplomatic tool , in strengthening relations with allies and potential allies . the latter of these functions can take place either as a single visit to a country , in which senior naval officers are allowed to observe the operating of the carrier and to interact with its senior officers , or as part of an international task force . this can be in combat operations , such as nato bombing of yugoslavia in 1999 , or other deployments involving training , such as exercise rimpac . in addition , carriers have participated in international maritime security operations , combating piracy in the persian gulf and off the coast of somalia . . accidents and incidents . on 26 may 1981 , an ea-6b prowler crashed on the flight deck of nimitz , killing 14 crewmen and injuring 45 others . forensic testing of the personnel involved showed that several tested positive for marijuana . while this in itself was not found to have directly caused the crash , the findings of the investigation prompted the introduction of mandatory drug testing of all service personnel . in cases of ditched aircraft , pilots have been able to eject safely in several cases . however , fatal aircraft crashes have occurred ; in 1994 , lieutenant kara hultgreen , the first female f-14 tomcat pilot , was killed while attempting to land on board abraham lincoln during a training exercise . fires have also caused damage to the ships ; in may 2008 , while rotating through to her new homeport at yokosuka naval base in yokosuka , japan , george washington suffered a serious fire which cost 70 & nbsp ; million in repairs , injured 37 sailors and led to the ship undergoing three months of repairs at san diego ; this led to its having to miss the 2008 rimpac exercises and delayed the final withdrawal from service of . the fire was caused by unauthorized smoking in an area near improperly stored flammable refrigerant compressor oil . . future and planned replacement . nimitz-class carriers were designed to have a 50-year service life . at the end of the service life , ships will be decommissioned . this process will first take place on nimitz and is estimated to cost from 750 to 900 & nbsp ; million . this compares with an estimate of 53 & nbsp ; million for a conventionally powered carrier . most of the difference in cost is attributed to the deactivation of the nuclear power plants and safe removal of radioactive material and other contaminated equipment . stevens , p . 10 a new class of carriers , the gerald r . ford class , is being constructed to replace previous vessels after decommissioning . ten of these are expected , and the first has entered service as of 22 july 2017 to replace . most of the rest of these new carriers are to replace the oldest nimitz ships as they reach the end of their service lives . the new carriers will have a similar design to george h.w . bush ( using an almost identical hull shape ) and technological and structural improvements . . see also . aircraft carrier ( medium ) list of aircraft carrier classes of the united states navy list of aircraft carriers of the united states navy list of aircraft carriers list of naval ship classes in service modern us navy carrier air operations naval aviation timeline of aircraft carriers of the united states navy . notes . footnotes .