Maedhros

concept and creation . etymology . maedhros 's old english name is doegred winsterhand ( ang . doegred dawn , daybreak , winsterhand left-handed ) . christopher tolkien thought that doegred referred to the colour of maedhros 's hair , though this is not certain . tolkien , when deciding maedhros 's name , came up with the sound of it first , and then decided a suitable meaning for the word . the translation of maedhros was originally '' glitter of metal '' , but was later changed to '' well-formed/shapely copper ” ( s . maed 'shapely ' , ros 'copper ' ) . tolkien explained that the translations of the sindarin roots were meant to match the meaning of maedhros 's quenya names , maitimo '' well-shaped one '' and russandol . however , around the last four years of his life , tolkien encountered a problem when he realized that he had stated that ros , which was meant to reference his red hair , translated into '' spray/spindrift '' . he later made a note suggesting that he might change maedhros 's name to maedron instead . tolkien wrote maedhros 's name as maedros '' . after the death of fingolfin . the noldor then became divided into separate kingships under fingon , son of fingolfin , turgon his younger brother , maedros son of fëanor , and finrod son of arfin finarfin ; and the following of finrod had become the greatest . '' or maidros in early versions . when the latter name first appears in drafts , however , it does not designate the eldest son of fëanor , but his grandfather : fëanor 's father was originally named bruithwir-go-maidros . . character arc . the dragon-helm of dor-lómin was given to maedhros by azaghâl during the first age , in gratitude for saving the life of the dwarf-lord , with whom maedhros forged an alliance . maedhros later passed it on to fingon in proof of their friendship . in earlier drafts , it is not the dragon-helm maedhros gives to fingon , but the elfstone , which maedhros received from his dying father . '' he fëanor gives the green stone to maidros.the green stone of fëanor given by maidros to fingon . '' the fate of the silmarils undergo changes through all three drafts ( which christopher tolkien dubs s , qi , qii ) of the silmarillion . in s , maglor alone steals the silmaril and casts himself into a pit after maedhros and maglor submit themselves to eönwë , while maedhros breaks the lost silmarils retrieved and restores the light back to the two trees . in qi , it is maedhros who is convinced by maglor to regain the silmarils , but is captured by eönwë . then released with his brother maglor , maedhros , in despair , slays himself by throwing himself into a fiery chasm . maglor , however , throws his silmaril in the sea and wanders by the shore . in qii , the fate of maedhros and maglor remains the same as in the published silmarillion . although it was maglor who , in the silmarillion , took pity on the sons of elwing , earlier versions portrayed maedhros as the one who saved elrond ( elros not appearing until later drafts ) . . fictional biography . born to fëanor and nerdanel , he is the eldest of their seven sons : his brothers were maglor , celegorm , caranthir , curufin , and twins amras and amrod . in aman , he was of the noldorin line for kingship—hence his father-name , '' nelyafinwë '' , which was quenya for '' finwë the third in succession '' —but unlike his royal kin , maedhros had auburn hair inherited from his maternal grandfather , mahtan , to whom maedhros was said to be alike in face and disposition . he preferred and was remembered by his mother-name , '' maitimo , '' which meant '' well-shaped one '' ( a reference to his comeliness ) , but was known as '' russandol '' , his epessë for '' copper-top '' , to his family . his tremendous height earned him the appellation '' the tall '' . during his travels maedhros befriended fingon , son of fingolfin , though their respective fathers would enter into a bitter feud . following his father 's banishment from tirion , maedhros lived in formenos with his family . they return to tirion , however , after maedhros brings tidings of finwë 's murder and the theft of the silmaril . fëanor 's fiery words lead the noldor to middle-earth and the fëanorians to swear their father 's terrible oath to pursue anyone who keeps the silmarils from their possession . maedhros participates in the kinslaying at alqualondë and stands aside at the burning of the ships at losgar . when fëanor and his sons secretly sail to middle-earth , maedhros is shocked when he realises that they will not return for fingolfin and his host . although fëanor is killed in the dagor-nuin-giliath , morgoth 's forces suffer a crushing defeat . he sends peace emissaries and maedhros agrees to treat with them . he brings more forces than has been agreed to the parley because he is not fooled by morgoth 's peace offers . unknown to him , balrogs are among morgoth 's party , and the elven company is overwhelmed . maedhros is taken captive and hung by the wrist of his right hand . for many years , he languishes there while fingolfin brings his hosts into middle-earth . eventually fingon finds him and with the help of thorondor , frees him by cutting off maedhros 's right hand . this daring rescue , along with maedhros ' repentance for the desertion of fingolfin 's hosts in araman and relinquishment of his claim as finwë 's heir to kingship over all the noldor in favour of his uncle ( which last caused the fëanorians to be known as “ the dispossessed ” ) , did much to repair the ill feelings between the house of fingolfin and the house of fëanor . his brothers , however , are not all pleased by their eldest brother 's actions , and maedhros , sensing that they will cause feuds with their kinsmen , moves them out of mithrim and to the lands around the hill of himring , which become known as the march of maedhros . a secondary purpose in relocating is the desire to take up the responsibility to defend the area that was in most danger of being attacked by morgoth . keen on peace and unification , maedhros on his part remained in friendship with the houses of fingolfin and finarfin . allied with fingolfin , he won the battle of dagor aglareb and set the siege of angband . the siege was broken , however , in the dagor bragollach , in which many elven kingdoms were destroyed . due to maedhros 's valour and deadly skill with the sword , himring was successfully defended , though it was surrounded by the enemy . this led many of the survivors from east beleriand and dorthonion to rally to maedhros . taking hope upon hearing the deeds of beren and lúthien , he gathered his brothers , and united with other elven houses to create the union of maedhros , an alliance of elves , men , and dwarves to drive the orcs from beleriand and lay siege to morgoth 's fortress of angband . under his leadership , the union won several battles and regained the territory lost in the dagor bragollach . when the joint attack on angband itself was to be launched , maedhros was delayed due to the treachery of an easterling , uldor the accursed , who was a spy of morgoth in the service of caranthir , and the forces of the union were utterly destroyed in the nírnaeth arnoediad . himring was taken by the orcs and the sons of fëanor were wounded . they retreated to mount dolmed , and eventually came to live with the nandor in ossiriand . during , the brothers learnt of the possession of the silmaril recovered by beren and lúthien in the hands of dior , the new king of doriath . maedhros restrained his brothers ' urge to attack , and instead , sent a message to dior demanding that he yield the silmaril to them , but dior ignored it . celegorm 's words convinced the fëanorians to launch an assault . thus doriath was destroyed , dior was killed , and the brothers emerged victorious , but the brothers celegorm , curufin and caranthir were slain and the silmaril was not recovered . upon learning that celegorm 's servants had left dior 's twin sons , eluréd and elurín , to starve in a dark forest , maedhros went on a long search for them , but it proved to be fruitless . maedhros and his surviving brothers then dwelt on amon ereb in east beleriand . when they heard that elwing , who had escaped from doriath with the silmaril , was now living at the havens of sirion . maedhros , repenting of his deeds at doriath , counselled against trying to regain the jewel by force . but the unfulfilment of the oath came to torment the brothers heavily , so they sent messages of friendship but with firm demands to surrender the silmaril . however , the people refused , arguing that they could not negotiate while their leader and elwing 's husband , eärendil , was away at sea . in , the fëanorians attacked sirion—but elwing cast herself and the jewel into the sea and they did not gain what they sought . elwing was ultimately rescued by the power of ulmo and reunited with eärendil in the west . eärendil and elwing 's sons , elrond and elros were taken captive by maedhros and maglor , but were treated gently and kindly . after the war of wrath , maedhros and maglor , the last of the sons of fëanor , told eönwë that the remaining two silmarils captured from morgoth should be given to them , but eönwë replied that the silmarils would not suffer them to hold them and that the brothers had to face judgement from the valar in aman . maglor was willing to listen , but maedhros reminded maglor that they had sworn that none , even the valar , could release them from their oath , and because of this , it would curse them into committing evil deeds in aman . resigned , the brothers stole the silmarils , but the jewels burned their hands because of all the evil deeds they had committed . unable to endure the suffering , maedhros killed himself , throwing himself and his silmaril into a fiery chasm of the earth , while maglor casts his silmaril into the sea and never returns to his folk , wandering along the coast and lamenting his loss and pain instead . '' no other player has there been , / no other lips or fingers seen / so skilled , 't is said in elven-lore , / save maelor son of fëanor , / forgotten harper , singer doomed , / who young when laurelin yet bloomed / to endless lamentation passed /and in the tombless sea was cast . '' . reception and analysis . the award-winning tolkien watercolour artist jenny dolfen is said by the tolkien society to have '' a particular penchant '' for characters from the silmarillion , in particular maedhros . the tolkien scholar verlyn flieger writes that maedhros 's death was caused by the silmarils . she finds this contradictory , as the silmarils embody the light of the two trees ; tolkien described the silmarils variously as '' holy '' , '' unsullied '' , and '' hallowed '' , but their effect is evil . dimitra fimi , analysing celtic influence on middle-earth , writes that the loss of maedhros 's hand is directly paralleled by the loss of nuadhu 's arm in the first battle of moytirra . annie kinniburgh similarly relates the noldor elves to the irish tuatha dé danann , citing the same parallel . . house of fëanor . notes . references . primary . . secondary . . sources . pl : lista calaquendich maedhros