Foot binding

health issues . the most common problem with bound feet was infection . despite the amount of care taken in regularly trimming the toenails , they would often in-grow , becoming infected and causing injuries to the toes . sometimes , for this reason , the girl 's toenails would be peeled back and removed altogether . the tightness of the binding meant that the circulation in the feet was faulty , and the circulation to the toes was almost cut off , so any injuries to the toes were unlikely to heal and were likely to gradually worsen and lead to infected toes and rotting flesh . the necrosis of the flesh would also initially give off a foul odor , and later the smell may come from various microorganisms that colonized the folds . most of the women receiving treatment did not go out often and are disabled . if the infection in the feet and toes entered the bones , it could cause them to soften , which could result in toes dropping off ; however , this was seen as a benefit because the feet could then be bound even more tightly . girls whose toes were more fleshy would sometimes have shards of glass or pieces of broken tiles inserted within the binding next to her feet and between her toes to cause injury and introduce infection deliberately . disease inevitably followed infection , meaning that death from septic shock could result from foot-binding , and a surviving girl was more at risk for medical problems as she grew older . it is thought that as many as 10 % of girls may have died from gangrene and other infections due to footbinding . at the beginning of the binding , many of the foot bones would remain broken , often for years . however , as the girl grew older , the bones would begin to heal . even after the foot bones had healed , they were prone to re-breaking repeatedly , especially when the girl was in her teenage years and her feet were still soft . bones in the girls ' feet would often be deliberately broken again in order to further change the size or shape of the feet . this was especially the case with the toes , as small toes were especially desirable . older women were more likely to break hips and other bones in falls , since they could not balance securely on their feet , and were less able to rise to their feet from a sitting position . cummings , s . & stone , k . ( 1997 ) '' consequences of foot binding among older women in beijing china '' , in : american journal of public health ebsco host . oct 1997 other issues that might arise from foot binding included paralysis and muscular atrophy . . views and interpretations . there are many interpretations to the practice of footbinding . the interpretive models used include fashion ( the chinese customs may be compared to examples of western women 's fashion such as corsetry ) ; seclusion ( sometimes evaluated as morally superior to the gender mingling in the west ) ; perversion ( the practice imposed by men with sexual perversions ) , inexplicable deformation , child abuse , and extreme cultural traditionalism . in the late 20th century some feminists introduced positive overtones , arguing that it gave women a sense of mastery over their bodies , and pride in their beauty . patricia buckley ebrey , “ gender and sinology : shifting western interpretations of foot binding , 1300-1890 , ” ‘ ’ late imperial china ’ ’ ( 1999 ) 20 2 pp 1-34 . . beauty and erotic appeal . before footbinding was practiced in china , admiration for small feet already existed as demonstrated by the tang dynasty tale of ye xian written around 850 by duan chengshi . this tale of a girl who lost her shoe and then married a king who sought the owner of the shoe as only her foot was small enough to fit the shoe contains elements of the european story of cinderella , and is thought to be one of its antecedents . for many , the bound feet were an enhancement to a woman 's beauty and made her movement more dainty , and a woman with perfect lotus feet was likely to make a more prestigious marriage . the desirability varies with the size of the feet & ndash ; the perfect bound feet and the most desirable ( called '' golden lotuses '' ) would be around 3 chinese inches ( around 4 inches ( 10 & nbsp ; cm ) in western measurement ) or smaller , while those larger may be called '' silver lotuses '' ( 4 chinese inches ) or '' iron lotuses '' ( 5 chinese inches or larger and the least desirable for marriage ) . therefore , people had greater expectations for foot-binding brides . the belief that footbinding made women more desirable to men is widely used as an explanation for the spread and persistence of footbinding . some also considered bound feet to be intensely erotic , and qing dynasty sex manuals listed 48 different ways of playing with women 's bound feet . some men preferred never to see a woman 's bound feet , so they were always concealed within tiny '' lotus shoes '' and wrappings . according to robert van gulik , the bound feet were also considered the most intimate part of a woman 's body ; in erotic art of the qing period where the genitalia may be shown , the bound feet were never depicted uncovered . howard levy however suggests that the barely revealed bound foot may also only function as an initial tease . an erotic effect of the bound feet was the lotus gait , the tiny steps and swaying walk of a woman whose feet had been bound . women with such deformed feet avoided placing weight on the front of the foot and tended to walk predominantly on their heels . walking on bound feet necessitated bending the knees slightly and swaying to maintain proper movement and balance , a dainty walk that was also considered to be erotically attractive to some men . some men found the smell of the bound feet attractive , and some also apparently believed that bound feet would cause layers of folds to develop in the vagina , and that the thighs would become sensuously heavier and the vagina tighter . the psychoanalyst sigmund freud considered footbinding to be a '' perversion that corresponds to foot fetishism '' , and that it appeased male castration anxiety . . role of confucianism . in the song dynasty , the status of women declined , and a common argument is that the decline was the result of the revival of confucianism as neo-confucianism during the song dynasty , and that in addition to promoting the seclusion of women and the cult of widow chastity , it also contributed to the development of footbinding . according to robert van gulik , the prominent song confucian scholar zhu xi stressed the inferiority of women as well as the need to keep men and women strictly separate . it was claimed by lin yutang among others , probably based on an oral tradition , that zhu xi also promoted footbinding in fujian as a way of encouraging chastity among women , that by restricting their movement it would help keep men and women separate . however , historian patricia ebrey suggests that this story might be fictitious , and argued that the practice arose so as to emphasize the gender distinction during a period of societal change in the song dynasty . some confucian moralists in fact disapproved of the erotic associations of footbinding , and unbound women were also praised . the neo-confucian cheng yi was said to be against footbinding and his family and descendants did not bind their feet . modern confucian scholars such as tu weiming also dispute any causal link between neo-confucianism and footbinding . it has been noted that confucian doctrine in fact prohibits mutilation of the body as people should not '' injure even the hair and skin of the body received from mother and father '' . it is however argued that such injunction applies less to women , rather it is meant to emphasize the sacred link between sons and their parents . furthermore , it is argued that confucianism institutionalized the family system in which women are called upon to sacrifice themselves for the good of the family , a system that fostered such practice . historian dorothy ko proposed that footbinding may be an expression of the confucian ideals of civility and culture in the form of correct attire or bodily adornment , and that footbinding was seen as a necessary part of being feminine as well as being civilized . footbinding was often classified in chinese encyclopedia as clothing or a form of bodily embellishment rather than mutilation ; one from 1591 for example placed footbinding in a section on '' female adornments '' that included hairdos , powders , and ear-piercings . according to ko , the perception of footbinding as a civilised practice may be evinced from a ming dynasty account that mentioned a proposal to '' entice the barbarians to civilize their customs '' by encouraging footbinding among their womenfolk . the practice was also carried out only by women on girls , and it served to emphasize the distinction between male and female , an emphasis that began from an early age . anthropologist fred blake argued that the practice of footbinding was a form of discipline undertaken by women themselves , and perpetuated by women on their daughters , so as to inform their daughters of their role and position in society , and to support and participate in the neo-confucian way of being civilized . . feminist perspective . foot binding is often seen by feminists as an oppressive practice against women who were victims of a sexist culture . it is also widely seen as a form of violence against women . bound feet rendered women dependent on their families , particularly the men , as they became largely restricted to their homes . thus , the practice ensured that women were much more reliant on their husbands . the early chinese feminist qiu jin , who underwent the painful process of unbinding her own bound feet , attacked footbinding and other traditional practices . she argued that women , by retaining their small bound feet , made themselves subservient as it would mean women imprisoning themselves indoors . she believed that women should emancipate themselves from oppression , that girls can ensure their independence through education , and that they should develop new mental and physical qualities fitting for the new era . the ending of the practice is seen as a significant event in the process of female emancipation in china . it is a great significance in the development history of chinese feminism . in the late 20th century some feminists introduced positive overtones , arguing that it gave women a sense of mastery over their bodies , and pride in their beauty . historian dorothy ko has argued that these feminists have mistakenly imposed late 20th-century middle-class western ideals of individualism and agency on a highly traditional culture . for example , they assume that the practice represented a woman 's individual freedom to enjoy sexuality , despite lack of evidence . dorothy ko , '' rethinking sex , female agency , and footbinding '' , research on women in modern chinese history / jindai zhongguo funu shi yanjiu ( 1999 ) , vol . 7 , pp 75–105 . other interpretations . some scholars such as laurel bossen and hill gates reject the notion that bound feet in china were considered more beautiful , or that it was a means of male control over women , a sign of class status , or a chance for women to marry well ( in general , bound women did not improve their class position by marriage ) . foot binding is believed to have spread from elite women to civilian women , and there were large differences in each region . the body and labor of unmarried daughters belonged to their parents , thereby the boundaries between work and kinship for women were blurred . they argued that foot binding was an instrumental means to reserve women to handwork , and can be seen as a way by mothers to tie their daughters down , train them in handwork and keep them close at hand . foot binding were common when women could do light industry , but where women were required to do heavy farm work they often did not bind their feet because it hindered physical work . these scholars argued that the coming of the mechanized industry at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century , such as the introduction of industrial textile processes , resulted in a loss of light handwork for women , removing a reason to maintain the practice . mechanization resulted in women who worked at home facing a crisis . coupled with changes in politics and people 's consciousness , the practice of foot binding disappeared in china forever after two generations . it has been argued that while the practice started out as a fashion , it persisted because it became an expression of han identity after the mongols invaded china in 1279 , and later the manchus ' conquest in 1644 , as it was then practiced only by han women . during the qing dynasty , attempts were made by the manchus to ban the practice but failed , and it has been argued the attempts at banning may have in fact led to a spread of the practice among han chinese in the 17th and 18th centuries . . in literature , film and television . the bound foot has played a prominent part in many media works , both chinese and non-chinese , modern and traditional . mei ching liu , '' women and the media in china : an historical perspective '' , journalism quarterly 62 ( 1985 ) : 45-52 . these depictions are sometimes based on observation or research and sometimes on rumors or supposition . sometimes , as in the case of pearl buck 's the good earth ( 1931 ) , the accounts are relatively neutral or empirical , implying a respect for chinese culture ( note however that buck 's previous novel , '' east wind : west wind '' , extensively explores the unbinding of a woman 's feet , experienced as frightening and painful yet finally empowering , as part of her transition into a new , more modern and more individualistic persona under her doctor husband 's tender tutelage ) . sometimes the accounts seem intended to rouse like-minded chinese and foreign opinion to abolish the custom , and sometimes the accounts imply condescension or contempt for china . patricia ebrey , '' gender and sinology : shifting western interpretations of footbinding , 1300–1890 '' , late imperial china 20.2 ( 1999 ) : 1-34 . quoted in the jin ping mei , . '' displaying her exquisite feet , three inches long and no wider than a thumb , very pointed and with high insteps . '' flowers in the mirror ( 1837 ) by ju-chen li includes chapters set in the '' country of women '' , where men bear children and have bound feet . the three-inch golden lotus ( 1994 ) by feng jicai presents a satirical picture of the movement to abolish the practice , which is seen as part of chinese culture . in the film the inn of the sixth happiness ( 1958 ) , ingrid bergman portrays british missionary to china gladys aylward , who is assigned as a foreigner the task by a local mandarin to unbind the feet of young women , an unpopular order that the civil government had failed to fulfill . later , the children are able to escape troops by walking miles to safety . ruthanne lum mccunn wrote a biographical novel , thousand pieces of gold ( 1981 , adapted into a 1991 film ) , about polly bemis , a chinese american pioneer woman . it describes her feet being bound , and later unbound , when she needed to help her family with farm labour . emily prager 's short story '' a visit from the footbinder '' , from her collection of short stories of the same name ( 1982 ) , describes the last few hours of a young chinese girl 's childhood before the professional footbinder arrives to initiate her into the adult woman 's life of beauty and pain . lisa loomer 's play the waiting room ( 1994 ) deals with themes of body modification . one of the three main characters is an 18th-century chinese woman who arrives in a modern hospital waiting room seeking medical help for complications resulting from her bound feet . lensey namioka 's novel ties that bind , ties that break ( 1999 ) follows a girl named ailin in china who refuses to have her feet bound , which comes to affect her future . lisa see 's novel snow flower and the secret fan ( 2005 ) is about two chinese girls who are destined to be friends . the novel is based upon the sacrifices women make to be married and includes the two girls being forced into getting their feet bound . the book was adapted into a 2011 film directed by wayne wang . feng shui and sequel feng shui 2 features a ghost of a foot-bound woman inhabits a bagua and cursed those who holds the item . lisa see 's novel china dolls ( 2014 ) describes chinese family traditions including foot binding .