Swing (dance)

original forms dating from the 1920s and early 1930s . lindy hop evolved in the early 1930s . it is a dance of african american origin characterized by a high degree of physical vigor . spring , howard . swing and the lindy hop : dance , venue , media , and tradition . vol . 15 . university of illinois press , 1997 . 183-207 it is characterized by an 8-count circular basic or '' swing out '' and has an emphasis on improvisation and the ability to easily adapt to include other steps in 8-count and 6-count rhythms . the name '' lindy hop '' is often attributed to '' shorty '' george snowden during an interaction with a newspaper writer who asked him what kind of dance they were doing . because charles lindbergh had just made his famous solo flight across the atlantic ocean , shorty george is said to have replied , '' the lindy hop . '' whether it was shorty george who coined the name is disputed by some writers , but , in any case , the name stuck . the savoy ballroom in harlem was the home of the lindy hop . as its popularity increased , professional troupes were formed . these troupes toured the united states and europe performing versions of the lindy hop . spring , howard . swing and the lindy hop : dance , venue , media , and tradition . vol . 15 . university of illinois press , 1997 . 183-207 . balboa , also known as '' bal '' is an eight-count dance that 's done in closed position . the earliest form of the dance ( often called '' pure balboa '' ) evolved in the mostly conservative dance halls of southern california where space was limited and strict codes of conduct were enforced . these dance halls usually prohibited the wild kicks of the charleston and lindy hop . pure balboa is characterized by an upright posture with partners standing chest to chest . there are no spins or turns and the dancers remain in contact through the upper chest at all times . not leaving much scope for variations , pure balboa is an intrinsically very simple dance . the few step variations generally play with the rhythm or look and feel ( style ) from below the knee downwards and deal with changes in direction . balboa is frequently danced to fast jazz ( usually anything from 180 to 320 & nbsp ; bpm beats per minute ) , though many like a slower ( 170-190 & nbsp ; bpm ) tempo . while most dancers differentiate between pure balboa and bal swing , both are considered to be a part of the dance . bal swing evolved from balboa when original balboa dancers experimented with fancier variations of the dance which forced the chest to chest connection to be broken . in this form of bal a variety of spins , turns , dips , tricks , and even air steps are introduced . these improvisations are permissible provided the overall style and framework remain true in spirit to the original dance and are combined with original balboa footwork . collegiate shag ( or '' shag '' ) is done primarily to uptempo swing and sometimes pre-swing jazz music ( 185-200+ beats per minute ) . it is believed that the dance originated in the carolinas in the 1920s , “ shag latest dance ” blytheville courier news ( arkansas ) 25 july 1929 : 5 research credit : forrest outman later spreading across the united states during the 1930s . the shag is still danced today by swing dance enthusiasts worldwide . shag is believed to have been the first and most popular swing dance of the original swing era lindy charleston is very similar to the original charleston of the 1920s , only the pulse of the dance is lowered ( the up-and-down motion in the pulse emphasizes the downward movement ) to match that of the lindy hop . this form of charleston includes a number of positions , including side-by-side , hand-to-hand , and tandem . in '' jockey position '' , the closed position is opened out so that both partners may face forward , without breaking apart . in side-by-side charleston , partners open the closed position entirely , so that their only points of connection are at their touching hips and arm contact , wherein the leader 's right hand and arm touch the follower 's back and the follower 's left hand and arm touch the leader 's shoulder and arm . both partners then swing their free arms as they would in solo charleston . in both jockey and side-by-side charleston , the leader steps back onto his left foot , while the follower steps back onto her right . in tandem charleston , one partner stands in front of the other ( usually the follower , though the arrangement may vary ) , both face in the same direction to start , and both begin by stepping back onto the left foot . the partner behind holds the front partner 's handseight , and their joined arms swing backwards and forwards , as in the basic step . forms dating from the late 1930s and early 1940s . st . louis shag ( or '' shag '' ) is a dance that evolved out of the charleston . as its name suggests , it is recognized as having started in st . louis , missouri . st . louis shag features a stationary 8-count basic that is most commonly composed of triple-step , kick , triple-step , kick . it is a very fast closed position dance that is usually done to stomp , jump , and boogie-woogie music . big apple is both a partner dance and a '' called '' circle dance that originated in the afro-american community of the united states in the beginning of the 20th century . the dance that eventually became known as the big apple is speculated to have been created in the early 1930s by african-american youth dancing at the big apple club , which was at the former house of peace synagogue on park street in columbia , south carolina . the synagogue was converted into a black juke joint called the '' big apple night club '' . little apple this dance was a partnered version of the big apple , which is also believed to have originated in the carolinas of the southern united states . . derivatives of swing dance from the 1940s and 1950s . east coast swing is a simpler 6-count variation that spawned from the six-count variations of the lindy hop . it evolved with swing-band music of the 1940s and the work of the arthur murray dance studios in the 1940s . it is also known as six-count swing , triple-step swing , or single-time swing . east coast swing has very simple structure and footwork along with basic moves and styling . it is popular for its simple nature and is often danced to slow , medium , or fast tempo jazz , blues , or rock and roll . occasionally , rockabilly , aka rock-a-billy , is mistaken for east coast swing , but rockabilly is more closely related to western swing . west coast swing was developed in the 1940s , as a stylistic variation on the los angeles style of the lindy hop . it is a slotted dance and is done to a wide variety of music including : blues , rock and roll , country music , pop , hip hop , smooth , cool jazz , r & b , and funk music . '' the history of swing dancing at zzounds . '' the history of swing dancing at zzounds . accessed march 28 , 2015 . it is popular throughout the united states and canada but was uncommon in europe and much of asia until the 21st century . west-coast-swing communities are growing in australia , brazil , france , india , new zealand , ukraine , romania , the united kingdom , and elsewhere . western swing has long been the name for jazz-influenced western music of the 1940s and , by extension , two-step , line dancing or swing dance done to such music . contemporary 21st century country swing or dancing or '' country western swing dancing '' ( c/w swing ) has a distinct culture , with classes and instructional videos on youtube and dvd teaching dips , lifts , aerials and flips . it adds variations from other country dances , swing styles , salsa and more . as the name suggests , it is most often danced to country music . boogie-woogie developed originally in the 1940s , with the rise of boogie woogie music . it is popular today in europe , and was considered by some to be the european counterpart to east coast swing , a 6-count dance standardized for the american ballroom industry . it is danced to rock music of various kinds , blues or boogie woogie music but usually not to jazz . as the dance has developed , it has also taken to 8-count variations and swing outs similar to lindy hop , while keeping the original boogie woogie footwork . carolina shag was danced along the strands between myrtle beach , south carolina , and wilmington , north carolina , during the 1940s but , during the 1990s and later , has expanded to many other places . it is most often associated with beach music , which refers to songs that are rhythm-and-blues-based and , according to bo bryan , a noted shag historian and resident of beaufort county , is a term that was coined at carolina beach , north carolina . imperial swing is a cross between east coast and west coast swing as it is done in slot and in the round . it started at the club imperial in st louis . george edick , who owned the club , let teenagers dance on the lower level and the swing dancers of the time taught them what was learned from their trips to the east coast . as people traveled around , they added parts of west coast , bop and carolina shag to complement the dance and make it distinctive . '' the imperial '' has elements of '' east coast '' , '' west coast '' , '' carolina shag '' and '' bop '' . jive is a dance of international style ballroom dancing . it is a very upbeat dance in which the performers look to be hopping off the ground . it initially was based on eastern swing taken to england by american troops in world war ii and evolved before becoming the now standardized form of today . skip jive is a british variant of the jive , popular in the 1950s and 1960s , danced to trad jazz . modern jive ( also known as leroc and ceroc© ) developed in the 1980s , reputedly from a french form of jive . modern jive is not technically of the jive family , which typically use a 6-count pattern of various combinations of walking and triple steps ( ballroom jive - back/replace triple-triple ; swing jive - triple-triple back/replace ) , etc . it is pared down to a simple box step and concentrates on the simpler forms of couple dance styling , gauged to provide a social atmosphere rather than technical aptitude . there are debates about whether it is a form of swing dancing due to lack of syncopations , rhythmic footwork variations , a static partner dynamic , and lack of swinging music , amongst the swing community at large , but they do consider themselves a style of swing . rock and roll - developing in the 1950s in response to rock and roll , rock-and-roll is very popular in australia and danced socially as well as competitively and in performances . the style has a long association with lindy hop in that country , as many of the earliest lindy hoppers in the early 1990s moved to lindy hop from a rock-and-roll tradition . there are ongoing debates about whether rock-and-roll constitutes swing dancing , particularly in reference to the music to which it is danced : there is some debate as to whether or not it swings . acrobatic rock ' n'roll – popular in europe , acrobatic rock ' n'roll is popularly associated with russian gymnasts who took up the dance , though it is popular throughout europe today . it is a performance dance and sport rather than a social dance , though there are people who remove the acrobatic stunts to dance it on a social level . hand dancing originated around washington , dc in the mid-1950s , and a new generation of dancers started innovating and dancing to motown music . from its very beginning , dc hand-dance was referred to and called “ dc hand-dance/hand-dancing ” , “ dc swing ” , “ dc style ” ( swing ) and “ fast dance ” ( meaning dc hand-dance ) . this is the first time a version of “ swing ” dance was termed “ hand-dance/hand-dancing ” . dc hand-dance is characterized by very smooth footwork and movements , and close-in and intricate hand-turns , danced to a 6-beat , 6-count dance rhythm . the more modern footwork consists of smooth and continuous floor contact , sliding and gliding-type steps versus hopping and jumping-type steps of the older style which stylistically still held elements of its jitterbug/lindy hop roots , and there are no aerials . push and whip are texas forms of swing dance developed in the 1940s and 1950s . they are slotted swing dances , danced to a wide variety of music including blues , pop , jazz , and rock and roll . similar to west coast swing , they emphasize the closed position , double resistance/rock step , and lead-follow and also incorporate intricate arm work . slow whip is a variation on whip/push that is danced to slow blues music , typically 60 & nbsp ; bpm or slower . swing dancing today . swing dancing was most popular in the 1930s and 1940s , but it still continues today . dance moves have evolved with the music . swing dancing styles are the foundation of many other dance styles including disco , country line dancing , and hip hop . swing dancing clubs and contests are still held around the world . . competition , social dancing and music . competition . traditionally , distinctions are made between '' ballroom swing '' and '' jazz dance swing '' styles . east coast swing is a standardized dance in '' american style '' ballroom dancing , while jive is a standardized dance in '' international style '' ; however both of these fall under the '' ballroom swing '' umbrella . jazz dance forms ( evolved in dance halls ) versus ballroom forms ( created for ballroom competition format ) are different in appearance . jazz dance forms include lindy hop , balboa , collegiate shag , and charleston . types of competition . dance competitions specify which forms are to be judged , and are generally available in four different formats : strictly : one couple competing together in various heats , to randomly selected music , where no pre-choreographed steps are allowed . jack and jill : where leaders and followers are randomly matched for the competition . in initial rounds , leaders and followers usually compete individually , but in final rounds , scoring depends on the ability of the partner you draw and your ability to work with that partner . some competitions hold a jill-and-jack division where leaders must be women and followers must be men . showcase : one couple competing together for a single song which has been previously choreographed . classic : similar to showcase but with restrictions on lifts , drops , moves where one partner supports the weight of the other partner , and moves where the partners are not in physical contact . levels . in west coast swing the competitions are divided into sections by level of experience . the levels are newcomer , novice , intermediate , advanced and all-star . there is no official system in the united states to ensure that couples dance at the appropriate level of experience . the world swing dance council holds a registry of all points attained at different levels of competition , wsdc points registry rules - world swing dance council , march 2019 . however not all competitions qualify as '' registry points events '' . there is no points system for the majority of lindy hop competitions . '' competition rules . '' - swing dance america . accessed april 10 , 2015 . . judging criteria . swing dancing falls under the american rhythm category . there are several different categories at competitions depending on what type of dance you do . '' dancesport - competition guides - for the competitor - usadance.org . '' dancesport - competition guides - for the competitor - usadance.org . accessed april 10 , 2015 . each form of swing dance , and each organization within those forms , will have various rules , but those most often used are pulled and adapted from ballroom usage . judging for competition is based on the three '' t 's '' ( below ) as well as showmanship ( unless the contest in question designates the audience as the deciding factor ) . the three '' t 's '' consist of : timing - related to tempo & rhythm of the music . teamwork - how well a leader and follower dance together and lead/follow dance variations . technique - how cleanly and precisely the cooperative dancing is executed . showmanship consists of presentation , creativity , costumes , and difficulty . lindy hop 's most prestigious events have never used these criteria , usually having the simple judging value as who was the best/most-impressive lindy hop couple . the harvest moon ball competition in new york city , the american vernacular jazz institute 's hellzapoppin ' competition , and the ultimate lindy hop showdown all fall into this category . heats . most competition dance floors can only hold about 12 couples dancing at a time . if the number of participants is larger than what the floor can hold , the competition will hold qualifying rounds . once they get to 24 couples there will then be the quarterfinal round ( 2 separate rounds of about 12 each ) , then the semifinal ( 1 round of about 12 ) , and finally the final round ( 1 round , usually 6 or 7 couples ) . . team formations . additionally a '' team formation '' division may also be specified at a competition . under this category , a minimum of 3 to 5 couples ( depending on individual competition rules ) perform a pre-choreographed routine to a song of their choosing , where the group dances in synchronization and into different formations . this division is also judged using the three '' t 's '' and showmanship ; however the criteria now apply to the team as a whole . social swing dancing . many , if not most , of the swing dances listed above are popular as social dances , with vibrant local communities that hold dances with djs and live bands that play music most appropriate for the preferred dance style . there are frequently active local clubs and associations , classes with independent or studio-/school-affiliated teachers and workshops with visiting or local teachers . most of these dance styles — as with many other styles — also feature special events , such as camps or lindy exchanges . music . the historical development of particular swing dance styles was often in response to trends in popular music . for example , 1920s and solo charleston was – and is – usually danced to ragtime music or traditional jazz , lindy hop was danced to swing music ( a kind of swinging jazz ) , and lindy charleston to either traditional or swing jazz . west coast swing is usually danced to pop , r & b , blues , or funk . western swing and push/whip are usually danced to country and western or blues music . there are local variations on these musical associations in each dance scene , often informed by local djs , dance teachers and bands . modern swing dance bands active in the u.s . during the 1990s and 2000s include many contemporary jazz big bands , swing revival bands with a national presence such as lavay smith and her red hot skillet lickers ( based in san francisco ) , and local/regional jazz bands that specialize in 1930s-1940s swing/lindy dance music , such as the swingout big band , white heat swing orchestra , and beantown swing orchestra ( boston ) , the boilermaker jazz band ( pittsburgh ) , the tony balluff ( minneapolis ) , gordon webster septet ( new york ) , jonathan stout and his campus five ( los angeles ) and the jonathan stout orchestra featuring hilary alexander ( los angeles ) , the flat cats ( chicago ) , glenn crytzer and his syncopators ( seattle ) , the solomon douglas swingtet ( seattle ) , the gina knight orchestra ( chicago and joliet , il ) , the solomon douglas swingtet and the tom cunningham orchestra ( washington , d.c . ) , sonoran swing ( arizona ) , and the bill elliott swing orchestra ( los angeles ) .