Olive Oyl

fictional character biography . in the strip as written by segar , olive was something of a coy flapper whose extremely thin build lent itself well to the fashions of the time ; her long black hair was usually rolled in a neat bun , like her mother 's . she is the youngest sibling of castor oyl and crude oyl . she was the more-or-less fiancée of harold hamgravy , a '' lounge lizard '' or slacker type who did as little work as possible and was always borrowing money . his attraction to other women—particularly if they were rich—naturally incensed olive , and she once succumbed to a fit of '' lunaphobia '' ( a kind of angry madness ) over one of his amours . ( when she recovered , she continued to pretend to have the disorder to win him back . ) she was not immune to flattery from other men , but remained committed to ham until popeye 's appearance . olive and popeye actually hated each other when they first met ( her first words to him were '' take your hooks offa me or i 'll lay ya in a scupper '' ) ; they fought bitterly—and hilariously—for weeks until finally realizing that they had feelings for each other . the version of olive oyl most widely familiar is the version from the theatrical animated cartoons created by fleischer studios and continued by famous studios . unlike most modern damsel in distress , olive oyl is tall and skinny , with tightly wound hair and enormous feet ( the latter sometimes used to comedic effect ) . popeye 's comment about her measurements is that she is a perfect 57 . 19-19-19 . in the films and later television cartoons , olive oyl is usually popeye 's girlfriend , although she could be extremely fickle , depending on who could woo her the best or had the flashier possessions , and she was prone to become angry with popeye over seemingly minor issues . she constantly gets kidnapped by bluto ( aka brutus ) , who is popeye 's arch-rival for her affections ; when she gets angry with popeye for whatever goes wrong , it 's usually as a result of bluto 's trickery , but popeye always rescues her and wins back her affection in the process . in the cartoons , she helps take care of a baby named swee'pea or she usually asks popeye to take care of him if she 's too busy ; it 's unknown if swee'pea is olive oyl 's biological or adopted son . in the comics , swee'pea is a foundling under popeye 's care . later sources ( mostly in the cartoon series ) say that swee'pea is olive oyl 's cousin or nephew that she has to take care of from time to time . like popeye , there are times where olive gains superhuman strength from eating spinach . history . olive oyl is named after olive oil , used commonly in cooking or in salads . segar 's newspaper strips also featured a number of her relatives named after other oils , including her brother , castor oyl , their mother , nana oyl ( after '' banana oil '' , a mild slang phrase of the time used in the same way as '' horsefeathers '' , i.e . '' nonsense '' ) , their father , coal oil , and castor 's estranged wife , cylinda oyl ; more recently , olive 's nieces diesel oyl and violet oyl have appeared in the cartoons . also among olive 's family are her two uncles , motor oil and intrepid explorer lubricant . lubry kent 's gift to castor and olive , a lucky whiffle hen , led them into the adventure where they met popeye . when bobby london took over the strip from 1986 to 1992 , he added the sultry blonde sutra oyl , olive 's cousin , and standard oil , a distant relative who was an extremely wealthy corporate magnate . the first two popeye cartoons , popeye the sailor ( 1933 ) and i yam what i yam ( 1933 ) , featured bonnie poe as the voice of olive oyl . she was thereafter voiced by character actor mae questel ( who also voiced betty boop and other characters ) . questel styled olive 's voice and delivery after those of actress zasu pitts . in 1938 , margie hines took over as the voice of olive oyl , starting with the cartoon bulldozing the bull . questel returned as her voice in 1944 , starting with the cartoon the anvil chorus girl . questel would remain so until after the king features syndicate made-for-tv popeye shorts in 1960 . marilyn schreffler became the new voice of olive when hanna-barbera obtained the rights to produce made-for-television popeye cartoons for the all-new popeye hour in 1978 . questel auditioned to reprise her role , but was rejected in favor of schreffler . despite being officially replaced by schreffler , questel later returned to voice olive oyl for a 1983 commercial promoting the popeye video game . taylor , james d . ( 2016 ) . the voice of betty boop , mae questel . alford publishing . p.135-136 . retrieved 18 december 2018 . in the 1980 musical live-action feature film popeye , olive is portrayed by shelley duvall opposite co-star robin williams as her lover popeye . . appearance . in her famous studios version , olive oyl is given more hair , smaller feet , wider eyes , more feminine face , a tomboyish streak and a slightly less silly personality . she had black hair with a red bow . she wears a red shirt with short sleeves , black skirt with a red line on the bottom and brown tall flat boots . olive oyl is foolish , full of energy , enthusiasm , and the joy of living . personality . olive oyl is absent-minded , short-tempered , foolish , shallow , inattentive , fickle , demanding and selfish . she is usually depicted as a stereotypical '' damsel-in-distress '' character and often blames others for her own mistakes . she frequently says '' oh , dear ! '' in a way that resembles film actress zasu pitts . other media . in 1936 , olive oyl appeared in fleischer studios ' first three-strip technicolor short somewhere in dreamland as the poverty-stricken mother of two barefooted waifs . in the 1980 popeye ( 1980 film ) directed by robert altman , olive oyl is played by actress shelley duvall . shelley duvall has mentioned that she was teased in school as olive oyl because of her physical resemblance to the character . olive oyl made a non-speaking cameo in the harvey birdman , attorney at law episode '' droopy botox '' . in 1997 , olive oyl appeared in the video game popeye and the quest for the woolly mammoth , voiced by cheryl chase . in 1998 , olive oyl appeared in the video game popeye and the sunken treasure , voiced again by cheryl chase . in 2006 , king features produced both a radio spot and industrial for the united states power squadrons featuring robyn gryphe as olive and allen enlow as popeye . olive oyl ( along with bluto and popeye ) was going to have a cameo in who framed roger rabbit , but the rights to the characters could not be obtained . in 2002 , olive oyl appeared in the video game slots from bally gaming , voiced by lani minella . in july 2007 , a live-animation tv commercial starring olive oyl aired as part of an advertising campaign for campbell soup company 's prego sauces . olive ’ s ad is one in a series of five different ads for prego , which features spice girl emma bunton ( '' baby spice '' ) , olympic silver medalist lea ann parsley , an average american couple named rosemary and herb and an englishman named basil . in each 15-second commercial , the '' flavorful '' characters wonder aloud about what spice to add to their simmering pot of sauce . olive oyl appeared in the robot chicken episodes '' the sack '' and '' squaw bury shortcake '' , voiced by kelly hu . lil wayne mentions olive oyl in the song '' i 'm on one '' . in the walking dead , daryl dixon calls lori grimes '' olive oyl '' . in the comic strip bizarro , the image of olive oyl ( or occasionally the abbreviation '' o2 '' ) began appearing as one of the hidden symbols in the artwork in may 2017 . parodies . in mad magazine 21 ( 1951 ) , a parody of olive called '' mazola oil '' appeared in poopeye . mazola supplies poopeye with various spinach recipes to help poopeye defeat other comic strip characters such as '' mammy jokeum '' ( a parody of '' mammy yokum '' from li ' l abner ) , '' melvin of the apes '' ( a parody of tarzan ) and '' superduperman '' ( a parody of superman ) . the story was reprinted in the paperback mad strikes back ( 1962 ) , which was later reprinted in a 50th anniversary edition ( ibooks , inc . , new york , . references . external links . popeye the home of popeye the sailor man