Plastid

in land plants . right in embryophyte , plastids that contain chlorophyll can carry out photosynthesis and are called chloroplasts . plastids can also store products like starch and can synthesize fatty acids and terpenes , which can be used for producing energy and as raw material for the synthesis of other molecules . for example , the components of the plant cuticle and its epicuticular wax are synthesized by the epidermal cells from palmitic acid , which is synthesized in the chloroplasts of the mesophyll tissue . kolattukudy , p.e . ( 1996 ) '' biosynthetic pathways of cutin and waxes , and their sensitivity to environmental stresses '' , pp . 83–108 in : plant cuticles . g . kerstiens ( ed . ) , bios scientific publishers ltd . , oxford all plastids are derived from proplastids , which are present in the meristematic regions of the plant . proplastids and young chloroplasts commonly divide by binary fission , but more mature chloroplasts also have this capacity . plant proplastids ( undifferentiated plastids ) may differentiate into several forms , depending upon which function they perform in the cell . they may develop into any of the following variants : chloroplasts : typically green plastids used for photosynthesis . etioplasts are the precursors of chloroplasts chromoplasts : coloured plastids for pigment synthesis and storage gerontoplasts : control the dismantling of the photosynthetic apparatus during plant senescence leucoplasts : colourless plastids for terpene synthesis ; leucoplasts sometimes differentiate into more specialized plastids : amyloplasts : for starch storage and detecting gravity ( for geotropism ) elaioplasts : for storing fat proteinoplasts : for storing and modifying protein tannosomes : for synthesizing and producing tannins and polyphenols depending on their morphology and function , plastids have the ability to differentiate , or redifferentiate , between these and other forms . each plastid creates multiple copies of a circular 10–250 kilobase plastome . the number of genome copies per plastid is variable , ranging from more than 1000 in rapidly cell division , which , in general , contain few plastids , to 100 or fewer in mature cells , where plastid divisions have given rise to a large number of plastids . the plastome contains about 100 genes encoding ribosomal and transfer ribonucleic acids ( rrnas and trnas ) as well as proteins involved in photosynthesis and plastid gene transcription and translation . however , these proteins only represent a small fraction of the total protein set-up necessary to build and maintain the structure and function of a particular type of plastid . plant nuclear genes encode the vast majority of plastid proteins , and the expression of plastid genes and nuclear genes is tightly co-regulated to coordinate proper development of plastids in relation to cell differentiation . plastid dna exists as large protein-dna complexes associated with the inner envelope membrane and called 'plastid nucleoids ' . each nucleoid particle may contain more than 10 copies of the plastid dna . the proplastid contains a single nucleoid located in the centre of the plastid . the developing plastid has many nucleoids , localized at the periphery of the plastid , bound to the inner envelope membrane . during the development of proplastids to chloroplasts , and when plastids convert from one type to another , nucleoids change in morphology , size and location within the organelle . the remodelling of nucleoids is believed to occur by modifications to the composition and abundance of nucleoid proteins . many plastids , particularly those responsible for photosynthesis , possess numerous internal membrane layers . in plant cells , long thin protuberances called stromules sometimes form and extend from the main plastid body into the cytosol and interconnect several plastids . proteins , and presumably smaller molecules , can move within stromules . most cultured cells that are relatively large compared to other plant cells have very long and abundant stromules that extend to the cell periphery . in 2014 , evidence of possible plastid genome loss was found in rafflesia lagascae , a non-photosynthetic parasitic flowering plant , and in polytomella , a genus of non-photosynthetic green algae . extensive searches for plastid genes in both rafflesia and polytomella yielded no results , however the conclusion that their plastomes are entirely missing is still controversial . some scientists argue that plastid genome loss is unlikely since even non-photosynthetic plastids contain genes necessary to complete various biosynthesis , such as heme biosynthesis . . in algae and protists . plastid types in algae and protists include : chloroplasts : found in the green algae and other organisms . muroplasts : also known as cyanoplasts or cyanelles , the chloroplasts of glaucophyte algae are similar to plant chloroplasts , except that they have a peptidoglycan cell wall that is similar to that of prokaryote . rhodoplasts : the red chloroplasts found in red algae , that allow them to photosynthesize to a depth of up to 268 m . the chloroplasts of plants differ from the rhodoplasts in their ability to synthesize starch , which is stored in the form of granules within the plastids . in red algae , floridean starch is synthesized and stored outside the plastids in the cytosol . secondary and tertiary chloroplasts : from endosymbiosis of green algae and red algae . leucoplast : in algae , the term is used for all unpigmented plastids . their function differs from the leucoplasts of plants . apicoplast : the non-photosynthetic plastids of apicomplexa derived from secondary endosymbiosis . the plastid of photosynthetic paulinella species is often referred to as the 'cyanelle ' or chromatophore , and is used in photosynthesis ; it had a much more recent endosymbiotic event about 90–140 million years ago , and is the only other known primary endosymbiosis event of cyanobacteria . etioplasts , amyloplasts and chromoplasts are plant-specific and do not occur in algae . plastids in algae and hornworts may also differ from plant plastids in that they contain pyrenoids . inheritance . most plants inherit the plastids from only one parent . in general , angiosperms inherit plastids from the female gamete , whereas many gymnosperms inherit plastids from the male pollen . algae also inherit plastids from only one parent . the plastid dna of the other parent is , thus , completely lost . in normal intraspecific crossings ( resulting in normal hybrids of one species ) , the inheritance of plastid dna appears to be quite strictly 100 % uniparental . in interspecific hybridisations , however , the inheritance of plastids appears to be more erratic . although plastids inherit mainly maternally in interspecific hybridisations , there are many reports of hybrids of flowering plants that contain plastids of the father . approximately 20 % of angiosperms , including alfalfa ( medicago sativa ) , normally show biparental inheritance of plastids . . dna damage and repair . plastid dna of maize seedlings is subject to increased damage as the seedlings develop . the dna is damaged in oxidative environments created by photo-oxidative reactions and photosynthesis/electron transport chain . some dna molecules are repaired while dna with unrepaired damage appears to be degraded to non-functional fragments . dna repair proteins are encoded by the cell 's nuclear genome but can be translocated to plastids where they maintain genome stability/integrity by repairing the plastid 's dna . as an example , in chloroplasts of the moss physcomitrella patens , a protein employed in dna mismatch repair ( msh1 ) interacts with proteins employed in recombinational repair ( reca and recg ) to maintain plastid genome stability . . origin . plastids are thought to be endosymbiosis cyanobacteria . the primary endosymbiotic event of the archaeplastida is hypothesized to have occurred around 1.5 billion years ago and enabled eukaryotes to carry out oxygenic photosynthesis . three evolutionary lineages in the archaeplastida have since emerged in which the plastids are named differently : chloroplasts in green algae and plants , rhodoplasts in red algae , and muroplasts in the glaucophytes . the plastids differ both in their pigmentation and in their ultrastructure . for example , chloroplasts in plants and green algae have lost all phycobilisomes , the light harvesting complexes found in cyanobacteria , red algae and glaucophytes , but instead contain stroma and grana thylakoids . the glaucocystophycean plastid—in contrast to chloroplasts and rhodoplasts—is still surrounded by the remains of the cyanobacterial cell wall . all these primary plastids are surrounded by two membranes . the plastid of photosynthetic paulinella species is often referred to as the 'cyanelle ' or chromatophore , and had a much more recent endosymbiotic event about 90–140 million years ago ; it is the only known primary endosymbiosis event of cyanobacteria outside of the archaeplastida . the plastid was a sister to the '' ps-clade '' ( of the cyanobacteria genera prochlorococcus and synechococcus ) , which is a different sister clade to the plastids belonging to the archaeplastida . in contrast to primary plastids derived from primary endosymbiosis of a prokaryoctyic cyanobacteria , complex plastids originated by secondary endosymbiosis in which a eukaryotic organism engulfed another eukaryotic organism that contained a primary plastid . when a eukaryote engulfs a red or a green alga and retains the algal plastid , that plastid is typically surrounded by more than two membranes . in some cases these plastids may be reduced in their metabolic and/or photosynthetic capacity . algae with complex plastids derived by secondary endosymbiosis of a red alga include the heterokonts , haptophytes , cryptomonads , and most dinoflagellates ( rhodoplasts ) . those that endosymbiosed a green alga include the euglenids and chlorarachniophytes ( chloroplasts ) . the apicomplexa , a phylum of obligate parasitic protozoa including the causative agents of malaria ( plasmodium spp . ) , toxoplasmosis ( toxoplasma gondii ) , and many other human or animal diseases also harbor a complex plastid ( although this organelle has been lost in some apicomplexans , such as cryptosporidium parvum , which causes cryptosporidiosis ) . the 'apicoplast ' is no longer capable of photosynthesis , but is an essential organelle , and a promising target for antiparasitic drug development . some dinoflagellates and sea slugs , in particular of the genus elysia , take up algae as food and keep the plastid of the digested alga to profit from the photosynthesis ; after a while , the plastids are also digested . this process is known as kleptoplasty , from the greek , kleptes , thief . plastid development cycle . in 1977 j.m whatley proposed a plastid development cycle which said that plastid development is not always unidirectional but is a cyclic process several times . the proplatids are precursor of the more differentiated forms of plastids as shown in the diagram depicted .