Idolatry

etymology and nomenclature . the word idolatry comes from the greek word eidololatria ( εἰδωλολατρία ) which itself is a compound of two words : eidolon ( εἴδωλον '' image '' ) and latreia ( λατρεία '' worship '' , related to λάτρις ) . the word eidololatria thus means '' worship of idols '' , which in latin appears first as idololatria , then in vulgar latin as idolatria , therefrom it appears in 12th century old french as idolatrie , which for the first time in mid 13th century english appears as '' idolatry '' . douglas harper ( 2015 ) , etymology dictionary , idolatry although the greek appears to be a calque of the hebrew phrase avodat elilim , which is attested in rabbinic literature ( e.g . , bchul . , 13b , bar . ) , the greek term itself is not found in the septuagint , philo , josephus , or in other hellenistic jewish writings . the original term used in early rabbinic writings is oved avodah zarah ( aaz , worship of avoda zara , or '' pagan '' ) , while avodat kochavim umazalot ( akum , worship of planets and constellations ) is not found in its early manuscripts . the later jews used the term , avodh zereh , meaning '' strange worship '' . idolatry has also been called idolism , idolism , merriam webster ; iconolatry iconolatry , merriam webster ; or idolodulia in historic literature . ; see john calvin ( 1537 ) the institutes of the christian religion , quote : '' the worship which they pay to their images they cloak with the name of εἰδωλοδυλεία ( idolodulia ) , and deny to be εἰδωλολατϱεία ( idolatria ) . so they speak , holding that the worship which they call dulia may , without insult to god , be paid to statues and pictures . ( . ) for the greek word λατϱεύειν having no other meaning than to worship , what they say is just the same as if they were to confess that they worship their images without worshipping them . they can not object that i am quibbling upon words . ( . ) but how eloquent soever they may be , they will never prove by their eloquence that one and the same thing makes two . let them show how the things differ if they would be thought different from ancient idolaters . '' . prehistoric and ancient civilizations . the earliest so-called venus figurines have been dated to the prehistoric upper paleolithic era ( 35–40 ka onwards ) . archaeological evidence from the islands of the aegean sea have yielded neolithic era cycladic figures from 4th and 3rd millennium bc , idols in namaste posture from indus valley civilization sites from the 3rd millennium bc , and much older petroglyphs around the world show humans began producing sophisticated images . national museum , seated male in namaskar pose , new delhi , government of india ; s kalyanaraman ( 2007 ) , indus script cipher : hieroglyphs of indian linguistic area , motilal banarsidass , , pages 234–236 however , because of a lack of historic texts describing these , it is unclear what , if any connection with religious beliefs , these figures had , or whether they had other meaning and uses , even as toys . s . diamant ( 1974 ) , a prehistoric figurine from mycenae , the annual of the british school at athens , vol . 69 ( 1974 ) , pages 103–107 jürgen thimme ( 1965 ) , die religiöse bedeutung der kykladenidole , antike kunst , 8 . jahrg . , h . 2 . ( 1965 ) , pages 72–86 ( in german ) the earliest historic records confirming cult images are from the ancient egyptian civilization , thereafter related to the greek civilization . by the 2nd millennium bc two broad forms of cult image appear , in one images are zoomorphic ( god in the image of animal or animal-human fusion ) and in another anthropomorphic ( god in the image of man ) . the former is more commonly found in ancient egypt influenced beliefs , while the anthropomorphic images are more commonly found in indo-european cultures . symbols of nature , useful animals or feared animals may also be included by both . the stele from 4,000 to 2,500 bc period discovered in france , ireland through ukraine , and in central asia through south asia , suggest that the ancient anthropomorphic figures included zoomorphic motifs . in nordic and indian subcontinent , bovine ( cow , ox , - gwdus , - g'ou ) motifs or statues , for example , were common . in ireland , iconic images included pigs . the ancient egyptian religion was polytheistic , with large cult images that were either animals or included animal parts . ancient greek civilization preferred human forms , with idealized proportions , for divine representation . the canaanites of west asia incorporated a golden calf in their pantheon . the ancient philosophy and practices of the greeks , thereafter romans , were imbued with polytheistic idolatry . they debate what is an image and if the use of image is appropriate . to plato , images can be a remedy or poison to the human experience . to aristotle , states paul kugler , an image is an appropriate mental intermediary that '' bridges between the inner world of the mind and the outer world of material reality '' , the image is a vehicle between sensation and reason . idols are useful psychological catalysts , they reflect sense data and pre-existing inner feelings . they are neither the origins nor the destinations of thought but the intermediary in the human inner journey . fervid opposition to the idolatry of the greeks and romans was of early christianity and later islam , as evidenced by the widespread desecration and defacement of ancient greek and roman sculptures that have survived into the modern era . . abrahamic religions . judaism . permitted . many jewish scholars such as rabbi saadia gaon , rabbi bahya ibn paquda , and rabbi yehuda halevi have elaborated on the issues of idolatry . one of the oft-cited discussions is the commentary of rabbi moshe ben maimon ( maimonides ) on idolatry . according to the maimonidean interpretation , idolatry in itself is not a fundamental sin , but the grave sin is the belief that god can be corporeal . in the jewish belief , the only image of god is man , one who lives and thinks ; god has no visible shape , and it is absurd to make or worship images ; instead man must worship the invisible god alone . the commandments in the hebrew bible against idolatry forbade the practices and gods of ancient akkad , mesopotamia , and egypt . the tanakh states that god has no shape or form , is utterly incomparable , is everywhere and can not be represented in a physical form of an idol . biblical scholars have historically focused on the textual evidence to construct the history of idolatry in judaism , a scholarship that post-modern scholars have increasingly begun deconstructing . this biblical polemics , states naomi janowitz , a professor of religious studies , has distorted the reality of israelite religious practices and the historic use of images in judaism . the direct material evidence is more reliable , such as that from the archaeological sites , and this suggests that the jewish religious practices have been far more complex than what biblical polemics suggest . judaism included images and cultic statues in the first temple period , the second temple period , late antiquity ( 2nd to 8th century ce ) , and thereafter . nonetheless , these sorts of evidence may be simply descriptive of ancient israelite practices in some—possibly deviant—circles , but can not tell us anything about the mainstream religion of the bible which proscribes idolatry . the history of jewish religious practice has included cult images and figurines made of ivory , terracotta , faience and seals . allen shapiro ( 2011 ) , judean pillar figurines : a study , ma thesis , advisor : barry gittlen , towson university , united states as more material evidence emerged , one proposal has been that judaism oscillated between idolatry and iconoclasm . however , the dating of the objects and texts suggest that the two theologies and liturgical practices existed simultaneously . the claimed rejection of idolatry because of monotheism found in jewish literature and therefrom in biblical christian literature , states janowitz , has been unreal abstraction and flawed construction of the actual history . the material evidence of images , statues and figurines taken together with the textual description of cherub and '' wine standing for blood '' , for example , suggests that symbolism , making religious images , icon and index has been integral part of judaism . every religion has some objects that represent the divine and stand for something in the mind of the faithful , and judaism too has had its holy objects and symbols such as the menorah . . christianity . . guru granth sahib is ritually installed every morning , and put to bed at night in many gurdwaras . william owen cole and piara singh sambhi ( 1995 ) , the sikhs : their religious beliefs and practices , sussex academic press , , page 44 torkel brekke ( 2014 ) , religion , war , and ethics : a sourcebook of textual traditions ( editors : gregory m . reichberg and henrik syse ) , cambridge university press , , page 675 . traditional religions . africa . africa has numerous ethnic groups , and their diverse religious idea have been grouped as african traditional religions , sometimes abbreviated to atr . these religions typically believe in a supreme being which goes by different regional names , as well as spirit world often linked to ancestors , and mystical magical powers through divination . idols and their worship have been associated with all three components in the african traditional religions . according to j.o . awolalu , proselytizing christians and muslims have mislabelled idol to mean false god , when in the reality of most traditions of africa , the object may be a piece of wood or iron or stone , yet it is '' symbolic , an emblem and implies the spiritual idea which is worshipped '' . j . o . awolalu ( 1976 ) , what is african traditional religion ? , studies in comparative religion , vol . 10 , no . 2 , pages 8 , 1–10 the material objects may decay or get destroyed , the emblem may crumble or substituted , but the spiritual idea that it represents to the heart and mind of an african traditionalist remains unchanged . sylvester johnson – a professor of african american and religious studies , concurs with awolalu , and states that the colonial era missionaries who arrived in africa , neither understood the regional languages nor the african theology , and interpreted the images and ritualism as '' epitome of idolatry '' , projecting the iconoclastic controversies in europe they grew up with , onto africa . first with the arrival of islam in africa , then during the christian colonial efforts , the religiously justified wars , the colonial portrayal of idolatry as proof of savagery , the destruction of idols and the seizure of idolaters as slaves marked a long period of religious intolerance , which supported religious violence and demeaning caricature of the african traditional religionists . the violence against idolaters and idolatry of traditional religion practicers of africa started in the medieval era and continued into the modern era . the charge of idolatry by proselytizers , state michael wayne cole and rebecca zorach , served to demonize and dehumanize local african populations , and justify their enslavement and abuse locally or far off plantations , settlements or for forced domestic labor . , quote : '' by negating african religious practices , the pejorative characterizations of these works as objects of idolatry served in vital ways to both demonize and dehumanize local populations , thereby providing a moral buttress for european religious and human trade practices on the continent '' . . americas . statues , images and temples have been a part of the traditional religions of the indigenous people of the americas . the incan , mayan and aztec civilizations developed sophisticated religious practices that incorporated idols and religious arts . the inca empire , for example , has believed in viracocha ( also called pachacutec ) as the creator deity and nature deities such as inti ( sun deity ) , and mama cocha the goddess of the sea , lakes , rivers and waters . in mayan culture , kukulkan has been the supreme creator deity , also revered as the god of reincarnation , water , fertility and wind . the mayan people built step pyramid temples to honor kukulkan , aligning them to the sun 's position on the spring equinox . other deities found at mayan archaeological sites include xib chac – the benevolent male rain deity , and ixchel – the benevolent female earth , weaving and pregnancy goddess . a deity with aspects similar to kulkulkan in the aztec culture has been called quetzalcoatl . missionaries came to the americas with the start of spanish colonial era , and the catholic church did not tolerate any form of native idolatry , preferring that the icons and images of jesus and mary replace the native idols . aztec , for example , had a written history which included those about their traditional religion , but the spanish colonialists destroyed this written history in their zeal to end what they considered as idolatry , and to convert the aztecs to catholicism . the aztec indians , however , preserved their religion and religious practices by burying their idols under the crosses , and then continuing their idol worship rituals and practices , aided by the syncretic composite of atrial crosses and their idols as before . during and after the imposition of catholic christianity during spanish empire , the incan people retained their original beliefs in deities through syncretism , where they overlay the christian god and teachings over their original beliefs and practices . the male deity inti became accepted as the christian god , but the andean rituals centered around idolatry of incan deities have been retained and continued thereafter into the modern era by the incan people . . polynesia . the polynesians have had a range of polytheistic theologies found across the pacific ocean . the polynesian people produced idols from wood , and congregated around these idols for worship . the christian missionaries , particularly from the london missionary society such as john williams , and others such as the methodist missionary society , characterized these as idolatry , in the sense of islanders worshipping false gods . they sent back reports which primarily focussed on '' overthrow of pagan idolatry '' as evidence of their christian sects triumph , with fewer mentions of actual converts and baptism . . false god or intolerance . yehezkel kaufman ( 1960 ) states that the biblical prohibition of idolatry relates to the belief where the idols are considered gods . he adds that it is erroneous to assume that all idolatry was of this type , when in some cases , idols may have only been representations of gods . he cites a passage from 1 kings 18:27 , the hebrew prophet elijah challenges the priests of baal atop of mount carmel to persuade their god to perform a miracle . the pagan priests beseeched their god without the use of an idol , which is evidence that baal was not an idol , but rather one of the polytheistic gods that merely could be worshipped with or without the use of an idol . the accusations and presumption that all idols and images are devoid of symbolism , or that icons of one 's own religion are '' true , healthy , uplifting , beautiful symbolism , mark of devotion , divine '' , while of other person 's religion are '' false , an illness , superstitious , grotesque madness , evil addiction , satanic and cause of all incivility '' is more a matter of subjective personal interpretation , rather than objective impersonal truth . allegations that idols only represent false gods , followed by violence and iconoclastic destruction , state regina schwartz and other scholars , is little more than religious intolerance . the philosopher david hume in his dialogue on religion , wrote that pagan idolatry is premised on pluralism , tolerance and acceptance of diverse representations of the divine , while monotheism has been intolerant , attempted to destroy freedom of expression and has violently forced others to accept and worship their singular view of the divine . . gallery . see also . bibliolatry buddhist devotion – prayer ritual in buddhism dambana deity el tío fetishism perceptions of religious imagery in natural phenomena puja ( hinduism ) – prayer ritual in hinduism . notes . references . further reading . swagato ganguly ( 2017 ) . idolatry and the colonial idea of india : visions of horror , allegories of enlightenment . routledge . reuven chaim klein ( 2018 ) . god versus gods : judaism in the age of idolatry . mosaica press . yechezkel kaufmann ( 1960 ) . the religion of israel : from its beginnings to the babylonin exile . univ . of chicago press . . external links . idolatry and iconoclasm , tufts university iconoclasm and idolatry , columbia university