Caltrop

name . the modern name '' caltrop '' is derived from the latin ( foot-trap ) , such as in the french usage . the synonymous latin word provides part of the modern scientific name of a plant commonly called the caltrop , tribulus terrestris , whose spiked seed case can injure feet and puncture tires . this plant can also be compared to centaurea calcitrapa , which is also sometimes referred to as the '' caltrop '' . a water plant with similarly-shaped spiked seeds is called the '' water caltrop '' , trapa natans . history . caltrops were known to the romans as or sometimes as , the latter meaning '' jagged iron '' ( literally '' iron jagged thing '' ) . in ancient greek the word '' tribolos '' meant three spikes . they were also used in the battle of carrhae in 53 bc . the late roman writer vegetius , referring in his work de re militari to scythed chariots , wrote : another example of the use of caltrops was found in jamestown , virginia , in the united states : american heritage . , march 1963 . the japanese version of the caltrop is called '' makibishi '' . makibishi were sharp spiked objects that were used in feudal japan to slow pursuers and also were used in the defence of samurai fortifications . iron makibishi were called '' tetsubishi '' , while the makibishi made from the dried seed pod of the water caltrop , or water chestnut ( genus trapa ) , formed a natural type of makibashi called '' tennenbishi '' . both types of makibishi could penetrate the thin soles of shoes , such as the waraji sandals , which were commonly worn in feudal japan . samurai , warfare and the state in early medieval japan , karl f . friday , psychology press , 2004 p . 119 . . similar devices . punji sticks perform a similar role to caltrops . these are sharpened sticks placed vertically in the ground . their use in modern times targets the body and limbs of a falling victim by means of a pit or tripwire . during the second world war , large caltrop-shaped objects made from reinforced concrete were used as anti-tank devices , although it seems that these were rare . much more common were concrete devices called dragon 's teeth , which were designed to wedge into tank treads . large ones weighing over are still used defensively by the army to deny access to wheeled vehicles , especially in camp areas . as dragon 's teeth are immobile , the analogy with the caltrop is inexact . another caltrop-like defence during world war ii was the massive steel , freestanding czech hedgehog ; the works were designed as anti-tank obstacles , and could also damage landing craft and warships that came too close to shore . these were used by the germans to defend beaches at normandy and other coastal areas . tetrapods are concrete blocks shaped like caltrops , which interlock when piled up . they are used as riprap in the construction of breakwaters and other sea defences , as they have been found to let the water pass through them and interrupt natural processes less than some other defenses . modern uses . tyre deflation device . researchers have tried to develop a caltrop-like device to deflate vehicle tyres in a manner useful to law enforcement agencies or the military . . world war i . during service in world war i , australian light horse troops collected caltrops as keepsakes . these caltrops were either made by welding two pieces of wire together to form a four-pointed star or pouring molten steel into a mould to form a solid , seven-pointed star . the purpose of these devices was to disable horses . they were exchanged with french troops for bullets . the australian light horse troops referred to them as '' horse chestnuts '' . world war ii . caltrops were used extensively and effectively during world war ii . the modifications and variants produced by the special operations executive ( soe ) and the office of strategic services ( oss ) of the united states are still in use today within special forces and law enforcement bodies . the germans dropped crowsfeet . these were made from two segments of sheet metal welded together into a tetrapod with four barbed points and then painted in camouflage colours . they came in two sizes with a side length of either . they were dropped from aircraft in containers the same size as a 500 & nbsp ; kg bomb and were dispersed by a small explosive charge . they were used to attack airfields and roads with a view to bursting tyres . . labour activists . caltrops have been used at times during labour strikes and other disputes . such devices were used by some to destroy the tyres of management and replacement workers . caltrops , referred to as '' jack rocks '' in news articles , were used during the caterpillar strike of the mid-1990s , puncturing tyres on vehicles crossing the picket line in peoria . because of their small size and the difficulty proving their source , both the company and the united auto workers blamed each other . collateral damage included a school bus and a walking mail carrier . in illinois , the state legislature passed a law making the possession of such devices a misdemeanor . . symbolic use . a caltrop has a variety of symbolic uses and is commonly found as a charge in heraldry . for instance , the finnish noble family fotangel ( swedish for 'caltrop ' ) had arms gules , three caltrops argent . it has also been adopted by military units : the caltrop is the symbol of the us army 's iii corps , which is based at fort hood , texas . iii corps traces its lineage to the days of horse cavalry , which used the caltrop as a defensive area denial weapon . the caltrop is also the symbol of the united states marine corps ' 3rd division , formed on 16 september 1942 . the savannah association annually commemorate '' operation savannah '' a battle from 1975 to 1976 in the south african border war also known as the namibian war of independence . the battle involved a covert intervention by the south african defence force 's ( sadf ) during the interrelated angolan war of independence , subsequent angolan civil war and namibian war of independence . during this battle many south african soldiers earned the honoris crux for bravery against angolan and cuban forces . their insignia was a caltrop . see also . booby trap czech hedgehog knucklebones , a game , with similar hazards makibishi spike strip tribulus terrestris , a plant water caltrop , a plant . footnotes . references . clan drummond , a brief history , at scot clans john l . cotter and j . paul hudson , new discoveries at jamestown , site of the first successful english settlement in america , 1957 project gutenberg ; official documents