Soundies

musical genres . soundies emphasized variety from the very beginning : the first three bandleaders who contracted for soundies were the boogie-woogie specialist will bradley , the established popular music maestro vincent lopez , and the hawaiian singer-leader ray kinney . scott macgillivray and ted okuda , the soundies book : a revised and expanded guide , iuniverse , 2007 ; soundies displayed all genres of music , from classical to big-band swing , and from hillbilly novelties to patriotic songs . jimmy dorsey , louis jordan , spike jones , stan kenton , kay starr , johnnie johnston , les brown , the hoosier hot shots , charlie spivak , martha tilton , sally rand , nick lucas , gene krupa , anita o'day , jimmie dodd , merle travis , and lawrence welk were some of the leading soundies performers . many stars of the future made appearances in soundies at the beginning of their careers , including gale storm , dorothy dandridge , ricardo montalban , liberace , doris day , gloria grahame , cyd charisse , alan ladd , marilyn maxwell and yvonne decarlo . many nightclub and recording artists also made soundies , including harry '' the hipster '' gibson , benny fields , frances faye , gloria parker , charles magnante , milton delugg , and gus van . in the mid-1940s , during a moratorium imposed by james petrillo of the musicians ' union , soundies resorted to filming non-musical vaudeville acts , featuring exotic dancers sally rand and faith bacon , animal acts , acrobats , impressionists , and jugglers . beginning in 1941 , soundies experimented with expanding its format , and filmed comedy soundies with our gang actor carl '' alfalfa '' switzer , broadway comic willie howard , dialect comedians smith and dale , harry langdon , snub pollard and the keystone kops . most of these films were non-musical , and were not as well received as the musical soundies . soundies abandoned the comedy-sketch idea , but continued to produce filmed versions of comic novelty songs . by the time that louis jordan had moved from swing music to jump blues with his new band , tympany five band , in the late 1940s , he was often using soundies as promotional material . caldonia , louis jordan louis jordan and his tympany band : films and soundies more than 1800 soundies mini-musicals were made , many of which have been released on home video . anthony slide , new historical dictionary of the american film industry chicago & london : fitzroy dearborn , 1998 1-57958-056-4 p.191 the soundies films were regularly described and reviewed in the entertainment and music trade publications , such as billboard . success , then readjustment . the soundies were a great success during its first year , making millions of dollars ( in dimes ) . in the days before television , the concept of seeing as well as hearing musical artists was very attractive . however , in late 1941 the federal government restricted the use of rubber and precious metals , prioritizing these resources for military use during wartime . this meant that mills novelty could no longer build and sell panoram machines , and had to confine its activities to keeping the existing projectors supplied with films . soundies became strictly a production company , dedicated to making its own musical shorts . legacy . for today 's filmmakers and archivists , soundies are known for preserving rare performances of african-american artists who had fewer opportunities to perform in mainstream films . artists such as the ink spots , fats waller , duke ellington , louis jordan , sister rosetta tharpe , dorothy dandridge , big joe turner , bob howard , billy eckstine , count basie , the mills brothers , herb jeffries , cab calloway , meade lux lewis , lena horne , louis armstrong , nat king cole , and stepin fetchit all made soundies ( a handful of which were excerpted from longer theatrical films ) . eclipse . the soundies distributing corporation of america remained active until 1947 . with commercial television developing rapidly , the soundies machines and films became obsolete . almost all of the panoram jukeboxes were either junked or modified into self-service '' peepshow '' machines , although the remaining panorams are in the hands of collectors and are occasionally offered for sale . the library of 1,800 soundies films was sold to home-movie companies castle films and official films , then to syndicated television , and ultimately to home video ( via england 's charly records ) . telescriptions and scopitones . the soundies concept was revived in 1951 by producer louis d . snader . radio stations relied on transcriptions -- recorded musical performances . snader brought the idea to television with films , which he called '' snader telescriptions . '' snader hired dozens of pop-music acts and vaudeville performers , many of whom had already appeared in soundies , to star in his new films . snader telescriptions are often confused with soundies because of their similarity in length and personnel . scott macgillivray and ted okuda , the soundies book : a revised and expanded guide , iuniverse , 2007 ; . telescriptions became a haven for bandleaders and singers of the 1940s , including charlie barnet , bob wills , tony pastor , gloria jean , carolina cotton , allan jones , and andy russell . snader telescriptions were widely syndicated and hundreds of film prints survive . in 1958 , the original soundies '' jukebox '' concept was revived by the french company cameca as scopitone . similar to soundies , scopitones are short musical films designed to be played on a specially designed coin-operated jukebox , but with new technical improvements : color and high-fidelity sound . scopitones were printed on color 16mm film with magnetic sound instead of soundies ' optical sound . by the mid-1960s , scopitone jukeboxes had spread across england and the united states . many well-known american and french popular music acts of the 1960s made scopitone films such as the exciters , brigitte bardot , debbie reynolds , vic damone , dalida , herb alpert & the tijuana brass , procol harum , neil sedaka , serge gainsbourg , johnny hallyday , sylvie vartan , brook benton , ray anthony , gale garnett , sacha distel , buddy greco , tommy james & the shondells , della reese , bobby rydell , petula clark , bobby vee , lou christie , the shadows , jody miller , kay starr , dionne warwick , jane morgan , nancy sinatra , françoise hardy , and julie london . the scopitone was popular until the end of the decade . documentaries . three documentaries have been produced about soundies . don mcglynn produced and edited '' the soundies '' in 1986 , hosted by cab calloway ; the film was broadcast nationally on pbs . dewey russell compiled an hourlong , direct-to-video history , '' soundies : music video from the '40s '' in 1987 , narrated by michael sollazzo . chris lamson produced '' soundies : a musical history , '' hosted by michael feinstein , in 2007 for pbs . further reading . scott macgillivray and ted okuda , the soundies book : a revised and expanded guide , iuniverse , 2007 ; . billboard magazine . references . external links .