Edwin H. Land

life and career . edwin land was born jewish in bridgeport , connecticut to matie and harry land , a russian scrap-metal dealer . growing up , he was known to take apart household appliances , such as a mantel clock and the family 's new phonograph , as well as blowing all the house 's fuses when he was six years old . land attended the norwich free academy at norwich , connecticut , a semi-private high school , and graduated in the class of 1927 . the library there was posthumously named for him , having been funded by grants from his family . he studied chemistry at harvard university but left after his freshman year , moving to new york city . there he invented the first inexpensive filters capable of polarizing light , which he called polaroid film . he was not associated with an educational institution and lacked the tools of a proper laboratory , making this a difficult endeavor , so he would sneak into a laboratory at columbia university late at night to use their equipment . he also availed himself of the new york public library to scour the scientific literature for prior work on polarizing substances . his breakthrough came when he realized that , instead of attempting to grow a large single crystal of a polarizing substance , he could manufacture a film with millions of micron-sized polarizing crystals that were coaxed into perfect alignment with each other . land returned to harvard university after developing the polarizing film , but he did not finish his studies or receive a degree . according to biographer peter wensberg , once land could see the solution to a problem in his head , he lost all motivation to write it down or prove his vision to others . often his wife would extract from him the answers to homework problems , at the prodding of his instructor . she would then write up the homework and hand it in so that he could receive credit and not fail the course . polaroid . in 1932 , he established the land-wheelwright laboratories together with his harvard physics instructor , george wheelwright , to commercialize his polarizing technology . wheelwright came from a family of financial means and agreed to fund the company . after a few early successes developing polarizing filters for sunglasses and photographic filters , land obtained funding from a series of wall street investors for further expansion . the company was renamed the polaroid corporation in 1937 . land further developed and produced the sheet polarizers under the polaroid trademark . although the initial major application was for sunglasses and scientific work , it quickly found many additional applications : for color animation in the wurlitzer 850 peacock jukebox of 1942 , for glasses in full-color stereoscopic ( 3-d ) movies , to control brightness of light through a window , a necessary component of all lcds , and many more . during world war ii , he worked on military tasks , which included developing dark-adaptation goggles , target finders , the first passively guided smart bombs , and a special stereoscopic viewing system called the vectograph which revealed camouflaged enemy positions in aerial photography . a little more than three years later , on february 21 , 1947 , land demonstrated an instant camera and associated film to the optical society of america . called the land camera , it was in commercial sale less than two years later . polaroid originally manufactured sixty units of this first camera . fifty-seven were put up for sale at the jordan marsh department store in boston before the 1948 christmas holiday . polaroid marketers incorrectly guessed that the camera and film would remain in stock long enough to manufacture a second run based on customer demand . all fifty-seven cameras and all of the film were sold on the first day of demonstrations . during his time at polaroid , land was notorious for his marathon research sessions . when land conceived of an idea , he would experiment and brainstorm until the problem was solved with no breaks of any kind . he needed to have food brought to him and to be reminded to eat . he once wore the same clothes for eighteen consecutive days while solving problems with the commercial production of polarizing film . as the polaroid company grew , land had teams of assistants working in shifts at his side . as one team wore out , the next team was brought in to continue the work . elkan blout , a close colleague of edwin land at polaroid , wrote : '' what was land like ? knowing him was a unique experience . he was a true visionary ; he saw things differently from other people , which is what led him to the idea of instant photography . he was a brilliant , driven man who did not spare himself and who enjoyed working with equally driven people . '' blout , e.r . , 1996 . '' polaroid : dreams to reality '' in the power of boldness , ed . by e.r . blout , joseph henry press , pp . 60–75 . . contributions to photo intelligence . beginning in the early years of the cold war , land played a major role in the development of photographic reconnaissance and intelligence gathering efforts . projects included the genetrix balloon borne cameras , the u-2 program , corona and samos photographic satellites , and the manned orbiting laboratory . he was a frequent advisor to president dwight d . eisenhower on photographic reconnaissance matters . . later years . in the 1950s , edwin land and his team helped design the optics of the revolutionary lockheed u-2 spy plane . also in this decade , land first discovered a two-color system for projecting the entire spectrum of hues with only two colors of projecting light ( he later found more specifically that one could achieve the same effect using very narrow bands of 579 & nbsp ; nm and 599 & nbsp ; nm light ) . some of this work was later incorporated in his retinex theory of color vision . in 1957 , harvard university awarded him an honorary doctorate , and edwin h . land blvd . , a street in cambridge , massachusetts , was later named in his memory . the street is at one end of memorial drive , in cambridge , where the polaroid company headquarters building was located ( over a mile west on memorial drive from land blvd . ) . polaroid occupied several buildings in various places in cambridge . in the early 1970s , land attempted to explain the previously known phenomenon of color constancy with his retinex theory . his popular demonstrations of color constancy raised much interest in the concept . he considered his leadership towards the development of integral instant color photography — the sx-70 film and camera — to be his crowning achievement . although he led the polaroid corporation as a chief executive , land was a scientist first and foremost , and as such made sure that he performed '' an experiment each day '' . despite the fact that he held no formal degree , employees , friends , and the press respected his scientific accomplishments by calling him dr . land . the only exception was the wall street journal , which refused to use that honorific title throughout his lifetime . land often made technical and management decisions based on what he felt was right as both a scientist and a humanist , much to the chagrin of wall street and his investors . from the beginning of his professional career , he hired women and trained them to be research scientists . following the assassination of martin luther king jr . in 1968 , he led polaroid to the forefront of the affirmative action movement . he had an artistic vision . in his laboratory he built giant studio cameras the size of bedroom closets that produced large format ( 20 x 24 inch ) prints . he gave photographers free access to these cameras in return for some of the prints they produced . this practice was continued by the company ; the result was polaroid_collection . compiled since the 1970s , the collection grew to between 16,000 and 24,000 photos shot by some of the world 's greatest artists and photographers , including ansel adams , chuck close , robert frank and andy warhol . the collection , an asset of the polaroid corporation , remained intact until 2010 when , in controversial circumstances , it was broken up and put up for sale in lots . despite the tremendous success of his instant cameras , land 's unsuccessful polavision instant movie system was a financial disaster , giambarba , paul ( 2004-09-01 ) '' the last hurrah – polavision , 1977 '' , '' the branding of polaroid 1957–1977 '' . retrieved 2006-12-01 and he resigned as chairman of polaroid on july 27 , 1982 . blumstein , michael ( 1982-07-28 ) '' era ends as land leaves polaroid '' , the new york times . retrieved 2008-11-06 . in his retirement years , land founded the rowland institute for science . death . edwin land died on march 1 , 1991 in cambridge , massachusetts , at the age of 81 . land 's family declined to disclose the cause of his death . land himself disliked being written about , wanting to leave behind a legacy of published scientific work , rather than a cult of personality , and so , on his death , land 's family had a laboratory associate shred his personal papers and notes , a task that would take three years to complete . he is buried in mount auburn cemetery in cambridge , massachusetts . . public service . land was : garwin , richard l . , '' edwin h . land : science , and public policy '' , the irish colleges of physicians and surgeons , 1993 a member of the president 's science advisory committee ( psac ) 1957–59 and a consultant-at-large of psac from 1960–1973 . a member of the president 's foreign intelligence advisory board ( pfiab ) 1961–77 . a member of the national commission on technology , automation and economic progress 1964–66 . a member of the carnegie commission on educational television 1966–67 . a trustee of the ford foundation 1967–1975 . honors . 1935 hood medal of the royal photographic society of great britain 1938 elliott cresson medal , franklin institute of philadelphia 1940 national modern pioneer award , national association of manufacturers 1945 rumford medal , american academy of arts and sciences 1948 holley medal , american society of mechanical engineers 1949 duddell medal , physical society of great britain 1956 howard n . potts medal 1963 presidential medal of freedom , the highest award given to a u.s . citizen , for his work in optics . 1965 iri medal from the industrial research institute 1966 michelson–morley award from the case institute of technology 1967 frederic ives medal by the optical society of america . 1967 national medal of science 1967 the cultural award from the german society for photography ( dgph ) , with henri cartier-bresson '' the cultural award of the deutsche gesellschaft für photographie ( dgph ) '' . deutsche gesellschaft für photographie e.v . accessed 7 march 2017 . 1972 founders medal , national academy of engineering 1974 vermilye medal 1977 inducted into the national inventors hall of fame 1988 national medal of technology for '' the invention , development and marketing of instant photography '' . 1991 inducted into the international photography hall of fame and museum although land never received a formal degree , he received honorary degrees from harvard , yale , columbia , carnegie institute of technology , willams college , tufts college , washington university , polytechnic institute of brooklyn , university of massachusetts , brandeis university and many others . he held 535 patents , compared with thomas edison 's 1,097 american patents . land 's development of instant photography was designated a national historic chemical landmark by the american chemical society on august 13 , 2015 . . bibliography . . notes . references . sources . earls , alan r . and rohani , nasrin ( 2005 ) , polaroid arcadia publishing , charleston , s.c . , wensberg , p . c . ( 1987 ) land 's polaroid : a company and the man who invented it houghton mifflin , new york , victor mcelheny ( 1999 ) edwin herbert land : may 7 , 1909 – march 1 , 1991 national academy press , washington , d.c . , . further reading . bonanos , christopher , new york times : '' man who inspired apple 's steve jobs '' , the new york times , october 7 , 2011 mcelheny , victor k . , '' biographical memoirs : edwin herbert land may 7 , 1909 — march 1 , 1991 '' , national academies press '' generation of greatness : the idea of a university in an age of science '' , ninth annual arthur dehon little memorial lecture at the massachusetts institute of technology . may 22 , 1957 . external links . land with self photo patents —apparatus for exposing and processing photographic film