Anglophobia

within the united kingdom . in his essay '' notes on nationalism '' , written in may 1945 and published in the first issue of the intellectual magazine polemic ( october 1945 ) , george orwell wrote that '' welsh , irish and scottish nationalism have points of difference but are alike in their anti-english orientation '' . . scotland . a 2005 study by hussain and millar of the department of politics at the university of glasgow examined the prevalence of anglophobia in relation to islamophobia in scotland . one finding of the report suggested that national '' phobias '' have common roots independent of the nations they are directed towards . the study states that : the study goes on to say ( of the english living in scotland ) : '' few of the english ( only 16 percent ) see conflict between scots and english as even 'fairly serious ' . '' hussain and millar 's study found that anglophobia was slightly less prevalent than islamophobia , but that unlike islamophobia , anglophobia correlated with a strong sense of scottish identity . in 1999 an inspector and race relations officer with lothian and borders police said that a correlation had been noticed between the establishment of the scottish parliament and anti-english incidents . however , hussain and millar 's research suggested that anglophobia had fallen slightly since the introduction of devolution . in 2009 , a woman originally from england was assaulted in an allegedly anti-english racially motivated attack . similar cases have been connected with major football matches and tournaments , particularly international tournaments where the english and scottish football teams often compete with each other . a spate of anti-english attacks occurred in 2006 during the football world cup . in one incident a 7-year-old boy wearing an england shirt was punched in the head in an edinburgh park . . wales . the laws in wales acts 1535 and 1542 , also known as the '' acts of union '' , passed by the parliament of england , annexed wales to the kingdom of england , and replaced the welsh language and welsh law with the english language and english law . in particular , section 20 of the 1535 act made english the only language of the law courts and stated that those who used welsh would not be appointed to any public office in wales . the welsh language was supplanted in many public spheres , with , for example , the use of the welsh not in some schools . this would later be adopted as a symbol of english oppression . since the glyndŵr rising of the early 15th century , welsh nationalism has been primarily nonviolent . kivisto , p . ( 2002 ) . multiculturalism in a global society . oxford . p.129 however , the welsh militant group meibion glyndŵr were responsible for arson attacks on english-owned second homes in wales from 1979–1994 , motivated by cultural anti-english sentiment . meibion glyndŵr also attempted arson against several estate agents in wales and england , and against the offices of the conservative party in london . in 2000 , the chairman of swansea bay race equality council said that '' devolution has brought a definite increase in anti-english behaviour , '' citing three women who believed that they were being discriminated against in their careers because they could not speak welsh . in 2001 dafydd elis-thomas , a former leader of plaid cymru , said that there was an anti-english strand to welsh nationalism . . northern ireland . during the troubles , the ira mainly attacked targets in northern ireland and england , not scotland or wales , although the ira planted a bomb at sullom voe terminal in shetland during a visit by the queen in may 1981 . however , the ancestry of most people in the loyalist and unionist communities is scottish rather than english . in the protestant community , the english are identified with british politicians , and are sometimes resented for their perceived abandonment of loyalist communities . bruce , s . ( 1994 ) . the edge of the union : the ulster loyalist political vision . oxford , oxford univ . press . . outside the united kingdom . in 1859 , in his essay a few words on non-intervention , john stuart mill notes that england '' finds itself , in respect of its foreign policy , held up to obloquy as the type of egoism and selfishness ; as a nation which thinks of nothing but of out-witting and out-generalling its neighbours , '' and urges his fellow countrymen against '' the mania of professing to act from meaner motives than those by which we are really actuated . '' . ireland . there is a long tradition of anglophobia within irish nationalism . much of this was grounded in the hostility felt by the largely catholic irish for the anglo-irish people , which was mainly anglican . in ireland before the great famine , anti-english hostility was deep-seated alvin jackson , ireland 1798-1998 : war , peace and beyond , p.85 and was manifested in increased anti-english hostility organised by united irishmen . robert william white , ruairí ó brádaigh : the life and politics of an irish revolutionary ( 2006 ) , p.1 eugenio r . biagini , british democracy and irish nationalism , 1876-1906 , p.31 . cambridge university press , 2007 in post-famine ireland , anti-english hostility was adopted into the philosophy and foundation of the irish nationalist movement . at the turn of the 20th century , the celtic revival movement associated the search for a cultural and national identity with an increasing anti-colonial and anti-english sentiment . seán farrell moran , patrick pearse and the politics of redemption : the mind of the easter rising , 1916 , p.54 anti-english themes manifested in national organisations seen as promoting native irish values , with the emergence of groups like sinn féin . one popular nationalist slogan was '' england 's difficulty is ireland 's opportunity '' , and the well-known anti-world-war-i song '' who is ireland 's enemy ? '' used past events to conclude that it was england , and furthermore that irish people ought to '' pay those devils back '' . the gaelic athletic association ( gaa ) was founded in 1884 as a countermeasure against the anglo-irish athletic association , which promoted and supervised british sports such as english football in ireland . the gaa was founded in the anti-english ideas of thomas croke , archbishop of cashel and emly . f.s.l lyons , ireland since the famine : an incomparable survey of modern irish history , pp.226–7 from 1886 to 1971 the gaa focused national pride into distinctly non-english activities . marcus tanner , the last of the celts , p.104 . yale university press , 2006 members were forbidden to belong to organisations that played '' english '' games , and the organisation countered the anglicisation in irish society . joseph v . o'brien , dear , dirty dublin : a city in distress , 1899-1916 , p.244 seán farrell moran , patrick pearse and the politics of redemption : the mind of the easter rising , 1916 , p.55 the g.a.a . : a history of the gaelic athletic association , pp.65-66 . dublin : cumann luthchleas geal , 1980 with the development across ireland of irish games and the arts , the celtic revivalists and nationalists identified characteristics of what they defined as the '' irish race '' . a nationalistic identity developed , as being the polar opposite of the anglo-saxons , and untainted by the anglo-irish community . seán farrell moran , patrick pearse and the politics of redemption : the mind of the easter rising , 1916 , pp.58-59 a sense of national identity and irish distinctiveness as well as an anti-english assertiveness was reinforced to catholics by teachers in hedge schools . david george boyce and alan o'day , defenders of the union : a survey of british and irish unionism since 1801 , p.61 a feeling of anti-english sentiment intensified within irish nationalism during the boer wars , leading to xenophobia underlined by anglophobia , donal p . mccracken , forgotten protest : ireland and the anglo-boer war , p.16 and resulting in two units of irish commandos who fought with the boer against british forces during the second boer war ( 1899 & ndash ; 1902 ) . j . donnolly , a member of the brigade , wrote to the editor of the irish news in 1901 stating ; '' it was not for the love of the boer we were fighting ; it was for the hatred of the english . '' ( j . donnolly letter to the irish news , 1901 ) donal p . mccracken , forgotten protest : ireland and the anglo-boer war , p.19 the pro-boer movement gained widespread support in ireland , and over 20,000 supporters demonstrated in dublin in 1899 where irish nationalism , anti-english , and pro-boer attitudes were one and the same . there was a pro-boer movement in england as well , but the english pro-boer movement was not based on anti-english sentiments . these opposing views and animosity led the english and irish pro-boer groups to maintain a distance from one another . donal p . mccracken , forgotten protest : ireland and the anglo-boer war , p.20 despite this however swathes of irishmen joined various irish regiments of the british army during this time , more so than pro-boer commandos . the w . b . yeats play the countess cathleen , written in 1892 , has anti-english overtones comparing the english gentry to demons who come for irish souls . frederic sefton delmer , english literature from '' beowulf '' to bernard shaw , p.13 films set during the irish war of independence , such as the informer ( 1935 ) and the plough and the stars ( 1936 ) , were criticised by the bbfc for the director john ford 's anti-english content , james c . robertson and james crighton robertson , the british board of film censors : film censorship in britain , 1896-1950 , p.88 and in recent years , michael collins and the wind that shakes the barley '' director in a class of his own '' the times , 31 may 2006 ( despite being a joint british-irish production ) have led to accusations of anglophobia in the british press . in 2006 , antony booth , the father-in law of tony blair , claimed he was the victim of anti-english vandalism and discrimination while living in county cavan , ireland , with his wife . in addition , in august 2008 an english pipefitter based in dublin was awarded €20,000 for the racial abuse and discrimination he received at his workplace . in 2011 , tensions and anti-english or anti-british feelings flared in relation to the proposed visit of elizabeth ii , the first british monarch to visit ireland in 100 years . the direct invitation by the president of ireland , mary mcaleese , and the irish government , was hailed by the irish press as a historic visit , but was criticised by sinn féin president gerry adams . an anti-queen demonstration was held at the gpo dublin by a small group of irish republicans on 26 february 2011 , and a mock trial and decapitation of an effigy of queen elizabeth ii were carried out by socialist republican group éirígí . other protests included one dublin publican ( the father of celtic player anthony stokes ) hanging a banner declaring '' the queen will never be welcome in this country '' . . france . after the norman conquest in 1066 , anglo-norman replaced english as the official language of england . however , in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries , the plantagenet kings of england lost most of their possessions in france , began to consider england to be their primary domain , and turned to the english language . king edward i , when issuing writs for summoning parliament in 1295 , claimed that the king of france planned to invade england and extinguish the english language , '' a truly detestable plan which may god avert . '' adrian hastings , the construction of nationhood . ethnicity , religion and nationalism ( cambridge university press , 1997 ) , p . 45 . '' rex franciae linguam anglicam , si conceptae iniquitatis proposito detestabili potestas correspondeat , quod deus avertat , omnino de terra delere proponit . '' william stubbs , select charters ( oxford : clarendon press , 1946 ) , p . 480 . in 1346 , edward iii exhibited in parliament a forged ordinance , in which philip vi of france would have called for the destruction of the english nation and country . the hundred years ' war ( 1337–1453 ) between england and france changed societies on both sides of the channel . the english and french were engaged in numerous wars in the following centuries . england 's ongoing conflict with scotland provided france with an opportunity to destabilise england , and there was a firm friendship ( known as the auld alliance ) between france and scotland from the late-thirteenth century to the mid-sixteenth century . the alliance eventually foundered because of growing protestantism in scotland . opposition to protestantism became a major feature of later french anglophobia ( and conversely , fear of catholicism was a hallmark of francophobia ) . france–united kingdom relations , as distinct from england , continued during later centuries . united states . in the early years of the republic , anglophobia was particularly associated with the jeffersonian republicans in the 1790s , who warned that close ties with great britain were especially dangerous because that nation was an enemy of american republicanism . by contrast , the opposing federalist party warned that the jeffersonians were too sympathetic to the radicalism of the french revolution . the origins of the war of 1812 involved claimed violations against american neutrality by the united kingdom during the napoleonic wars . the treaty of ghent , ratified in 1815 and ending the war of 1812 , established peaceful relations for the two countries that has lasted more than two centuries , though this was stressed at times in the years following the treaty by events such as the trent affair of 1861 and the fenian raids in 1866-1871 . h . c . allen , great britain and the united states : a history of anglo-american relations , 1783–1952 ( 1954 ) online in the final days of the 1888 presidential campaign , a republican operative claiming to be a british immigrant in america named charles f . murchison murchison letter ambassador lord sackville-west into indicating britain 's support for the democratic candidate grover cleveland . anglophobia was aroused , and the careless diplomat was sent home . charles s . campbell , '' the dismissal of lord sackville . '' mississippi valley historical review 44.4 ( 1958 ) : 635-648 online . george brooks , '' anglophobia in the united states : some light on the presidential election . '' westminster review ( 130.1 ( 1888 ) : 736-756 online . the great rapprochement was the convergence of social and political objectives between the united kingdom and the united states from 1895 until world war i began in 1914 . the most notable sign of improving relations during the great rapprochement was britain 's actions during the spanish–american war ( started 1898 ) . initially britain supported the spanish empire and its colonial rule over cuba , since the perceived threat of american occupation and a territorial acquisition of cuba by the united states might harm british trade and commercial interests within its own imperial possessions in the west indies . however , after the united states made genuine assurances that it would grant cuba 's independence ( which eventually occurred in 1902 under the terms dictated in the platt amendment ) , the british abandoned this policy and ultimately sided with the united states , unlike most other european powers who supported spain . in return the us government supported britain during the boer war , although many americans favoured the boers . in 2002 , academic john moser said that , although anglophobia is now '' almost completely absent '' from american society , this was not always the case . he stated that '' there were strains of anglophobia present in virtually every populist movement of the late 19th and early 20th centuries , '' with the populist party , for example , '' referring to england as a 'monster ' that had 'seized upon the fresh energy of america and is steadily fixing its fangs into our social life . ' '' reasons suggested for the faltering of anglophobia included the impact of the second world war , and reduced political support for irish nationalist movements compared with that in earlier periods . moser also said : the film industry is widely perceived to give a british nationality to a disproportionate number of villains . . anglophobia in the irish-american community . the irish-american community in the united states has historically shown antipathy towards britain for its role in controlling ireland . the large irish catholic element provided a major base for demands for irish independence , and occasioned anti-british rhetoric , especially at election time . william c . reuter , '' the anatomy of political anglophobia in the united states , 1865–1900 , '' mid america ( 1979 ) 61 2 pp . 117-132 . anglophobia thus has been a defining feature of the irish-american experience . bolstered by their support of irish nationalism , irish-american communities have been staunchly anti-english since the 1850s , and this sentiment is fostered within the irish-american identity . simon james potter , newspapers and empire in ireland and britain : reporting the british empire , c.1857-1921 . ( four courts press , 2004 ) , p.216 arthur gribben , the great famine and the irish diaspora in america . university of massachusetts press ( 1999 ) , p.220 irish immigrants arrived poor and within a generation or two prospered . many subscribed cash from their weekly wage to keep up the anti-english agitation . the century : volume 26 , 1883 . anglophobia was a common theme in democratic party politics . davies , gareth , and julian e . zelizer , eds . america at the ballot box : elections and political history ( 2015 ) pp . 98-117 . irish-american newspapers , like the pro-catholic truth teller which was founded in 1825 by an anti-english priest , were influential in the identity of the community . ronald h . bayor and timothy j . meagher , the new york irish . johns hopkins university press ( 1997 ) , p.74 anti-english feelings among irish-americans spread to american culture through irish-american performers in popular blackface minstrel shows . these imparted both elements of the irish-american performers ' own national bias , and the popular stereotypical image that the english people were bourgeois , aloof , or upper class . robert nowatzki , representing african americans in transatlantic abolitionism and blackface minstrelsy , p.181 . lsu press ( 2010 ) sentiments quickly turned into direct and violent action when in the 1860s the fenian brotherhood society invaded canada to provoke a united states-british war in hope it would lead to irish freedom . patrick j . buchanan , a republic , not an empire : reclaiming america 's destiny , p.334 . regnery publishing ( 2002 ) violence is said to have included direct action by fenian sympathisers , with the assassination of thomas d'arcy mcgee , himself an irish canadian and irish nationalist who was against the invasion , although he was very critical of the orange order , and it has long been suspected they were his true killers . robert nowatzki , lsu press , 2010 - social science p.181 goldwin smith , professor at cornell university , wrote in the north american review that '' hatred of england '' was used as a tool to win the irish-american vote . kim c . sturgess , shakespeare and the american nation . cambridge university press ( 2004 ) , p.46 a similar observation was made in 1900 by u.s . secretary of state john hay , who criticised the prairie populist and his own democratic party 's political pandering to attract the support of the irish diaspora : well into the early 20th century anti-english sentiment was increasing with famine memorials in the irish-american communities , which '' served as a wellspring for their obsessive and often corrosive antipathy , '' as noted in the british parliament in 1915 : some newspapers , including the san francisco leader and the new york irish world , first published in 1823 , were renowned for their anti-english articles . clark , dennis . the irish in philadelphia : ten generations of urban experience . temple university press ( 1982 ) , p.110 the irish world blamed the mainland united kingdom for the depopulation and desolate state of ireland 's industries . arthur gribben , the great famine and the irish diaspora in america . university of massachusetts press ( 1999 ) , p.228 one newspaper , the gaelic american , called a student performance of the god save the queen by some girls of irish heritage from a convent school an act of disloyalty , where they were taught to reverence the traditions of the hereditary enemy of their race and religion . a commemorative stamp by philanthropy andrew carnegie on a century of peace between america and great britain was criticised by the irish-american press . in recent years american political commentators , such as pat buchanan , have highlighted the anti-english stance of the irish-american in the united states of america . . china . chinese hatred of the british can be traced to the opium wars and the boxer rebellion and the sale of opium drugs in china in the late nineteenth century . one notable incident of hatred against british by chinese villages in guangdong was a denunciation they wrote saying : '' we note that you english barbarians have formed the habits and developed the nature of wolves , plundering and seizing things by force . '' and '' we patriots have received the favour of the celestial dynasty in nourishing us for two centuries . today , if we do not exterminate you english barbarians , we are not human beings . you the english have killed and injured our common people in many villages and seriously hurt the universal harmony . you also completely destroy the coffins in several places , and you disastorously destroy the buddhist statues in several monasteries . this is the time when heaven is angered and mankind is resentful , even the ghosts and spirits will not tolerate you beasts ( the english ) '' . . iran . anti-british sentiment has been described as '' deeply entrenched in iranian culture '' , jonathan freedland , '' if this crisis can be overcome , think about the negotiations that matter '' , the guardian , 4 april 2007 . accessed 24 november 2009 and reported to be increasingly prevalent in iran . in july 2009 , an adviser to ali khamenei called britain '' worse than america '' for its alleged interference in iran 's post-election affairs . animosity has been dated back to the early 19th century , when a british diplomat , sir gore ouseley , was responsible for drawing up the country 's boundaries after the first russo-persian war . olivia lang , bbc news , '' iran and uk - centuries of mistrust '' , 30 november 2011 . accessed 1 december 2011 in the first half of the 20th century , the british empire exerted political influence over iran ( persia ) in order to control the profits from the anglo-iranian oil company . as a result , british influence was widely known to have been behind the overthrow of the qajar dynasty in the 1920s , the subsequent rise of reza shah pahlavi , and the successful coup d'état overthrowing prime minister mohammad mosaddeq in 1953 . ali ansari , '' why iran is obsessed with the british wily fox '' , the times , 25 june 2009 . accessed 24 november 2009 tara bahrampour , '' in wake of unrest , britain replacing u.s . as iran 's great satan '' , the washington post , 17 july 2009 . accessed 24 november 2009 conference on '' iran and british colonialism '' , march 2008 . accessed 24 november 2009 in november 2011 , attacks on the uk 's embassy in tehran led to the closure of the embassy and the expulsion of iranian diplomats from the uk , with the iranian parliamentary chairman ali larijani stating that the incident was the outcome of '' decades of domineering moves by the british in iran . '' the classic iranian novel my uncle napoleon , published in 1973 , lampoons the widespread belief that the english are responsible for events that occur in iran . russia . despite having formed an alliance between two nations since the tsarist rule , however due to the great game , there got a wave of anglophobia to widespread in russia , with the fear of english meddling and intervention . during the russo-japanese war , there was a sentiment in russia that england was behind japan 's militarism against russia in the far east , strained relationship between britain and russia . these tensions temporarily settled following the world war i , but it became tense when britain was thought to have been hiding the lost gold reserve of the house of romanov following the fall of the russian empire . theories of british meddling continued to influence russian society that the british government 's secret relationship with joseph stalin toward the great purge . during the cold war , britain firmly sided with the united states against the soviet union , and the relationship between two continues to remain problematic even today . before 2018 fifa world cup , there had been controversies regarding anglophobia in russia . . australia and new zealand . '' pommy '' or '' pom '' ( probably derived from rhyming slang - pomegranate for immigrant ) is a common australasian and south african slang word for the english , often combined with '' whingeing '' ( complaining ) to make the expression '' whingeing pom '' & ndash ; an english immigrant who stereotype complains about everything . although the term is sometimes applied to british immigrants generally , it is usually applied specifically to the english , by both australians and new zealanders . from the 19th century onwards , there were feelings among established australians that many immigrants from england were poorly skilled , unwanted by their home country , and unappreciative of the benefits of their new country . in recent years , complaints about two newspaper articles blaming english tourists for littering a local beach , and called the english '' filthy poms '' in the headlines and '' poms fill the summer of our discontent '' , were accepted as complaints and settled through conciliation by the australian human rights commission when the newspapers published apologies . however , letters and articles which referred to english people as '' poms '' or '' pommies '' did not meet the threshold for racial hatred . in 2007 a complaint to australia 's advertising standards bureau about a television commercial using the term '' pom '' was upheld and the commercial was withdrawn . films such as gallipoli and breaker morant have highlighted anti-english sentiment felt by some australians . see also . anglophile list of phobias perfidious albion views of lyndon larouche and the larouche movement anti-germans ( political current ) anti-irish sentiment anti-russian sentiment sweden-bashing antisemitism consequences of nazism german american germanophilia internment of german americans list of terms used for germans stereotypes of germans operation bolivar . references . further reading . france . acomb , frances dorothy . anglophobia in france , 1763-1789 : an essay in the history of constitutionalism and nationalism ( duke university press , 1950 ) bell , philip j . france and britain , 1900–1940 . entente and estrangement ( longman , 1996 ) berthon , simon . allies at war : the bitter rivalry among churchill , roosevelt , and de gaulle ( 2001 ) . 356 pp . black , jeremy . natural and necessary enemies : anglo-french relations in the eighteenth century ( 1986 ) brunschwig , henri . anglophobia and french african policy ( yale university press , 1971 ) . gibson , robert . the best of enemies : anglo-french relations since the norman conquest ( 2nd ed . 2011 ) major scholarly study excerpt and text search horne , alistair , friend or foe : an anglo-saxon history of france ( weidenfeld & nicolson , 2005 ) . johnson , douglas , et al . britain and france : ten centuries ( 1980 ) table of contents newman , gerald . '' anti-french propaganda and british liberal nationalism in the early nineteenth century : suggestions toward a general interpretation . '' victorian studies ( 1975 ) : 385-418 . in jstor otte , t . g . '' from '' war-in-sight '' to nearly war : anglo–french relations in the age of high imperialism , 1875–1898 . '' diplomacy and statecraft ( 2006 ) 17 4 pp : 693-714 . pickles , dorothy . the uneasy entente . french foreign policy and franco-british misunderstandings ( 1966 ) schmidt , h . d . '' the idea and slogan of 'perfidious albion ' '' journal of the history of ideas ( 1953 ) pp : 604-616 . in jstor ; on french distrust of '' albion '' ( i.e . england ) tombs , r . p . and i . tombs , that sweet enemy : britain and france , the history of a love-hate relationship ( pimlico , 2007 ) . germany . frederick , suzanne y . '' the anglo-german rivalry , 1890-1914 , pp . 306–336 in william r . thompson , ed . great power rivalries ( 1999 ) online geppert , dominik , and robert gerwarth , eds . wilhelmine germany and edwardian britain : essays on cultural affinity ( 2009 ) görtemaker , manfred . britain and germany in the twentieth century ( 2005 ) hoerber , thomas . '' prevail or perish : anglo-german naval competition at the beginning of the twentieth century , '' european security ( 2011 ) 20 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 65–79 . kennedy , paul m . '' idealists and realists : british views of germany , 1864–1939 , '' transactions of the royal historical society 25 ( 1975 ) pp : 137-56 ; compares the views of idealists ( pro-german ) and realists ( anti-german ) kennedy , paul . the rise of the anglo-german antagonism 1860–1914 ( london , 1980 ) excerpt and text search ; influential synthesis major , patrick . '' britain and germany : a love-hate relationship ? '' german history , october 2008 , vol . 26 issue 4 , pp . & nbsp ; 457–468 . milton , richard . best of enemies : britain and germany : 100 years of truth and lies ( 2004 ) , popular history covers 1845–1945 focusing on public opinion and propaganda ; 368pp excerpt and text search ramsden , john . don ’ t mention the war : the british and the germans since 1890 ( london , 2006 ) . rüger , jan . '' revisiting the anglo-german antagonism , '' journal of modern history ( 2011 ) 83 3 , pp . & nbsp ; 579–617 in jstor scully , richard . british images of germany : admiration , antagonism , and ambivalence , 1860–1914 ( palgrave macmillan , 2012 ) 375pp . united states . cook , james g . anglophobia : an analysis of anti-british prejudice in the united states ( 1919 ) online crapol , edward p . america for americans : economic nationalism and anglophobia in the late nineteenth century ( greenwood , 1973 ) frost , jennifer . '' dissent and consent in the '' good war '' : hedda hopper , hollywood gossip , and world war ii isolationism . '' film history : an international journal 22 2 ( 2010 ) : 170-181 . ellis , sylvia . historical dictionary of anglo-american relations ( 2009 ) and text search foreman , amanda . a world on fire : britain ’ s crucial role in the american civil war ( random house , 2011 ) , 958 pp . geoffrey wheatcroft , '' how the british nearly supported the confederacy , '' new york times sunday book review june 30 , 2011 online gleason , mark c . from associates to antagonists : the united states , great britain , the first world war , and the origins of war plan red , 1914-1919 '' ( phd . dissertation university of north texas , 2012 ) ; online ; '' war plan red '' was the american army 's plan for war against great britain . haynes , sam w . unfinished revolution : the early american republic in a british world ( 2010 ) louis , william roger ; imperialism at bay : the united states and the decolonization of the british empire , 1941–1945 ( 1978 ) moser , john e . twisting the lion 's tail : american anglophobia between the world wars ( new york university press , 1999 ) perkins , bradford . prologue to war : england and the united states , 1805–1812 ( 1961 ) full text online peskin , lawrence a . '' conspiratorial anglophobia and the war of 1812 . '' journal of american history 98 3 ( 2011 ) : 647-669 . online tuffnell , stephen . '' '' uncle sam is to be sacrificed '' : anglophobia in late nineteenth-century politics and culture . '' american nineteenth century history 12 1 ( 2011 ) : 77-99 . anglophobic publications . gelli , frank julian . the dark side of england , ( london , 2014 , asin : b00qj19txi )