Johnny Appleseed

family . chapman was born on september 26 , 1774 , in leominster , massachusetts , the second child of nathaniel and elizabeth chapman ( née simonds , married february 8 , 1770 ) . his birthplace has a granite marker , and the street is now called johnny appleseed lane . chapman 's mother , elizabeth , died in 1776 shortly after giving birth to a second son , nathaniel jr . , who died a few days later . his father , nathaniel , who was in the military , returned in 1780 to longmeadow , massachusetts , where , in the summer of 1780 , he married lucy cooley . the new england roots of '' johnny appleseed '' , the new england quarterly , vol . 12 , no . 3 . ( sep . , 1939 ) , pp . 454-469 according to some accounts , an 18-year-old john persuaded his 11-year-old brother nathaniel cooley chapman to go west with him in 1792 . the duo apparently lived a nomadic life until their father brought his large family west in 1805 and met up with them in ohio . the younger nathaniel decided to stay and help their father farm the land . shortly after the brothers parted ways , john began his apprenticeship as an orchardist under a mr . crawford , who had apple orchards , thus inspiring his life 's journey of planting apple trees . '' johnny appleseed , orchardist , '' prepared by the staff of the public library of fort wayne and allen county , november , 1952 , page 4 . life . there are stories of johnny appleseed practicing his nurseryman craft in the area of wilkes-barre , pennsylvania , and of picking seeds from the pomace at potomac river cider mills in the late 1790s . another story has chapman living in pittsburgh on grant 's hill in 1794 at the time of the whiskey rebellion . the popular image is of johnny appleseed spreading apple seeds randomly everywhere he went . in fact , he planted nurseries rather than orchards , built fences around them to protect them from livestock , left the nurseries in the care of a neighbor who sold trees on shares , and returned every year or two to tend the nursery . he planted his first nursery on the bank of brokenstraw creek , south of warren , pennsylvania . next , he seems to have moved to venango county , along the shore of french creek , but many of these nurseries were in the mohican river area of north-central ohio . this area included the towns of mansfield , lisbon , lucas , perrysville , and loudonville . . the story of johnny appleseed almost ended in 1819 in ohio . one morning he was picking hops in a tree when he fell and caught his neck in the fork of the tree . shortly after he fell one of his helpers , an eight year old boy , found him struggling in the tree . unable to get him out of the tree , young john white cut the tree down , saving chapman 's life . ( ( cite '' the illustrated historical family record and album '' ) , presented to mrs . isabelle white , by miss amanda white , december 25 , 1888 ) ) according to harper 's new monthly magazine , toward the end of his career he was present when an itinerant missionary was exhorting an open-air congregation in mansfield , ohio . the sermon was long and severe on the topic of extravagance , because the pioneers were buying such indulgences as calico and imported tea . '' where now is there a man who , like the primitive christians , is traveling to heaven barefooted and clad in coarse raiment ? '' the preacher repeatedly asked until johnny appleseed , his endurance worn out , walked up to the preacher , put his bare foot on the stump that had served as a podium , and said , '' here 's your primitive christian ! '' the flummoxed sermonizer dismissed the congregation . ( 1871 ) '' johnny appleseed : a pioneer hero '' , harper 's new monthly magazine , xliii , 836 he would tell stories to children and spread the new church gospel to the adults , receiving a floor to sleep on for the night , and sometimes supper , in return . '' we can hear him read now , just as he did that summer day , when we were busy quilting upstairs , and he lay near the door , his voice rising denunciatory and thrillin—strong and loud as the roar of wind and waves , then soft and soothing as the balmy airs that quivered the morning-glory leaves about his gray beard . his was a strange eloquence at times , and he was undoubtedly a man of genius , '' reported a lady who knew him in his later years . '' johnny appleseed : a pioneer hero '' , harper 's new monthly magazine , november 1871 , page 834 he made several trips back east , both to visit his sister and to replenish his supply of swedenborgian literature . he preached the gospel as he traveled , and during his travels he converted many native americans , whom he admired . the native americans regarded him as someone who had been touched by the great spirit , and even hostile tribes left him strictly alone . he cared very deeply about animals , including insects . henry howe visited all the counties in ohio in the early nineteenth century and collected several stories from the 1830s , when johnny appleseed was still alive : henry howe ( 1903 ) . richland county . howe 's historical collections of ohio ( 485 ) , new york : dover . in a story collected by eric braun , he had a pet wolf that had started following him after he healed its injured leg . more controversially , he also planted dogfennel during his travels , believing that it was a useful medicinal herb . it is now regarded as a noxious , invasive weed . according to another story , he heard that a horse was to be put down , so he bought the horse , bought a few grassy acres nearby , and turned it out to recover . when it did , he gave the horse to someone needy , exacting a promise to treat it humanely . '' johnny appleseed , orchardist , '' prepared by the staff of the public library of fort wayne and allen couth , november , 1952 , page 26 during his later life , he was a vegetarian . he never married . he thought he would find his soulmate in heaven if she did not appear to him on earth . . death . thumb different dates are listed for his death . harper 's new monthly magazine of november 1871 was apparently incorrect in saying that he died in mid 1847 , though this is taken by many as the primary source of information about john chapman . multiple indiana newspapers reported his death date as march 18 , 1845 . the goshen democrat published a death notice for him in its march 27 , 1845 , edition , citing the day of death as march 18 of that year . the paper 's death notice read : the the news-sentinel printed his obituary on march 22 , 1845 , saying that he died on march 18 : the site of his grave is also disputed . developers of the canterbury green apartment complex and golf course in fort wayne , indiana , claim that his grave is there , marked by a rock . that is where the worth cabin sat in which he died . steven fortriede , director of the allen county public library ( acpl ) and author of the 1978 johnny appleseed , believes that another gravesite is the correct site , in johnny appleseed park in fort wayne . johnny appleseed park is a fort wayne city park that adjoins archer park , an allen county park . archer park is the site of john chapman 's grave marker and used to be a part of the archer family farm . the worth family attended first baptist church in fort wayne , according to records at acpl , which has one of the nation 's top genealogy collections . according to an 1858 interview with richard worth jr . , chapman was buried '' respectably '' in the archer cemetery , and fortriede believes that use of the term '' respectably '' indicates that chapman was buried in the hallowed ground of archer cemetery instead of near the cabin where he died . john h . archer , grandson of david archer , wrote in a letter john h . archer letter , dated october 4 , 1900 , in johnny appleseed collection of allen county public library , fort wayne , indiana dated october 4 , 1900 : the johnny appleseed commission council of the city of fort wayne reported , '' as a part of the celebration of indiana 's 100th birthday in 1916 an iron fence was placed in the archer graveyard by the horticulture society of indiana setting off the grave of johnny appleseed . at that time , there were men living who had attended the funeral of johnny appleseed . direct and accurate evidence was available then . there was little or no reason for them to make a mistake about the location of this grave . they located the grave in the archer burying ground . '' report of a special committee of the johnny appleseed commission to the common council of the city of fort wayne , december 27 , 1934 . legacy . johnny appleseed left an estate of over of valuable nurseries to his sister . he also owned four plots in allen county , indiana , including a nursery in milan township with 15,000 trees , and two plots in mount vernon , ohio . he bought the southwest quarter ( 160 & nbsp ; acres ) of section & nbsp ; 26 , mohican township , ashland county , ohio , but did not record the deed and lost the property . the financial panic of 1837 took a toll on his estate . trees brought only two or three cents each , as opposed to the '' fippenny bit '' ( about six and a quarter cents ) that he usually got . '' johnny appleseed , orchardist '' , prepared by the staff of the public library of fort wayne and allen couth , november , 1952 , page 17 some of his land was sold to pay taxes following his death , and litigation used up much of the rest . johnny appleseed died in fort wayne , indiana . a memorial in fort wayne 's swinney park purports to honor him but not to mark his grave . in fort wayne , since 1975 , the johnny appleseed festival has been held the third full weekend in september in johnny appleseed park and in archer park . musicians , demonstrators , and vendors dress in early-19th-century attire and offer food and beverages that would have been available then . in 2008 the fort wayne wizards , a minor-league baseball club , changed their name to the fort wayne tincaps . in their first season with the new name , 2009 , the tincaps won their only league championship . the name '' tincaps '' refers to the tin hat ( or pot ) which johnny appleseed allegedly wore . the team mascot is named '' johnny '' . from 1962 to 1980 a high-school athletic league made up of schools from around the mansfield , ohio , area used the name the '' johnny appleseed conference '' . in 1966 the u.s . postal service issued a 5-cent stamp commemorating johnny appleseed . a memorial in spring grove cemetery in cincinnati , ohio , stands on the summit of the grounds in section 134 . a circular garden surrounds a large stone upon which a bronze statue of chapman stands , face looking skywards , holding an apple-seedling tree in one hand and a book in the other . a bronze cenotaph identifies him as johnny appleseed and gives a brief biography and eulogy . march 11 and september 26 are sometimes celebrated as johnny appleseed day . the september date is appleseed 's acknowledged birthdate , but the march date is sometimes preferred because it falls during planting season . johnny appleseed elementary school is a public school in leominster , massachusetts , his birthplace . mansfield , ohio , one of appleseed 's stops in his peregrinations , was home to johnny appleseed middle school until it closed in 1989 . the village of lisbon , ohio , hosts an annual johnny appleseed festival , september 18–19 . jill and michael gallina published a biographical musical , johnny appleseed , in 1984 . a large terracotta sculpture of johnny appleseed , created by viktor schreckengost ( 1906-2008 ) , adorns the front of the lakewood high school civic auditorium in lakewood , ohio . although the local board of education deemed appleseed too '' eccentric '' a figure to grace the front of the building ( renaming the sculpture simply '' early settler '' ) - students , teachers , and parents alike still call the sculpture by its intended name : '' johnny appleseed '' . urbana university in urbana , ohio , maintains one of two johnny appleseed museums in the world , which is open to the public . the johnny appleseed educational center and museum hosts a number of artifacts , including a tree that is believed to have been planted by johnny appleseed . they also provide a number of services for research , including a national registry of johnny appleseed 's relatives . in 2011 the museum was renovated and updated . the educational center and museum was founded on the belief that those who have the opportunity to study the life of johnny appleseed will share his appreciation of education , his country , the environment , peace , moral integrity and leadership . compare : supposedly , the only surviving tree planted by johnny appleseed grows on the farm of richard and phyllis algeo of nova , ohio . some marketers claim it is a rambo . some even make the claim that the rambo was '' johnny appleseed 's favorite variety '' , ignoring that he had religious objections to grafting and preferred wild apples to all named varieties . it appears most nurseries are calling the tree the '' johnny appleseed '' variety , rather than a rambo . unlike the mid-summer rambo , the johnny appleseed variety ripens in september and is a baking-applesauce variety similar to an newtown pippin . nurseries offer the johnny appleseed tree as an immature apple tree for planting , with scions from the algeo stock grafted on them . orchardists do not appear to be marketing the fruit of this tree . apple cider . author michael pollan believes that since chapman was against grafting , his apples were not of an edible variety and could be used only for cider : '' really , what johnny appleseed was doing and the reason he was welcome in every cabin in ohio and indiana was he was bringing the gift of alcohol to the frontier . he was our american dionysus . '' . see also . folk hero seed bombing tree planting silviculture the man who planted trees . references . notes . . citations . . further reading . william kerrigan , johnny appleseed and the american orchard : a cultural history . baltimore , md : johns hopkins university press , 2012 . external links . '' the appleseed walk '' an homage to the legacy of johnny appleseed '' johnny appleseed : a pioneer hero '' from harper 's magazine , november 1871 . johnny appleseed festival in sheffield , pa searching for johnny film documentary by director miroslav mandic searching for johnny official movie site '' johnny appleseed trail in north central ma ''