Rendon Group

history . john rendon . john rendon began his career in democratic party politics with george mcgovern ’ s 1972 presidential campaign . he later served as the executive director and political director of the democratic national committee ; managed president carter ’ s 1980 democratic convention in new york ; and subsequently worked as director of scheduling and advance for president carter 's reelection campaign . in 1985 , rendon began working for clients internationally . the company was founded in 1981 and offers consulting and training in strategic communications , crisis communications , public affairs , political consulting , media monitoring and analysis , media training , media relations , opinion polling , social media , and new business risk analysis . according to the rendon group website , the company has worked in over 98 countries to date . . iraq . a number of publications have reported on the rendon group ’ s work with the cia in the 1990s . after allegation of inflated staff salaries , the cia conducted an audit in 1995 . abc reported that the company spent 23 million in the first year of work . the cia has not commented as to whether the claims were accurate . according to a freelance translator who helped translate some of the radio broadcasts into arabic , the program was poorly run . '' no one in-house spoke a word of arabic , '' he says . the scripts , he adds , were often ill conceived . '' who in iraq is going to think it 's funny to poke fun at saddam 's mustache , '' the student notes , '' when the vast majority of iraqi men themselves have mustaches ? '' writing in the new yorker , seymour hersh said the rendon group was '' paid close to a hundred million dollars by the cia '' for its work with the inc . '' journalist james bamford reported in the rolling stone that rendon came up with the name for the inc and helped install ahmed chalabi as its head . james bamford . '' the man who sold the war : meet john rendon , bush 's general in the propaganda war . '' rolling stone november 17 , 2005 . winner of 2006 national magazine award in the category of '' reporting . '' francis brooke , adviser to ahmed chalabi and former employee of the rendon group said , “ those arguments are false . mr . rendon was a consultant . the iraqi national congress was founded independently by dr . chalabi , and mr . rendon provided consulting services during that period . ” '' 10 marines killed in iraq '' , cnn , the situation room , 2 december 2005 the rendon group replied on its website to mr . bamford ’ s article , saying , “ for the record , the rendon group ( trg ) had no role whatsoever in making the case for the iraq war , here at home or internationally . mr . bamford 's contention to the contrary is flatly untrue . trg reviews open source media reports for the department of defense and analyzes and charts positive and negative trends very much the same way public opinion researchers analyze polling data . unable to find facts that support his thesis , mr . bamford relies on false information and mischaracterization to create his story . ” the post goes on to address numerous factual errors in bamford ’ s article . . osi . the office of strategic influence , or osi , was a department created by the united states department of defense on october 30 , 2001 . according to a dod ig report , the rendon group never had any connection to osi aside from a 60-day deployment . in february 2002 , osi provided a government contracting technical representative to assist in managing a work order given to the rendon group that was funded by the office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence for the joint information operation task force . this task order funded a 60-day deployment of two media advisors to indonesia to support the embassy ’ s public diplomacy and opinion research . later , dod publicly disbanded the osi following a backlash when pentagon officials said the new office would engage in '' black '' disinformation campaigns , of which the rendon group was not a part . . afghanistan . in december , 2005 , the chicago tribune reported that the rendon group received 1.4 million in 2004 to help the afghan government with media relations . according to the paper , president karzai and zalmay khalilzad , then the u.s . ambassador to afghanistan , were unhappy with the work . the article quoted jeff raleigh , who helped oversee rendon in kabul for the u.s . embassy and later left the u.s . embassy in september , as saying the contract was '' a rip-off of the u.s . taxpayer '' . later jeff raleigh 's afghan supervisor said jeff wanted full control of the rendon group and was out of his bound . furthermore , the same official , ambassador daod , in a signed letter said that the rendon group did a great job and really helped his office . former pentagon spokesman richard mcgraw said , '' i think they did an excellent job in a tough circumstance . '' the company continued its working relationship with the pentagon , who funded an additional 3.9 million project to create a media team for anti-narcotics programs . advocates say rendon helps fight propaganda from islamic fundamentalists and strategize messaging for their clients . critics say the pentagon 's use of media firms such as rendon blurs the line between public relations and propaganda . in late august 2009 stars and stripes reported that the rendon group was employed by us forces afghanistan to provide “ news analysis and media assessment ” , including profiling journalists writing on the war.5 stars and stripes alleged that one of their reporters had been denied embedding access for refusing to highlight positive coverage . according to air force capt . elizabeth mathias , a public affairs officer with u.s . forces afghanistan in kabul , the reports were designed so that , “ we know with whom we ’ re working . ” she said that dod had not “ denied access to anyone because of what may or may not come out of their biography . ” however dod has moved from a “ positive ” , “ neutral ” , “ negative ” scale to one of accuracy . the work was allegedly intended to analyze how effectively the military is communicating its message and familiarize us forces with the journalists covering the war , these claims however seem to be contradicted by the actual profiles ( which stars and stripes obtained physical copies of ) which included no mention on accuracy but instead were not only focused on if journalist past work could be said to be positive , neutral or negative , but also included ways in which these journalist could be manipulated to produce positive spin . this manipulation was paid for by taxpayers . these claims however seem to be contradicted by the actual profiles ( which stars and stripes obtained physical copies of ) which included no mention on accuracy but instead were not only focused on if journalist past work could be said to be positive , neutral or negative , but also included ways in which these journalist could be manipulated to produce positive spin . this manipulation was paid for by taxpayers . . further reading . james bamford . '' the man who sold the war : meet john rendon , bush 's general in the propaganda war . '' rolling stone november 17 , 2005 . winner of 2006 national magazine award in the category of '' reporting . '' the rendon group . letter to editor of rolling stone magazine . the rendon group november 17 , 2005 . accessed october 11 , 2010 . foer , franklin . '' flacks americana : john rendon 's shallow pr war on terrorism , '' the new republic may 20 , 2002 . miller , laura , and sheldon rampton . '' the pentagon 's information warrior : rendon to the rescue '' . pr watch 8.1 ( fourth quarter 2001 ) . brand , stewart . '' john rendon : 'long-term policy to make the war on terror short . ' '' report on talk presented by john rendon at the herbst theatre , san francisco , california . july 14 , 2005 . information posted or re-posted by user '' bkeating '' in long now foundation ( message board ) . july , 2005 . incl . text and link to audio download . chatterjee , pratap . rendon wins hearts & minds in business , politics & war , corpwatch , august 4 , 2004 . goodman , amy '' the man who sold the iraq war . '' democracy now november 21 , 2005 . hedges , stephen j . '' u.s . pays pr guru to make its points . '' chicago tribune may 12 , 2002 . stein , jeff . '' when things turn weird , the weird turn pro . '' tompaine.com february 27 , 2002 . references . external links .