Elizabeth de Clare

marriages . elizabeth de clare married three times and had three children ; one by each husband . her father had been one of england 's wealthiest and most powerful nobles , and her mother was a daughter of king edward i of england . when elizabeth 's only brother gilbert , 7th earl of hertford was killed at the battle of bannockburn in 1314 aged only 23 and leaving no surviving issue , his property , estimated to be worth £6,000/year , was equally divided between his three full sisters , elizabeth , eleanor and margaret . this made elizabeth one of the greatest heiresses in england . her maternal uncle , king edward ii , recalled her to england so he could select a husband for her . she left ireland for good in 1316 , leaving behind her young son , william . first marriage . she accompanied her brother gilbert to ireland for their double wedding to two siblings : the son and daughter of the earl of ulster . elizabeth married john de burgh on 30 september 1308 . he was the heir to the earl of ulster , and elizabeth could expect to be a countess in due course . she gave birth to their only child , a son , in 1312 ; he would become william donn de burgh , 3rd earl of ulster . only a year later , her husband john was unexpectedly killed in a minor skirmish . a widow , elizabeth remained in ireland until the death of her brother , gilbert , at the battle of bannockburn compelled her immediate return to england in july 1314 . . second marriage . edward ii placed her in bristol castle , but his plans to marry her to one of his supporters were dashed in february 1316 , when elizabeth was abducted from bristol by theobald ii de verdun , the former justiciar of ireland . he and elizabeth had been engaged before she was called back to england . she was lady verdun for only six months when theobald died on 27 july 1316 , at alton , staffordshire , from typhoid . he left behind three daughters from a prior marriage and elizabeth , who was pregnant . she fled to amesbury priory , where she stayed under the protection of her aunt mary de burgh , who was a nun there , and where theobald 's posthumous daughter , isabel de verdun ( named for the queen ) , was born on 21 march 1317 . the complete peerage , vol xii , p . 252 . . third marriage . just a few weeks later after isabel 's birth , edward ii married elizabeth to sir roger d'amory , lord d'amory , baron of amory in ireland . d'amory had been a knight in her brother 's service who rose to prominence as a favourite of edward ii . now married to him , elizabeth was caught up in the political upheavals of her uncle 's reign . she gave birth to another daughter , elizabeth , in may 1318 . roger was reckless and violent , and made a deadly enemy of his brother-in-law , hugh the younger despenser . d'amory switched sides , joining the marcher lords led by roger mortimer and thomas , earl of lancaster in the rebellion known as the despenser war . he died of his wounds at tutbury castle , staffordshire after 16 march 1322 , having been captured by the royalist forces at the battle of boroughbridge where the rebels were soundly defeated . elizabeth was captured at usk castle and imprisoned at barking abbey with her children by the victorious faction . loss and recovery of property . elizabeth 's brother-in-law , hugh despenser the younger , lord of glamorgan , became a particular favourite of king edward ii . with the support of the king he began to take over the adjacent lordships in south wales , with the aim to consolidate a huge landholding by fair means or foul . he concentrated on the lordships held by his sisters-in law and their husbands : margaret and hugh d'audley ( lordship of gwynllwg or newport ) , and elizabeth and roger damory ( lordship of usk ) . faced with this threat , the marcher lords of south wales , led by damory , rose up against despenser in may 1321 capturing his castles at caerphilly and cardiff . their success contributed to the king 's banishment of hugh and his father on 14 august that year . this success was only short-lived as the king recalled the despensers in october 1321 and launched a counter-offensive against the marcher lords and their allies . elizabeth was taken prisoner at usk castle in january 1322 , and imprisoned in barking abbey , london , with her husband dying two months later . elizabeth was forced by the king to exchange her lordship of usk with despenser 's less-valuable lordship of gower . the rebellion of queen isabella and her lover roger mortimer , saw king edward ii and hugh despenser flee to south wales in october 1326 . by this date elizabeth seems to have been back in residence at usk castle , and she regained this lordship after despenser 's execution . she held a very elaborate christmas feast that year in usk castle , perhaps partly in celebration of her adversary 's death , for which the long list of food and drink survives ( see the national archives pro e101/91/14 ) . she also undertook building works at usk and nearby llangibby castles , where she would entertain her friends , marie de st pol , countess of pembroke , first amongst these . she stayed at usk from october 1348 until april 1350 , perhaps to escape the black death . . later life . after damory 's death , elizabeth de clare never remarried and styled herself the 'lady of clare ' after her principal estate in suffolk . she also had a residence at anglesey abbey , cambridgeshire , great bardfield , essex , and in 1352 she built a london house in the precinct of the franciscan convent of minoresses , aldgate . a good idea of her lifestyle in the last 25 years of her life can be taken from the extensive survival of her household and other records . these threw light on the activities of and provision of food and drink for the household ( numbering up to 100 people ) of one of the richest and most influential women of the fourteenth century . amongst the records are the work of her personal goldsmith in 1333 , and she also lists her alms giving and the patronage towards her favourite religious houses , the priories at clare , anglesey , and walsingham , and denny abbey . her most important and long-lasting foundation was clare college , cambridge . this began when she was asked to support university hall , founded by richard de badew , in 1326 . when richard handed over his rights as patron to elizabeth in 1346 , she made further grants and it became known as clare hall . . death . elizabeth de burgh died on 4 november 1360 and was buried at the convent of the minoresses following a funeral costing £200 . her tomb has not survived but must have been elaborate . her will with its extensive bequests is published along with her household records . elizabeth de clare 's eldest daughter , isabel de verdun married henry de ferrers , 2nd lord ferrers of groby , and her younger daughter , elizabeth d'amory , married john bardolf , 3rd lord bardolf of wormegay , knight banneret ( 1314–1363 ) . her son william , 3rd earl of ulster married maud of lancaster , by whom he had a daughter , elizabeth de burgh , 4th countess of ulster . elizabeth became the future wife of edward iii 's second son lionel of antwerp , 1st duke of clarence . william had been murdered in ireland in 1333 , 27 years before her own death on 4 november 1360 . . ancestry . references .