Zeppo Marx

early life . zeppo was born in manhattan , new york city , on february 25 , 1901 . his parents were sam marx ( called '' frenchie '' throughout his life ) , and his wife , minnie marx . minnie 's brother was al shean , who later gained fame as half of the vaudeville team gallagher and shean . marx 's family was jewish . his mother was from east frisia in germany ; and his father was a native of alsace , france , and worked as a tailor . . name . as with all of the marx brothers , different theories exist as to where zeppo got his stage name : groucho said in his carnegie hall concert in 1972 that the name was derived from the zeppelin airship . zeppo 's ex-wife barbara sinatra repeated this in her 2011 book , lady blue eyes : my life with frank . his brother harpo offered a different account in his 1961 autobiography , harpo speaks ! , claiming ( p . & nbsp ; 130 ) that there was a popular trained chimpanzee named mr . zippo , and that '' herbie '' was tagged with the name '' zippo '' because he liked to do chinups and acrobatics , as the chimp did in its act . the youngest brother objected to his being likened to a chimpanzee , and it was altered to '' zeppo '' . in a rare tv interview years later , zeppo said that zep is italian-american slang for baby and as zeppo was the youngest or baby marx brother , he was called zeppo ( bbc archives ) . career . zeppo replaced brother gummo in the marx brothers ' stage act when the latter joined the army in 1918 . at that time , zeppo was employed as a mechanic for the ford motor company . he had no desire for a show business career , but the team 's mother , minnie insisted he replace gummo because she wanted to maintain the act as a foursome . zeppo remained with the team and appeared in their successes in vaudeville , on broadway , and the first five marx brothers films , as a straight man and romantic lead , before leaving the team in 1933 . he also made a solo appearance in the adolphe menjou comedy film a kiss in the dark ( 1925 ) , as herbert marx . it was described in newspaper reviews as a minor role , though his performance was praised by the new york sun . in lady blue eyes , barbara sinatra , zeppo 's second wife , reported that zeppo was considered too young to perform with his brothers , and when gummo joined the army , zeppo was asked to join the act as a last-minute stand-in at a show in texas . zeppo was supposed to go out that night with a jewish friend of his . they were supposed to take out two irish girls , but zeppo had to cancel to board the train to texas . his friend went ahead and went on the date , and was shot a few hours later when he was attacked by an irish gang that disapproved of a jew dating an irish girl . as the youngest and having grown up watching his brothers , zeppo could fill in for and imitate any of the others when illness kept them from performing . groucho suffered from appendicitis during the broadway run of animal crackers and zeppo filled in for him as captain spaulding . '' he was so good as captain spaulding in animal crackers that i would have let him play the part indefinitely , if they had allowed me to smoke in the audience '' , groucho recalled . marx , arthur . my life with groucho : growing up with the marx brothers . barricade books ( june 1992 ) however , a comic persona of his own that could stand up against those of his brothers did not emerge . as critic percy hammond wrote , sympathetically , in 1928 : one of the handicaps to the thorough enjoyment of the marx brothers in their merry escapades is the plight of poor zeppo marx . while groucho , harpo , and chico are hogging the show , as the phrase has it , their brother hides in an insignificant role , peeping out now and then to listen to plaudits in which he has no share . the theater : poor zeppo marx ! , the pittsburgh press , november 18 , 1928 . the popular assumption that zeppo 's character was superfluous was fueled in part by groucho . according to groucho 's own story , when the group became the three marx brothers , the studio wanted to trim their collective salary , and groucho replied , '' we 're twice as funny without zeppo ! '' duck soup – encyclopædia britannica . groucho later said of his brother : '' except for the chorus girls , being a straight man in the marx brothers was n't fun for him . he wanted to be a comedian , too , but there just was n't room for another funny marx brother . but offstage , he was the funniest one of us '' . zeppo had great mechanical skills and was largely responsible for keeping the marx family car running . he later owned a company that machined parts for the war effort during world war ii , marman products co . of inglewood , california , later acquired by the aeroquip company . aeroquip corporation . '' international directory of company histories , edited by tina grant , vol . 16 , st . james press , 1997 , pp . 7-9 . this company produced a motorcycle , called the marman twin , marman twin – herbert zeppo marx – marx brothers and the marman clamps used to hold the '' fat man '' atomic bomb inside the b-29 bomber bockscar . he invented and obtained several patents for a wristwatch that monitored the pulse rate of cardiac patients and gave off an alarm if the heartbeat became irregular , us patent and trademark office ; us pat . 3,473,526 ; '' cardiac pulse-rate monitor '' , filed july 14 , 1967 & issued october 21 , 1969 ; 3,426,747 , '' method and watch mechanism for actuation by a cardiac pulse '' , a continuation-in-part filed november 20 , 1967 , issued february 11 , 1969 . and a therapeutic pad for delivering moist heat to a patient . us pto ; u.s . pat . 2,590,026 ; inventor zeppo marx ; '' vapor delivery pad for distributing moist heat '' , filed june 14 , 1950 , issued march 18 , 1952 . he also founded a large theatrical agency with his brother gummo . during their time as theatrical agents , zeppo and gummo represented numerous screenwriters and actors , including their brothers . simon louvish . monkey business : the lives and legends of the marx brothers . thomas dunne books ; 1st u.s . edition ( 2000 ) . also e-text at google books . personal life . on april 12 , 1927 , zeppo married marion benda ( birth name bimberg ) . mallory curley , zeppo 's marion benda and valentino 's marion benda : a legacy of confusion ( randy press , 2016 ) , p . 23 . the couple adopted two children , timothy and thomas , in 1944 and 1945 , and later divorced on may 12 , 1954 . on september 18 , 1959 , marx married barbara blakeley , whose son , bobby oliver , he wanted to adopt and give his surname , but bobby 's father would not allow it . bobby simply started using the last name '' marx '' . blakeley wrote in her book , lady blue eyes , that zeppo never made her convert to judaism . blakeley was of methodist faith and said that zeppo told her she became jewish by '' injection '' . sinatra , barbara ( 2012 ) . lady blue eyes : my life with frank . crown archetype . p . 64 . blakeley also wrote in her book that zeppo wanted to keep her son out of the picture , adding a room for him onto his estate , which was more of a guest house , as it was separated from the main residence . it was also decided that blakeley 's son would go to military school , which according to blakeley , pleased zeppo . zeppo owned a house on halper lake drive in rancho mirage , california , which was built off the fairway of the tamarisk country club . the tamarisk club had been set up by the jewish community , which rivaled the gentile club called the thunderbird . his neighbor happened to be frank sinatra . along with brothers groucho and harpo , zeppo later attended the hillcrest country club with friends such as sinatra , george burns , jack benny , danny kaye , sid caesar , and milton berle . blakeley became involved with the cedars-sinai medical center , and had arranged to show spartacus ( featuring kirk douglas ) for charity , selling tickets , and organizing a postscreening ball . at the last minute , blakeley was told she could not have the film , so zeppo went to the country club and spoke to sinatra , who agreed to let him have an early release of a film he had just finished named come blow your horn . sinatra also flew everyone involved to palm springs for the event . sinatra began to invite blakeley and zeppo to his house two or three times a week . sinatra would also send champagne or wine to their home , as a friendly gesture . blakeley and sinatra began a love affair , unbeknownst to zeppo . the press eventually got wind of the affair , snapping photos of blakely and sinatra together , or asking blakeley questions whenever they spotted her . both she and sinatra denied the affair . zeppo and blakeley divorced in 1973 . zeppo let blakeley keep the 1969 jaguar he had bought her , and agreed to pay her 1,500 per month for 10 years . sinatra upgraded blakeley 's jaguar to the latest model . sinatra also gave her a house to live in . the house had belonged to eden hartford , groucho marx 's third wife . blakeley and sinatra continued to date , and were constantly hounded by the press until the divorce between zeppo and blakeley became final . blakeley and sinatra were married in 1976 . zeppo was accused of beating up 37-year old jean bodul , the future wife of mobster jimmy fratianno , in 1973 and a jury awarded her 20,690 in 1978 . zeppo became ill with cancer in 1978 . he sold his home , and moved to a house on the fairway off frank sinatra drive . the doctors thought the cancer had gone into remission , but it returned . an ailing zeppo turned to blakeley for support and she accompanied him to doctor 's appointments and treatment . zeppo spent his last days with blakeley 's family . death . the last surviving marx brother , zeppo died of lung cancer at the eisenhower medical center in rancho mirage on november 30 , 1979 , at the age of 78 . he was cremated and his ashes were scattered into the pacific ocean . in his will , zeppo left stepson bobby marx a few possessions and enough money to finish law school . both sinatra and blakeley attended his funeral . legacy . zeppo introduced jack benny to his wife mary livingstone . several critics have challenged the notion that zeppo did not develop a comic persona in his films . james agee considered zeppo '' a peerlessly cheesy improvement on the traditional straight man '' . joe adamson . groucho , harpo , chico and sometimes zeppo : a celebration of the marx brothers . new york : simon and schuster , 1973 . along similar lines , gerald mast , in his book the comic mind : comedy and movies , noted that zeppo 's comedic persona , while certainly more subtle than his brothers ' , was undeniably present : he added a fourth dimension as the cliché of the romantic juvenile , the bland wooden espouser of sentiments that seem to exist only in the world of the sound stage . he is too schleppy , too nasal , and too wooden to be taken seriously . mast , gerald . the comic mind : comedy and movies , pp . 282 , 285 . university of chicago press , 1979 . while this interpretation of zeppo 's comedic contributions could seemingly be considered a contemporary reappraisal of his role in the paramount pictures , more astute film reviewers were apparently in on the joke as far back as the release of i 'll say she is , the team 's 1924 broadway hit . in its review of the play , the new york daily news calls zeppo '' the obliging audience of the family – the feeder who helps his brothers be funny by playing straight himself . '' '' again , the old casino rocks with laughter -- marx brothers and ' i 'll say she is is grand burlesque . '' new york daily news . may 25 , 1924 . when the new york times reviewed their debut film the cocoanuts in 1929 , it ranked all four marx brothers equally – '' when the four marx brothers are on the screen , it 's a riot '' emphasis added – and went on to describe each of the brothers ' unique style of comedy , and praised zeppo as '' the handsome but dogged straight man with the charisma of an enamel washstand . '' cinema year by year , 1894–2001 . london : dorling kindersley limited , 2001 , p . 205 . in his essay '' the marx brothers : from vaudeville to hollywood , '' roger s . bader observes that the films that the marx brothers made as a trio after zeppo left the group should generally be considered a different comedy team altogether , noting that '' changes in the marx brothers ’ screen personas were immediate and apparent , '' with less of vaudevillian-inspired anarchy and more in tune with standard hollywood comedies where '' love stories were injected in the plots to make their films more palatable to female moviegoers . '' bader notes zeppo 's absence as a symptom of his older brothers ' watered-down new act : their zaniness and anarchy would be heavily diluted at m-g-m as the studio found them a wider audience . … these are not vaudeville ’ s marx brothers . but in the paramount films they certainly are the marx brothers of the stage – the four marx brothers , as minnie intended them to be . while zeppo may not be as busy as his brothers , they function best as a quartet . groucho may have had other capable straight men , but when zeppo takes a letter to the honorable charles h . hoongerdoonger , marx brothers fans know he ’ s the best man for the job . … those five films are one of the last links to the era when vaudeville was the primary form of entertainment in america – and the four marx brothers were packing vaudeville theaters across the country . of course they were still great as a trio in their later films , but if you want to know what it was like to see them on stage , you need to start with four of them – and their first five films . bader , robert s . the marx brothers : from vaudeville to hollywood . this essay was first published in the 2016 universal pictures home entertainment release , the marx brothers silver screen collection ( restored blu-ray edition . ) it also appears in the 2017 uk edition of the release , the 4 marx brothers at paramount . in her book hello , i must be going : groucho & his friends , charlotte chandler defended zeppo as being '' the marx brothers ' interpreter in the worlds they invaded . he was neither totally a straight man nor totally a comedian , but combined elements of both , as did margaret dumont . zeppo 's importance to the marx brothers ' initial success was as a marx brother who could 'pass ' as a normal person . none of zeppo 's replacements ( allan jones , kenny baker and others ) could assume this character as convincingly as zeppo , because they were actors , and zeppo was the real thing , cast to type '' ( 562 ) . chandler 's appraisal of zeppo 's role in the films – as an interpreter for his older brothers to the audience – was essentially confirmed by groucho himself , who once noted that zeppo 's role was '' handsome , obtuse , slightly wooden , '' and that he '' brought logic to a basically illogical story , '' acting as '' an intrusion '' to their otherwise complete anarchy . wilson , victoria . a life of barbara stanwyck : steel-true 1907-1940 , p 427 . simon & schluster , 2013 . zeppo 's comic persona was further highlighted in the '' dictation scene '' of animal crackers . in his book groucho , harpo , chico , and sometimes zeppo , joe adamson analyzed the scene , showing how it revealed zeppo 's ability to one-up groucho with simple , plain-english rebuttals . in the scene , groucho dictates a letter to his lawyer , which zeppo takes down . adamson noted , there is a common assumption that zeppo zero , which this scene does its best to contradict . groucho dictating a letter to anybody else would hardly be cause for rejoicing . we have to believe that someone will be there to accept all his absurdities and even respond somewhat in kind before things can progress free from conflict into this genial mishmash . groucho clears his throat in the midst of his dictation , and zeppo asks him if he wants that in the letter . groucho says , 'no , put it in the envelope . ' zeppo nods . and only zeppo could even try such a thing as taking down the heading and the salutation and leaving out the letter because it did n't sound important to him . it takes a marx brother to pull something like that on a marx brother and get away with it . joe adamson , groucho , harpo , chico and sometimes zeppo : a history of the marx brothers and a satire on the rest of the world , simon & schuster , paperback ( 1983 ) . in the same book , adamson noted zeppo 's position as the campy parody of the juvenile romantic in his analysis of horse feathers . this tongue-in-cheek observation bolstered the theory of zeppo 's stiffness as a deliberate comic persona : each marx brother has his own form of comedy . zeppo is at his funniest when he opens his mouth and sings . it has taken forty years , of course , for the full humor to come across . for a normal comedian this may be bad timing , but for a marx brother it 's immortality . almost every crooner of 1932 looks stilted and awkward now , but with zeppo , who was never very convincing in the first place , the effect crosses the threshold into lovable comedy . '' i think you 're wonderful ! '' he oozes charmingly to thelma todd , and we know he never met her before shooting started . critic danél griffin , who praises zeppo as '' that great comic parody of the schleppy juvenile role of the 1920s/30s musicals '' , believes that the onscreen dynamic between groucho and zeppo is one of the '' key relationships between the individual marx brothers that shape their comedic strategy , not counting when the four of them are onstage together . '' griffin points out that zeppo is often the brother who puts ideas into groucho 's head that set up storylines and big laughs ; he goes on to explain , zeppo ’ s onscreen relationship with groucho has always been tricky to ascertain ; zeppo is generally groucho 's aloof secretary in their films , but he is seemingly capable of reducing groucho to stunned silence with simple , plain-english rebuttals ( see animal crackers ) when chico 's snappy comebacks only fuel groucho ’ s insults all the more . … zeppo 's parts are usually small , but he performs exactly what is required of him as an outwardly wooden fellow who is incapable of being rattled by a man whose business is to rattle . allen w . ellis wrote in his article '' yes , sir : the legacy of zeppo marx '' : indeed , zeppo is a link between the audience and groucho , harpo and chico . in a sense , he is us on the screen . he knows who those guys are and what they are capable of . as he ambles out of a scene , perhaps it is to watch them do their business , to come back in as necessary to move the film along , and again to join in the celebration of the finish . further , zeppo is crucial to the absurdity of the paramount films . the humor is in his incongruity . typically he dresses like a normal person , in stark contrast to groucho 's greasepaint and 'formal ' attire , harpo 's rags , and chico 's immigrant hand-me-downs . by most accounts , he is the handsomest of the brothers , yet that handsomeness is distorted by his familial resemblance to the others – sure , he 's handsome , but it is a decidedly peculiar , marxian handsomeness . by making the group four , zeppo adds symmetry , and in the surrealism worlds of the paramount films , this symmetry upsets rather than confirms balance : it is chaos born of symmetry . that he is a plank in a maelstrom , along with the very concept of 'this guy ' who is there for no real reason , who joins in and is accepted by these other three wildmen while the narrative offers no explanation , are wonderful in their pure absurdity . 'to string things together in a seemingly purposeless way , ' said mark twain , 'and to be seemingly unaware that they are absurd , is the mark of american humor . ' the 'sense ' injected into the nonsense only compounds the nonsense . ellis , allen w . '' yes , sir : the legacy of zeppo marx '' in the journal of popular culture , vol . 37 , no . 1 , 2003 , pp . 21-22 . in a eulogy for zeppo written in 1979 for the washington post , columnist tom zito wrote : thank goodness for zeppo , who never really cracked a joke on screen . at least not directly . he just took it from groucho , in more ways than one . if groucho , chico and harpo were the funny guys , zeppo was the everyman , the loser who 'd come running out of the grocery store only to find the meter maid sticking the parking ticket on his hungadunga . tom zito , '' the last of the marxes '' , the washington post : december 1 , 1979 . zeppo 's performances produced this tribute from a prominent fan , written in marc eliot 's 2005 biography of cary grant . grant , a teenager performing in vaudeville under his real name , archie leach , loved the marx brothers . and as eliot put it , while the rest of the country preferred groucho , zeppo , the good-looking straight man and romantic lead , was archie 's favorite , the one whose foil timing he believed was the real key to the act 's success . not long after , archie began to augment his already well-practiced '' suave '' fairbanks look and dress with a zeppo-like fancy bowtie ( called a jazz-bow , or jazzbo , during the roaring twenties ) and copied his brilliantine hairstyle , adding dixie peach , a favorite pomade of american black performers and show business leads , by the palmful to his thick dark mop , to give it a molded , comb-streaked blue-black zeppo sheen . eliot , marc . cary grant : the biography . new york : aurum press ( 2005 ) . in his book the anarchy of the imagination : interviews , essays , notes , noted filmmaker rainer werner fassbinder included zeppo on his list for the ten greatest film actors of all time . fassbinder , r . w . the anarchy of the imagination : interviews , essays , notes . the johns hopkins university press ( september 1 , 1992 ) . in a june 2016 review of an off-broadway revival of i 'll say she is , the new yorkers adam gopnik wrote : matt walters , becoming zeppo , is a reminder that the marxes were never quite as good again after they lost their one straight man . the object of the marxes ' comedy is anarchy , but its subject is fraternity : they are in it together to the end . zeppo 's inclusion in the family made the others less like clowns and more like brothers . gopnik , adam . how a lost marx brothers musical found its way back onstage . the new yorker , june 1 , 2016 . awards and honors . in the 46th academy awards , jack lemmon presented groucho with an honorary academy award to a standing ovation . the award was also on behalf of harpo , chico , and zeppo , whom lemmon mentioned by name . it was one of groucho 's final major public appearances . '' i wish that harpo and chico could be here to share with me this great honor , '' he said , naming the two deceased brothers ( zeppo was still alive at the time and in the audience ) . groucho also praised the late margaret dumont as a great straight woman who never understood any of his jokes . . in popular culture . on the television series cheers , lilith crane said zeppo was her favorite marx brother . a third season episode of the television series buffy the vampire slayer was titled '' the zeppo '' . this episode focuses on the perspective of the character xander harris ; his position as ostensibly the least impressive or capable member of the cast is compared to zeppo marx . the mystery science theater 3000 character tv 's frank revealed in episode 323 featuring sax rohmer 's the castle of fu manchu , that while he was working at arby 's , he was given the nickname of '' zeppo '' due to his supposed sense of humor . references . external links . the marx brothers council podcast episode devoted to zeppo