1994 in music

specific locations . 1994 in british music 1994 in norwegian music . specific genres . 1994 in country music 1994 in heavy metal music 1994 in hip hop music 1994 in latin music 1994 in jazz . events . january–february . january 19 – bryan adams becomes the first major western music star to perform in vietnam since the end of the vietnam war . january 21–february 5 – the big day out festival takes place , again expanding from the previous year 's venues to include the gold coast , queensland and auckland in new zealand . the festival is headlined by soundgarden , ramones and björk . january 25 – alice in chains release their jar of flies album which makes its us chart début at no . 1 on the billboard 200 , becoming the first ever ep to do so . january 29 – the supremes ' mary wilson is injured when her jeep hits a freeway median and flips over just outside los angeles , usa . wilson 's 14-year-old son is killed in the accident . february 1 – green day release their breakthrough album dookie , ushering in the mid-1990s punk revival . dookie eventually achieves diamond certification . february 7 – blind melon 's lead singer shannon hoon is forced to leave the american music awards ceremony because of his loud and disruptive behavior . hoon is later charged with battery , assault , resisting arrest , and destroying a police station phone . february 11 – the three surviving members of the beatles secretly reunite to begin recording additional music for a few of john lennon 's old unfinished demos , presented to paul mccartney by yoko ono , with jeff lynne producing . the track , '' free as a bird '' , is released as a single in late 1995 as part of the exhaustive beatles anthology project , reaching 2 in the uk and 6 in the united states . february 14 – the grateful dead 's jerry garcia marries deborah koons . february 23 – eddie van halen , chris isaak , and b.b . king attend the ground breaking ceremony for the hard rock hotel and casino takes place in paradise , nevada , usa . february 26 – the sanremo music festival ends with victory for aleandro baldi in the '' big artists '' category , for the song '' passerà '' . march–april . march 1 selena becomes the first tejano music singer to win a grammy award . nirvana play their final concert , in munich . the 36th annual grammy awards are presented in new york , hosted by garry shandling . the soundtrack from the 1992 film the bodyguard wins album of the year , while its lead single , whitney houston 's cover of '' i will always love you '' , wins record of the year . the single version of '' a whole new world '' , performed by peabo bryson and regina belle , wins song of the year . toni braxton wins best new artist . frank sinatra receives the grammy legend award . sinatra 's acceptance speech is cut short . other artists criticize the producer 's decision during the show , and billy joel takes extra time to perform his song , the river of dreams , noting that he is wasting valuable air time . march 3 – in rome , nirvana 's kurt cobain lapses into a coma after overdosing on rohypnol and champagne . march 5 – grace slick is arrested for pointing a shotgun at police in her tiburon , california , home . march 7 – the united states supreme court decision campbell v . acuff-rose music , inc . rules that parody can qualify as fair use . the case was spurred by 2 live crew releasing a parody of the roy orbison hit '' oh , pretty woman '' without a license from the publishing firm acuff-rose music . march 8 – nine inch nails release their second studio album the downward spiral . it would go on to sell over 3 million copies and be credited with helping bring industrial rock music into the mainstream . march 13 – selena releases her final spanish album amor prohibido . its production had been delayed because of the launch of selena 's fashion clothing line and boutiques , and her '' selena live ! '' tour in support of live ! . march 18 courtney love calls the police , fearing that her husband , nirvana 's kurt cobain , is suicidal . police confiscate four guns and twenty-five boxes of ammo from cobain 's home . bassist darryl jones replaces bill wyman in the rolling stones , march 30 – pink floyd embark on what would be their last world tour before their breakup . the record-breaking tour supports their division bell album , with the band playing to 5,500,000 people in 68 cities and grossing over £150,000,000 ( us 186,952,500 ) . march 31 – madonna on late show with david letterman : madonna appears on the late show with david letterman , making headlines with her foul-mouthed , profanity-laced interview . robin williams later describes the segment as a '' battle of wits with an unarmed woman . '' april 8 – the body of kurt cobain , lead singer of nirvana , is found . cobain 's death , three days before , is legally declared to be suicide from a self-inflicted gunshot . april 11 – the offspring release smash , which goes on to become the best selling independent album of all time and one of the most influential albums of the 90s . april 25 blur releases parklife , its first album reaching 1 in uk , where it was certified '' quadruple platinum '' . ad-rock of the beastie boys is sentenced to 200 hours of community service for attacking a television cameraman during funeral services for actor river phoenix in november 1993 . april 26 – grace slick pleads guilty to having pointed a shotgun at police officers on march 5 . april 27 – the legendary fillmore club reopens in san francisco with a concert headlined by the smashing pumpkins . april 30 the eurovision song contest 1994 takes place in dublin , ireland , which becomes the first-ever country to win three consecutive contests . its winners are paul harrington and charlie mcgettigan with '' rock ' n ' roll kids '' , written by brendan graham . the interval features the first-ever public performance of riverdance , featuring michael flatley and jean butler , which developed into the world-famous stage show . . may–june . may 2 – a los angeles jury finds michael bolton , along with co-writer andy goldmark and sony music entertainment , guilty of copyright infringement over the song '' love is a wonderful thing '' . the song is ruled to be too similar to a song of the same name by the isley brothers . may 3 – the rolling stones arrive by yacht to a press conference in new york city to announce the voodoo lounge tour kicking off in the summer . may 6 pearl jam files a complaint against ticketmaster with the u.s . justice department charging that the company has a monopoly on the concert ticket business . to help promote his new album , alice cooper releases a three-part comic book that followed the album the last temptation . may 9–13 – 1994 international rostrum of composers may 10 tupac shakur begins serving a 15-day sentence in a county jail for attacking director allen hughes on the set of a video shoot . weezer are introduced to the world with their self-titled debut , often referred to as the blue album . it would go on to become one of the most influential records of the 1990s spanning hits '' undone – the sweater song '' , '' buddy holly '' and '' say it ai n't so '' . may 26 – michael jackson and lisa marie presley are married in the dominican republic . may 27 – the eagles launch the hell freezes over tour in burbank , california . the reunion tour is the group 's first since breaking up in 1980 , but much is also made of the band becoming the first to charge over 100 per ticket for arena shows . june 7 – grace slick is sentenced to 200 hours of community service and three months ' worth of alcoholics anonymous meetings after a march 5 incident with police officers . june 9 – lisa lopes of tlc , in a domestic dispute with partner andre rison , sets fire to his shoes ; the fire ultimately spreads to the mansion they share and destroys it . june 21 – george michael loses his legal bid in a london court to be released from his contract with sony records . june 27 – aerosmith becomes the first major band to premiere a new song on the internet . over 10,000 compuserve subscribers download the free track '' head first '' within its first eight days of availability . july–august . july 12–16 – the yoyo a go go punk and indie rock festival opens in olympia , washington . july 30 the verbier festival is launched . in keeping with the country 's new constitution and the promotion of its native language , moldova adopts limba noastră as its new national anthem , replacing the anthem of romania which was previously in use . suede announce that guitarist bernard butler has left the band following fractious recording sessions for their album dog man star august 9 peter maxwell davies conducts the first performance of his fifth symphony at the royal albert hall in london , as part of the proms . . top ten best albums of the year . all albums have been named albums of the year for their hits in the charts . jeff buckley – grace oasis – definitely maybe weezer – weezer portishead – dummy nirvana – mtv unplugged in new york green day – dookie nas – illmatic blur – parklife soundgarden – superunknown nine inch nails – the downward spiral . classical music . thomas beveridge – yizkor requiem george crumb – quest for guitar , soprano saxophone , harp , double bass , and percussion ( two players ) richard danielpour – cello concerto mario davidovsky – festino for guitar , viola , violoncello , contrabass peter maxwell davies – symphony no . 5 david diamond – trio for violin , clarinet and piano lorenzo ferrero paesaggio con figura for small orchestra portrait for string quartet osvaldo golijov – the dreams and prayers of isaac the blind vagn holmboe – symphony no . 13 , m.362 ( begun 1993 ) guus janssen – klotz , for violin , hi-hat and small ensemble karl jenkins – adiemus : songs of sanctuary wojciech kilar – reign over us , christ , for voice and piano oliver knussen – horn concerto györgy kurtág – stele frederik magle – concerto for organ and orchestra the infinite second thea musgrave – journey through a japanese landscape , for marimba and wind tristan murail – l'esprit des dunes michael nyman – concerto for trombone einojuhani rautavaara – symphony no . 7 angel of light steve reich city life bagoya marimbas robert simpson – string quintet no . 2 ( 1991–94 ) karlheinz stockhausen – weltraum ( electronic music from freitag aus licht ) boris tishchenko – symphony no . 7 charles wuorinen lightenings viii , for soprano and piano piano quintet christes crosse , for soprano and piano percussion quartet guitar variations windfall , for wind ensemble . opera . peter maxwell davies – the doctor of myddfai vivian fine – memoirs of uliana rooney adam guettel – floyd collins nicholas lens – the accacha chronicles trilogy : flamma flamma tobias picker – emmeline , libretto by jd mcclatchy alice shields – apocalypse karlheinz stockhausen – freitag aus licht ( completed ; not staged until 1996 ) . jazz . musical theater . beauty and the beast – broadway production opened at the palace theatre and ran for 5461 performances carousel ( rodgers & hammerstein ) – broadway revival damn yankees ( richard adler and jerry ross ) – broadway revival grease – broadway revival show boat ( jerome kern and oscar hammerstein ii ) – broadway revival sunset boulevard ( andrew lloyd webber ) – broadway production opened at the minskoff theatre and ran for 977 performances . musical films . aag aur chingari andaz , with music by bappi lahiri airheads backbeat chaand kaa tukdaa , starring sridevi fear of a black hat gandugali , with music by sadhu kokila . hated : gg allin and the murder junkies hum aapke hain koun . ! , with music by raamlaxman immortal beloved , biopic of ludwig van beethoven min fynske barndom , biopic of composer carl nielsen sukham sukhakaram , with music by ravindra jain . the lion king – animated feature film with songs by elton john and tim rice that 's entertainment ! iii . births . january 13 – asta , australian singer-songwriter january 23 – vera blue , australian indie singer-songwriter january 28 – maluma , colombian singer and rapper february 1 skylar laine , american singer-songwriter harry styles , british musician , singer-songwriter , activist , ( pop singer of boy band one direction ) ( taylor swift , mabel , stevie nicks , kacey musgrave 's ) february 3 – orla gartland , irish singer/songwriter/youtuber february 8 – nikki yanofsky , canadian singer february 10 – seulgi , korean singer and dancer february 14 – paul butcher , american actor and singer becky hill , english singer and songwriter february 16 – ava max , american singer and songwriter february 17 – angie miller , american singer-songwriter and pianist february 18 – j-hope , south korean rapper , songwriter , dancer and record producer , member of bts february 22 – rachael leahcar , ( italian ) australian multi lingual singer-songwriter , musician , performer , and writer . runner composer ( the voice ( australia ) ) ( team and toured with delta goodrem ) february 23 – little simz , english rapper , singer and actress february 24 – earl sweatshirt , american rapper february 28 – jake bugg , english singer-songwriter and musician march 1 – justin bieber , canadian singer march 10 – bad bunny , puerto rican latin trap and reggaeton singer . march 12 – christina grimmie , american singer , songwriter , musician , multi instrumentalist , actress and youtuber ( d . 2016 ) march 13 – zella day , american singer , songwriter and musician march 14 – ansel elgort , american actor , singer and dj march 15 – lynn gunn , american musician ( pvris ) march 19 – fletcher ( singer ) , american actress , singer , and songwriter . march 28 dreezy , american hip hop recording artist , rapper , musician catherine and lizzy ward thomas , twin english country-pop musicians april 1 – ella eyre , english singer-songwriter april 4 – risako sugaya , japanese singer april 9 – bladee , swedish rapper , singer , songwriter , fashion designer and member of the musical group drain gang . april 12 – airi suzuki , japanese singer april 18 – aminé , american rapper , singer and songwriter april 24 – jordan fisher , american singer , dancer and actor april 25 – sam fender , english actor singer-songwriter , musician and activist may 5 – celeste , american-born british singer may 17 – julie anne san jose , filipina actress , singer , television personality may 28 – alec benjamin , american musician june 4 – olivia somerlyn , known as livvia , american pop singer-songwriter july 4 – era istrefi , kosovar singer july 5 – sơn tùng m-tp , vietnamese singer-songwriter july 7 ashton irwin , australian drummer and singers ( 5 seconds of summer ) georgia josiena nott , new zealand singer-songwriter and musician ( broods ) july 10 – angel haze , american rapper and singer july 11 – nina nesbitt , scottish singer-songwriter , model and musician july 17 – kali uchis , colombian-american singer-songwriter , record producer , music video director and fashion designer july 31 – lil uzi vert , american rapper , singer , songwriter august 2 – jacob collier , british musician , singer-songwriter , composer , music producer and multi-instramentalist august 8 – lauv ( ari leff ) , american singer-songwriter and record producer august 17 – phoebe bridgers , american indie rock singer-songwriter , musician and artist august 16 – áine cahill , irish singer-songwriter august 18 – bobby andonov , australian singer-songwriter and actor august 28 – felix jaehn , german/dutch dj and record producer september 1 – bianca ryan , american singer september 12 – rm , south korean rapper , songwriter and record producer , member of bts september 17 taylor ware , american singer and yodeler chen yihan , chinese pianist and composer september 22 – emily burns , english musician and singer-songwriter september 23 – zolita , american singer-songwriter , director , photographer and activist september 28 – trevor daniel , american singer-songwriter september 29 – halsey , american singer-songwriter , artist and activist october 4 – sarah aarons , australian singer , songwriter , musician october 15 – lil ' kleine , dutch musician november 3 – ella mai , english singer and songwriter november 8 – lauren alaina , american country music singer , songwriter and actress november 9 – mnek , british singer-songwriter and record producer november 24 – reece mastin , winner of the x factor ( australia ) , rock-soul-blues singer/songwriter/musician ( english born , australian ) november 26 – emma portner , american dancer and choreographer november 28 – bonnie anderson , australian singer/songwriter december 13 – ibeyi ( lisa-kaindé diaz and naomi diaz ) , twin french singer-songwriters . deaths . january 4 – r . d . burman , music director , 54 january 6 – harold sumberg , violinist , 88 january 15 – harry nilsson , singer , songwriter , 52 ( heart attack ) january 17 – georges cziffra , pianist , 72 january 22 – rhett forrester , american singer-songwriter , 37 ( shot ) january 25 – bertha rawlinson , new zealand opera singer , composer and music teacher , 83 january 30 – rudolf schwarz , conductor , 88 february 5 – tiana lemnitz , operatic soprano , 96 february 7 – witold lutosławski , composer , 81 february 8 – raymond scott , composer and bandleader , 85 february 19 – micho russell , irish tin whistle player and collector of traditional music and folklore , 79 february 22 – papa john creach , blues violinist , 76 february 24 jean sablon , french singer , 87 dinah shore , singer , actress , 77 march 6 – yvonne fair , african-american singer , 51 march 13 – danny barker , jazz musician and composer , 85 march 16 – nicolas flagello , composer , 66 march 18 – ephraim lewis , soul and r & b singer , 26 march 22 – dan hartman , singer , 42 ( brain tumour ) march 23 – donald swann , pianist , composer and entertainer ( flanders and swann ) , 70 april 5 rowland greenberg , norwegian jazz trumpeter , 73 kurt cobain , singer & guitarist ( nirvana ) , 27 ( self-inflicted shotgun wound ) april 7 – lee brilleaux , british r & b singer ( dr feelgood ) , 41 ( cancer ) april 19 – larry davis , blues singer and guitarist , 57 may 23 – joe pass , jazz guitarist , 65 ( liver cancer ) may 25 – eric gale , jazz guitarist , 55 ( lung cancer ) may 26 – sonny sharrock , jazz guitarist , 53 may 27 – red rodney , bop trumpeter , 66 may 29 – oliver jackson , jazz drummer , 61 may 31 uzay heparı , turkish composer , music producer , songwriter and actor , 24 ( motorcycle accident ) herva nelli , operatic soprano , 85 june 4 – earle warren , saxophonist , 79 june 11 – robert beadell , composer , 68 june 14 – henry mancini , composer , 70 june 15 – manos hadjidakis , composer , 68 june 16 – kristen pfaff , bass guitarist ( hole ) , 27 ( heroin overdose ) june 25 kin vassy , songwriter , performer , co-lead singer and guitarist of the first edition 1969–72 ( lung cancer ) , 50 dj train , producer ( smoke inhalation ) june 29 – kurt eichhorn , conductor , 85 july 2 – marion williams , gospel singer , 66 july 31 – anne shelton , british singer , 70 august 6 – domenico modugno , italian singer and songwriter , 66 september 2 – roy castle , musician and all-round entertainer , 62 ( lung cancer ) september 3 – major lance , r & b singer , 55 september 6 nicky hopkins , session musician , keyboardist , 50 ( complications from intestinal surgery ) max kaminsky , jazz trumpeter and bandleader , 85 september 7 – eric crozier , librettist , 79 september 13 – john stevens , jazz musician september 20 – jule styne , songwriter , 88 september 24 – urmas alender , singer , 40 ( drowned in ms estonia sinking ) september 29 – cheb hasni , algerian raj musician , 26 ( murdered ) october 4 – danny gatton , guitarist , 49 october 19 – martha raye , singer and comedian , 88 october 22 jimmy miller , record producer , 52 shlomo carlebach , jewish songwriter october 26 – wilbert harrison , r & b singer , pianist , guitarist and harmonica player , 65 october 27 – robert white , motown session guitarist , 57 october 31 lester sill , record executive , 76 erling stordahl , norwegian singer , 71 november 4 – fred '' sonic '' smith , mc5 guitarist , 46 ( heart attack ) november 7 – shorty rogers , jazz trumpeter , 70 november 11 – elizabeth maconchy , composer , 87 november 18 – cab calloway , jazz and scat singer , 86 november 21 – juancho rois , colombian vallenato musician , accordionist , and composer , 35 ( plane crash ) november 28 – vic legley , belgian violist and composer of french birth , 79 december 8 – antônio carlos jobim , bossa nova composer and songwriter , 67 december 10 – garnett silk , reggae singer , 28 ( house fire ) . awards . the following artists are inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame : john lennon , elton john , grateful dead , the band , bob marley , duane eddy , rod stewart , and the animals inductees of the gma gospel music hall of fame include tennessee ernie ford . filmfare awards . kumar sanu – filmfare best male playback award filmfare best music director awards – rahul dev burman . grammy awards . 36th annual grammy awards . country music association awards . . eurovision song contest . eurovision song contest 1994 . mercury music prize . elegant slumming – m people wins . juno award . rascalz – juno award best rap album . charts . kroq . kroq top 106.7 countdown of 1994 . triple j hottest 100 . triple j hottest 100 , 1994