Smithfield, London

20th century . during the second world war , a large underground cold store at smithfield was the theatre of secret experiments led by max perutz on pykrete , a mixture of ice and woodpulp , believed to be possibly tougher than steel . perutz 's work , inspired by geoffrey pyke and part of project habakkuk , was meant to test the viability of pykrete as a material to construct floating airstrips in the atlantic to allow refuelling of cargo planes in support of lord louis mountbatten 's operations . the experiments were carried out by perutz and his colleagues in a refrigerated meat locker in a smithfield market butcher 's basement , behind a protective screen of frozen animal carcasses . these experiments became obsolete with the development of longer-range aircraft , resulting in abandonment of the project . at the end of the second world war , a v-2 rocket struck the north side of charterhouse street , near the junction with farringdon road ( 1945 ) . the explosion caused massive damage to the market buildings , affecting the railway tunnel structure below , and causing more than 110 deaths . the original poultry market designed by sir horace jones was destroyed by fire in 1958 . its replacement building was designed by sir thomas bennett in 1962–63 , with a reinforced concrete frame , and external cladding of dark blue brick . it is listed building . the main hall is covered by an enormous concrete dome , shaped as an elliptical paraboloid , spanning by and only thick at the centre . the dome is believed to have been the largest concrete shell structure built at that time in europe . . today . smithfield is the city of london 's only major wholesale market ( leadenhall market nowadays attracts more tourist trade ) which has escaped relocation out of central london to cheaper land , better transport links , and more modern facilities . ( covent garden , spitalfields and billingsgate have all relocated ) . the market operates to supply inner city butchers , shops and restaurants with quality fresh meat , and so its main trading hours are 4:00 & nbsp ; a.m . to 12:00 & nbsp ; noon each weekday . instead of moving away , smithfield market continues to modernise its existing site : its imposing victorian buildings have had access points added for the loading and unloading of lorry . the buildings stand above a warren of tunnels : previously , live animals were brought to market by hoof ( from the mid-19th century onwards they arrived by rail ) and were slaughtered on site . the former railway tunnels are now used for storage , parking and as basements . an impressive cobbled ramp spirals down around west smithfield 's public garden , on the south side of the market , providing access to part of this area . some of the buildings on charterhouse street on smithfield north side maintain access to the tunnels via their basements . some of the former meat market buildings have now changed use . for example , the former central cold store , on charterhouse street is now , most unusually , a city centre cogeneration power station operated by citigen . chp plant ( e.on ) accessed 13 april 2009 the metropolitan cold stores was converted in 1999 into the nightclub fabric . smithfield comprises the market as its central feature , surrounded by many old buildings on three sides and a public open space ( or rotunda garden ) at west smithfield , beneath which there is a public car park . the south side is occupied by st bartholomew 's hospital ( known as barts in common parlance ) , and on the east side by the priory church of st bartholomew the great . the church of st bartholomew the less is located next to the king henry viii gate , the hospital 's main entrance . the north and south of the square are now closed to through traffic , as part of the city 's security and surveillance cordon known as the ring of steel . security for the market is provided by its market constabulary . . future . in early 2019 , it was proposed in plans put forward by the court of common council , the city of london corporation 's main decision-making body , that billingsgate fish market , new spitalfields market , and smithfield market would move to a new consolidated site in barking reach . a formal planning application was made in june 2020 . . demolition and development plans . since 2005 , the general market ( 1883 ) and the adjacent fish market and red house buildings ( 1898 ) , part of the victorian complex of the smithfield market , have been facing a threat of demolition . the city of london corporation , ultimate owners of the property , has been engaged in public consultation to assess how best to redevelop their disused property and regenerate the area . former property developers thornfield properties had planned to demolish the historic site and build a seven-storey office block , offering of office space , with a retail outlet on the ground floor . general market , smithfields market , urban75 several campaigns , promoted by english heritage and save britain 's heritage among others , were run to raise public awareness of this part of london 's victorian heritage . grade ii listed building protection was approved for the red house cold store building in 2005 by then-culture secretary tessa jowell , on the basis of new historical evidence qualifying the complex as '' the earliest existing example of a purpose-built powered cold store '' . whilst the market continues to trade , its future remains unclear following government planning minister ruth kelly 's instigating a major public inquiry in 2007 . the public inquiry for the demolition and redevelopment of the general market building took place between 6 november 2007 and 25 january 2008 . in august 2008 , communities secretary hazel blears announced that planning permission for the general market 's redevelopment had been refused , stating that the threatened buildings made '' a significant contribution '' to the character and appearance of farringdon and the surrounding area . on 12 october 2012 , henderson group unveiled its £160 million-plan for redeveloping the western side of the central market . henderson proposed that the fish market , general market and red house buildings , all over a century old , be demolished to make way for restaurants , retailers and office buildings , while they would restore and retain much of the market building 's original perimeter walls , with a new piazza being created in the general market . marcus binney of the campaign group save britain 's heritage said : '' this proposal constitutes the worst mutilation of a victorian landmark in the last 30 years . '' some of the buildings on lindsey street opposite the east market were demolished in 2010 to allow the construction of the new crossrail station at farringdon . the demolished buildings include smithfield house ( an early 20th-century unlisted françois hennebique building ) , the edmund martin ltd . shop ( an earlier building with alterations dating to the 1930s ) , and two victorian warehouses behind them . in march 2015 , the museum of london revealed plans to vacate its barbican site and move into the general market building . the cost of the move is estimated to be in the region of £70 million and , if funding can be achieved , would be complete by 2021 . . gallery . file : smithfield-meatmarket-large.jpg the central market and grand avenue from the south file : grand avenue smithfield market.jpg the entrance of the grand avenue from the south file : inside smithfield market ii , ec1.jpg inside the poultry market file : market interior.jpg market interior file : smithfield meat market abandoned 1.jpg the general market ( now abandoned ) file : smithfield meat market abandoned 3.jpg inside the general market ( now abandoned ) file : east poultry avenue smithfield market.jpg east poultry avenue file : butchers ' hall ( london ) . jpg butchers ' hall file : st bartholomew the great , west smithfield , london ec1 - cloisters - geograph.org.uk - 1142485.jpg st bartholomew the great priory church 's cloisters and barts hospital file : st bartholomew the less , st bartholomews hospital , west smithfield , london ec1 - geograph.org.uk - 1140929.jpg st bartholomew the less & barts hospital file : st john 's gate 2007 5.jpg st john 's gate file : charterhouseec1.jpg charterhouse square file : port of london com.jpg the port of london authority building file : cold storage 1.jpg the former central cold store , currently a power station