Okefenokee Swamp

etymology . the name okefenokee is attested with more than a dozen variant spellings of the word in historical literature . though often translated as '' land of trembling earth '' , the name is likely derived from hitchiti oki fanôːki '' bubbling water '' . . origin . the okefenokee was formed over the past 6,500 years by the accumulation of peat in a shallow basin on the edge of an ancient atlantic coastal terrace , the geological relic of a pleistocene estuary . the swamp is bordered by trail ridge , a strip of elevated land believed to have formed as coastal dunes or an offshore barrier island . the st . marys river and the suwannee river both originate in the swamp . the suwannee river originates as stream channels in the heart of the okefenokee swamp and drains at least 90 percent of the swamp 's watershed southwest toward the gulf of mexico . the st . marys river , which drains only 5 to 10 percent of the swamp 's southeastern corner , flows south along the western side of trail ridge , through the ridge at st . marys river shoals , and north again along the eastern side of trail ridge before turning east to the atlantic . history . the earliest known inhabitants of the okefenokee swamp were the timucua-speaking oconi , who dwelt on the eastern side of the swamp . the spanish friars built the mission of santiago de oconi nearby in order to convert them to christianity . the oconi 's boating skills , developed in the hazardous swamps , likely contributed to their later employment by the spanish as ferrymen across the st . johns river , near the riverside terminus of north florida 's camino real . modern-day longtime residents of the okefenokee swamp , referred to as '' swampers '' , are of overwhelmingly english ancestry . due to relative isolation , the inhabitants of the okefenokee used elizabethan phrases and syntax , preserved since the early colonial period when such speech was common in england , well into the 20th century . the suwannee canal was dug across the swamp in the late 19th century in a failed attempt to drain the okefenokee . after the suwannee canal company 's bankruptcy , most of the swamp was purchased by the hebard family of philadelphia , who conducted extensive cypress logging operations from 1909 to 1927 . several other logging companies ran railroad lines into the swamp until 1942 ; some remnants remain visible crossing swamp waterways . on the west side of the swamp , at billy 's island , logging equipment and other artifacts remain of a 1920s logging town of 600 residents . most of the okefenokee swamp is included in the okefenokee national wildlife refuge . the largest wildfire in the swamp ’ s history began with a lightning strike near the center of the refuge on may 5 , 2007 , eventually merging with another wildfire that began near waycross , georgia , on april 16 when a tree fell on a power line . named the bugaboo scrub fire , by may 31 , it had burned more than , or more than 935 square miles , and remains the largest wildfire in both georgia and florida history . in 2011 , the honey prairie fire consumed of land in the swamp . . access . there are four public entrances : suwannee canal recreation area at folkston , georgia kingfisher landing at race pond , georgia stephen c . foster state park at fargo , georgia suwannee sill recreation area at fargo , georgia in addition , a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) non-profit , okefenokee swamp park , provides the northernmost access into the okefenokee swamp near waycross , georgia . state road 2 passes through the florida portion between the georgia cities of council and moniac . the graded swamp perimeter road encircles okefenokee national wildlife refuge . gated and closed to public use , it provides access for fire management of the interface between the federal refuge and the surrounding industrial tree farms . tourism . many visitors enter the okefenokee national wildlife refuge each year . the swamp provides an important economic resource to southeast georgia and northeast florida . about 400,000 people visit the swamp annually , with many from distant locations such as germany , the united kingdom , france , japan , china and mexico . service providers at the refuge entrances and several local outfitters offer guided tours by motorboat , canoe , and kayak . titanium mining operations . a 50-year titanium mining operation by dupont was set to begin in 1997 , but protests and public–government opposition over possibly disastrous environmental effects from 1996 to 2000 forced the company to abandon the project in 2000 and retire their mineral rights forever . in 2003 , dupont donated the it had purchased for mining to the conservation fund , and in 2005 , nearly of the donated land was transferred to okefenokee national wildlife refuge . in 2018 , twin pines minerals llc proposed another titanium mining operation near the okefenokee swamp . over 60,000 people sent comments opposing the operation . later , in 2020 , a new rule by the trump administration reduced what was protected under the clean water act , removing about in the proposed mining site from federal protections . the current plan is to mine for titanium and zirconium , southeast of the okefenokee refuge . . environment . the okefenokee swamp is part of the southeastern conifer forests ecoregion . much of the okefenokee is a southern coastal plain nonriverine basin swamp , forested by bald cypress ( taxodium distichum ) and swamp tupelo ( nyssa biflora ) trees . upland areas support southern coastal plain oak domes and hammocks , thick stands of evergreen oaks . drier and more frequently burned areas support atlantic coastal plain upland longleaf pine woodlands of longleaf pine ( pinus palustris ) . the swamp has many species of carnivorous plants , including many species of utricularia , sarracenia psittacina , and the giant sarracenia minor . the okefenokee swamp is home to many wading birds , including herons , egrets , ibises , cranes , and bitterns , though populations fluctuate with seasons and water levels . the swamp also hosts numerous woodpecker and songbird species . okefenokee is famous for its amphibians and reptiles such as toads , frogs , turtles , lizards , snakes , and an abundance of american alligators . it is also a critical habitat for the florida black bear . in 1974 , two lp recordings of the sounds of the swamp were released as disk 6 of the environments series . recent events . more than of the okefenokee region burned from april to july 2007 . essentially the entire swamp burned , but the degrees of impact are widely varied . smoke from the fires was reported as far away as atlanta and orlando . four years later , in april 2011 , the honey prairie wildfire began when the swamp was left much drier than usual by an extreme drought . as of january 2012 , the honey prairie fire had already scorched more than of the okefenokee , sending volumes of smoke across the southern atlantic seaboard and with an unknown impact on wildlife . with the drought still continuing , the massive honey prairie fire continued to burn at only 75 % containment . on april 17 , 2012 , the honey prairie fire was finally declared out . thousands of firefighters , refuge neighbors , and businesses contributed to the safe suppression of this fire . at the peak of fire activity on june 27 , 2011 , the honey prairie complex had grown to and had 202 engines , 112 dozers , 20 water tenders , 12 helicopters , and 6 crews with a total of 1,458 personnel assigned . over the duration of the fire , there were no fatalities or serious injuries . firefighters managed to contain the fire within the boundaries of the 402,000 acre okefenokee national wildlife refuge . only burned outside the refuge . on april 6 , 2017 , a lightning strike started the west mims fire , which burned about . . in popular culture . the name '' okefenokee '' has appeared many times in american pop culture , including walt kelly 's comic strip pogo , where the characters made their home in the okefenokee swamp , and scooby-doo , in which scooby-dum comes from the okefenokee as well . the 1941 movie swamp water , directed by jean renoir , starring walter brennan and walter huston , and based on the novel by vereen bell , was shot on location in the okefenokee near waycross , georgia . the 1952 movie lure of the wilderness , a remake of swamp water starring jeffrey hunter , walter brennan ( reprising his swamp water role ) , and jean peters , was set in the okefenokee swamp in 1962 , los angeles sisters jonell and glenell mcquaig , known as '' the holly twins , '' recorded an atmospheric song with swamp creature sound effects , '' okeefenokee . '' the former six flags over georgia attraction '' tales of the okefenokee : the old plantation legends '' is named after the swamp . the okefenokee swamp is considered to be one of the seven natural wonders of georgia . in 1973 , the okefenokee was mentioned in the hollywood film white lightning starring burt reynolds as robert 'gator ' mcklusky , an illegal moonshine runner . reynolds reprised the role in the 1976 sequel gator , also his directorial debut . the film co-starred celebrated georgia swamp rock musician/actor jerry reed , who wrote and recorded '' the ballad of gator mcklusky '' for the film . the third track on the 1976 album stratosfear by tangerine dream is called '' 3 am at the border of the marsh from okefenokee '' . references . bibliography . this is a readable book from a professional historian that covers the history of the human interaction with the swamp from about 1700 to the 1940s , very good background for those planning a visit . external links . georgiaencyclopedia.org : natural history of the okefenokee swamp fws.gov : okefenokee national wildlife refuge website gorp.com : okefenokee swamp and national wildlife refuge okefenokee adventures website okefenokee pastimes website okefenokee swamp parks website okefenokee nation website charlton county : okefenokee swamp historical marker