Julia Quinn

biography . pottinger was born as julie cotler in 1970 to a jewish family . she was raised primarily in new york , although she spent much of her time in california following her parents ' divorce . since her early childhood , pottinger thoroughly enjoyed books . her father disagreed with her choices of reading material , sweet dreams and the sweet valley high book series , and told her she could keep reading them only if she could prove that they were good for her . she promptly told him that she was studying them in order to write one herself . challenged to prove that she meant her statement , pottinger sat down at their early computer and wrote her first two chapters . after finishing her novel three years later , she submitted it to sweet dreams , but was rejected . pottinger graduated from harvard with a degree in art history . during her senior year of college , she realized that she did not know what she wanted to do with her degree and decided to attend medical school . that decision required her to attend two additional years of college to complete the science prerequisites necessary to apply for medical school . to occupy herself during the long days of studying science , pottinger began to write light-hearted regency novels . a few weeks after she was accepted to medical school , she discovered that her first two novels , splendid and dancing at midnight , had been sold at auction , an unusual occurrence for a novice romance author . she postponed medical school for two years while she wrote two more novels . by the time pottinger finally entered yale school of medicine to realize her dream of being a doctor , three of her books had been published . after only a few short months of studying medicine , however , pottinger realized that she preferred writing to medical study . she left medical school and devoted herself full-time to her writing . pottinger considers herself a feminist and gives her heroines feminist qualities that are not necessarily true to the attitudes of the times her novels are set in . her books are noted for being full of humor , with sharp , witty dialogue . the novels are primarily character-driven , lacking the great external conflicts that many romance novels employ . one of her novels , when he was wicked , was highly unusual for a romance novel , as the first four chapters actually describe the heroine in a happy marriage with someone who is not the hero , and then shows the death of the original husband and deals with the grief of both the heroine and hero before allowing the second love story to flourish . most of her books are dedicated to her husband , paul pottinger , often with references to amusing alternate titles for the work . she won the romance writers of america rita award for 2007 for on the way to the wedding and again for 2008 for the secret diaries of miss miranda cheever . when she won for 2010 for what happens in london , she became ( at the time ) the youngest member and is now one of only 16 authors to be inducted into the rwa hall of fame . in 2003 , she enjoyed the rare honor of being profiled in time magazine , an accomplishment few romance novelists have achieved . in 2005 publishers weekly gave to sir phillip , with love a rare starred review , and later named it one of the six best mass market original novels of the year . each of her last 17 novels has appeared on the new york times bestseller list , with mr . cavendish , i presume hitting number one in october 2008 . most recently , the girl with the make-believe husband was on the nyt list in june 2017 . additionally to those , both her lady whistledown anthologies appeared on the ny times list , as did both of her novel-in-three-part collaborations with connie brockway and eloisa james ( the lady most likely and the lady most willing ) , and the bridgertons : happily ever after collection of bridgertons second epilogues . in 2001 , pottinger won 79,000 on the weakest link . she is an avid reader , posting recommendations of her favorite books on her facebook page . pottinger and her husband live in seattle , wa in the united states . recognition . 1997– everything and the moon nominated for best regency historical by romantic times magazine 2001 – finalist in the romance writers of america 's rita awards 2002 – romancing mister bridgerton voted one of the top ten books of the year by rwa membership finalist for the rwa rita awards in the long historical category 2002 – to sir phillip , with love named one of the six best mass market original novels of the year by publishers weekly 2003 – quinn was profiled in time magazine . 2007 – received romance writers of america rita award for best long historical romance , for on the way to the wedding 2008 – received romance writers of america rita award for best regency historical romance , for the secret diaries of miss miranda cheever 2010 – received romance writers of america rita award for best regency historical romance for what happens in london 2010 – quinn was inducted into the romance writers of america hall of fame . 2016 – quinn taught the inaugural romance writing course at the yale summer writers conference . 2018 – announcement that quinn 's bridgerton series will be adapted for netflix by shonda rhimes . bibliography . splendid trilogy . splendid ( 1995 ) dancing at midnight ( 1995 ) minx ( 1996 ) '' a tale of two sisters '' in where 's my hero ? ( 2003 , anthology with lisa kleypas and kinley macgregor ) . lyndon sisters . everything and the moon ( 1997 ) brighter than the sun ( 1997 ) . agents of the crown . to catch an heiress ( 1998 ) how to marry a marquis ( 1999 ) . bridgerton series . the duke and i ( 2000 ) the viscount who loved me ( 2000 ) an offer from a gentleman ( 2001 ) romancing mister bridgerton ( 2002 ) to sir phillip , with love ( 2003 ) when he was wicked ( 2004 ) it 's in his kiss ( 2005 ) on the way to the wedding ( 2006 ) the bridgertons : happily ever after ( 2013 ) the bridgerton family consists of eight siblings and their widowed mother . in the novels , the bridgertons are well respected and favored among british society . the bridgertons are an extremely loving and tight-knit clan . the series comprises eight books in which each of the siblings finds true love . each book is set against the backdrop of upper english society during the period of regency era . on the way to the wedding , won the romance writers of america rita award in 2007 . in 2002 , to sir phillip , with love was named one of the six best mass market original novels of the year by publishers weekly . several books on the series have been on the new york times bestseller list . quinn has published six '' 2nd epilogues , '' one each for the viscount who loved me , an offer from a gentleman , romancing mister bridgerton , to sir phillip , with love , when he was wicked , and it 's in his kiss , as ebooks . the final collection of eight second epilogues ( those six , plus second epilogues from the duke and i and on the way to the wedding ) —plus a short story about violet , the bridgerton matriarch—released on april 2 , 2013 . . two dukes of wyndham . the lost duke of wyndham ( 2008 ) mr . cavendish , i presume ( 2008 ) according to quinn , this two-book set was based on the premise '' two men say they ’ re the duke of something . one of them must be wrong , '' inspired by a dire straits song events are concurrent and the plots are intertwined , with some scenes appearing in both books , but from different perspectives . bevelstoke series . the secret diaries of miss miranda cheever ( 2007 ) what happens in london ( 2009 ) ten things i love about you ( 2010 ) . smythe-smith quartet . just like heaven ( 2011 ) a night like this ( 2012 ) the sum of all kisses ( 2013 ) the secrets of sir richard kenworthy ( 2015 ) . rokesby series . because of miss bridgerton ( 2016 ) the girl with the make-believe husband ( 2017 ) the other miss bridgerton ( 2018 ) first comes scandal ( 2020 ) . lady whistledown . the witty gossip columnist '' lady whistledown '' from the bridgerton series ties together these two anthologies of interlinked novellas : '' thirty-six valentines '' in the further observations of lady whistledown ( 2003 , anthology with suzanne enoch , karen hawkins and mia ryan ) '' the first kiss '' in lady whistledown strikes back ( 2004 , anthology with suzanne enoch , karen hawkins and mia ryan ) . the lady most . the lady most likely . ( december 28 , 2010 a novel in three parts with connie brockway and eloisa james ) the lady most willing . ( december 26 , 2012 a novel in three parts with connie brockway and eloisa james ) . others . '' gretna greene '' in scottish brides ( june 1 , 1999 an anthology with christina dodd , stephanie laurens and karen ranney ) '' . and a sixpence in her shoe '' in four weddings and a sixpence ( december 27 , 2016 an anthology with elizabeth boyle stefanie sloane and laura lee guhrke ) . references . external links . official julia quinn website chapter excerpts and title list ( official publisher web page )