Sorry, Wrong Number

plot . leona stevenson is the spoiled , bedridden daughter of wealthy businessman james cotterell . one day , while listening to what seems to be a crossed telephone connection , she hears two men planning a woman 's murder . the call cuts off without leona learning very much other than it is scheduled for 11:15pm , when a passing train will hide any sounds . she calls the telephone company and the police , but with few concrete details , they can do nothing . complicating matters , her husband henry is overdue and their servants have the night off , leaving her all alone in a manhattan apartment . as she makes a number of phone calls trying to locate henry , leona inadvertently begins to piece together the mystery in flashbacks . when leona reaches henry 's secretary , elizabeth jennings , she learns that he took an attractive woman , sally lord , to lunch and did not return to the office . sally lord turns out to be the former sally hunt . leona stole then-drug-store-employee henry from sally , and married him against her father 's wishes . sally is now the wife of fred lord , a lawyer in the district attorney 's office . from overheard conversations , she learned that her husband was close to resolving an investigation that involves henry somehow . sally became so concerned that she followed her husband and two associates to a mysterious meeting in a seemingly abandoned house on staten island . the house , according to a '' no trespassing '' sign , belongs to a waldo evans , a chemist working for her father . sally arranged to meet henry for lunch , but before she could warn him , he left the table and did not return . later , sally calls leona with more news . the house on staten island has burned down , and three men , including one named morano have been arrested . evans , however , has escaped . leona then receives a message from henry stating he has gone out of town on business he had forgotten about and will not be back until sunday . leona next gets in touch with dr . phillip alexander , a specialist she had come to new york to see regarding her lifelong heart troubles . alexander reveals that he gave henry her prognosis ten days before , something that henry kept from her . henry had married leona without being aware of her health problems . he first found out when she had a heart attack after they quarreled about his attempt to get a job on his own , rather than being a do-nothing vice president in his father-in-law 's business . cotterell sabotaged his job interview . leona 's attacks became more and more frequent , until she finally took to her bed about a year ago . alexander , however , diagnosed leona 's problems as purely psychosomatic ; nothing is wrong with her physically . leona goes into hysterics and phones a hospital , asking to hire a nurse for the night . the receptionist tells her that they are short-staffed and she can only have a nurse if the doctor feels it is an emergency . she thinks it is only 11:00 pm , but discovers her clock has stopped . leona receives a telephone call from waldo . he reluctantly discloses that henry recruited him to steal chemicals from the cotterell drug company to sell to morano . later , henry decided to bypass morano when waldo was transferred . morano , however , showed up with two thugs and intimidated henry into signing an iou for 200,000 for his lost profits , due in three months . when henry protested that he did not have that much , morano pointed out that leona must have a large insurance policy . with morano now in custody , waldo stresses that henry no longer has to raise the sum . waldo gives leona a number to call to locate henry , but when she calls she discovers that it is for the city morgue . when henry calls her from a train station , leona gives him waldo 's message . seeing that it is only minutes from 11:15 , he pleads with her to go to the balcony and scream for help , but she protests that she can not , though she can hear somebody downstairs . when the intruder enters her bedroom , she begs for her life , then screams . unaware of the policemen about to apprehend him , henry frantically calls back , only to have a man answer , '' sorry , wrong number . '' . cast . production . sorry , wrong number conforms to many of the conventions of film noir . the movie plays in real time , with many flashbacks to flesh out the story . stanwyck 's bedroom window overlooks the night skyline of manhattan . the film is shot very dark , with looming shadows and a circling camera used to maintain a high level of suspense . eifert , steve . sorry , wrong number , film analysis and review , film noir of the week , june 29 , 2008 . accessed : july 12 , 2013 . hollywood 's production code administration initially objected to elements of fletcher 's screenplay , including its depiction of drug trafficking , and the script was significantly revised to win approval . passafiume , andrea . turner classic movies , sorry , wrong number , film article , '' the big idea behind sorry , wrong number '' . accessed : july 12 , 2013 . . reception . variety listed the film as one of the top grossers of the year , earning 2,850,000 in the domestic market alone . variety ( january 1949 ) . radio play . lucille fletcher 's play originally aired on the suspense radio program on may 25 , 1943 , essentially a one-woman show with agnes moorehead as mrs . stevenson . the play was reprised seven times ( on august 21 , 1943 , then in 1944 , 1945 , 1948 , 1952 , 1957 and 1960 ) , each starring moorehead . the final broadcast was on february 14 , 1960 . orson welles called sorry , wrong number '' the greatest single radio script ever written '' . in 2015 , the may 25 , 1943 broadcast was deemed '' culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant '' by the library of congress and selected for inclusion in the national recording registry . adaptations . a radio adaptation of the film was broadcast january 9 , 1950 , on lux radio theatre . stanwyck recreated her screen role . sorry , wrong number was made into a television play broadcast on station wcbs-tv ( now wcbs-tv ) in new york on january 30 , 1946 , starring mildred natwick . a second live teleplay was broadcast on november 4 , 1954 , as the fourth episode of the cbs anthology series climax ! , starring lillian bronson , adapted by fletcher herself , with music provided by her then-husband , bernard herrmann . . a version was produced for australian television in 1958 starring georgie sterling . sterling had performed in the play on radio in 1948 . another television version aired in 1989 , starring loni anderson , patrick macnee and hal holbrook . it was directed by tony wharmby and adapted by ann louise bardach . . . parody . on october 17 , 1948 , stanwyck did a parody of sorry , wrong number on the jack benny program . benny , jack . the old time radio network , at the otr.network library web site , december 8 , 2011 . accessed : july 12 , 2013 . . other media . clips from sorry , wrong number were used for the 1982 comedy-mystery dead men do n't wear plaid , the 1991 thriller dead again and the 2014 action-thriller jack ryan : shadow recruit . see also . list of films featuring home invasions real time . references . external links . . streaming audio . sorry , wrong number east coast broadcast on suspense : may 25 , 1943 , starring agnes moorehead . sorry , wrong number west coast broadcast on suspense : may 25 , 1943 , starring agnes moorehead . sorry , wrong number on suspense : august 8 , 1943 , starring agnes moorehead . sorry , wrong number on suspense : september 6 , 1945 , starring agnes moorehead , broadcast to coincide with the release of the film . sorry , wrong number on lux radio theater : january 9 , 1950 . starring barbara stanwyck and burt lancaster . sorry , wrong number on suspense : february 14 , 1960 , starring agnes moorehead in the final radio broadcast of the play .