Aldrich Ames

early life and work . aldrich ames was born in river falls , wisconsin , to carleton cecil ames and rachel ames ( née aldrich ) . his father was a college lecturer at the university of wisconsin-river falls and his mother a high school english teacher . aldrich was the eldest of three children and the only son . in 1952 , his father began working for the cia 's directorate of operations in virginia , and in 1953 was posted to southeast asia for three years , accompanied by his family . carleton received a '' particularly negative performance appraisal '' in part because of serious alcoholism and spent the remainder of his career at cia headquarters . an assessment of the aldrich h . ames espionage case and its implications for u.s . intelligence : report prepared by the staff of the select committee on intelligence , united states senate 84-046 ( washington : u . s . government printing office , 1994 ) , 4 . ames attended high school at mclean high school in mclean , virginia . beginning in 1957 , following his sophomore year , he worked for the cia for three summers as a low-ranking ( gs-3 ) records analyst , marking classified documents for filing . in 1959 , ames entered the university of chicago planning to study foreign cultures and history , but his '' long-time passion '' for drama resulted in failing grades and he did not finish his sophomore year . ames worked at the cia during the summer of 1960 as a laborer/painter . he then became an assistant technical director at a chicago theater until february 1962 . returning to the washington area , ames took full-time employment at the cia doing the same sort of clerical jobs he had performed in high school . '' assessment , '' 4 . . cia career . five years after first working for the cia , ames completed a bachelor 's degree in history at the george washington university . he did not originally plan to have a career with the cia , but after attaining the grade of gs-7 , and receiving good performance appraisals , he was accepted into the career trainee program despite several alcohol-related brushes with the police . '' assessment , '' 5 ; in 1969 , ames married a fellow cia officer , nancy segebarth , whom he had met in the career trainee program . when ames was assigned to ankara , nancy resigned from the cia because of a rule that prohibited married partners from working from the same office . '' assessment , '' 5 . nevertheless , nancy ames performed part-time administrative work in her husband 's office . ames 's job in turkey was to target soviet intelligence officers for recruitment , and he succeeded in infiltrating the communism dev-genç organization through a roommate of student activist deniz gezmiş . . ames made multiple payments for information that included the names of dev-genç members gezmiş knew and the details of their activities . in spite of this success , ames 's performance was rated only '' satisfactory '' and ames , discouraged by the critical assessment , considered leaving the cia . '' assessment , '' 6 . in 1972 , ames returned to cia headquarters and spent the next four years in the soviet-east european ( se ) division . his performance reviews were '' generally enthusiastic '' , apparently because he was better at managing paperwork and planning field operations than at agent recruiting . nevertheless , his excessive drinking was also noted , and two '' eyes only '' memoranda were placed in his file . '' assessment , '' 6 . at a christmas party in 1974 , ames was discovered intoxicated and in '' a compromising position '' with a female cia employee . however , a bright point in that assignment was ames 's handling of a czech asset , preventing his recapture , which so impressed ames 's superiors that he was recommended for a more demanding assignment . in 1976 , ames was assigned to new york city where he handled two important soviet assets . his performance was excellent and he received several promotions and bonuses , being ranked above most operations officers in his pay grade . however , ames 's tendency to procrastinate in submissions of financial accounting was noted . his inattention to detail also led him to commit two important security violations , including once leaving a briefcase of classified operational materials on the subway . ames apparently received only a verbal reprimand . '' assessment , '' 6–7 . in 1981 , ames accepted a posting to mexico city while his wife remained in new york . his evaluations in mexico were mediocre at best , and he engaged in at least three extramarital affairs . in october 1982 , ames began an affair with maría del rosario casas dupuy , a cultural attaché in the colombian embassy and a cia informant . despite cia regulations , ames did not report his romance with a foreign national to his superiors , even though some of his colleagues were aware of it . his lackluster performance reviews were in part the result of heavy drinking . at a diplomatic reception in mexico city , ames got into a loud , drunken argument with a cuban official that '' caused alarm '' among his superiors . '' assessment , '' 8 . nevertheless , in september 1983 , the cia assigned ames back to the se division in washington . his reassignment placed him '' in the most sensitive element '' of the department of operations , which was responsible for soviet counterintelligence . ames had access to all cia plans and operations against the kgb and the gru , soviet military intelligence . '' assessment , '' 8–9 . in october , he formally separated from nancy , and , in november , he submitted an '' outside activity '' report to the cia noting his romantic relationship with rosario . as part of his divorce settlement , ames agreed to pay the couple 's debts plus provide nancy monthly support for three-and-a-half years , a total of about 46,000 . ames thought the divorce might bankrupt him , and later said that this financial pressure was what had first led him to consider spying for the soviet union . rosario also proved to be a heavy spender , phoning her family in colombia at a cost of 400 a month and going on shopping sprees & nbsp ; – after her arrest the fbi discovered compulsive hoarding . maas , 222–23 . . espionage . ames routinely assisted another cia office that assessed soviet embassy officials as potential intelligence assets . as part of this responsibility , and with the knowledge of both the cia and the fbi , ames began making contacts within the soviet embassy . in april 1985 , ames provided information to the soviets that he believed was '' essentially valueless '' but would establish his credentials as a cia insider . he also asked for 50,000 , which the soviets paid quickly . '' assessment , '' 11–13 . ames later claimed that he had not prepared for more than the initial '' con game '' to satisfy his immediate indebtedness , but having '' crossed a line '' he '' could never step back '' . ames soon identified more than ten top-level cia and fbi sources who were reporting on soviet activities . not only did ames believe that there was '' as much money as he could ever use '' in betraying these intelligence assets , but their elimination would also reduce the chance of his own espionage being discovered . '' assessment , '' 13–14 . by 1985 , the cia 's network of soviet-bloc agents began disappearing at an alarming rate , for example agent gennady varenik and agent dmitri polyakov . the cia realized something was wrong but was reluctant to consider the possibility of a mole within their agency . initial investigations focused on possible breaches caused by soviet bugs , or a code which had been broken . powell , bill ( 2002-11-01 ) , treason : how a russian spy led an american journalist to a u.s . double agent , simon & schuster , the cia initially blamed asset losses on another former cia agent , edward lee howard , who had also been passing information to the soviets . however , when the cia lost three other important assets about whom howard could have known nothing , it was clear that the arrests ( and executions ) were the result of information provided by another source . '' assessment , '' 14–15 . as one cia officer put it , the soviets '' were wrapping up our cases with reckless abandon '' , which was highly unusual because the '' prevailing wisdom among the agency 's professional 'spy catchers ' '' was that suddenly eliminating all the assets known to the mole would put him in danger . in fact , ames 's kgb handlers apologized to him , saying they disagreed with that course of action , but that the decision to immediately eliminate all american assets had been made at the highest political levels . '' assessment , '' 15–16 . meanwhile , ames continued to meet openly with his contact at the soviet embassy , sergey dmitriyevich chuvakhin . for a time , ames summarized for the cia and fbi the progress of what he portrayed as an attempt to recruit the soviet . ames received 20,000 to 50,000 every time the two had lunch . '' assessment , '' 18–19 . to deposit the money , ames maintained several bank accounts and divided the cash into amounts under 10,000 to avoid bank reporting requirements . ultimately , ames received 4.6 million from the soviets , which allowed him to enjoy a lifestyle well beyond the means of a cia officer . in august 1985 , when ames 's divorce became final , he immediately married rosario . understanding that his new wealth would raise eyebrows , he developed a cover story that his prosperity was the result of money given to him by his colombian wife 's wealthy family . to assist with that fabrication , ames wired considerable amounts of his espionage payments to his new in-laws in bogotá to help improve their impoverished status . '' assessment , '' 19 . in mid-may 1985 , someone had apparently reported to the soviets that oleg gordievsky , their chief of station in london , was sending secrets to mi6 . ( he had , in fact , been doing so for 11 years , under great secrecy . ) gordievsky was recalled to moscow on 17 may and was drugged and interrogated about his alleged communications with mi6 . there was great suspicion that ames had reported gordievsky 's treachery to soviet counterintelligence . a 1994 report by the washington post , however , stated that '' after six weeks of questioning ames . the fbi and cia remain baffled about whether ames or someone else first warned the soviets about gordievsky '' . an fbi report later stated that ames had not advised the soviets about gordievsky until 13 june 1985 ; by that time , the spy was under kgb surveillance but he was not charged with treason as of 19 july 1985 when mi6 agents began to exfiltrate him to britain . in 1986 , following the loss of several cia assets , ames told the kgb that he feared he would be a suspect . the kgb threw u.s . investigators off ames 's trail by constructing an elaborate diversion , in which a soviet case officer told a cia contact that the mole was stationed at warrenton training center ( wtc ) , a secret cia communications facility in virginia . u.s . mole hunters investigated ninety employees at wtc for almost a year and came up with ten suspects , although the lead investigator noted that '' there are so many problem personalities that no one stands out '' . in 1986 , ames was posted to rome . there , his performance once again ranged from mediocre to poor and included evidence of problematic drinking . nevertheless , in 1990–1991 , he was reassigned to the cia 's counterintelligence center analysis group , providing him with access to '' extremely sensitive data '' , including information on u.s . double agents . '' assessment , '' 33–35 . ames 's immediate supervisors were aware of his alcohol abuse and his proclivity to sleep at his desk , but his annual performance reviews '' consistently rated him a strong performer '' . later , after he had defected , oleg gordievsky spoke highly of the information that ames had provided to the kgb , stating that '' the significance of ames was huge '' and that the soviets were impressed with the '' quality and quantity '' of secrets that he had delivered . . cia response . in late 1986 , the cia assembled a team to investigate the source of the leaks . led by paul redmond , and consisting of jeanne vertefeuille , sandra grimes , diana worthen , and dan payne , the team examined different possible causes , including the possibilities that the kgb had bugged the agency , or intercepted its communications , or had a mole in place . by 1990 , the cia was certain that there was a mole in the agency but could not find the source . recruitment of new soviet agents came to a virtual halt , as the agency feared it could not protect its current assets . prior to that , in november 1989 , a fellow employee reported that ames seemed to be enjoying a lifestyle well beyond the means of a cia officer , and that his wife 's family was less wealthy than he had claimed . worthen had known rosario ames prior to her marriage and had met with her one day to discuss installing drapes in the ames residence . worthen , who had recently installed drapes in her own home , knew they could be expensive and asked which room to concentrate upon first , at which rosario laughed and said , '' do not worry about the price , we are going to have the whole house done at once ! '' worthen also knew that rosario 's parents had little money , but a cia contact in bogotá observed that her family was now well-off . nevertheless , the cia moved slowly . when the investigator assigned to look at ames 's finances began a two-month training course , no one immediately replaced him . '' assessment , '' 40–41 . investigators were also diverted by a false story from a cia officer abroad who claimed that the soviets had penetrated the cia with an employee born in the ussr . '' analysis , '' 48 . the investigation into this tale suggested a fabrication '' for career enhancing or financial reasons . '' in 1986 and 1991 , ames passed two polygraph examinations while spying for the soviet union and russia , respectively . ames was initially '' terrified '' at the prospect of taking the test , but he was advised by the kgb '' to just relax '' . '' assessment , '' 44–45 ; the kgb instructed ames to get '' a real good night 's sleep . be fresh and rested . be cooperative . develop rapport with examiner . and try to remain as calm and easy as you can '' . ames 's test demonstrated deceptive answers to some questions but the examiners passed him , perhaps , in the later opinion of the cia , because the examiners were '' overly friendly '' and therefore did not induce the proper physiological response . '' assessment , '' 45–46 . pete early depicts ames as being able to convince himself that the answers he was giving were actually truthful . also , according to early , except for a handful of staff members , the cia had largely abandoned trying to solve the case , and more credit for the resolution should be given the fbi . christopher lehmann-haupt , '' aldrich ames : brilliant or bumbling ? '' the new york times , february 24 , 1997 , review of pete early , confessions of a spy . the cia finally focused on ames after co-workers noted his sharper personal appearance , including : cosmetic dentistry : ames 's teeth , which were yellowed by heavy smoking , were capped . attire : previously , ames had been known for '' bargain basement '' attire , but suddenly changed to wearing tailor-made suits not even his superiors could afford . the cia also realized that , despite ames 's annual salary being 60,000 , he could afford : a 540,000 house in arlington , virginia , paid for in cash a 50,000 jaguar luxury car home remodeling and redecoration costs of 99,000 monthly phone bills exceeding 6,000 , mostly calls by ames 's wife to her family in colombia premium credit cards , on which the minimum monthly payment exceeded his monthly salary . . arrest . in march 1993 , the cia and fbi began an intensive investigation of ames that included electronic surveillance , combing through his trash , and a monitor installed in his car to track his movements . '' assessment , '' 50–51 . the monitor sometimes failed , frustrating the fbi on several occasions . from november 1993 until his arrest , ames was kept under virtually constant physical surveillance . when , in early 1994 , he was scheduled to attend a conference in moscow , the fbi believed it could wait no longer , and he and his wife were arrested on february 21 . at his arrest , ames told the officers , '' you 're making a big mistake ! you must have the wrong man ! '' on february 22 , 1994 , ames and his wife were formally charged by the department of justice with spying for the soviet union and russia . ames ' betrayal resulted in the deaths of a number of cia assets . he pleaded guilty on april 28 and received a sentence of life imprisonment . as part of a plea bargain by ames , his wife received a five-year prison sentence for tax evasion and conspiracy to commit espionage . . rosario ames was released from federal custody after she completed her sentence . in court , ames admitted that he had compromised '' virtually all soviet agents of the cia and other american and foreign services known to me '' , and had provided the ussr and russia with a '' huge quantity of information on united states foreign , defense and security policies '' . it is estimated that information ames provided to the soviets led to the compromise of at least a hundred u.s . intelligence operations and to the execution of at least ten u.s . sources . '' assessment , '' 53 . furthermore , ames ' betrayal of cia methods allowed the kgb to use '' controlled agents '' to 1995 cia disinformation controversy from 1986 to 1993 . some of this '' feed material '' was incorporated into cia intelligence reports , several of which even reached three presidents . ames said he was not afraid of being caught by the fbi or cia but was afraid of soviet defectors , saying , '' virtually every american who has been jailed in connection with espionage has been fingered by a soviet source '' . additionally , when asked about the polygraph tests , ames said , '' there 's no special magic . confidence is what does it . confidence and a friendly relationship with the examiner . rapport , where you smile and you make him think that you like him . '' . post-sentence . ames is federal bureau of prisons prisoner 40087-083 , serving his life sentence in the medium-security federal correctional institution ( fci ) in terre haute , indiana . the cia was criticized for not focusing on ames sooner , given the obvious increase in his standard of living . there was a '' huge uproar '' in congress when cia director james woolsey decided that no one in the agency would be dismissed or demoted . '' some have clamored for heads to roll in order that we could say that heads have rolled , '' woolsey declared . '' sorry , that 's not my way . '' woolsey resigned under pressure . maas , 242 . ames 's attorney , plato cacheris , had threatened to litigate the legality of fbi searches and seizures in ames 's home and office without traditional search warrants , although ames 's guilty plea made the threat moot . congress then passed a new law giving that specific power to the foreign intelligence surveillance court . maas , 242 . cia sources betrayed . vitaly yurchenko was a kgb officer in the fifth department of directorate k , '' the highest-ranking kgb officer ever to defect to the united states '' . in august 1985 , he defected via rome to the united states , only to return to the soviet union three months later . ames was privy to all information that yurchenko gave to the cia and was able to transmit it to the kgb , which allowed easy cover-ups of lost information . yurchenko returned to the soviet union in 1985 and was reassigned to a desk job within the fcd as a reward for helping to keep ames 's spying a secret . major general dmitri polyakov was the highest-ranking figure in the gru , giving information to the cia from the early 1960s until his retirement in 1980 . he was executed in 1988 after ames exposed him . polyakov was probably the most valuable asset compromised by ames . one cia official said of polyakov , '' he did n't do this for money . he insisted on staying in place to help us . '' wise , david . nightmover : how aldrich ames sold the cia to the kgb for 4.6 million , harpercollins , 1995 , . excerpted in time : victims of aldrich ames colonel oleg gordievsky was the head of the london rezidentura ( station ) and spied for the sis ( mi6 ) . ames handed over information about gordievsky that positively identified him as a double agent , although gordievsky managed to escape to the finnish border , where he was extracted to the united kingdom via norway by the sis before he could be detained in the soviet union . adolf tolkachev was an electrical engineer who was one of the chief designers at the phazotron company , which produces military radars and avionics . tolkachev passed information to the cia between 1979 and 1985 , compromising multiple radar and missile secrets , as well as turning over classified information on avionics . he was arrested in 1985 after being compromised by both ames and edward lee howard , and was executed in 1986 . was a line x ( technical & scientific intelligence ) officer at the washington rezidentura . martynov revealed the identities of fifty soviet intelligence officers operating from the embassy , and technical and scientific targets that the kgb had penetrated . maas , 6 . martynov 's name was given to the kgb by ames , and martynov was executed . major sergei motorin was a line pr ( political intelligence ) officer at the washington rezidentura , whom the fbi tried to blackmail into spying for the u.s . he eventually cooperated for his own reasons . motorin was one of two moles at the rezidentura betrayed by ames and was executed in 1988 . colonel leonid poleshchuk was a line kr ( counterintelligence ) agent in nigeria , also betrayed by ames . poleshchuk 's arrest was attributed to a chance encounter in which kgb agents had observed a cia agent loading a dead drop . after some time , poleshchuk was seen removing the contents . poleshchuk was eventually tried and executed . sergey fedorenko was a nuclear weapons expert assigned to the soviet delegation to the united nations . in 1977 , ames was assigned to handle him , and fedorenko betrayed information about the soviet missile program to ames . the two men became good friends , hugging when fedorenko was about to return to moscow . '' we had become close friends '' , said ames . '' we trusted each other completely . '' ames was initially hesitant to inform on fedorenko , but soon after handing over the majority of the information , he decided to betray him to '' do a good job '' for the kgb . back in the ussr , fedorenko used political connections to get himself out of trouble . years later , fedorenko met his friend ames for an emotional reunion over lunch and promised to move to the u.s . for good . ames promised to help . shortly after lunch , ames betrayed him to the kgb for a second time . fedorenko escaped arrest , defected , and is currently living in rhode island . in a 2004 interview with howard hart , who was the cia station chief of bonn , west germany in the late 1980s , it was revealed that in 1988 , ames also betrayed a mikoyan engineer who had been working with the cia for fourteen years , and had provided complete technical , test , and research data on all of the soviet union 's fighter jets . according to hart , his information '' allowed the us government to prevent the skies from being blacked out by soviet bombers , saved us billions of dollars . since we knew precisely what they could do '' . . aldrich ames and jonathan pollard . rafi eitan , the israeli handler of jonathan pollard , who served 30 years in prison for passing classified information to israel , alleged that pollard was blamed for some of ames crimes . eitan stated that pollard never exposed american agents in the soviet union or elsewhere and that he believed ames tried to blame pollard to clear himself of suspicion . eitan said '' i have no doubt that had pollard been tried today , in light of what is known about ames and other agents who were exposed , he would have received a much lighter sentence '' . . in popular culture . ames 's story is dramatized in the 1998 movie aldrich ames : traitor within , starring timothy hutton as ames . the 2014 abc miniseries the assets is based on the book circle of treason : a cia account of traitor aldrich ames and the men he betrayed by sandra grimes and jeanne vertefeuille , two of the investigators who uncovered ames 's espionage . grimes is one of the central characters in the series . ames was portrayed by american actor joseph dimartino in the television program mysteries at the museum ( season 2 , episode 6 ) which chronicled the aldrich ames story and the infamous mailbox used as a signal . ames was also mentioned in the 2003 film the recruit , which uses the examples of ames , nicholson and howard , to examine the ways in which the cia works to prevent external espionage , but is , and always will be , subject to internal espionage . ames is featured in ben macintyre 's best selling book the spy and the traitor : the greatest espionage story of the cold war . macintyre observes that ames had no particular communist sympathies , but , having been promised some 4m , his only motivation was money ( '' to buy a bigger car '' ) . ames is also a subject of thematic card in a cold war related board game twilight struggle . ames is used as a plot device in frederick forsyth 's novel '' icon '' . published in 1996 by bantam books . ames is attributed for the quote '' lying is wrong , son , but if it serves a greater good , it 's ok . '' in the title scene of the television program condor ( season 2 , episode 2 , if it serves a greater good ) . however , in ben macintyre 's best selling book the spy and the traitor : the greatest espionage story of the cold war , macintyre attributes this quote to ames ' father .