Sexual ritual

rites of passage . part of the rites of passage of growing up are what have been termed 'rites of separation from the asexual world.followed by rites of incorporation into the world of sexuality' . arnold van gennep , the rites of passage ( 1977 ) p . 67 these may be formal or semi-formal—'for some students , going to college is partly a sexual ritual , like the ceremonial dances of the whooping crane ' northrop frue et al , northrop frye 's writing on education ( 2000 ) p . 92 —or take the form of a more private induction : 'formal and artificial.the impression that a long-established rite was to be enacted , among staffordshire figurs and papier-mâché trays , with the compelling , detached formality of nightmare' . antony powell , a buyer 's market ( 1981 ) p . 267-8 freud was particularly interested in ethnological accounts of 'the '' ceremonial '' ( purely formal , ritual , or official ) coitus , which takes place ' in connection with 'the taboo of virginity' . sigmund freud , on sexuality ( pfl 7 ) p . 268-9 . wedding as orgy . freud also noted that in 'numerous examples of marriage ceremonies there can be no doubt that people other than the bridegroom , for example his assistants and companions ( our traditional '' groomsmen '' ) , granted full sexual access to the bride' . freud , sexuality p . 269n to his followers , 'the wedding as orgy , with the bride taking on all the men present , is the clear historical reality behind the modern jokes.and the climactic line-up or '' gang '' -kissing of the bride , by all the men present' . g . legman , the rationale of the dirty joke vol ii ( 1973 ) p . 90-2 in such a view , 'other examples of sacred or permitted public coitus of all women with all men do survive , in similarly modified '' kissing '' form ' , as under the mistletoe 'to revive the dying sun at the winter solstice , when the strongest human '' life-magic '' , namely ritual intercourse , is to be deployed' . legman , rationale p . 90 . interaction ritual . to the sociologist looking upon 'sexual intercourse as interaction ritual.sexual intercourse is the ritual of love ; it both creates and recreates the social tie ( since durkheimian rituals need to be repeated periodically , as solidarity runs down ) , and symbolizes it' . randall collins , interaction ritual chains ( princeton 2004 ) p . 235 in similar fashion , margot anand has pointed out that 'rituals pervade our daily life and give it a sense of ceremony and celebration ( . ) a ritual , through your own unique symbolic gestures.will help you transform your lovemaking into a special and sacred act' . margo anand , the art of sexual ecstasy ( 1990 ) p . 71 erving goffman has noted however 'the considerable informational delicacy of this form of interaction ' , and how 'individuals may use darkness to ensure strategic ambiguity' . erving goffman , relations in public ( penguin 1972 ) p . 235 . compulsions . in perversion , sexual rituals may emerge as a necessary part of sexual activity . for the criminologist , 'sexual ritual involves repeatedly engaging in an act or series of acts in a certain manner because of a sexual need' . j . e . douglas et al , crime classification manual ( 2006 ) p . 296 within a relationship , 'the compulsive libido type takes advantages of opportunities to use the specific sexual ritual that causes intense arousal , and in its stronger form , the compulsive lover can only arouse using the sexual object or ritual . sandra pertot , when your sex drives do n't match ( 2007 ) p . 8 in any relationship however , ' a sexual habit that becomes routine or stylised.can lead to a sexual ritual ' , so that 'if you do n't have a way to talk to your partner about your sexual relationship , you may find yourself.stuck in sexual rituals that could be limiting your sexual enjoyment ' : g . anderson/b . k . weinhold , connective bargaining ( 1981 ) p . 53 and p . 58 as a wife might say , ' '' same old technique , same old lewis . it 's you all right , i 'd know that old routine anywhere' . mary stewart , airs above the ground ( 1967 ) p . 98 thus one 's sex life may all 'be about rituals : the ritual of sex in the morning , or the ritual of sex at night ; and the ritual of sex at anniversaries , and the ritual of sex at christmas' . eric berne , sex in human loving ( 1970 ) p . 47 . dharmic art . in the buddhist art of india , bhutan , nepal and tibet , yab-yum is the male deity in sexual union with his female consort . the symbolism is associated with anuttarayoga tantra where the male figure is usually linked to compassion and skillful means ( upaya ) , and the female partner to 'insight ' ( prajñā ) . keown , damien . ( 2003 ) . a dictionary of buddhism , p . 338 . oxford university press . the symbolism of union and sexual polarity is a central teaching in tantric buddhism , especially in tibet . the union is realised by the practitioner as a mystical experience within one 's own body . herrmann-pfandt , adelheid . '' yab yum iconography and the role of women in tibetan tantric buddhism . '' the tibet journal . vol . xxii , no . 1 . spring 1997 , pp . 12-34 . yab-yum is generally understood to represent the primordial ( or mystical ) union of wisdom and compassion . the marriage of wisdom and method by marco pallis tantric buddhism is itself an outcrop of tantra , advanced techniques of which included 'the ritual sex act ( maithuna ) which was a feature of tantric yoga' . sophie hoare , yoga ( london 1977 ) p . 19 given that 'sex is holy to a tantric.tantric art , writings and religious rituals glorify sex' . k . devi , in margo anand , the art of sexual ecstasy ( 1990 ) p . 39 . private worship . a sex organ 'makes an admirable fertility symbol , and has been worshipped as such privately from time to time , or even publicly.gives dramatic promise of productivity and protection' . berne , p . 78-80 such '' worship '' may only become more common in late modernity , as 'in our secular culture sexuality often replaces religion as a means of pursuing the meaning of life' . gail sheehy , new passages ( london 1996 ) p . 328-9 alan watts maintains that 'when you are in love with someone , you do indeed see them as a divine being.through a tremendous outpouring of psychic energy in total devotion and worship for this other person' . watts , in anand , p . 62 a woman may 'want someone who adores me.like he was adoring my breasts with his hands' . kate cann , sea change ( london 2007 ) p . 48 and p . 297 a man ( more ambivalently ) may muse on 'the white breasts he worships ; adores ; is scared of ; detests' . sean thomas , the cheek perforation dance ( london 2003 ) p . 230 for shakespeare , 'this is the liver-vein , which makes flesh a deity , a green goose a goddess ; pure , pure idolatry' . g . blakemore evans ed . , the riverside shakespeare ( 1997 ) p . 229 in the further reaches of chick lit , ' the male organ.becomes a tower of strength , a tree trunk in girth , the pillar that sustains the universe.a pillar of hercules , sustaining heaven ' amanda hemingway , soulfire ( london 1994 ) p . 277 and p . 437 —evidence perhaps that 'the phallic religious tendency is alive in the modern and the civilized.a compulsive fascination ' c . r . aldrich , the primitive mind and modern civilization ( 1999 ) p . 153 and p . 146 with what jung termed 'the phallus as the quintessence of life and fruitfulness' . c . g . jung , psychology of the unconscious 9london 1944 ) p . 57 correspondingly , the western adept may borrow , in the quest 'to create a sacred space.names given to the vagina in the east , including valley of joy , great jewel , pearl , lotus blossom , moist cave , ripe peach , enchanted garden , and full moon' . anand , p . 72 and p . 215 . literature . in the satyricon , the hero is throughout 'hounded by the mighty rage of priapus of hellespont'—almost certainly because early on he 'has offended priapus.by impersonating him in some sexual ceremonies' . petronius , the satyricon ( penguin 1986 ) p . 157 and p . 17 . see also .