Women's suffrage

history . in ancient athens , often cited as the birthplace of democracy , only adult male citizens who owned land were permitted to vote . through subsequent centuries , europe was generally ruled by monarchs , though various forms of parliament arose at different times . the high rank ascribed to abbesses within the catholic church permitted some women the right to sit and vote at national assemblies – as with various high-ranking abbesses in medieval germany , who were ranked among the independent princes of the empire . their protestant successors enjoyed the same privilege almost into modern times . marie guyart , a french nun who worked with the first nations peoples of canada during the seventeenth century , wrote in 1654 regarding the suffrage practices of iroquois women , '' these female chieftains are women of standing amongst the savages , and they have a deciding vote in the councils . they make decisions there like the men , and it is they who even delegated the first ambassadors to discuss peace . '' women mystics confront the modern world ( marie-florine bruneau : state university of new york : 1998 : p . 106 ) the iroquois , like many first nations peoples in north america , had a matrilineal kinship system . property and descent were passed through the female line . women elders voted on hereditary male chiefs and could depose them . the emergence of modern democracy generally began with male citizens obtaining the right to vote in advance of female citizens , except in the kingdom of hawai ' i , where universal suffrage was introduced in 1840 without mention of sex ; however , a constitutional amendment in 1852 rescinded female voting and put property qualifications on male voting . in sweden , conditional women 's suffrage was in effect during the age of liberty ( 1718–1772 ) . karlsson sjögren , åsa , männen , kvinnorna och rösträtten : medborgarskap och representation 1723–1866 men , women , and suffrage : citizenship and representation 1723–1866 , carlsson , stockholm , 2006 ( in swedish ) other possible contenders for first '' country '' to grant women suffrage include the corsican republic ( 1755 ) , the pitcairn islands ( 1838 ) , the isle of man ( 1881 ) , and franceville ( 1889–1890 ) , but some of these operated only briefly as independent states and others were not clearly independent . in 1756 , lydia taft became the first legal woman voter in colonial america . this occurred under british rule in the massachusetts colony . in a new england town meeting in uxbridge , massachusetts , she voted on at least three occasions . unmarried white women who owned property could vote in new jersey from 1776 to 1807 . in the 1792 elections in sierra leone , then a new british colony , all heads of household could vote and one-third were ethnic african women . simon schama , rough crossings , ( 2006 ) , p . 431 , . 19th century . the female descendants of the bounty mutineers who lived on pitcairn islands could vote from 1838 . this right was transferred after they resettled in 1856 to norfolk island ( now an australian external territory ) . the seed for the first woman 's rights convention in the united states in seneca falls , new york was planted in 1840 , when elizabeth cady stanton met lucretia mott at the world anti-slavery convention in london . the conference refused to seat mott and other women delegates from the u.s . because of their sex . in 1851 , stanton met temperance worker susan b . anthony , and shortly the two would be joined in the long struggle to secure the vote for women in the u.s . in 1868 anthony encouraged working women from the printing and sewing trades in new york , who were excluded from men 's trade unions , to form working women 's associations . as a delegate to the national labor congress in 1868 , anthony persuaded the committee on female labor to call for votes for women and equal pay for equal work . the men at the conference deleted the reference to the vote . in the us , women in the wyoming territory were permitted to both vote and stand for office in 1869 . see facsimile at subsequent american suffrage groups often disagreed on tactics , with the national american woman suffrage association arguing for a state-by-state campaign and the national woman 's party focusing on an amendment to the u.s . constitution . the 1840 constitution of the kingdom of hawaii established a house of representatives , but did not specify who was eligible to participate in the election of it . some academics have argued that this omission enabled women to vote in the first elections , in which votes were cast by means of signatures on petitions ; but this interpretation remains controversial . the second constitution of 1852 specified that suffrage was restricted to males over twenty years-old . in 1849 , the grand duchy of tuscany , in italy , was the first europe state to have a law that provided for the vote of women , for administrative elections , taking up a tradition that was already informally sometimes present in italy . in 1881 the isle of man , an internally self-governing dependent territory of the british crown , enfranchised women property owners . with this it provided the first action for women 's suffrage within the british isles . the pacific commune of franceville ( now port vila , vanuatu ) , maintained independence from 1889 to 1890 , becoming the first self-governing nation to adopt universal suffrage without distinction of sex or color , although only white males were permitted to hold office . '' wee , small republics : a few examples of popular government , '' hawaiian gazette , november 1 , 1895 , p1 for countries that have their origins in self-governing colonies but later became independent nations in the 20th century , the colony of new zealand was the first to acknowledge women 's right to vote in 1893 , largely due to a movement led by kate sheppard . the british protectorate of cook islands rendered the same right in 1893 as well . another british colony in the same decade , south australia , followed in 1894 , enacting laws which not only extended voting to women , but also made women eligible to stand for election to its parliament at the next vote in 1895 . . 20th century . the newly federated parliament of australia passed laws to permit voting and standing for election , to adult women for national elections from 1902 ( with the exception of aboriginal women in some states ) . the first place in europe to introduce women 's suffrage was the grand duchy of finland in 1906 , and it also became the first place in continental europe to implement racially-equal suffrage for women . as a result of the 1907 parliamentary elections , finland 's voters elected 19 women as the first female members of a representative parliament . this was one of many self-governing actions in the russian autonomous province that led to conflict with the russian governor of finland , ultimately leading to the creation of the finnish nation in 1917 . in the years before world war i , women in norway also won the right to vote . during wwi , denmark , canada , russia , germany , and poland also recognized women 's right to vote . the representation of the people act 1918 saw british women over 30 gain the vote . dutch women won the vote in 1919 , and american women on august 26 , 1920 , with the passage of the 19th amendment ( the voting rights act of 1965 secured voting rights for racial minorities ) . irish women won the same voting rights as men in the irish free state constitution , 1922 . in 1928 , british women won suffrage on the same terms as men , that is , for ages 21 and older . the suffrage of turkish women was introduced in 1930 for local elections and in 1934 for national elections . by the time french women were granted the suffrage in july 1944 by charles de gaulle 's government in exile , by a vote of 51 for , 16 against , france had been for about a decade the only western country that did not at least allow women 's suffrage at municipal elections . voting rights for women were introduced into international law by the united nations ' human rights commission , whose elected chair was eleanor roosevelt . in 1948 the united nations adopted the universal declaration of human rights ; article & nbsp ; 21 stated : '' ( 1 ) everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country , directly or through freely chosen representatives . ( 3 ) the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government ; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures . '' the united nations general assembly adopted the convention on the political rights of women , which went into force in 1954 , enshrining the equal rights of women to vote , hold office , and access public services as set out by national laws . one of the most recent jurisdictions to acknowledge women 's full right to vote was bhutan in 2008 ( its first national elections ) . most recently , in 2011 king abdullah of saudi arabia let women vote in the 2015 local elections and be appointed to the consultative assembly . suffrage movements . the suffrage movement was a broad one , made up of women and men with a wide range of views . in terms of diversity , the greatest achievement of the twentieth-century woman suffrage movement was its extremely broad class base . dubois , dumneil 2012 , p . 474 . one major division , especially in britain , was between suffragists , who sought to create change constitutionally , and suffragettes , led by english political activist emmeline pankhurst , who in 1903 formed the more militant women 's social and political union . pankhurst would not be satisfied with anything but action on the question of women 's enfranchisement , with '' deeds , not words '' the organisation 's motto . maroula joannou , june purvis ( 1998 ) the women 's suffrage movement : new feminist perspectives p . 157 . manchester university press , 1998 sophia a . van wingerden , the women 's suffrage movement in britain , 1866–1928 ( 1999 ) ch 1 . throughout the world , the women 's christian temperance union ( wctu ) , which was established in the united states in 1873 , campaigned for women 's suffrage , in addition to ameliorating the condition of prostitutes . under the leadership of frances willard , '' the wctu became the largest women 's organization of its day and is now the oldest continuing women 's organization in the united states . '' there was also a diversity of views on a '' woman 's place '' . suffragist themes often included the notions that women were naturally kinder and more concerned about children and the elderly . as kraditor shows , it was often assumed that women voters would have a civilizing effect on politics , opposing domestic violence , liquor , and emphasizing cleanliness and community . an opposing theme , kraditor argues , held that women had the same moral standards . they should be equal in every way and that there was no such thing as a woman 's '' natural role '' . aileen s . kraditor , the ideas of the woman suffrage movement : 1890–1920 ( 1965 ) ch 3 christine bolt , the women 's movements in the united states and britain from the 1790s to the 1920s ( 2014 ) pp . 133 , 235 for black women , achieving suffrage was a way to counter the disfranchisement of the men of their race . dubois , dumneil 2012 , p . 475 . despite this discouragement , black suffragists continued to insist on their equal political rights . starting in the 1890s , african american women began to assert their political rights aggressively from within their own clubs and suffrage societies . '' if white american women , with all their natural and acquired advantages , need the ballot , '' argued adella hunt logan of tuskegee , alabama , '' how much more do black americans , male and female , need the strong defense of a vote to help secure their right to life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness ? '' . timeline . the voting rights act of 1965 prohibited racial discrimination in voting , and secured voting rights for racial minorities throughout the u.s . . venezuela . after the generation of 1928 , women started participating more actively in politics . in 1935 , women 's rights supporters founded the feminine cultural group ( known as 'acf ' from its initials in spanish ) , with the goal of tackling women 's problems . the group supported women 's political and social rights , and believed it was necessary to involve and inform women about these issues to ensure their personal development . it went on to give seminars , as well as founding night schools and the house of laboring women . groups looking to reform the 1936 civil code of conduct in conjunction with the venezuelan representation to the union of american women called the first feminine venezuelan congress in 1940 . in this congress , delegates discussed the situation of women in venezuela and their demands . key goals were women 's suffrage and a reform to the civil code of conduct . around twelve thousand signatures were collected and handed to the venezuelan congress , which reformed the civil code of conduct in 1942 . in 1944 , groups supporting women 's suffrage , the most important being feminine action , organized around the country . during 1945 , women attained the right to vote at a municipal level . this was followed by a stronger call of action . feminine action began editing a newspaper called the correo cívico femenino , to connect , inform and orientate venezuelan women in their struggle . finally , after the 1945 venezuelan coup d'état and the call for a new constitution , to which women were elected , women 's suffrage became a constitutional right in the country . in non-religious organizations . the right of women to vote has sometimes been denied in non-religious organizations ; for example , it was not until 1964 that women in the national association of the deaf in the united states were first allowed to vote . . in religion . catholicism . the pope is elected by cardinals . women are not appointed as cardinals , and therefore women can not vote for the pope . the female catholic offices of abbess or mother superior are elective , the choice being made by the secret votes of the nuns belonging to the community . on 6 february 2021 , pope francis appointed nathalie becquart an undersecretary of the synod of bishops , making her the first woman to have the right to vote in the catholic synod of bishops . . islam . in some countries , some mosques have constitutions prohibiting women from voting in board elections . . judaism . in conservative judaism , reform judaism , and most orthodox jewish movements women have the right to vote . since the 1970s , more and more modern orthodox synagogues and religious organizations have been granting women the rights to vote and to be elected to their governing bodies . in a few ultra-orthodox jewish communities women are denied the vote or the ability to be elected to positions of authority . . timelines . timeline of first women 's suffrage in majority-muslim countries timeline of women 's suffrage timeline of women 's legal rights ( other than voting ) . see also . anti-suffragism list of monuments and memorials to women 's suffrage list of suffragists and suffragettes list of the first female holders of political offices in europe list of the first female members of parliament by country list of women 's rights activists open christmas letter suffrage hikes woman suffrage procession women 's suffrage movement in washington women 's suffrage organizations women 's work . notes . further reading . gisela bock . das politische denken des suffragismus : deutschland um 1900 im internationalen vergleich , in : gisela bock : geschlechtergeschichten der neuzeit , goettingen 2014 , 168–203 . bush , julia . women against the vote : female anti-suffragism in britain ( oxford up , 2007 ) . crawford , elizabeth . the women 's suffrage movement : a reference guide , 1866–1928 ( 1999 ) , worldwide coverage ; 800pp ; online fletcher , ian christopher , laura e . nym mayhall , and philippa levine , eds . women 's suffrage in the british empire : citizenship , nation , and race . oxon : routledge , 2000 . patricia grimshaw . women 's suffrage in new zealand . auckland : auckland university press , 1972 . hannam , june , mitzi auchterlonie , and katherine holden . international encyclopedia of women 's suffrage ( abc-clio inc , 2000 ) . hannam , june . '' international dimensions of women 's suffrage : ‘ at the crossroads of several interlocking identities ’ '' women 's history review 14.3–4 ( 2005 ) : 543–560 . lloyd , trevor , suffragettes international : the worldwide campaign for women 's rights ( new york : american heritage press , 1971 ) . susan magarey . passions of the first wave feminists . melbourne : cambridge university press , 2001 . markoff , john . '' margins , centers , and democracy : the paradigmatic history of women 's suffrage , '' signs ( 2003 ) 29 1 pp . & nbsp ; 85–116 in jstor mayhall , laura e . nym . the militant suffrage movement : citizenship and resistance in britain , 1860–1930 . oxford : oxford university press , 2003 . melanie nolan , and caroline daley , eds . suffrage and beyond : international feminist perspectives . auckland : auckland university press , 1994 . owens , rosemary cullen . smashing times : a history of the irish women 's suffrage movement , 1889–1922 ( irish books & media , 1984 ) . raeburn , antonia . militant suffragettes ( london : new english library , 1973 ) on great britain ramirez , francisco o . , yasemin soysal , and suzanne shanahan . '' the changing logic of political citizenship : cross-national acquisition of women 's suffrage rights , 1890 to 1990 '' , american sociological review ( 1997 ) 62 5 pp . & nbsp ; 735–45 . in jstor sangster , joan . one hundred years of struggle : the history of women and the vote in canada . vancouver , canada : university of british columbia press , 2018 . sulkunen , irma , seija-leena nevala-nurmi , and pirjo markkola . suffrage , gender and citizenship : international perspectives on parliamentary reforms . newcastle upon tyne : cambridge scholars publishing , 2008 . van wingerden , sophia a . the women 's suffrage movement in britain , 1866–1928 . united kingdom : palgrave macmillan , 1999 . cherryl walker . the women 's suffrage movement in south africa . cape town : centre for african studies , university of cape town , 1979 . clare wright . you daughters of freedom : the australians who won the vote and inspired the world . melbourne : text publishing , 2018 . united states . jean h . baker . sisters : the lives of america 's suffragists . hill and wang , new york , 2005 . ellen carol dubois and lynn dumenil , eds . ( 1999 ) . through women 's eyes : an american history with documents , 456 ( 475 ) . dubois , ellen carol . harriot stanton blatch and the winning of woman suffrage ( new haven and london : yale university press , 1997 ) dubois , ellen carol . suffrage : women 's long battle for the vote ( new york city : simon & schuster , 2020 ) eleanor flexner . century of struggle : the woman 's rights movement in the united states , enlarged edition with foreword by ellen fitzpatrick ( 1959 , 1975 ; cambridge and london : belknap press , 1996 ) aileen s . kraditor . ideas of the woman suffrage movement , 1890–1920 . ( 1965 ) . midge mackenzie , shoulder to shoulder : a documentary ( new york : alfred a . knopf , 1975 ) . rosalyn terborg-penn . african american women in the struggle for the vote , 1850–1920 . bloomington : indiana university press , 1998 . tetrault , lisa . the myth of seneca falls : memory and the women 's suffrage movement , 1848–1898 . chapel hill : university of north carolina press , 2014 . external links . photo essay on women 's suffrage by the international museum of women women 's suffrage , '' a world chronology of the recognition of women 's rights to vote and to stand for election '' . suffrage in canada cia yearbook : suffrage press release with respect to qatar and yemen uncg special collections and university archives selections of american suffragette manuscripts photographs of u.s . suffragettes , marches , and demonstrations ada james papers and correspondence ( 1915–1918 ) & nbsp ; – a digital collection presented by the university of wisconsin digital collections center . ada james was a leading a social reformer , humanitarian , and pacifist from richland center , wisconsin and daughter of state senator david g . james . the ada james papers document the grass roots organizing and politics required to promote and guarantee the passage of women 's suffrage in wisconsin and beyond . women 's suffrage in germany & nbsp ; – january 19 , 1919 & nbsp ; – first suffrage ( active and passive ) for women in germany suffragists vs . suffragettes & nbsp ; – brief article outlining origins of term '' suffragette '' , usage of term and links to other sources . women in congress & nbsp ; – information about women who have served in the u.s . congress including historical essays that cover suffrage . culture victoria & nbsp ; – historical images and videos for the centenary of women 's suffrage woman suffragist , mary ellen ewing vs the houston school board & nbsp ; – collection at the university of houston digital library . gayle olson-raymer , '' the early women 's movement '' , 17-page teaching guide for high school students , zinn education project/rethinking schools women 's suffrage and equal rights in the claremont colleges digital library select '' suffrage '' subject , at the persuasive cartography , the pj mode collection , cornell university library timeline and map of woman suffrage legislation state by state 1838–1919 women of protest : photographs from the records of the national woman 's party [ detailed chronology of national woman 's digitized items from the national american women 's suffrage collection in the rare book and special collections division of the library of congress up & doing ! , a video re-enactment of the 1894 passage of women 's suffrage in south australia produced by the parliament of south australia