De facto standard

examples . a selection of well-known and illustrative examples of de facto and de jure standards are : with consolidation by tradition : the drive side in a given country starts as a user/industry preference , turning to a local tradition , then a traffic code . the qwerty system was one of several options for the layout of letters on typewriter ( and later keyboard ) keys . it became a de facto standard because it was used on the most commercially successful early typewriters and is now used on devices which have no moving parts such as touchscreens . the mp3 audio format started as an alternative to wav for internet music distribution , then replaced it & nbsp ; — it is now supported by the vast majority of music players , audio transport , media server and noncommercial media . wav and mp3 are also '' de jure iso formats '' . with consolidation by uniqueness and efficiency : html ( computer file format ) started as '' de facto '' ( 1993-1995 ) and became the '' de jure '' standard ( 1995–present day ) . pdf ( computer file format ) was first created in 1993 by adobe . adobe internal standards were part of its software quality systems , but they were neither published nor coordinated by a standards body . with the acrobat reader program available for free , and continued support of the format , pdf eventually became the de facto standard for printable documents . in 2005 , pdf/a became a de jure standard as iso 19005-1:2005 . in 2008 adobe 's pdf 1.7 became iso 32000-1:2008 . examples of long-time de facto but never de jure standards ( for computer file formats ) : autocad dxf : a de facto ascii for import and export of cad drawings and fragments in the 1980s and 1990s . in the 2000s , xml based standards emerged as de facto standards . microsoft word doc ( over all other old pc word processors ) : one of the best known de facto standards . due to the market dominance of word , it is supported by all office applications that intend to compete with it , typically by reverse engineering the undocumented file format . microsoft has repeatedly internally changed the file specification between versions of word to suit their own needs , while continuing to reuse the same file extension identifier for different versions . fits and csv file formats , commonly used in science and engineering , with fits traditionally used in astronomy . tex typesetting system , commonly used in creating scientific articles and reports for publication ( in fact many journals require the publication to be fully written in tex ) . other examples : most american-made spark plugs require a -inch hex socket ( 21mm ) to remove or install . the spacing of the rollers in a bicycle chain . the ibm personal computer ( pc ) . by one year after its 1981 release , john dvorak described the pc as rapidly becoming a '' de facto standard microcomputer '' . with the ms-dos and microsoft windows operating systems , it gained a large share of the personal computer market . because of the great influence of the ibm pc on the personal computer market , competing products like the rainbow 100 were eventually withdrawn . interpreted programming languages such as php that have multiple implementations tend to also have a de facto standard . in php 's case the de facto standard is the binaries available from php.net , rather than the phalanger implementation for example . use of programming languages r and python in data science and other science disciplines , other than computer science , where automated analysis of data is required , without system being too complicated for a persons not being professionals . various connectors and interconnect standards - despite being formalized and standardized , almost no product is required by law or other legal standard to use them . examples : phone connector ( 3.5mm jack ) , rca and xlr connectors , used in audio industry , for connecting audio equipment , headphones , mixing consoles , microphones ( often with phantom power with 48 volts in most applications ) , stage lighting , etc . midi connection ( using so called din connector ) , electrical and protocol standard for connecting musical instruments , synthesizers , drum machines , sequencers and some audio equipment , as well daisy chaining them . dmx512 ( commonly just dmx ) with xlr connector to control and sometimes power stage and venue lights , effects , smoke machines , laser projectors and sometimes pyrotechnics . pci express electrical and mechanical interface , and interconnect protocol used in pc computers , desktops , laptops , server , and industrial applications . gpib , also known as ieee-488 , multi-device bus protocol , mechanical and electronic interface commonly found in electronic test equipment , i.e . digital multimeters , oscilloscopes , initially created by hewlett hewlett-packard as hp-ip . commonly used with scpi protocol . hdmi , display port , vga for video , rs-232 for low bandwidth serial communication . usb for high speed serial interface in computers and for powering or charging low power external devices ( like mobile phones , headphones , portable hard drives ) usually using micro usb plug and socket . banana plugs in low frequency voltage and current measurements . bnc for medium frequency signal in electronic engineering testing ( commonly used by signal generators , oscilloscopes , advanced multimeters and lcr meters , vector network analysers ) and sometimes in video signal ( analog and digital ) delivery between devices in studios and other professional settings . amp 's amp mate-n-lok / molex 's standard . 093 '' pin power plug and socket , commonly used on hard drives , and other medium power devices both in pc , server , industrial applications , and others where standardized power connector for 5v and 12v is required , and off the shelf psu can be used . in embedded applications it is usually replaced with smaller square connector , that is easier to connect . 2.54mm ( 0.1 inch ) pin spacing on many electronic components , including dip , sil packages , header connectors , and many more . the standard spacing enable use of these devices in prototyping boards and standardized sockets . 4-20ma current loop standard used by sensors , transducers , amplifiers , transmission lines , control and measurement equipment . 3.5 inch and 2.5 inch ( actual dimensions are different ) hard drive standard sizes . 19-inch rack standards for telecommunication , server , storage , audio , music , video and power equipment . atx motherboard , back plane and power standards ( but the intention of atx design was to reduce number of standards , so it was not established by convention , but by biggest pc hardware and components manufacturers at the time ) . many more connectors and cables , like standardized ribbon cables medium speed and power connection between boards and devices ; use of rj45 jack in ethernet switches for management purposes ( instead of another de facto standard , rs-232 connector ) ; sd and microsd cards for removable storage in mobile applications like photo cameras , video recorders , phones ; aa batteries . materials and units of packaging : solder in electronics , like sn60pb40 . aluminium alloys , with most common being 6061 . volumes , weights and quantities of common consumables usually follow round number of base legal units , i.e . in europe milk is usually sold in 1 liter containers , and eggs are sold as quantity of 6 . intermodal 48-foot container . standards battles . there are many examples of de facto consolidation ( of a standard ) by market forces and competition , in a two-sided market , after a dispute . examples : alternating current over direct current : see war of the currents . vhs over betamax ( see videotape format war ) : when the vhs format for videotape recording was introduced , other recording formats were already available in the market . regardless of whether betamax was superior from a technical point of view or not , the vhs format won the format war due to superior marketing tactics by its proponents . the market could not support two competing formats ; vhs became the de facto standard and betamax was eventually withdrawn . blu-ray over hd dvd ( see high definition optical disc format war ) . scalable vector graphics ( svg ) over adobe flash ( ceasing development in 2020 ) for vector graphics web page animations . examples of standards that are '' in dispute '' for turns de facto : oasis 's opendocument format ( a de facto standard for linux users ( apache openoffice , libreoffice , calligra , koffice et al . use it as default file format ) ) vs microsoft 's office open xml format ( a de facto standard for ms-windows and mac users ) .