Dual (grammatical number)

comparative characteristics . many languages make a distinction between singular and plural : english , for example , distinguishes between man and men , or house and houses . in some languages , in addition to such singular and plural forms , there is also a dual form , which is used when exactly two people or things are meant . in many languages with dual forms , the use of the dual is mandatory as in some arabic dialects using dual in nouns as in hejazi arabic , and the plural is used only for groups greater than two . however , the use of the dual is optional in some languages such as other modern arabic dialects including egyptian arabic . in other languages such as hebrew , the dual exists only for words naming time spans ( day , week , etc . ) , a few measure words , and for words that naturally come in pairs and are not used in the plural except in rhetoric : eyes , ears , and so forth . in slovene , the use of the dual is mandatory except for nouns that are natural pairs , such as trousers , eyes , ears , lips , hands , arms , legs , feet , kidneys , breasts , lungs , etc . , for which the plural form has to be used unless one wants to stress that something is true for both one and the other part . for example , one says '' oči me bolijo '' ( my eyes hurt ) , but if they want to stress that both their eyes hurt , they say '' obe očesi me bolita '' . when using the pronoun '' obe/oba '' ( both ) , the dual form that follows is mandatory . although relatively few languages have the dual number , using different words for groups of two and groups greater than two is not uncommon . english has words distinguishing dual vs . plural number , including : both/all , either/any , neither/none , between/among , former/first , and latter/last . japanese , which has no grammatical number , also has words dochira ( which of the two ) and dore ( which of the three or more ) , etc . use in modern languages . among living languages , modern standard arabic has a mandatory dual number , marked on nouns , verbs , adjectives and pronouns . ( first-person dual forms , however , do not exist ; compare this to the lack of third-person dual forms in the old germanic languages . ) many of the spoken arabic dialects have a dual marking for nouns ( only ) , and its use can be mandatory in some dialects , and not mandatory in others . likewise , akkadian had a dual number , though its use was confined to standard phrases like '' two hands '' , '' two eyes '' , and '' two arms '' . the dual in hebrew has also atrophied , generally being used for only time , number , and natural pairs ( like body parts ) even in its biblical hebrew . inuktitut and the related central alaskan yup'ik language use dual forms ; however , the related greenlandic language does not ( though it used to have them ) . khoekhoegowab and other khoe languages mark dual number in their person-gender-number enclitics , though the neuter gender does not have a dual form . austronesian languages , particularly polynesian languages such as hawaiian , niuean and tongan , possess a dual number for pronouns but not for nouns , as nouns are generally marked for plural syntactically and not morphologically . other austronesian languages , particularly languages of the philippines , have a dual first-person pronoun ; these languages include ilokano , tausug , and kapampangan . these forms mean '' we '' , but specifically '' you and i '' . this form once existed in tagalog or sometimes but has disappeared from standard usage ( save for certain dialects such as in batangas ) since the middle of the 20th century , with kitá as the only surviving form ( e.g . mahál kitá , loosely '' i love you '' ) . the dual was a standard feature of the proto-uralic language , and lives on in the samoyedic languages and in most sami languages , while other branches like finnish , estonian and hungarian have lost it . sami also features dual pronouns , expressing the concept of '' we two here '' as contrasted to '' we '' . nenets , two closely related samoyedic languages , features a complete set of dual possessive suffixes for two systems , the number of possessors and the number of possessed objects ( for example , '' two houses of us two '' expressed in one word ) . the dual form is also used in several modern indo-european languages , such as irish , scottish gaelic , slovene and sorbian ( see below for details ) . the dual was a common feature of all early slavic languages around the year 1000 . arabic . in modern standard arabic , as well as in classical arabic , the use of dual is compulsory when describing two units . for this purpose , , is added to the end of any noun or adjective regardless of gender or of how the plural is being formed . in the case of feminine nouns ending with , this letter becomes a . when the dual noun or adjective is rendered in the genitive or accusative forms , the becomes . besides the noun and adjective dual , there are also dual verb forms of compulsory use for second and third person , together with their pronouns , but none for the first person . the use of dual in spoken arabic varies widely and is mostly rendered a even when in nominative context . whereas its use is quite common in levantine arabic , for instance meaning '' two kilograms '' , dual forms are generally not used in maghrebi arabic , where two units are commonly expressed with the word , as in meaning '' a pair of kilograms '' , with the noun appearing in singular . hebrew . biblical and mishnaic hebrew . in biblical , mishnaic , and medieval hebrew , like arabic and other semitic languages , all nouns can have singular , plural or dual forms , and there is still a debate whether there are vestiges of dual verbal forms and pronouns . however , in practice , most nouns use only singular and plural forms . usually is added to masculine words to make them plural for example '' book / books '' , whilst with feminine nouns the is replaced with . for example , '' cow / cows '' . the masculine dual form is shown in pointed text with a pathach ; in a purely consonantal text , masculine dual is not indicated at all by the consonants . the dual for ( two ) days is with pathach under the mem . an example of the dual form is '' day / two days / two or more days '' . some words occur so often in pairs that the form with the dual suffix is used in practice for the general plural , such as '' eye / eyes '' , used even in a sentence like '' the spider has eight eyes . '' thus words like only appear to be dual , but are in fact what is called '' pseudo-dual '' , which is a way of making a plural . sometimes , words can change meaning depending on whether the dual or plural form is used , for example ; can mean eye or water spring in the singular , but in the plural eyes will take the dual form of whilst springs are . adjectives , verbs , and pronouns have only singular and plural , with the plural forms of these being used with dual nouns . modern hebrew . in modern hebrew as used in israel , there is also a dual number , but its use is very restricted . the dual form is usually used in expressions of time and number . these nouns have plurals as well , which are used for numbers higher than two , for example : . languages with dual number . afroasiatic languages egyptian ( including coptic ) semitic languages akkadian ( assyrian and babylonian ) biblical hebrew classical arabic gulf arabic ( in nouns ) maltese sabaean ugaritic austronesian languages tagalog language cebuano language ilocano language polynesian languages māori ( only the personal pronouns ) samoan ( only the personal pronouns ) tongan ( only the personal pronouns ) tahitian ( only the personal pronouns ) hawaiian ( only the personal pronouns ) chamorro ( reflected in the verb ) indo-european languages avestan ancient greek germanic languages ( only first and second person pronouns and verb forms ) north frisian ( only pronouns in some dialects ) gothic old english ( only the personal pronouns ) old norse ( only the personal pronouns ) insular celtic languages : old irish irish ( only nouns , only following the numeral for two ) scottish gaelic ( only nouns , only following the numeral for two ) old church slavonic old east slavic sanskrit slovene chakavian sorbian languages : lower sorbian upper sorbian pama–nyungan languages woiwurrung–daungwurrung language yidiny uralic languages khanty mansi nenets sami languages other natural languages american sign language dogrib ( only in the first person ) hopi ( nouns ) hmong inuktitut khamti '' khamti . '' indian institute of technology guwahati . n.p . , n.d . web . 14 oct . 2012 . khoe languages komo language otero , manuel a . '' dual number in ethiopian komo . '' nilo-saharan : models and descriptions . by angelika mietzner and anne storch . cologne : rudiger koppe verlag , 2015 . 123-34 . print . kunama language idris , nikodimos.1987 . the kunama and their language . addis ababa university ba thesis . lakota ( only the personal pronouns , always means '' you and i '' ) mapuzungun melanesian pidgin ( several related languages ) mi'kmaq nhanda santali ( nouns ) tonkawa xavante language yaghan constructed languages quenya ( elvish language created by j.r.r tolkien ) . see also . grammatical number . notes . references . wilhelm von humboldt ( 1828 ) . über den dualis . berlin charles fontinoy . le duel dans les langues sémitiques . paris : les belles lettres , 1969 . fritz , matthias . der dual im indogermanischen . heidelberg : universitätsverlag winter , 2011 .