Video rental shop

history . the world 's oldest business that rents out copies of movies for private use was opened by eckhard baum in kassel , germany in the summer of 1975 . baum collected movies on super 8 film as a hobby and lent pieces of his collection to friends and acquaintances . because they showed great interest in his films , he came up with the idea of renting out films as a sideline . over the years , videotapes and optical discs were added to the range . baum still operates the business as of september 2015 and was portrayed in the june 2006 documentary film eckis welt by olaf saumer . filmklasse kassel : entry on eckis welt , kunsthochschule kassel the first professionally managed video rental store in the u.s . was opened by george atkinson in december 1977 at 12011 wilshire boulevard in los angeles . after 20th century fox had made an agreement with magnetic video founder andre blay to license him 50 of their titles for sale directly to consumers , amongst them butch cassidy and the sundance kid , m a s h , hello , dolly ! , patton , the french connection , the king and i and the sound of music , atkinson bought all the titles in both vhs and beta formats , and offered them for rent . 1975 - 1979 entertainment merchants association such stores led to the creation of video rental chains such as west coast video , blockbuster llc , and rogers plus in the 1980s . sony released their first commercially available video recorders in the united states on june 7 , 1975 , betamax is born , june 7 , 1975 and the following year , on october 25 , 1976 , universal and disney filed a lawsuit against sony in the case known as sony corp . of america v . universal city studios , inc . the two studios tried to ban the sales of vcrs , and later the rental of movies , which would have destroyed the video rental business in the us . justice harry blackmun sided with the studios , while justice john paul stevens ruled in sony 's favor . eventually , on january 17 , 1984 , the supreme court overruled the u.s . 9th circuit court of appeals after justice sandra day o ’ connor changed her mind , leading to a 5-to-4 ruling . thirty years ago today , sandra day o ’ connor saved the future of video a look back at how the content industry almost killed blockbuster and netflix ( and the vcr ) what the 1984 betamax ruling did for us all copyright ruling rings with echo of betamax by mid-1985 , the united states had 15,000 video rental stores , and many record , grocery , and drug stores also rented tapes . by may 1988 , the number of video specialty stores was estimated to be 25,000 , in addition to 45,000 other outlets that also offered video rentals . groceries rented tapes for as little as 0.49 as loss leaders . the press discussed the vcr '' and the viewing habits it has engendered — the saturday night trip down to the tape rental store to pick out for a couple of bucks the movie you want to see when you want to see it '' . video rental stores had customers of all ages and were part of a fast-growing business . by 1987 , for example , pennsylvania had 537 stores that primarily dealt in renting videotapes , with annual spending per resident of 10.50 . six years after its founding , philadelphia 's west coast video had by 1989 come to operate more than 700 stores in the us , canada , and britain . also in 1987 , the revenue taken in from the home video market surpassed box office revenues for that year . herbert , andrew . '' videoland : movie culture at the american video store '' . university of california press , 2014 , p . 17-18 . in the 1980s , it was common for shops to rent equipment—typically vhs recorders—as well as tapes . some video shops also had adults-only sections containing x-rated videos . to cope with the videotape format war of the 1970s and 1980s , some stores initially stocked both vhs and betamax cassettes , while others specialized in one format or the other . during the 1980s most stores eventually became all-vhs , contributing to the eventual demise of beta . in the late 1990s , dvds began appearing in video rental stores . rogers video was the first chain to provide dvd rentals in canada . other chains and independent stores later transitioned to the newer format . similarly , many stores now rent blu-ray disc movies after the high definition optical disc format war was finished in the late 2000s decade . the widespread availability of video on demand ( vod ) on cable tv systems and vhs-by-mail services offered consumers a way of watching movies without having to leave their home . with the advent of the world wide web , internet services such as netflix have become increasingly popular since the mid–2000s . all of these new ways of watching movies have greatly reduced the demand for video rental shops , and many have closed down as a result . in 2000 , there were 27,882 stores open , billboard 8 . july 2000 and in late 2015 , it down to 4,445 . in 2017 , it was reported that about 86 % of 15,300 video stores that were open in the us in 2007 were closed , bringing the number down to about 2,140 remaining stores . the total income from brick and mortar rentals for 2017 was about 390 million . in mid-june 2020 , malaysian video rental chain speedy video closed its 14 remaining shops in response to competition from satellite television and streaming platforms . on january 5 , 2021 , glenview , illinois based family video announced it was closing all of its remaining video rental stores . family video was the last remaining video rental chain in the united states and its closing marked the end of large scale video rental stores . rental and copyright . the rental of books , cds , tapes , and movies is covered by copyright law . copyright owners sometimes put warning notices on the packaging of products such as vhs cassettes to deter copyright infringement . in some cases , the rights of consumers in europe and the us are in fact significantly broader than described in such warnings . companies . blockbuster gamerush blockbuster express rental kiosks civic video ( australia , canada , new zealand and thailand ) discount drug mart ( united states ) dvdxpress rental kiosks family video ( united states and canada ) geo ( japan ) hastings entertainment ( united states ) hoyts kiosk ( australia ) jumbo video ( canada ) microplay ( jumbo video 's game-focused stores ) le superclub vidéotron ( quebec , canada ) major video ( united states ) movie gallery ( united states and canada ) hollywood video ( united states ) gamecrazy ( movie gallery 's game-focused stores ) video update ( united states and canada ) movies to go , iowa ( acquired by moovies , inc . , greenville , sc - ceased operations in 1997 ) ( united states ) redbox rental kiosks rogers plus ( canada ) speedy video distributors ( malaysia ) that 's entertainment llc canada 's largest video store - st . catharines , ontario top hat video ( united states ) tsutaya ( japan ) united video ( new zealand ) video city ( northern ireland and canada ) video ezy stores and kiosks ( australia , new zealand , canada , and thailand ) videoland ( netherlands ) west coast video ( united states , canada , and peru ) xtra-vision ( ireland and canada ) . gallery . file : hk queensway plaza hmv shop.jpg hmv music and film retailer , store in hong kong file : vice and video.jpg vice and video rentals and bar in ohio file : dvd vending machine.jpg a dvd rental machine in japan file : riwa video på heimdal , trondheim ( 03 ) . jpg a video rental store in trondheim in 2014 . see also . book rental service dvd-by-mail . footnotes . further reading . daniel herbert , videoland : movie culture at the american video store . berkeley , ca : university of california press , 2014 .