Fyresdal

general information . name . the old norse form of the name was fyrisdalr . the first element is the genitive case of the name of the lake fyrir ( now called fyresvatn ) . the last element is dalr which means '' valley '' or '' dale '' . the name of the lake is derived from the word fura which means '' pine tree '' . prior to 1879 , the municipality was called moland . . coat-of-arms . the coat of arms is from modern times . they were granted in 1992 . the arms show two silver-colored broadaxes on a green background . it was chosen to represent the forestry work in the municipality . history . fyresdal is known for its many findings from the viking age , its mighty viking graves , heaps of slag , and the former pilgrim church that once stood proudly north of the village centre . people travelled to this church from all over norway and even from europe . it was said that the stream running behind the church had healing powers . a few miles south of the site where the heggland pilgrim church , once stood at molandsmoen , a stone with runic alphabet can be found . this is a reminder from the viking age when horse battles were held there . originally , one believes , there were four of them . klokkarhamaren is a little mountain on a headland in the municipal centre , and it is the location of a cave called munkhola . it is believed that a certain number of monks in medieval times resided , held masses , and sought refuge here . economy . most people in the municipality work in the fields of agriculture , forestry , trade , industry and tourism . there are not many full-time farmers left in fyresdal , but many people derive a secondary income from agriculture and forestry . the largest employer in the municipality is telemark kildevann which makes bottled water and soft drinks for the national and swedish markets . there are also a few small high-competence mechanical factories which produce parts for the offshore industry . transportation . the vest-telemark airport , fyresdal is located in moland , with a nearby hotel . this is a joint operation under the name airparc fyresdal . fyresdal has bus connections with the city centres of skien and porsgrunn in telemark county ; arendal in aust-agder county ; bergen in hordaland county ; haugesund in rogaland county ; and to the capital , oslo . a bus also travels between fyresdal and dalen , the municipal centre of tokke , every school day of the year . geography . thumb the municipality of fyresdal consists of several little villages north of the municipal centre , in the main valley of fyresdal , and on the western and southeastern shores of fyresvatn ( lake fyresdal ) , one of norway 's deepest lakes . the municipal centre of fyresdal is moland . this is the location of the municipal assembly , the school , the community house , kindergartens , the home for the elderly , and most of the commercial enterprises in the village . moland is the most heavily populated aea of fyresdal . fyresdal is among the westernmost municipalities in telemark . it borders the municipalities of tokke , kviteseid , and nissedal in telemark county . it also shares borders with the municipalities of åmli , bygland , and valle in aust-agder county . neighbourhoods in fyresdal . . attractions . one of fyresdal 's two churches ( moland kyrkje ) and the rectory ( fyresdal prestegard ) are located in moland . according to telemark folklore , the troll of røykjenes moved across the lake because the bells of the moland church were disturbing its nap . the vicarage is where vidkun quisling was born . within the administrative center of moland , one also finds the old village centre , folkestadbyen . folkestadbyen is the location of the fyresdal vertshus , a swiss-styled dwelling built in 1890 . it has housed and served both food and drinks to locals and travellers for over 100 years . øyskogen park , which contains viking graves and a lot of traditional telemark houses ( e.g . lofts and hórreo ) is also part of the old village . the fyresdal bygdemuseum , the village museum , is also located in øyskogen . folkestadbyen was named the prettiest town/village centre in telemark in 2003 . rv 355 runs straight through the municipality from north to south . hegglandsgrend , veum , and hauggrend are villages along rv 355 located north of moland . hegglandsgrend is the home of heggland gamle kyrkjegard ; veum is the home of veum kyrkje . a rudolf steiner school ( an education in norway ) was located at foldsæ in hauggrend . this so-called friskole ( '' free school '' ) based on the thoughts and ideas of rudolf steiner was however closed down after few years . in hauggrend , one also finds the most distinct mountain in fyresdal , roan . this peak is above sea level , but not the highest point in the municipality , since the border to valle passes near the peak of napuren , at a height of above sea level , some 300 feet higher . north of moland , to the west from the main valley we find the little settlements of kleivgrend , åslandsgrend . turning left of the rv 355 in hegglandsgrend , one comes to kleivgrend and åslandsgrend . between kleivgrend and the neighbouring municipality valle on the western side of the mountains , one finds an old track that priests and bishops used to get between the counties of agder and telemark . this track is named bispevegen ( '' bishop 's road '' ) and every year a march called bispevegmarsjen ( '' the bishop 's road march '' ) starts in kleivgrend . in fjellgardane , germans ran mines in the 16th century at moisesberg . on the western shores of fyresvatn ( lake fyresdal ) , to the southwest of moland , one finds the villages of fardal , breivik . here one finds an old and interesting stone called røykjenessteinen . in 2005 , one also found some arrowheads in this area that are believed to be 4000–4500 years old . farther along the country road we find birtedalen , a popular place for people who set up mountain cabins . south of moland , at the southern end of rv 355 across the scenic and mighty mountain of våmur where one can see the lake from up above , one comes to the little village of kilegrend . in the old days there was no road connecting kilegrend with the municipal centre . thus one had to travel by boat . for years the steamboats called teisner and fyresdølen travelled between moland and kilegrend . the latter eventually capsized and sank . the wreck is still visible in kilegrend . image : moland kyrkje.jpg moland church image : fyresdal flyplass ( tårn ) . jpg fyresdal airport image : veum kyrkje.jpg veum church image : fyresvatn.jpg fyresvatn ( lake fyresdal ) . notable natives . : no : petter veum ( 1811 in fyresdal - 1889 ) fiddler : no : jon lauritz qvisling ( 1844 in fyresdal - 1930 ) clergyman , author and genealogist : no : john lie ( 1846 in fyresdal - 1916 ) author ivar peterson tveiten ( 1850 in fyresdal – 1934 ) a norwegian teacher and politician torgeir vraa ( 1868 in fyresdal – 1934 ) a norwegian educator , newspaper editor and politician haakon lie ( 1884 in fyresdal – 1970 ) a norwegian forester , novelist , poet and children 's writer vidkun quisling ( 1887 in fyresdal – 1945 ) a norwegian military officer , politician , nazi collaborator & treason : no : frode rui ( born 1969 im fyresdal ) a norwegian weightlifter sugar plum fairies ( formed 2000 in fyresdal – 2009 ) a folk and pop band . references . external links . municipal fact sheet from statistics norway