Alfredo Stroessner

operation condor . paraguay was a leading participant in operation condor , a campaign of state terror and security operations officially implemented in 1975 which were jointly conducted by the military dictatorships of six south american countries ( chile , argentina , bolivia , paraguay , uruguay and brazil ) with the support of the united states . greg grandin ( 2011 ) . the last colonial massacre : latin america in the cold war . university of chicago press . p . 75 . walter l . hixson ( 2009 ) . the myth of american diplomacy : national identity and u.s . foreign policy . yale university press . p . 223 . human rights violations characteristic of those in other south american countries such as kidnappings , torture , forced disappearances and extrajudicial killings were routine and systematic during the stroessner regime . following executions , many of the bodies of those killed by the regime were dumped in the chaco or the río paraguay . the discovery of the '' archives of terror '' in 1992 in the lambaré suburb of asunción confirmed allegations of widespread human rights violations . 1992 : archives of terror discovered . national geographic . retrieved august 11 , 2018 . pastor coronel was the chief of the department of investigations , or secret police . he would interview people in a pileta , a bath of human vomit and excrement , or ram electric cattle prods up their rectums . general alfredo stroessner . the telegraph , august 17 , 2006 . retrieved august 6 , 2015 . in 1975 , the secretary of the paraguayan communist party , , was dismembered alive with a chainsaw while stroessner listened on the phone . gimlette , p . 12 alex henderson ( february 4 , 2015 ) . 7 fascist regimes enthusiastically supported by america . alternet . retrieved march 8 , 2015 . the screams of tortured dissidents would often be recorded and played over the phone to family members , and sometimes the bloody garments of those killed were sent to their homes . simon sebag montefiore . history 's monsters . metro books , 2008 . p . 271 . under stroessner , egregious human rights violations were committed against the aché indian population of paraguay 's eastern districts , largely as the result of u.s . and european corporations wanting access to the country 's forests , mines and grazing lands . the aché indians resided on land that was coveted and had resisted relocation attempts by the paraguayan army . the government retaliated with massacres and forced many aché into slavery . in 1974 the un accused paraguay of slavery and genocide . only a few hundred aché remained alive by the late 1970s . the stroessner regime financed this genocide with u.s . aid . stroessner was careful not to show off or draw attention from jealous generals or foreign journalists . he avoided rallies and took simple holidays in patagonia . he became more tolerant of opposition as the years passed , but there was no change in the regime 's basic character . during stroessner 's rule , no socialist states had diplomatic relations with paraguay , with the sole exception of non-aligned yugoslavia . ' & 39 ; paraguay : a country study ' & 39 ; , '' foreign relations '' . lcweb2.loc.gov . retrieved on august 21 , 2014 . stroessner made many state visits , including to japan , the united states , and france , as well as to south africa , a country which paraguay developed close bilateral ties with in the 1970s . he also made several visits to west germany , although over the years his relations with that country deteriorated . since he had always been known as pro-german , this worsening of relations , combined with his feeling that the u.s . had abandoned him , was regarded as a personal blow to stroessner . it has been asserted that the roman catholic church is the only reason stroessner did not have absolute control over the country . ' & 39 ; paraguay : a country study ' & 39 ; , '' interest groups : the roman catholic church '' . lcweb2.loc.gov . retrieved on august 21 , 2014 . after the destruction of asunción university in 1972 by police , the archbishop of paraguay ismael rolón silvero excommunicated the minister of the interior and the chief of police , and proscribed the celebration of holy mass in a sign of protest against the stroessner regime . when pope john paul ii visited paraguay in 1988 , his visit bolstered what was already a robust anti-stroessner movement within the country . ' & 39 ; new york sun ' & 39 ; obituaries : '' alfredo stroessner , 93 , old-style military dictator of paraguay '' . nysun.com . retrieved on august 21 , 2014 . stroessner gave a written television interview to alan whicker as part of a documentary called the last dictator ( uk : april 7 , 1970 ) for the television series whicker 's world . the programme was released in a region 2 dvd box-set by the uk 's network imprint . economics . stroessner dedicated large proportions of the paraguayan national budget to the military and police apparatus , both fundamental to the maintenance of the regime . according to a 1963 article from time magazine , stroessner spent 33 % of the 1962 annual budget on army and police , 15 % for education , and just 2 % for public works . dictator by popular request , time , february 22 , 1963 there was no income tax and public spending was the smallest percentage of gdp in latin america . stroessner enacted several economic development projects , including the building of the largest hydroelectric power plant in the world in itaipu dam , developing paraguay 's economy : although paraguay received only 15 % of the contracts , it was a major factor allowing the country to have the highest rate of growth in latin america for most of the 1970s . ' & 39 ; the economist ' & 39 ; obituary : alfredo stroessner . economist.com ( august 24 , 2006 ) . retrieved on 2014-08-21 . the construction of the itaipu dam , as well as the subsequently built yacyretá dam on the paraguay–argentina border , displaced thousands of paraguayans , pushing them from their homes , often without any restitution . the itaipu dam displaced at least 80,000 paraguayans , and the yacyretá was estimated to have displaced at least that many by december 2008 . 160 workers died building the itaipu dam . gimlette , p . 277 stroessner also promoted projects that purportedly developed the country 's infrastructure . amongst these were the improvement of highways and the issuing of 15–20 hectare land grants to military personnel upon completion of their service , provided that the land would be used for farming purposes . over 10,000 soldiers took up this offer . by the end of el stronato , the second biggest city was puerto flor de lis ( renamed '' puerto presidente stroessner , '' then '' ciudad del este '' ) , founded just 32 years before . downfall . in april 1987 , stroessner lifted the state of siege as part of the run-up to elections the following spring . however , several draconian security laws remained in effect , meaning that the substance ( if not the form ) of the state of siege was still in place . as had been the case for over three decades , opposition leaders continued to be arbitrarily arrested and opposition meetings and demonstrations were broken up ( often brutally ) . stroessner was nominated by the colorados once again , and was the only candidate who was allowed to campaign completely unmolested . under these circumstances , the february 1988 election was no different from past elections , with stroessner officially registering 89 percent of the vote — a margin that his rivals contended could only have been obtained through massive fraud . country profile : paraguay . library of congress federal research division ( october 2005 ) . on february 3 , 1989 , only six months after being sworn in for what would have been his eighth full term , stroessner was ousted in a coup d'état led by general andrés rodríguez , his closest confidant for over three decades . one reason for the coup was that the generals feared one of stroessner 's offspring would succeed him . of the two , alfredo ( aka 'freddie ' ) , was a cocaine addict and gustavo , a pilot , was loathed for being homosexual . a more outlandish rumour was that lino oviedo threatened rodríguez with a grenade if he did not launch the coup . the two generals , rodríguez and oviedo , fought a brief artillery duel over asunción . gimlette , p . 29 . later life and death . after the coup , stroessner fled to brazil , where he lived in exile for the next 17 years . the eastern city of puerto flor de lis , which had been renamed puerto presidente stroessner in his honor , in 1989 was again renamed ciudad del este . asunción 's airport had been named after him during his regime , but was later renamed silvio pettirossi international airport . stroessner died on august 16 , 2006 , in brasília , at the age of 93 . the immediate cause of death was a stroke . he had been suffering from pneumonia after undergoing a hernia operation . nbcnews.com : '' ex-paraguayan dictator stroessner dies at 93 '' . nbc news ( august 16 , 2006 ) . retrieved on 2014-08-21 . the paraguayan government preemptively dismissed any suggestions for honoring the late president within paraguay . bbc : '' ex-paraguayan ruler dies in exile '' . bbc news ( august 16 , 2006 ) . retrieved on 2014-08-21 . he tried to return to paraguay before his death , to die in his homeland , but he was rebuked and threatened with arrest by the government . in part due to stroessner 's abuses , paraguay 's current constitution limits the president to a single five-year term with no possibility of reelection , even if nonsuccessive . the ban on any sort of reelection has become so entrenched in paraguayan politics that in 2017 , when the legislature debated an amendment that would have allowed then-president horacio cartes to run for reelection , massive protests forced the colorados to abandon those plans . family . marriage and children . stroessner was married to eligia mora ( 26 december 1910 – 3 february 2006 ) . they had three children : gustavo , alfredo and graciela . alfredo domínguez stroessner , son of graciela , was a senator . the couple were forcibly separated after his exile ; she fled to the us , while he was given asylum in brazil . although they stayed in touch by phone and occasionally met up , they were unable to live together , and neither stroessner nor his son were able to return to paraguay to attend her funeral . . extramarital affairs . stroessner was a philanderer who engaged in extramarital affairs before and during his presidency . according to many sources , some of his affairs were with teenage girls as young as 13 , and he may have fathered over 30 illegitimate children . the affairs were divulged after his downfall , further tarnishing his image . . references . bibliography . . further reading . cia : stroessner 's paraguay . external links . obituary bbc news paraguay 's archive of terror the presidential papers of dwight d . eisenhower official letter to president stroessner ( 1959 ) paraguay seeks stroessner return obituarythe guardian alfredo stroessner , 93 , old-style military dictator of paraguay obituary the economist stroessner , paraguay ’ s enduring dictator , dies the new york times gen . alfredo stroessner , colorful dictator of paraguay for 35 years , dies in exile at 93