1964 in film

top-grossing films ( u.s . ) . the top ten 1964 released films by box office gross in north america are as follows : . events . january 29 – 50-year-old actor alan ladd is found dead in bed at his home in palm springs , california . an autopsy confirms the cause of death as cerebral edema caused by an acute overdose of '' alcohol and three other drugs '' his death is ruled accidental . ladd 's final film , the carpetbaggers , is released in april and , despite mostly negative reviews from critics , becomes a major commercial success . march 6 – elvis presley 's 14th motion picture , kissin ' cousins , is released to theaters . july 6 – a hard day 's night , the first beatles film , premieres . august 27 – the film mary poppins is released . not only is it a massive hit with both critics and audiences , but it also becomes disney 's highest-grossing film of all time . it goes on to win five academy awards , including best actress for julie andrews . october – in photoplay magazine , hedda hopper announces that sophia loren and paul newman will star in the film version of arthur miller 's play after the fall , with loren in the role that was written about marilyn monroe . the film is never made . awards . academy awards : : best picture : my fair lady – warner bros . : best director : george cukor – my fair lady : best actor : rex harrison – my fair lady : best actress : julie andrews – mary poppins : best supporting actor : peter ustinov – topkapi : best supporting actress : lila kedrova – zorba the greek : best foreign language film : yesterday , today and tomorrow ( ieri , oggi , domani ) , directed by vittorio de sica , italy golden globe awards : : drama : : best picture : becket : best actor : peter o'toole – becket : best actress : anne bancroft – the pumpkin eater : comedy or musical : : best picture : my fair lady : best actor : rex harrison – my fair lady : best actress : julie andrews – mary poppins : other : best supporting actor : edmond o'brien – seven days in may : best supporting actress : agnes moorehead – hush.hush , sweet charlotte : best director : george cukor – my fair lady palme d'or ( cannes film festival ) : : les parapluies de cherbourg ( the umbrellas of cherbourg ) , directed by jacques demy , france golden lion ( venice film festival ) : : il deserto rosso ( the red desert ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni , italy golden bear ( berlin film festival ) : : susuz yaz ( dry summer ) , directed by metin erksan , turkey . 1964 film releases . united states unless stated . january–march . january 1964 19 january strait-jacket 22 january the comedy of terrors pyro . the thing without a face zulu 29 january dr . strangelove or : how i learned to stop worrying and love the bomb man 's favorite sport ? 30 january a global affair surf party february 1964 5 february man in the middle 10 february the incredibly strange creatures who stopped living and became mixed-up zombies 12 february seven days in may 19 february dead ringer les parapluies de cherbourg 24 february crack in the world 26 february he rides tall march 1964 6 march kissin ' cousins 8 march the last man on earth ( united states/italy ) 11 march becket mail order bride 12 march a tiger walks 18 march 7 faces of dr . lao the flesh eaters law of the lawless the pink panther 19 march two thousand maniacs ! the world of henry orient 25 march flight from ashiya the misadventures of merlin jones muscle beach party 26 march the fall of the roman empire 28 march the incredible mr . limpet . april–june . april 1964 1 april the curse of the living corpse gunfighters of casa grande 3 april dark purpose 5 april the best man 8 april paris when it sizzles the strangler 9 april the carpetbaggers 14 april the quick gun 21 april the chalk garden french dressing 28 april the third secret woman of straw 29 april mothra vs . godzilla ( japan ) may 1964 2 may the bargee the thin red line 6 may the visit 11 may what a way to go ! 13 may the eyes of annie jones 14 may girl with green eyes 19 may signpost to murder 20 may black like me the brass bottle rhino ! viva las vegas 27 may a distant trumpet 29 may 3 nuts in search of a bolt june 1964 1 june the horror of party beach the new interns 3 june for those who think young hey there , it 's yogi bear ! honeymoon hotel 4 june 633 squadron the three lives of thomasina 10 june advance to the rear bedtime story mchale 's navy wild and wonderful 11 june the unsinkable molly brown 17 june robinson crusoe on mars 23 june a shot in the dark the young lovers 24 june flipper 's new adventure the masque of the red death robin and the 7 hoods 25 june circus world 26 june the cavern . july–september . july 1964 2 july the moon-spinners the pawnbroker 3 july island of the blue dolphins 6 july a hard day 's night 7 july the killers 8 july lady in a cage 22 july bikini beach good neighbor sam marnie shock treatment 29 july carry on spying one potato , two potato august 1964 5 august ride the wild surf 6 august the night of the iguana 11 august crooks in cloisters dogora ( japan ) 12 august a house is not a home the patsy 14 august behold a pale horse 16 august diary of a bachelor 26 august the beauty jungle i 'd rather be rich 27 august mary poppins september 1964 2 september the 7th dawn bullet for a badman the comedy man topkapi 4 september the gospel according to st . matthew ( italy ) 11 september lorna 12 september a fistful of dollars ( italy ) 16 september the secret invasion 18 september goldfinger 19 september nothing but a man 25 september fanny hill 27 september lilith . october–december . october 1964 3 october cheyenne autumn 7 october fail-safe 8 october the outrage 11 october blood on the arrow the system 14 october invitation to a gunfighter send me no flowers 20 october the black torment 24 october the lively set 27 october the americanization of emily 28 october rio conchos 29 october the naked kiss the time travelers the train november 1964 2 november where love has gone 4 november kitten with a whip youngblood hawke your cheatin ' heart 5 november flight to fury 8 november fate is the hunter 9 november my fair lady 10 november roustabout stage to thunder rock 11 november pajama party 15 november back door to hell 18 november goodbye charlie 21 november four days in november 25 november ensign pulver 26 november apache rifles 27 november looking for love december 1964 3 december dear heart 4 december kisses for my president 10 december carry on cleo father goose the golden head 12 december raiders from beneath the sea 16 december the disorderly orderly hush.hush , sweet charlotte zorba the greek 18 december emil and the detectives get yourself a college girl 20 december ghidorah , the three-headed monster ( japan ) 22 december kiss me , stupid 25 december the pleasure seekers sex and the single girl 28 december carol for another christmas 30 december the night walker . notable films released in 1964 . united states unless stated . . 3 nuts in search of a bolt , starring mamie van doren and tommy noonan 7 faces of dr . lao , starring tony randall , barbara eden and arthur o'connell , with special effects by george pal the 7th dawn , starring william holden and susannah york 633 squadron , starring cliff robertson , george chakiris and maria perschy – ( u.k . ) . a . adobe and mirror , directed by ebrahim golestan , starring mohammad ali keshavarz , jamshid mashayekhi and pari saberi ( iran ) advance to the rear , directed by george marshall , starring glenn ford , stella stevens and melvyn douglas adventures of zatoichi ( zatōichi sekisho-yaburi ) , directed by kimiyoshi yasuda – ( japan ) ali baba and the seven saracens the alive and the dead ( zhivye i myortvye ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) all these women ( för att inte tala om alla dessa kvinnor ) , directed by ingmar bergman – ( sweden ) the americanization of emily , directed by arthur hiller , starring james garner and julie andrews anatomy of a marriage : my days with françoise , directed by andré cayatte – ( france ) anatomy of a marriage : my days with jean-marc , directed by andré cayatte – ( france ) the ape woman ( la donna scimmia ) , starring ugo tognazzi and annie girardot – ( italy/france ) assassination ( ansatu ) – ( japan ) at midnight i 'll take your soul ( à meia-noite levarei sua alma ) – ( brazil ) atentát – ( czechoslovakia ) a trip to the moon ayee milan ki bela – ( india ) . b . back door to hell , starring jimmie rodgers and jack nicholson backfire ( échappement libre ) , starring jean-paul belmondo and jean seberg – ( france ) ballad in blue , directed by paul henreid and starring ray charles band of outsiders ( bande à part ) , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) the bargee , starring harry h . corbett and eric sykes – ( u.k . ) the beauty jungle , starring ian hendry – ( u.k . ) becket , directed by peter glenville , starring peter o'toole and richard burton – ( u.k./u.s . ) bedtime story , starring marlon brando , david niven and shirley jones before the revolution ( prima della rivoluzione ) , directed by bernardo bertolucci – ( italy ) behold a pale horse , directed by fred zinnemann , starring gregory peck , anthony quinn , omar sharif belarmino , a cinema novo docufiction – ( portugal ) the best man , directed by franklin j . schaffner , written by gore vidal , starring henry fonda and cliff robertson bikini beach , starring frankie avalon , annette funicello , martha hyer and don rickles black god , white devil ( deus e o diabo na terra do sol ) – ( brazil ) black like me , starring james whitmore and roscoe lee browne black peter ( cerný petr ) , directed by miloš forman – ( czechoslovakia ) the black torment , directed by robert hartford-davis – ( u.k . ) blood and black lace ( 6 donne per l'assassino ) , directed by mario bava – ( italy ) blood on the arrow , directed by sidney salkow and starring dale robertson and martha hyer la bonne soupe ( a.k.a . careless love ) , directed by robert thomas – ( italy/france ) the brass bottle , starring tony randall , burl ives and barbara eden bullet for a badman , starring audie murphy , darren mcgavin and ruta lee . c . a carol for another christmas , starring peter sellers and britt ekland the carpetbaggers , starring george peppard , carroll baker and elizabeth ashley carry on cleo , starring sid james and amanda barrie – ( u.k . ) carry on spying , starring kenneth williams and barbara windsor – ( u.k . ) castle of blood ( danza macabra ) , directed by antonio margheriti and sergio corbucci – ( italy/france ) castle of the living dead ( il castello dei morti vivi ) , directed by warren kiefer – ( italy/france ) the chairman ( predsedatel ) – ( u.s.s.r . ) the chalk garden , starring deborah kerr and hayley mills – ( u.k . ) charulata , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) cheyenne autumn , directed by john ford , starring carroll baker , richard widmark , edward g . robinson and karl malden circle of love ( la ronde ) , directed by roger vadim and starring jane fonda – ( france ) circus world , starring john wayne , claudia cardinale and rita hayworth the comedy man , starring kenneth more and cecil parker – ( u.k . ) the comedy of terrors , starring vincent price , peter lorre , boris karloff , basil rathbone crooks in cloisters , starring ronald fraser and barbara windsor – ( u.k . ) the curse of the hidden vault ( die gruft mit dem rätselschloß ) , directed by franz josef gottlieb – ( west germany ) the curse of the living corpse , produced , written and directed by del tenney the curse of the mummy 's tomb , directed by michael carreras – ( u.k . ) . d . dark purpose , starring shirley jones dead ringer , starring bette davis , peter lawford dear heart , directed by delbert mann , starring geraldine page , glenn ford and angela lansbury dear john ( käre john ) , directed by lars-magnus lindgren – ( sweden ) devil doll , directed by lindsay shonteff – ( u.k . ) the devil-ship pirates , starring christopher lee and andrew keir diamonds of the night ( démanty noci ) , directed by jan němec – ( czechoslovakia ) diary of a bachelor , directed by sandy howard , starring william traylor , joe silver and dagne crane diary of a chambermaid ( le journal d'une femme de chambre ) , directed by luis buñuel , starring jeanne moreau and michel piccoli – ( france ) the disorderly orderly , directed by frank tashlin , starring jerry lewis and susan oliver a distant trumpet , starring troy donahue , suzanne pleshette and diane mcbain dog eat dog ( einer frisst den anderen ) , starring jayne mansfield – ( west germany/italy/liechtenstein ) dogora ( a.k.a . uchū daikaijū dogora ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) dosti ( friendship ) , directed by satyen bose – ( india ) dr . crippen , starring donald pleasence – ( u.k . ) dr . sex , directed by ted v . mikels dr . strangelove or : how i learned to stop worrying and love the bomb , directed by stanley kubrick , starring peter sellers ( in three roles ) and george c . scott – ( u.k . ) dry summer ( susuz yaz ) , directed by metin erksan – ( turkey ) . e . the earth dies screaming , starring willard parker , virginia field and dennis price – ( u.k . ) east of sudan , starring anthony quayle , sylvia syms and jenny agutter – ( u.k . ) empire , directed by andy warhol ensign pulver , a sequel to mister roberts , starring robert walker jr . and burl ives the evil of frankenstein , starring peter cushing – ( u.k . ) el extraño viaje ( the strange voyage ) , directed by fernando fernán gómez – ( spain ) the evil of frankenstein , directed by freddie francis – ( u.k . ) the evil stairs ( 마의 계단 , ma-ui gyedan ) , directed by lee man-hee – ( south korea ) the eyes of annie jones , starring richard conte and francesca annis – ( u.k . ) . f . face of the screaming werewolf , starring lon chaney – ( mexico/u.s . ) fail-safe , directed by sidney lumet , starring henry fonda , dan o'herlihy and walter matthau the fall of the roman empire , starring sophia loren , stephen boyd and alec guinness fanny hill , directed by russ meyer – ( west germany/u.s . ) fantômas , starring jean marais – ( france ) fate is the hunter , starring glenn ford , rod taylor and suzanne pleshette father came too ! , starring james robertson justice , leslie phillips and stanley baxter – ( u.k . ) father goose , starring cary grant , leslie caron and trevor howard father of a soldier ( jariskats'is mama ) , directed by revaz chkheidze – ( georgia ) the fifth horseman is fear ( a paty jezdec je strach ) , directed by zbyněk brynych – ( czechoslovakia ) fight , zatoichi , fight ( zatōichi kesshō-tabi ) , directed by kenji misumi – ( japan ) first men in the moon , starring edward judd and lionel jeffries , with special effects by ray harryhausen – ( u.k . ) a fistful of dollars , directed by sergio leone , starring clint eastwood – ( italy ) the flesh eaters , starring martin kosleck flight from ashiya , starring yul brynner and richard widmark flipper 's new adventure , starring luke halpin and pamela franklin the flower and the angry waves ( hana to dotō ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) for those who think young , starring pamela tiffin and james darren forest of the hanged ( pădurea spânzuraţilor ) , directed by liviu ciulei – ( romania ) four days in november , a documentary directed by mel stuart . g . gate of flesh ( nikutai no mon ) , directed by seijun suzuki – ( japan ) gertrud , directed by carl theodor dreyer – ( denmark ) get yourself a college girl , starring mary ann mobley and nancy sinatra ghidorah , the three-headed monster ( san daikaijū : chikyū saidai no kessen ) – ( japan ) the ghost of sierra de cobre , starring martin landau , judith anderson and diane baker girl with green eyes , starring peter finch and rita tushingham – ( u.k . ) a global affair , starring bob hope goldfinger , starring sean connery as james bond ) , with honor blackman , shirley eaton and gert fröbe – ( u.k . ) goodbye charlie , starring debbie reynolds , tony curtis and pat boone good neighbor sam , starring jack lemmon and romy schneider the gorgon , starring peter cushing , barbara shelley and christopher lee – ( u.k . ) the gospel according to st . matthew ( il vangelo secondo matteo ) , directed by pier paolo pasolini – ( italy ) greed in the sun ( cent mille dollars au soleil ) , starring jean-paul belmondo – ( france ) os fuzis ( os fuzis ) , directed by ruy guerra – ( brazil/argentina ) guns at batasi , starring richard attenborough and jack hawkins – ( u.k . ) the guns of august , a documentary directed by nathan kroll and narrated by fritz weaver . h . hamlet ( a.k.a . richard burton 's hamlet ) , starring richard burton hamlet – ( u.s.s.r . ) haqeeqat ( reality ) – ( india ) a hard day 's night , directed by richard lester , starring the beatles – ( u.k . ) hey there , it 's yogi bear ! , a hanna-barbera feature production hide and seek , starring ian carmichael and curd jürgens – ( u.k . ) high infidelity ( alta infedeltà ) , starring nino manfredi – ( italy ) honeymoon hotel , starring robert morse and robert goulet the horror of party beach , directed by del tenney hot enough for june , starring dirk bogarde and sylva koscina – ( u.k . ) a house is not a home , starring shelley winters and robert taylor hush… hush , sweet charlotte , directed by robert aldrich , starring bette davis and olivia de havilland . i . i am cuba ( soy cuba ) , directed by mikhail kalatozov – ( cuba/u.s.s.r . ) iams the incredible mr . limpet , starring don knotts , jack weston and andrew duggan unholy desire ( akai satsui ) , directed by shōhei imamura – ( japan ) invitation to a gunfighter , starring yul brynner , george segal , janice rule it 's not just you , murray ! , a short film directed by martin scorsese italiani brava gente , directed by giuseppe de santis – ( italy ) . j . joseph kilian ( postava k podpírání ) , directed by pavel juráček and jan schmidt – ( czechoslovakia ) joy house ( les felins ) , directed by rené clément , starring alain delon and jane fonda – ( france ) . k . the killers , directed by don siegel , starring lee marvin , angie dickinson , john cassavetes and , in his final film , ronald reagan king & country , directed by joseph losey , starring dirk bogarde and tom courtenay – ( u.k . ) kiss me quick ! , starring althea currier kiss me , stupid , directed by billy wilder , starring dean martin and kim novak kisses for my president , starring polly bergen and fred macmurray kissin ' cousins , starring elvis presley and yvonne craig kitten with a whip , starring ann-margret and john forsythe kwaidan , directed by masaki kobayashi – ( japan ) . l . lady general hua mu-lan ( a.k.a . hua mu lan ) – ( hong kong ) lady in a cage , directed by walter grauman , starring olivia de havilland and james caan lana , queen of the amazons ( lana - königin der amazonen ) , starring catherine schell – ( west germany/brazil ) the last gun ( jim il primo ) , directed by sergio bergonzelli – ( italy ) the last man on earth ( l'ultimo uomo della terra ) , starring vincent price – ( united states/italy ) les pas perdus ( les pas perdus ) , starring michèle morgan and jean-louis trintignant – ( france ) leader , starring dilip kumar and vyjayanthimala – ( india ) the leather boys , directed by sidney j . furie , starring rita tushingham – ( u.k . ) lemonade joe ( limonádový joe aneb koňská opera ) , directed by oldřich lipský – ( czechoslovakia ) let 's talk about women ( se permettete parliamo di donne ) , directed by ettore scola – ( italy ) lilith , directed by robert rossen , starring warren beatty and jean seberg the lively set , starring james darren , pamela tiffin and doug mcclure london in the raw , a documentary about london nightlife – ( u.k . ) the lonely wife ( charulata ) , directed by satyajit ray – ( india ) the long hair of death ( i lunghi capelli della morte ) , directed by antonio margheriti – ( italy ) the long ships , starring richard widmark and sidney poitier – ( u.k./yugoslavia ) looking for love , starring connie francis lorna , directed by russ meyer love in 4 dimensions ( amore in 4 dimensioni ) , directed by mino guerrini – ( italy ) loving couples ( älskande par ) , directed by mai zetterling – ( sweden ) the luck of ginger coffey , directed by irvin kershner , starring robert shaw . m . madu tiga ( three wives ) , starring p . ramlee – ( malaysia ) the magnificent cuckold ( il magnifico cornuto ) , directed by antonio pietrangeli – ( italy ) mail order bride , directed by burt kennedy , starring buddy ebsen and lois nettleton male companion ( un monsieur de compagnie ) , directed by philippe de broca – ( france ) male hunt ( la chasse à l'homme ) , starring jean-paul belmondo – ( france/italy ) man in the middle , starring robert mitchum man 's favorite sport ? , directed by howard hawks , starring rock hudson and paula prentiss marnie , directed by alfred hitchcock , starring tippi hedren and sean connery marriage italian style ( matrimonio all'italiana ) , directed by vittorio de sica , starring sophia loren and marcello mastroianni – ( italy ) a married woman ( une femme mariée ) , directed by jean-luc godard – ( france ) mary poppins , starring julie andrews and dick van dyke the masque of the red death , starring vincent price , hazel court and jane asher – ( u.k . ) mchale 's navy , based on the television sitcom of the same name , starring ernest borgnine men and women ( noite vazia ) , directed by walter hugo khouri – ( brazil ) the misadventures of merlin jones , starring annette funicello and tommy kirk the moon-spinners , starring hayley mills mothra vs . godzilla ( godzilla vs . the thing ) , directed by ishirō honda – ( japan ) murder ahoy ! , starring margaret rutherford and lionel jeffries murder most foul , starring margaret rutherford and ron moody my fair lady , directed by george cukor , starring audrey hepburn and rex harrison my friend lefterakis ( o filos mou o lefterakis ) – ( greece ) . n . the naked kiss , directed by samuel fuller , starring constance towers the new interns , starring dean jones and michael callan night must fall , starring albert finney , mona washbourne and susan hampshire – ( u.k . ) the night of the iguana , directed by john huston , starring richard burton , ava gardner , deborah kerr and sue lyon night train to paris , starring leslie nielsen , aliza gur and dorinda stevens – ( u.s./u.k . ) the night walker , starring barbara stanwyck ( her last film ) and robert taylor nightmare , directed by freddie francis – ( u.k . ) nobody waved good-bye , directed by don owen – ( canada ) nothing but a man , starring ivan dixon , abbey lincoln and yaphet kotto nothing but the best , starring alan bates and millicent martin – ( u.k . ) . o . of human bondage , starring kim novak , laurence harvey and siobhán mckenna – ( u.k . ) one potato , two potato , starring barbara barrie , bernie hamilton and richard mulligan onibaba ( demon woman ) , directed by kaneto shindo – ( japan ) the outrage , directed by martin ritt , starring paul newman , laurence harvey , claire bloom and edward g . robinson . p . pajama party , starring annette funicello and tommy kirk pale flower ( kawaita hana ) – ( japan ) panic button , starring jayne mansfield and maurice chevalier paris when it sizzles , starring william holden and audrey hepburn the patsy , directed by and starring jerry lewis the pawnbroker , directed by sidney lumet , starring rod steiger , geraldine fitzgerald and brock peters the pleasure seekers , starring pamela tiffin , carol lynley , brian keith , tony franciosa and ann-margret point of order ! , a documentary directed by emile de antonio psyche 59 , directed by alexander singer – ( u.k . ) the pumpkin eater , starring anne bancroft and peter finch – ( u.k . ) . q . quick , before it melts , starring george maharis , robert morse , anjanette comer and yvonne craig the quick gun , starring audie murphy . r . raiders from beneath the sea , starring ken scott and merry anders rattle of a simple man directed by muriel box , starring diane cilento and harry h . corbett – ( u.k . ) the ravishing idiot ( une ravissante idiote ) , starring brigitte bardot and anthony perkins – ( france ) red desert ( il deserto rosso ) , directed by michelangelo antonioni , starring monica vitti and richard harris – ( italy ) rhino ! , starring robert culp ride the wild surf , starring tab hunter , fabian forte , shelley fabares and barbara eden ring of spies , starring bernard lee – ( u.k . ) rio conchos , starring stuart whitman , tony franciosa , richard boone and wende wagner robin and the 7 hoods , starring frank sinatra , dean martin , sammy davis , jr . and bing crosby robinson crusoe on mars , directed by byron haskin , starring paul mantee , vic lundin and adam west room 13 ( zimmer 13 ) , directed by harald reinl – ( denmark/france/west germany ) roustabout , starring elvis presley and barbara stanwyck rudolph the red-nosed reindeer – tv film by rankin/bass productions . s . sallah shabati , starring chaim topol – ( israel ) sangam , starring vyjayanthimala , raj kapoor and rajendra kumar – ( india ) santa claus conquers the martians , directed by nicholas webster séance on a wet afternoon , starring kim stanley and richard attenborough – ( u.k . ) the secret invasion , starring stewart granger and mickey rooney seduced and abandoned ( sedotta e abbandonata ) , starring stefania sandrelli – ( italy ) send me no flowers , starring doris day and rock hudson seven days in may , directed by john frankenheimer , starring kirk douglas , burt lancaster , fredric march and ava gardner seven up ! , a documentary directed by paul almond – ( u.k . ) sex and the single girl , starring natalie wood , tony curtis , henry fonda and lauren bacall shehar aur sapna ( the city and the dream ) , directed by khwaja ahmad abbas – ( india ) a shot in the dark , second pink panther film , directed by blake edwards . starring peter sellers and elke sommer – ( u.k./u.s . ) sleep , by andy warhol smokescreen , starring yvonne romain the soft skin ( la peau douce ) , directed by françois truffaut , starring françoise dorléac – ( france ) strait-jacket , directed by william castle , starring joan crawford and diane baker swedish wedding night ( bröllopsbesvär ) , directed by åke falck – ( sweden ) the system , starring oliver reed . t . t.a.m.i . show , a concert film filmed at the santa monica civic auditorium that man from rio ( l'homme de rio ) , starring jean-paul belmondo and françoise dorléac – ( france ) the thin red line , starring keir dullea and jack warden this is my street , directed by sidney hayers – ( u.k . ) the three lives of thomasina , starring patrick mcgoohan and susan hampshire – ( uk/us ) the third secret , starring stephen boyd and pamela franklin – ( u.k . ) three outlaw samurai ( sanbiki no samurai ) – ( japan ) la tía tula ( aunt tula ) – ( spain ) a tiger walks , starring brian keith and vera miles time of indifference ( gli indifferenti ) , starring claudia cardinale , rod steiger and shelley winters – ( italy ) the time travelers , starring preston foster and merry anders tintin and the blue oranges ( tintin et les oranges bleues ) , starring jean-pierre talbot – ( france ) to the moon and beyond , a film created for the 1964 new york world 's fair the tomb of ligeia , directed by roger corman , starring vincent price and elizabeth shepherd topkapi , starring melina mercouri , maximilian schell and peter ustinov the train , directed by john frankenheimer , starring burt lancaster , paul scofield and jeanne moreau – ( u.s./france/italy ) the troops of saint-tropez ( le gendarme de saint-tropez ) , directed by jean girault – ( france ) troubled waters , ( a.k.a . man with two faces ) , starring tab hunter – ( u.k . ) two stage sisters ( wŭtái jiěmèi ) , directed by xie jin – ( china ) two thousand maniacs ! , directed by herschell gordon lewis . u . the umbrellas of cherbourg ( les parapluies de cherbourg ) , directed by jacques demy , starring catherine deneuve and nino castelnuovo – ( france ) the unsinkable molly brown , starring debbie reynolds , harve presnell and ed begley the unvanquished ( l'insoumis ) , starring alain delon – ( france ) . v . the visit , directed by bernhard wicki – ( west germany/u.s./france/italy ) viva las vegas , starring elvis presley and ann-margret . w . weekend at dunkirk ( week-end à zuydcoote ) , directed by henri verneuil – ( italy/france ) welcome , or no trespassing , starring yevgeniy yevstigneyev – ( u.s.s.r . ) what a way to go ! , starring shirley maclaine , paul newman , robert mitchum , dean martin , gene kelly , bob cummings and dick van dyke where love has gone , starring bette davis and susan hayward whirlwind ( shikonmado – dai tatsumaki ) , directed by hiroshi inagaki – ( japan ) white voices ( le voci bianche ) , directed by pasquale festa campanile and massimo franciosa – ( italy ) wild and wonderful , starring tony curtis and christine kaufmann wild west story starring carl-gustaf lindstedt , lena granhagen and gerald mohr witchcraft , starring lon chaney and jack hedley – ( u.k . ) woh kaun thi ? ( who was she ? ) – ( india ) woman in the dunes ( suna no onna ) , directed by hiroshi teshigahara – ( japan ) woman of straw , starring gina lollobrigida and sean connery – ( u.k . ) world without sun ( le monde sans soleil ) , directed by jacques-yves cousteau – ( france ) the world 's most beautiful swindlers ( les plus belles escroqueries du monde ) , composed of five segments – ( france ) wonderful life ( u.s . title : swingers ' paradise overview for swingers ' paradise ( 1965 ) '' , turner classic movies page ) , starring cliff richard and the shadows – ( u.k . ) the world of henry orient , directed by george roy hill , starring peter sellers , paula prentiss and angela lansbury . y . yearning ( midareru ) , directed by mikio naruse – ( japan ) the yellow rolls-royce , starring rex harrison and jeanne moreau – ( u.k . ) the young lovers , starring peter fonda and sharon hugueny youngblood hawke , starring james franciscus , suzanne pleshette and geneviève page your cheatin ' heart , a biopic of hank williams , starring george hamilton . z . zatoichi and the chest of gold ( zatōichi senryō-kubi ) , directed by kazuo ikehiro – ( japan ) zatoichi 's flashing sword ( zatōichi abare dako ) , directed by kazuo ikehiro – ( japan ) zhavoronok ( жаворонок ) , starring gennadi yukhtin – ( u.s.s.r . ) zindagi , starring vyjayanthimala , rajendra kumar , raaj kumar and prithviraj kapoor – ( india ) zorba the greek , directed by michael cacoyannis , starring anthony quinn and alan bates – ( greece/u.k . ) zulu , directed by cy endfield , starring stanley baker , michael caine and jack hawkins – ( u.k . ) . short film series . looney tunes ( 1930 & ndash ; 1969 ) terrytoons ( 1930-1964 ) merrie melodies ( 1931 & ndash ; 1969 ) speedy gonzales ( 1953 & ndash ; 1968 ) bugs bunny ( 1940-1964 ) woody woodpecker ( 1940–1972 ) chilly willy ( 1953–1972 ) . births . january 7 – nicolas cage , actor , producer and director january 13 – penelope ann miller , actress january 18 – jane horrocks , actress january 23 - mariska hargitay , actress january 27 – bridget fonda , actress february 5 – laura linney , actress february 15 – chris farley , actor ( d . 1997 ) february 18 – matt dillon , actor february 20 - french stewart , american actor february 24 – todd field , director and actor february 25 - lee evans , english stand-up comedian and actor march 7 – wanda sykes , american actress , comedian and writer march 9 – juliette binoche , actress march 11 - shane richie , english actor , comedian , television presenter and singer march 17 – rob lowe , actor april 4 – david cross , actor and comedian april 7 – russell crowe , actor april 13 - caroline rhea , canadian-american actress , voice artist and stand-up comedian april 20 crispin glover , actor andy serkis , actor april 24 djimon hounsou , actor cedric the entertainer , actor and comedian april 25 – hank azaria , actor , voice actor , comedian and producer may 11 - tim blake nelson , american actor , writer and director may 12 – pierre morel , french film director may 13 – stephen colbert , american comedian , television host , and writer may 25 – ray stevenson , irish actor june 9 – gloria reuben , actress/singer june 15 – courteney cox , actress june 22 – hiroshi abe , actor and model july 3 – yeardley smith , actress , voice actress , writer , author , comedian and painter july 8 – lam suet , hong kong actor july 16 – canti lau , hong kong actor july 22 john leguizamo , actor , voice actor , comedian and producer david spade , actor , comedian , writer july 26 – sandra bullock , actress july 28 — lori loughlin , actress july 30 – vivica a . fox , actress august 2 – mary-louise parker , actress august 16 – william salyers , actor and voice actor august 20 – flaminia cinque , english actress september 2 – keanu reeves , actor september 6 - rosie perez , american actress , community activist , talk show host , author , dancer and choreographer september 14 – faith ford , american actress september 16 - molly shannon , american actress and comedian september 20 - maggie cheung , hong kong actress september 28 - janeane garofalo , american actress , voice artist , stand-up comedian and writer october 3 – clive owen , actor october 10 - quinton flynn , american film , television and voice actor october 14 - david kaye , canadian-american voice actor october 25 – kevin michael richardson , american actor and voice actor november 14– patrick warburton , american actor and voice artist november 29 – don cheadle , actor december 4 – marisa tomei , actress december 8 – teri hatcher , actress december 19 – ben becker , actor . deaths . january 21 - joseph schildkraut , 67 , austrian actor , the diary of anne frank , the life of emile zola , viva villa ! january 22 – lissy arna , 63 , german actress , eva in silk , the dance goes on january 27 – norman z . mcleod , 65 , american director , the paleface , the secret life of walter mitty january 29 – alan ladd , 50 , american actor , shane , the blue dahlia february 24 – frank conroy , 73 , british actor , the ox-bow incident , the naked city february 27 – orry-kelly , 66 , australian costume designer , casablanca , the maltese falcon february 29 – frank albertson , 55 , american actor , it 's a wonderful life , psycho march 4 – edwin august , 80 , american actor , director and screenwriter march 10 – arthur hohl , 74 , american actor , cleopatra , private detective 62 march 23 – peter lorre , 59 , hungarian actor , casablanca , the maltese falcon april 18 – ben hecht , 70 , american playwright and screenwriter , notorious , his girl friday may 10 – carol haney , 39 , american dancer , actress , the pajama game , invitation to the dance may 13 – diana wynyard , 58 , british actress , cavalcade , gaslight june 27 – mona barrie , 54 , british actress , mystery woman , ladies love danger july 15 – myles connolly , 66 , american screenwriter , state of the union , hans christian andersen july 26 – william a . seiter , 73 , american film director , the beautiful and damned , sons of the desert , roberta august 5 – charles quigley , 58 , american actor , the shadow , the game that kills august 6 cedric hardwicke , 71 , british actor , rope , suspicion reed howes , 64 , american model and actor , the dawn rider , paradise canyon august 12 – ian fleming , 56 , british author of james bond novels , chitty chitty bang bang august 27 – gracie allen , 69 , american comedy actress , a damsel in distress , the big broadcast of 1936 september 23 – fred m . wilcox , 56 , american director , forbidden planet , lassie come home september 28 harpo marx , 75 , american comedy actor ( marx brothers ) , duck soup , a night at the opera nacio herb brown , 68 , american songwriter and composer , the broadway melody , glorifying the american girl october 10 – eddie cantor , 72 , american actor , singer , comedian , whoopee ! , kid millions october 15 – cole porter , 73 , american composer and songwriter , night and day , high society october 19 – russ brown , american actor , damn yankees , anatomy of a murder october 22 – whip wilson , 53 , american actor , night raiders october 23 – jo swerling , 71 , american screenwriter , it 's a wonderful life , guys and dolls october 27 – rudolph maté , 66 , hungarian cinematographer and director , d.o.a . , when worlds collide november 10 – sam newfield , 64 , american director , the terror of tiny town , i accuse my parents november 22 – george tomasini , 55 , american film editor , psycho , rear window december 11 – percy kilbride , 76 , american actor , the southerner , state fair december 14 – william bendix , 58 , american actor , lifeboat , detective story december 31 – gertrude michael , 53 , american actress , murder at the vanities , women in bondage . film debuts . jenny agutter – east of sudan the beatles – a hard day 's night ellen burstyn – for those who think young david carradine – taggart dom deluise – diary of a bachelor judi dench – the third secret olympia dukakis – twice a man morgan freeman – the pawnbroker elliott gould – quick , let 's get married james earl jones – dr . strangelove charlotte rampling – a hard day 's night roy scheider – the curse of the living corpse raquel welch – a house is not a home . references .