Princess Beatrice

personal life . in 2006 , beatrice was briefly in a relationship with paolo liuzzo , an american whose previous charge for assault and battery caused controversy at the time . for ten years , until july 2016 , she was in a relationship with virgin galactic businessman dave clark . in march 2019 , beatrice attended a fundraising event at the national portrait gallery , london , accompanied by property developer edoardo mapelli mozzi , the son of alex mapelli-mozzi , a former british olympian and descendant of the italian nobility ; the bbc describes edoardo as '' also a count '' , like his father . the couple are believed to have begun dating in 2018 . together , they attended the wedding of lady gabriella windsor , beatrice 's second cousin once removed . they became engaged in italy in september 2019 , with their engagement formally announced by the duke of york 's office on 26 september . the wedding was scheduled to take place on 29 may 2020 at the chapel royal at st james 's palace , followed by a private reception in the gardens of buckingham palace , but first the reception and then the wedding itself were postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic . the wedding was eventually held in private on 17 july 2020 , at the royal chapel of all saints , royal lodge , windsor , and was not publicly announced in advance . beatrice 's father walked her down the aisle . she wore the queen mary fringe tiara that was also worn by the queen at her own wedding , and a remodelled norman hartnell dress that was loaned by the queen . princess beatrice has a stepson , christopher woolf ( born 2016 ) , her husband 's child from a relationship with architect dara huang . . activities . in 2002 , beatrice visited children living with hiv in russia . in britain , she supported springboard for children ( a literacy project for primary-school children with learning difficulties ) and the teenage cancer trust . in an interview to mark her 18th birthday , beatrice said she wanted to use her position to assist others through charity work ; she had already undertaken charitable duties alongside her mother through the various organisations the duchess supported . in april 2010 , running to raise money for children in crisis , she became the first member of the royal family to complete the london marathon . beatrice is the patron of forget me not children 's hospice , which supports children with life-shortening conditions in west yorkshire and north manchester . forget me not children 's hospice at the april 2011 wedding of her cousin prince william , beatrice 's unusual fascinator , designed by philip treacy , received much attention and derision from the public and the media . the following month , the headpiece was auctioned for £81,000 on ebay , with the proceeds going to two charities : newscore ( 11 may 2011 ) . princess beatrice 's ridiculed wedding hat to be sold on ebay . new york post unicef and children in crisis . beatrice and the duke of edinburgh accompanied the queen to the traditional royal maundy services on 5 april 2012 in york . there , beatrice interacted with parishioners , received flowers from the public , and assisted the queen as she passed out the official maundy money to the pensioners . in the lead up to the 2012 summer olympics , beatrice welcomed the olympic flame on the steps of harewood house near leeds . in 2013 , beatrice and her sister promoted britain overseas in germany . she also visited the isle of wight in 2014 , whose governor was beatrice 's namesake princess beatrice , daughter of queen victoria . in november 2012 , beatrice became a patron of the york musical society . in april 2013 , she became royal patron of the helen arkell dyslexia centre , a charity that she credits with helping her overcome her own academic challenges resulting from dyslexia . she accompanied her father during an official engagement in the united arab emirates on 24 november 2014 . in 2016 , beatrice , her mother , sarah , duchess of york , and her sister , eugenie , collaborated with british contemporary artist teddy m to create the first ever royal graffiti . the painting on canvas , royal love , was painted at royal lodge and exhibited in london before being sold for a five-figure sum . proceeds from the sale were donated to children in crisis . in 2018 , children in crisis merged with street child , a children 's charity active in multiple countries , with beatrice serving as its ambassador . she is also a supporter of the pitch palace initiative , a charity her father founded to amplify and accelerate entrepreneurs ' business ideas . beatrice took part in a south asia tour 2016 that lasted nine days . she visited & nbsp ; nepal , india , and bhutan on behalf of the franks family foundation ( fff ) , and jamgon kongtrul eyes centres , a free micro-surgical cataract programme in technical collaboration with nepal 's tilganga eye centre under nepali eye surgeon sanduk ruit 's direction . a few weeks later , she attended the 2016 asia game changer awards dinner at the united nations in new york city , which honoured ruit and others . beatrice and charles rockefeller presented ruit with his asia society asia game changer award . beatrice is the founder of big change , a charity she established with six of her friends to encourage young people to develop skills '' outside a traditional academic curriculum '' . in 2012 , she climbed mont blanc in aid of the charity . in 2016 , with richard branson and his children , she participated in the fundraising challenge virgin strive challenge , which involved climbing mount etna . in 2017 , beatrice helped promote the anti-bullying book be cool be nice and gave an interview to vogue at a house of lords event , speaking about her own experiences with being bullied for her fashion choices in her early adulthood . hello ! magazine later named her one of the best-dressed royals . in october 2018 , she undertook an extended tour of laos to '' raise the profile of the uk '' there , and also participated in the luang prabang half marathon for children . in march 2019 , beatrice was elected to the board of the uk charity the outward bound trust as a trustee , after her father took over the patronage from his father , the duke of edinburgh . in may 2019 , she was honoured at a gala in new york city for her work with friends without a border . . titles , styles , and arms . titles and styles . as a male-line grandchild of the sovereign , beatrice was known as '' her royal highness princess beatrice of york '' , at birth , with the territorial designation coming from her father 's title , duke of york . since her marriage , she has been styled '' her royal highness princess beatrice , mrs edoardo mapelli mozzi '' in the court circular . . arms .