David Brooks (commentator)

early career . upon graduation , brooks became a police reporter for the city news bureau of chicago , a wire service owned jointly by the chicago tribune and chicago sun times . he says that his experience on chicago 's crime beat had a conservatizing influence on him . in 1984 , mindful of the offer he had received from buckley , brooks applied and was accepted as an intern at buckley 's national review . according to christopher beam , the internship included an all-access pass to the affluent lifestyle that brooks had previously mocked , including yachting expeditions , bach concerts , dinners at buckley 's park avenue apartment and villa in stamford , connecticut , and a constant stream of writers , politicians , and celebrities . brooks was an outsider in more ways than his relative inexperience . national review was a catholic magazine , and brooks is not catholic . sam tanenhaus later reported in the new republic that buckley might have eventually named brooks his successor if it had n't been for his being jewish . '' if true , it would be upsetting , '' brooks says . after his internship with buckley ended , brooks spent some time at the conservative hoover institution at stanford university and wrote movie reviews for the washington times . career . in 1986 , brooks was hired by the wall street journal , where he worked first as an editor of the book review section . he also filled in for five months as a movie critic . from 1990 to 1994 , the newspaper posted brooks as an op-ed columnist to brussels , where he covered russia ( making numerous trips to moscow ) ; the middle east ; south africa ; and european affairs . on his return , brooks joined the neo-conservative weekly standard when it was launched in 1994 . two years later , he edited an anthology , backward and upward : the new conservative writing . in 2000 , brooks published a book of cultural commentary titled bobos in paradise to considerable acclaim . the book , a paean to consumerism , argued that the new managerial or '' new upper class '' represents a marriage between the liberal idealism of the 1960s and the self-interest of the 1980s . according to a 2010 article in new york magazine written by christopher beam , new york times editorial-page editor gail collins called brooks in 2003 and invited him to lunch . collins was looking for a conservative to replace outgoing columnist william safire , but one who understood how liberals think . '' i was looking for the kind of conservative writer that would n't make our readers shriek and throw the paper out the window , '' says collins . '' he was perfect . '' brooks started writing in september 2003 . '' the first six months were miserable , '' brooks says . '' i 'd never been hated on a mass scale before . '' in 2004 , brooks ' book on paradise drive : how we live now ( and always have ) in the future tense was published as a sequel to his 2000 best seller , bobos in paradise , but it was not as well received as its predecessor . brooks is also the volume editor of the best american essays ( publication date october 2 , 2012 ) , and authored the social animal ( david brooks book ) . the book was excerpted in the new yorker in january 2011 and received mixed reviews upon its full publication in march of that year . the book has been a commercial success , reaching the 3 spot on the publishers weekly best-sellers list for non-fiction in april 2011 . brooks was a visiting professor of public policy at duke university 's terry sanford institute of public policy , and taught an undergraduate seminar there in the fall of 2006 . in 2013 , he taught a course at yale university on philosophical humility . in 2012 , brooks was elected to the university of chicago board of trustees . he also serves on the board of advisors for the university of chicago institute of politics . in 2019 , brooks gave a ted talk in vancouver entitled 'the lies our culture tells us about what matters – and a better way to live ' . ted curator chris anderson selected it as one of his favourite talks of 2019 . . political views . ideologically , brooks has been described as a moderate , a centrist , a conservative , and a moderate conservative . brooks has described himself as a '' moderate '' , and said in a 2017 interview that '' one of his callings is to represent a certain moderate republican whig political philosophy . '' ottawa citizen conservative commentator david warren has identified brooks as a '' sophisticated pundit '' ; one of '' those republicans who want to 'engage with ' the liberal agenda '' . when asked what he thinks of charges that he 's '' not a real conservative '' or '' squishy '' , brooks has said that '' if you define conservative by support for the republican candidate or the belief that tax cuts are the correct answer to all problems , i guess i do n't fit that agenda . but i do think that i 'm part of a long-standing conservative tradition that has to do with edmund burke . and alexander hamilton . '' in fact , brooks read burke 's work while he was an undergraduate at the university of chicago and '' completely despised it '' , but '' gradually over the next five to seven years . came to agree with him '' . brooks claims that '' my visceral hatred was because he touched something i did n't like or know about myself . '' in september 2012 , brooks talked about being criticized from the conservative side , saying , '' if it 's from a loon , i do n't mind it . i get a kick out of it . if it 's michelle malkin attacking , i do n't mind it . '' with respect to whether he was '' the liberals ' favorite conservative '' brooks said he '' did n't care '' , stating : '' i do n't mind liberals praising me , but when it 's the really partisan liberals , you get an avalanche of love , it 's like uhhh , i got ta rethink this . '' brooks describes himself as having originally been a liberal before , as he put it , '' coming to my senses . '' he recounts that a turning point in his thinking came while he was still an undergraduate , when he was selected to present the socialist point of view during a televised debate with nobel laureate free-market economist milton friedman . as brooks describes it , '' it was essentially me making a point , and he making a two-sentence rebuttal which totally devastated my point . that did n't immediately turn me into a conservative , but . '' before the 2003 invasion of iraq , brooks argued forcefully for american military intervention , echoing the belief of commentators and political figures that american and british forces would be welcomed as liberators . in 2005 , brooks wrote what columnist jonathan chait described as '' a witheringly condescending '' column portraying senator harry reid as an '' unhinged conspiracy theorist because he accused the george w . bush administration george w . bush administration of falsifying its iraq intelligence . '' by 2008 , five years into the war , brooks maintained that the decision to go to war was correct , but that secretary of defense donald rumsfeld had botched u.s . war efforts . in 2015 , brooks wrote that '' from the current vantage point , the decision to go to war was a clear misjudgment '' made in 2003 by president george w . bush and the majority of americans who supported the war , including brooks himself . brooks wrote '' many of us thought that , by taking down saddam hussein , we could end another evil empire , and gradually open up human development in iraq and the arab world . has that happened ? in 2004 , i would have said yes . in 2006 , i would have said no . in 2015 , i say yes and no , but mostly no . '' citing the robb-silberman report , brooks rejected as a '' fable '' the idea that '' intelligence about iraqi weapons of mass destruction was all cooked by political pressure , that there was a big political conspiracy to lie us into war . '' instead , brooks viewed the war as a product of faulty intelligence , writing that '' the iraq war error reminds us of the need for epistemological modesty . '' his dismissal of the conviction of scooter libby as being '' a farce '' and having '' no significance '' was derided by political blogger andrew sullivan . on august 10 , 2006 , brooks wrote a column for the new york times titled '' party no . 3 '' . the column imagined a moderate mccain-lieberman party in opposition to both major parties , which he perceived as polarized and beholden to special interests . brooks was long a supporter of john mccain ; however , he disliked mccain 's 2008 running mate , sarah palin , calling her a '' cancer '' on the republican party . he has referred to her as a '' joke '' , unlikely ever to win the republican nomination . david brooks : sarah palin is a 'joke ' , tpmtv on youtube , november 15 , 2009 but he later admitted during a c-span interview that he had gone too far in his previous '' cancer '' comments about palin , which he regretted , and simply stated he was not a fan of her values . in a march 2007 article published in the new york times titled '' no u-turns '' , brooks explained that the republican party must distance itself from the minimal-government conservative principles that had arisen during the barry goldwater and ronald reagan eras . he claims that these core concepts had served their purposes and should no longer be embraced by republicans in order to win elections . alex pareene commented that brooks '' has been trying for so long to imagine a sensible republican party into existence that he ca n't still think it 's going to happen soon . '' brooks has frequently expressed admiration for president barack obama . in an august 2009 , profile of brooks , the new republic describes his first encounter with obama , in the spring of 2005 : '' usually when i talk to senators , while they may know a policy area better than me , they generally do n't know political philosophy better than me . i got the sense he knew both better than me . i remember distinctly an image of – we were sitting on his couches , and i was looking at his pant leg and his perfectly creased pant , and i 'm thinking , a ) he 's going to be president and b ) he 'll be a very good president . '' brooks appreciates that obama thinks '' like a writer '' , explaining , '' he 's a very writerly personality , a little aloof , exasperated . he 's calm . he 's not addicted to people . '' two days after obama 's second autobiography , the audacity of hope , hit bookstores , brooks published a column in the new york times , titled '' run , barack , run '' , urging the chicago politician to run for president . however , in december 2011 , during a c-span interview , brooks expressed a more tempered opinion of obama 's presidency , giving obama only a '' b- '' , and saying that obama 's chances of re-election would be less than 50–50 if elections were held at that time . he stated , '' i do n't think he 's integrated himself with people in washington as much as he should have . '' however , in a february 2016 new york times op-ed , brooks admitted that he missed obama during the 2016 primary season , admiring the president 's '' integrity '' and '' humanity '' , among other characteristics . in writing for the new york times in january 2010 , brooks described israel as '' an astonishing success story '' . he wrote that '' jews are a famously accomplished group , '' who , because they were '' forced to give up farming in the middle ages . have been living off their wits ever since '' . in brooks ' view , '' israel 's technological success is the fruition of the zionist dream . the country was not founded so stray settlers could sit among thousands of angry palestinians in hebron . it was founded so jews would have a safe place to come together and create things for the world . '' in 2015 , brooks issued his commentary on poverty reform in the united states . his op-ed in the new york times titled '' the nature of poverty '' specifically followed the social uproar caused by the death of freddie gray , and concluded that federal spending is not the issue impeding the progress of poverty reforms , but rather that the impediments to upward mobility are '' matters of social psychology '' . when discussing gray in particular , brooks claimed that gray as a young man was '' not on the path to upward mobility '' . in regard to the 2016 election , brooks spoke in support of hillary clinton , applauding her ability to be '' competent '' and '' normal '' in comparison to her republican counterpart , donald trump . pbs news hour . '' shields and brooks on 'anticlimactic ' clinton victory , trump 's 'moral chasm ' . '' online video clip . youtube . youtube , june 10 , 2016 . web . september 20 , 2016 . in addition , brooks noted that he believed clinton would eventually be victorious in the election , as he foresaw that the general american public would become '' sick of '' trump . when discussing the political emergence of trump , brooks has been strong in his critiques of the candidate , most notably by authoring a new york times op-ed he titled '' no , not trump , not ever '' . in this piece , brooks attacked trump by arguing he is '' epically unprepared to be president '' and by pointing out trump 's '' steady obliviousness to accuracy '' . on the august 9 , 2019 episode of the pbs newshour , brooks suggested trump may be a sociopath . . social views . brooks opposes what he sees as self-destructive behavior , such as the prevalence of teenage sex and divorce . his view is that '' sex is more explicit everywhere barring real life . as the entertainment media have become more sex-saturated , american teenagers have become more sexually abstemious '' by '' waiting longer to have sex . and having fewer partners '' . he sees the culture war as nearly over , because '' today 's young people . seem happy with the frankness of the left and the wholesomeness of the right . '' as a result , he is optimistic about the united states ' social stability , which he considers to be '' in the middle of an amazing moment of improvement and repair '' . the new york times , april 17 , 2005 , 4–14 as early as 2003 , brooks wrote favorably of same-sex marriage , pointing out that marriage is a traditional conservative value . rather than opposing it , he wrote : '' we should insist on gay marriage . we should regard it as scandalous that two people could claim to love each other and not want to sanctify their love with marriage and fidelity . it 's going to be up to conservatives to make the important , moral case for marriage , including gay marriage . '' in 2020 , brooks wrote in the atlantic , under the headline '' the nuclear family was a mistake '' , that '' recent signs suggest at least the possibility that a new family paradigm is emerging , '' suggesting that in the place of the '' collapsed '' nuclear one the '' extended '' family emerges , with '' multigenerational living arrangements '' that stretch even '' across kinship lines . '' brooks had already started in 2017 a project called '' weave '' , in order , as he described it , to '' support and draw attention to people and organizations around the country who are building community '' and to '' repair america ’ s social fabric , which is badly frayed by distrust , division and exclusion . '' brooks also takes a moderate position on abortion , which he thinks should be legal , but with parental consent for minors , during the first four or five months , and illegal afterward , except in extremely rare circumstances . he has expressed opposition to the legalization of marijuana , stating that use of the drug causes immoral behavior . brooks relates that he smoked it in his youth but quit after a humiliating incident : brooks smoked marijuana during lunch hour at school and felt embarrassed during a class presentation that afternoon in which he says he was incapable of intelligible speech . . criticisms . brooks ' writing on sociology has been criticized for being based on stereotypes and presenting false claims as factual . in 2004 , sasha issenberg , writing for philadelphia magazine , fact-checked bobos in paradise , concluding that many of its comments about middle america were misleading or the exact reverse of the truth . he reported brooks as insisting that the book was not intended to be factual but to report his impressions of what he believed an area to be like : '' he laughed . 'the book was partially tongue-in-cheek'.i went through some of the other instances where he made declarations that appeared insupportable . he accused me of being 'too pedantic , ' of 'taking all of this too literally , ' of 'taking a joke and distorting it . ' 'that 's totally unethical ' , he said . '' brooks later said the article made him feel that '' i suck.i ca n't remember what i said but my mother told me i was extremely stupid . '' in 2015 , an opinion piece by david zweig published in salon found that brooks had got '' nearly every detail '' wrong about a poll of high-school students . michael kinsley argued that brooks was guilty of '' fearless generalizing . brooks does not let the sociology get in the way of the shtick , and he wields a mean shoehorn when he needs the theory to fit the joke '' . writing for gawker , which consistently criticized brooks ' work , opinion writer tom scocca argued that brooks does not use facts and statistics to support his policy positions , noting '' possibly that is because he perceives facts and statistics as an opportunity for dishonest people to work mischief '' . furthermore , annie lowrey , in writing for the new york magazine , criticized brooks ' statistical methods when arguing his stance on political reform , claiming he used '' some very tricksy , misleading math '' . additionally , sean illing of slate criticized the same article from brooks , claiming he argued his point by framing his sources ' arguments out of context and routinely making bold '' half-right '' assumptions regarding the controversial issue of poverty reform . in 2016 , james taranto criticized brooks ' analysis of the u.s . supreme court case dretke v . haley , dretke v . haley , 541 u.s . 386 ( 2004 ) . writing that '' brooks 's treatment of this case is either deliberately deceptive or recklessly ignorant '' . law professor ann althouse concurred that brooks '' distorts rather grotesquely '' the case in question . althouse , ann . '' althouse '' ( january 13 , 2016 ) . brooks was previously criticized by lyle denniston with regard to another case , for having '' scrambled the actual significance of what the supreme court has done '' . in 2018 brooks wrote an article in the new york times about the generation gap . brooks was criticized by journalist ari paul who claimed that in the article brooks '' rebrands cultural marxism as mere political correctness , giving the nazi-inspired phrase legitimacy for the american right . it is dropped in or quoted in other stories—some of them lighthearted , like the fashion cues of the alt-right—without describing how fringe this notion is . it 's akin to letting conspiracy theories about chem trails or vaccines get unearned space in mainstream press . '' ari paul and spencer sunshine , an associate fellow at the political research associates , concluded that failure to highlight the nature of the cultural marxist conspiracy theory '' has bitter consequences . 'it is legitimizing the use of that framework , and therefore it 's coded antisemitism . '' . legacy . sidney awards . in 2004 brooks created an award to honor the best political and cultural journalism of the year . named for philosopher sidney hook and originally called '' the hookies '' , the honor was renamed '' the sidney awards '' in 2005 . the awards are presented each december . . personal life . brooks met his first wife , jane hughes , while they were students at the university of chicago . she converted to judaism and changed her given name to sarah . in november 2013 , they divorced . in 2017 , brooks married his former research assistant , writer anne snyder . according to the jewish journal of greater los angeles , in a september 2014 interview with the israeli newspaper haaretz , brooks said that his oldest son serves in the israel defense forces . in recent years , brooks has explored christianity , although he has not formally converted . . select bibliography . editor , backward and upward : the new conservative writing ( vintage , 1996 ) 0-6797-6654-5 bobos in paradise ( 2000 ) on paradise drive : how we live now ( and always have ) in the future tense ( 2004 ) the social animal : the hidden sources of love , character , and achievement ( 2011 ) the road to character ( random house , 2015 ) the second mountain : the quest for a moral life ( random house , 2019 ) . see also . co-commentator on npr : e . j . dionne . co-commentator on the pbs newshour : mark shields the lies our culture tells about what matters - a better way to live - ted talk - . references . external links . column archive at the new york times column archive at the atlantic column archive at the weekly standard david brooks on the emily rooney show on wgbh radio video : david brooks discusses the social animal : the hidden sources of love , character , and achievement on march 17 , 2011 , on forum network .