Sefer haYashar (midrash)

other books of the same name . the book is named after the book of jasher mentioned in joshua and 2 samuel . joseph jacobs schulim ochser 1911 jewish encyclopedia article although it is presented as the original '' book of jasher '' in translations such as that of moses samuel ( 1840 ) , it is not accepted as such in rabbinical judaism , nor does the original hebrew text make such a claim . it should not be confused with the very different book of jasher ( pseudo-jasher ) printed by jacob ilive in 1751 , which was purported to have been translated by the english monk alcuin . it should also not be confused with an ethical text by the same name , which , according to the encyclopaedia judaica , volume 14 , p . & nbsp ; 1099 , was '' probably written in the 13th century . '' . content . the book covers biblical history from the creation of adam and eve until a summary of the initial israelite conquest of canaan in the beginning of the book of judges . the bible twice quotes from a sefer hayashar , and this midrashic work includes text that fits both biblical references - the reference about the sun and moon found in joshua , and also the reference in 2 samuel ( in the hebrew but not in the septuagint ) to teaching the sons of judah to fight with the bow . this appears in jasher 56:9 among the last words of jacob to his son judah : : only teach thy sons the bow and all weapons of war , in order that they may fight the battles of their brother who will rule over his enemies . ( mcr ) but the book as a whole was written much later - as shown by chapter 10 , covering the descendants of noah , but containing medieval names for territories and countries , most obviously franza for france and lumbardi in italy for lombardy . the text of this chapter closely follows the beginning of josippon , a tenth-century rabbinic text that lists the various peoples living in europe in ca . 950 . most of its extra-biblical accounts are found in nearly the same form in other medieval compilations , or in the talmud , other midrash or arabic sources . for example , it includes the common tale that lamech and his son jabal accidentally killed cain , thus requiting cain 's wickedness for slaying abel . there are five discrepancies when comparing it with chapter 5 of genesis : when the sefer relates that a son of seth died '' in the eighty-fourth year of the life of noah '' , it calls that son enoch instead of enosh . enoch actually was jared 's son . other than the confusion of the names , the date agrees with genesis . the sefer also relates that jared died in the as '' 336th year of the life of noah '' ( instead of the '' 336th year '' , as in genesis ) and that lamech died in the '' 195th year of the life of noah ( instead of the 595th year ) . it also gives different lifespans for lamech ( 770 instead of 777 ) and methuselah ( 960 instead of 969 ) . in its genealogy of abram ( 7:19 ) , it makes no mention of the cainan between arpachsad and shelah , in congruence with the masoretic text and samaritan pentateuch , but in conflict with the septuagint ( lxx ) and luke 's genealogy in chapter 3 of his gospel . in its highly interpolated account of god 's testing of abraham concerning isaac , it says in 23:50-51 : '' and when they were going along isaac said to his father : behold , i see here the fire and wood , and where then is the lamb that is to be the burnt offering before the lord ? and abraham answered his son isaac , saying : the lord has made choice of thee my son , to be a perfect burnt offering instead of the lamb . '' this conflicts with the biblical account , in which abraham 's response was only : '' my son , god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering '' . the book ( chapter shemot ) contains anecdotal material about moses when he fled from pharaoh after killing the egyptian , and who is said to have fled to the land of kush at the age of eighteen , where he was made the king of kush at the age of twenty-seven , and there reigned for forty years before being deposed at the age of sixty-seven . according to this narrative , which is also alluded to in josephus ' antiquities ( 2.10 . 1–2 ) , josephus ' account of the story differs vastly , in that , according to josephus , moses had been sent by pharaoh as a general to wage war against his enemies , the people of kush . cf . abraham ibn ezra 's commentary on numbers 12:1 ( hebrew ) , where he wrote : '' …and there are those who say that moses reigned over kush and took a negro wife , etc . '' see also yalkuṭ shim'oni on exodus , sect . 247:168 . moses assisted the indigenous peoples of the country in their conquest of one of the rebellious cities ( whose proprietor was bilʻam the sorcerer ) and which had been under siege for nine years . the narrative recounts how that when the enemy 's country was infested with poisonous serpents , moses contrived a stratagem how they could advance on the besieged city and take it without suffering harm from the vipers , by bringing along with them caged birds who fed upon snakes , and releasing the hungry birds in the enemy 's territory . at this advice , they were able to take the city and they made moses their king , and gave to him in marriage the deceased king 's wife , whose name was adoniya ( the widow of qiqanos ) . . history . scholars have proposed various dates between the 9th and 16th century for its composition . the earliest extant version of this hebrew midrash was printed in venice in 1625 , and the introduction refers to an earlier 1552 edition in naples , of which neither trace nor other mention has been found . the printer yosèf ben samuel claimed the work was copied by a scribe named jacob the son of atyah , from an ancient manuscript whose letters could hardly be made out . the venice 1625 text was heavily criticised as a forgery by leon modena , as part of his criticisms of the zohar as a forgery , and of kabbalah in general . modena was a member of the venetian rabbinate that supervised the hebrew press in venice , and modena prevented the printers from identifying sefer ha-yashar with the biblical lost book . the scandal of kabbalah : leon modena , jewish mysticism , early . - page 68 yaacob dweck - 2011 '' modena compared the pseudepigraphic character of the zohar to sefer ha-yashar , a hebrew work printed in venice in the early seventeenth century . 34 sefer ha-yashar appeared in venice in 1625 . see joseph dan , ed . , sefer ha-yashar '' despite modena 's intervention , the preface to the 1625 version still claims that its original source book came from the ruins of jerusalem in ad 70 , where a roman officer named sidrus allegedly discovered a hebrew scholar hiding in a hidden library . the officer sidrus reportedly took the scholar and all the books safely back to his estates in seville , spain ( in roman known as hispalis , the provincial capital of hispania baetica ) . the 1625 edition then claims that at some uncertain point in the history of al-andalus , the manuscript was transferred or sold to the jewish college in cordova . the 1625 edition further claims that scholars preserved the book until its printings in naples in 1552 and in venice in 1625 . apart from the preface to the 1625 work , there is no evidence to support any of this story . the work was used extensively , but not especially more than many other sources , in louis ginzberg 's legends of the jews . although there remains doubt about whether the 1552 '' edition '' in naples was ever truly printed , the study of joseph dan , professor of kabbalah at the hebrew university of jerusalem , in the preface to his 1986 critical edition of the 1625 text joseph sefer hayashar , edited with an introduction , jerusalem : the bialik institute 1986 . concludes , from the hebrew used and other indicators , that the work was in fact written in naples in the early 16th century . the arabic connections suggest that if the preface to the 1625 version is an '' exaggeration '' , it was then probably written by a jew who lived in spain or southern italy . translations . johann abicht 's latin translation . johann georg abicht , professor of theology at the university of halle-wittenberg , johann christoph gottsched briefwechsel : unter einschluss des briefwechsels von luise . 2007 page 398 '' 13 der vorherige rektor , johann georg abicht , war 1729 zum professor der theologie nach wittenberg berufen worden und hatte im mai 1730 sein neues amt angetreten ; '' translated the 1625 text into latin as dissertatio de libro recti ( leipzig , 1732 ) . religious books , 1876-1982 : volume 1 r.r . bowker company . dept . of bibliography , r.r . bowker company . publications systems dept - 1983 '' a latin version by johann g . abicht appeared in leipzig , 1732 , with title : dissertatio de libro recti . '' . moses samuel 's english translation . the first translation of the 1625 venice edition into english was that published by mordecai manuel noah and a . s . gould in 1840 . mordecai noah was a prominent jewish newspaper editor and publisher , as well as playwright , diplomat , journalist , and utopian . the translator of the 1840 edition was not published , but indicated as an eminent jewish scholar in britain in the comments of one of the four certificating hebraist scholars to the publisher in the preface to the 2nd editions : subsequently , the translator identified himself as moses samuel of liverpool ( 1795–1860 ) , who obtained a copy of the 1625 hebrew edition and became convinced that the core of this work truly was the self-same book of the upright referenced in hebrew scriptures . he translated it into english , and in 1839 sold it to mordecai manuel noah . samuel gave the reason his name did not appear on the translation thus : '' i did not put my name to it as my patron and myself differed about its authenticity '' & mdash ; the nyc publisher noah having had a lower opinion of the work 's authenticity than samuel . jewish historical studies : transactions of the jewish historical . : volume 35 jewish historical society of england 2000 '' ' i did not put my name to it as my patron and myself differed about its authenticity ' , samuel later explained.16 this was odd since noah seems to have had a lower opinion of the work 's authenticity than samuel . '' samuel had in fact originally tried to persuade the royal asiatic society at calcutta to publish the work , a fact alluded to obliquely in the preface to noah 's 1840 edition , but eventually samuel sold the work to noah for £150 . even so , noah in his promotional materials did enthusiastically claim that the historian josephus had said of the book of jasher : '' by this book are to be understood certain records kept in some safe place on purpose , giving an account of what happened among the hebrews from year to year , and called jasher or the upright , on account of the fidelity of the annals . '' no such statement is found in josephus ' works . noah 's 1840 preface contained endorsements by hebrew scholars of the day , all of whom praised the quality of the translation , but these said nothing to indicate they believed it to be the work referred to in joshua and 2 samuel . in fact one of them , samuel h . turner ( 1790–1861 ) , of the general theological seminary , nyc , referred to the '' rabbinical writer '' in this way : '' the work itself is evidently composed in the purest rabbinical hebrew , with a large intermixture of the biblical idiom , . '' indicating that turner was not of the opinion that it was an ancient text . edward b.m . browne english translation . another translation of this book exist , created by reform rabbi and editor , dr . edward b.m . browne , known as “ alphabet ” browne , and published in new york in 1876 . . acceptance by latter-day saints . joseph smith , founder of the latter day saint movement , acquired a copy in 1841 or 1842 and wrote in the september 1 , 1842 edition of the times and seasons , in reference to the patriarch abraham : '' the book of jasher , which has not been disproved as a bad author , says he was cast into the fire of the chaldeans '' . times and seasons , volume 3 , number 21 , reprinted by centerplace.org in 1886 , joseph hyrum parry of salt lake city acquired the rights to the translation from mordecai noah 's estate . it was published by j . h . parry & company in salt lake city in 1887 . a number of mormon scholars consider this book of jasher to be of authentic ancient hebrew origin . some of these scholars suggest that the book likely contains many original portions of the sefer hayashar referenced in the old testament but also has a number of added interpolations . this joseph hyrum parry edition of the book of jasher continues to be held in high repute by many mormons . a number of mormons have pointed to certain portions of the book that have commonalities to parts of the joseph smith translation of the bible , particularly those parts dealing with the antediluvian period . the bible has only scant information about pre-flood times , but both the book of jasher and parts of the joseph smith translation of the bible contain additional information , some of which is strikingly similar . the lds church does not officially endorse this book of jasher . editions . hebrew editions sefer ha-yashar , ed . rosenthal , berlin , 1898 , sefer ha-yashar , ed . dan joseph , jerusalem , 1986 english translation : book of yasher ( 1750 ) , by thomas ilive book of jasher referred to in joshua and second samuel ( 1840 ) , by moses samuel book of jasher referred to in joshua and second samuel ( 1887 ) , edited by j . h . parry various print-on-demand reprints including : kessinger publishing company , ; the authentic annals of the early hebrews : also known as the book of jasher , edited by wayne simpson ( morris publishing ( ne ) , 1995 ) ( hardcover - january 1995 ) hardcover ; ( lightcatcher books , 2003 ) paperback , etc . references . external links . the book of jasher - m.m . noah & a.s gould , new-york , 1840 ; with reviews for the 2nd edition , publisher and translators prefaces , translation of hebrew venice 1825 preface plain text : cumorah project : lds and world classics ( based on 1840 translation ; includes translator 's preface . ) html : christian etherial library : anonymous ( based on j.h . parry & company , salt lake city 1887 reprint ; with graphic reproduction of translator 's preface . ) pseudepigrapha or sacred texts : apocrypha ( based on j.h . parry & company , 1887 salt lake city reprint ) google books reprint published by j.h . parry & company , salt lake city , 1887