Artful Dodger

role in the novel . in the novel , he becomes oliver 's closest friend ( although he betrays oliver when oliver is caught ) and he tries to make him a pickpocket , but soon realizes that oliver will not succeed , and feels sorry for him , saying '' what a pity it is he is n't a prig ! '' he also has a close relationship with charley bates . the artful dodger is characterized as a child who acts like an adult . he is described as wearing adult clothes which are much too large for him . like an adult , he seldom gives in to childish urges . ultimately the dodger is caught with a stolen silver snuff box and presumably sent to a penal colony in australia ( only alluded to in the novel ) . the absurdity of the master pickpocket being caught over something so small is remarked upon in the book . the dodger chooses to consider himself a '' victim of society '' , roaring in the courtroom , '' i am an englishman ; where are my privileges ? '' the judge has little patience for the dodger 's posturing , and orders him out of the courtroom immediately after the jury convicts him of the theft . dickens describes him this way : dickens had first used a similar term in his previous novel , the pickwick papers . at the close of chapter 16 , sam weller refers to the recent schemes of mr . jingle : '' reg'lar do , sir ; artful dodge . '' the artful dodger , though a pickpocket , is not a heartless character . he has a great respect for fagin , to whom he delivers all of the pickpocketing spoils without question . actors who have played the role . the role of the artful dodger has been played by several notable performers . british actor anthony newley played the character in a 1948 film adaptation of the story . the role was amplified in the musical oliver ! . the part was first played by martin horsey , and later by tony robinson , davy jones , leonard whiting , steve marriott , and phil collins . elijah wood also portrayed the character in the 1997 television film that aired as part of the wonderful world of disney on abc . he was played by harry eden in roman polanski 's big-budget 2005 film version . in the 1968 film oliver ! , jack wild played the role and was nominated for an academy award for best supporting actor . in the bbc adaptation of oliver twist in 2007 , he is played by adam arnold . in the 2021 film twist , rita ora plays the role . others to have played the role in amateur productions include adam levine , ben elton , robbie williams , joe jonas , claire josefson , and hayley smith . cultural influences . in the 1980 atv series the further adventures of oliver twist , the dodger was played by john fowler . when oliver is sent by mr . brownlow to a boarding school , he finds the dodger already there , and it is revealed that thanks to oliver 's uncle harry maylie the dodger escaped transportation and was instead enrolled in the school . the two friends re-unite , and when oliver flees the school the dodger follows him back to london . oliver is made to believe , by noah claypole , noah 's girlfriend charlotte , and mrs . carraway ( mr . brownlow 's corrupt new housekeeper ) , that mr . brownlow is ill to the point of death . after dodger rescues oliver from his imprisonment by claypole in the brownlow cellar , he and oliver are forced to take to the streets to uncover the truth , encountering mr . bumble , the villainous monks , and their old mentor fagin along the way . in peter f . hamilton 's void trilogy , aaron pilots a spaceship called the artful dodger . argentine football player and 1986 fifa world cup winning captain diego maradona has frequently been referred to as the artful dodger due to his cunning personality and ability to get away with unpenalized fouls . '' world cup legends 1 : diego maradona '' . esquire . retrieved 3 february 2015 '' argentina coach diego maradona writes another chapter in a turbulent life '' . the telegraph . retrieved 3 february 2015 taylor , chris ( 9 november 2005 ) . '' a big hand '' . the guardian . retrieved 3 february 2015 jimmy burns ( 2011 ) . '' maradona : the hand of god '' . p . 17 . a & c black at least two different books about the major league baseball club known as the '' dodgers '' have used this character 's name as a play-on-words for their titles : the artful dodgers , edited by tom meany ; and the artful dodger , by tommy lasorda with david fisher . condredge holloway , the quarterback for the tennessee volunteers football ( 1972–74 ) , was known as '' the artful dodger '' for his scrambling prowess and elusive manner . holloway was the first african-american starting quarterback in the history of southeastern conference football , went on to star in the canadian football league from 1975 through 1987 , and was inducted into the canadian football hall of fame in 1999 . dodger is one of the characters in shadowrun , an elven hacker ; his romantic involvement with semi-autonomous knowbot morgan spurs her into full self-consciousness and turns her into one of the setting 's first true ais , launching a far-reaching chain of events that still largely define the metaplot twenty in-character ( fifteen real ) years later . in the bewitched episode , '' the phrase is familiar '' , tabitha 's tutor uses witchcraft to make the artful dodger come out of oliver twist . in this episode he steals samantha 's ring , darrin 's watch , and the cufflinks of a client of darrin 's advertising company . the literary magazine artful dodge was named after the character . in an episode of gilmore girls , '' nick & nora , sid & nancy '' , rory calls jess '' dodger '' after he steals her book . in the lost girl episode '' it 's better to burn out than fade away '' , a character refers to himself as being the '' artful dodger '' for his artist friend . bo suggests that he did not actually read oliver twist . in the 1986 animated film an american tail , tony toponi , a streetwise teenage mouse of italian descent , has similarities to the artful dodger . the character of adric in the science-fiction tv series doctor who was originally envisioned as an artful dodger-style character . modern interpretations . in walt disney 's 1988 animated feature film version of oliver twist , oliver and company , the character of the artful dodger was changed to a streetwise mutt simply named dodger . the voice was provided by musician billy joel . in 1996 , jean loup wolfman played the role in an adaptation by seth michael donsky entitled twisted . the film is set in a contemporary new york city underground populated by drag queens , drug abusers and hustlers . the artful dodger is a gay rent boy and hustler called arthur , better known among his clientele as '' fine art '' . he befriends the oliver twist character called lee ( played by keivyn mcneill grayes ) , the latter a black adolescent runaway . in the first edition of alan moore and kevin o'neill 's comic series league of extraordinary gentlemen , set in 1898 london , the dodger briefly appears as an elderly man running his own gang of boy thieves , hinting that he is still following in fagin 's footsteps . in 2001 , the artful dodger was the subject of an australian children 's show called escape of the artful dodger . the show followed the artful dodger 's adventures in the australian penal colony in new south wales , as well as his eventual redemption . oliver twist and fagin also appeared . in the 2003 film twist , the artful dodger is called dodge and is played by nick stahl . the film is told from his point of view , where he 's a drug addict influenced by fagin . in the 2010 doctor who audio drama legend of the cybermen , produced by big finish productions the artful dodger is one of the characters seen in the land of fiction . he was voiced by steven kynman . in tony lee 's 2011 novel dodge & twist , set twelve years after the events of oliver twist , dodger has returned to england a changed man from his time in australia , and is planning a heist . however he can not escape the 'ghost ' of fagin , who still guides his actions , even past the grave . in terry pratchett 's 2012 novel dodger , the title character bears certain similarities to the dickens character . the sampler of the book also includes him meeting an astute gentleman who concerns himself with the well-being of the poor called charlie dickens . '' dodger ( dodger 1 ) by terry pratchett '' . goodreads . retrieved october 9 , 2016 . a 2014 novel by peter david , artful , features the artful dodger as the main character , and depicts his life following the events of oliver twist , which includes confrontations with vampires , one of whom is revealed to be fagin . richards , dave ( march 26 , 2014 ) . '' david introduces a dangerous dynamic in 'all-new x-factor ' '' . cbr.com . the storyline of that novel was continued in a comic book series of the same name . johnston , rich ( july 7 , 2016 ) . '' action lab launches peter david 's artful at san diego – and other exclusives '' . bleeding cool . in the late 2015 bbc series dickensian , the artful dodger is portrayed by wilson radjou-pujalte .