Throbbing Gristle

history . . first era : 1976–1981 . throbbing gristle evolved from the performance art group coum transmissions , formed in kingston upon hull by a group of performers centred on genesis p-orridge and cosey fanni tutti . the last known performance of coum transmissions—prostitution , an exhibition held in october 1976 at the institute of contemporary arts—was also the public debut of throbbing gristle . ; throbbing gristle 's confrontational live performances and use of often disturbing imagery , including pornography and photographs of nazi concentration camps , gave the group a reputation as notorious . the group always maintained that their mission was to challenge and explore the darker and obsessive sides of the human condition rather than to make attractive music . throbbing gristle made extensive use of pre-recorded tape-based samples and special effects to produce a distinctive , highly distorted background , usually accompanied by lyrics or spoken-word performances by cosey fanni tutti or genesis p-orridge . though they asserted they wanted to provoke their audience into thinking for themselves rather than pushing any specific agenda ( as evidenced by the song '' do n't do as you 're told , do as you think '' on heathen earth ) , throbbing gristle frequently associated with the anarchopunk scene . they appeared in the fanzine toxic grafity , with a condensation of their own propaganda parody series , industrial news . in 1977 , they released their debut single '' united/zyklon b zombie '' , followed by the album the second annual report . although pressed in a limited initial run of 786 copies on the band 's industrial records label , it was re-released on mute records due to high demand ; however , this later release was reversed with all tracks playing backwards and in reverse order . this was followed by a series of albums , singles and live performances over a four-year period . in 1981 , michael sheppard , concert promoter and founder of transparency record label brought throbbing gristle to los angeles . on 29 may 1981 , throbbing gristle performed at the kezar pavilion in san francisco in what turned out the group 's last performance until 2004 ; throbbing gristle announced their dissolution on 23 june 1981 , mailing out postcards declaring that their '' mission is terminated '' . in a 1987 interview , cosey fanni tutti attributed the band 's split to that between her and p-orridge saying , '' tg broke up because me and gen broke up '' . genesis p-orridge and peter christopherson went on to form psychic tv , and cosey fanni tutti and carter continued to record together under the names of chris and cosey , carter tutti and creative technology institute . christopherson participated in psychic tv 's first releases , and later joined john balance in the latter project coil . meanwhile , gen ( now known as genesis breyer p-orridge ) subsequently formed thee majesty and ptv3 with the help of his wife jacqueline '' jaye '' breyer . second era : 2004–2010 . in 2004 , throbbing gristle briefly reunited to record and release the limited album tg now . on 2 april 2007 , tg released the album part two , which the group had finished recording in berlin . it was originally set to be released by mute records in september 2006 but was delayed for unknown reasons . in march 2007 , side-line announced part two ' s final release date , adding that a string of special live events would take place in 2007 . a seven-disc dvd set , titled tgv , was issued in 2007 . the set contains old and new footage of the band . tgv came packaged in a deluxe box with a 64-page book , all designed by christopherson . the group performed a re-interpretation of their debut album the second annual report twice in 2008 to mark 30 years since its original release . the performance in paris on 6 june was issued as a limited edition framed vinyl set titled the thirty-second annual report , limited to 777 copies ( as the group claim the original was , but other sources claim that there were 785 ) . throbbing gristle worked to record an album based on their interpretation of nico 's album desertshore . the group issued the entirety of the recording sessions for this album as a limited edition twelve-cd set packaged in a custom cd wallet , the desertshore installation , which sold out via mail order from the group 's website . in april 2009 , throbbing gristle toured the united states , appearing at the coachella valley music and arts festival and in los angeles , new york , san francisco and chicago . the third mind movements , a new release was made available at these shows , was edited from jams recorded during the desertshore sessions . a collaboration with cerith wyn evans titled a p p a r i t i o n was displayed at tramway , glasgow from 7 august to 27 september 2009 . throbbing gristle contributed a multi-channel soundtrack that was played through sixteen hanging audio spotlight sound panels that evans had incorporated into his sculpture . in november 2009 , throbbing gristle and industrial records released their version of the buddha machine titled gristleism . it was designed by throbbing gristle and christiaan virant based on fm3 's design . gristleism offers more loops and almost twice the frequency range of the buddha machine . the player comes in three colours : black , chrome and red . on 29 october 2010 , throbbing gristle announced on their website that genesis p-orridge had informed them that they were no longer willing to perform with throbbing gristle and would be returning to their home in new york . chris carter , cosey and christopherson finished the tour under the name x-tg . p-orridge 's website stated that they had not quit throbbing gristle and had just stopped participating on the current tour ; it also said that an explanation would be released when all things were cleared up . however , on 24 november 2010 , christopherson died in his sleep at the age of 55 , and the band subsequently dissolved . . third era : 2011–present . in 2011 , industrial records had an official '' re-activation '' , as tg 's contract with mute records had expired . because tg has disbanded following the death of christopherson , the label 's plan is to re-release the original tg albums ( the second annual report , d.o.a : the third and final report , 20 jazz funk greats , heathen earth and greatest hits ) on the label . originally intended to be released on 26 september 2011 , they had to delay due to a sony dadc warehouse fire in london . the plan changed to issue each album chronologically once per week starting on halloween 2011 with the second annual report and ending 28 november with greatest hits . industrial records announced that a double album , titled desertshore/the final report , would be released on 26 november 2012 . chris and cosey produced the album , with the participation of guest vocalists anohni ( from antony and the johnsons ) , blixa bargeld ( from einstürzende neubauten ) , marc almond ( from soft cell ) , film director gaspar noé and former pornography star sasha grey . a group decision had been made before christopherson 's death that the album would be recorded afresh because they were not satisfied with the ica recordings . christopherson had been the driving force behind the project and had been working on the record in bangkok with danny hyde , even getting custom instruments made to use for the album . '' it was sleazy 's project , then cosey and sleazy 's , then i came in on it '' , carter said in an interview with the quietus . after christopherson died , the desertshore instruments were given to carter and cosey , and they began combining the recordings he had been making with the work they had done themselves . they announced plans to debut the album live at av festival on 17 march 2012 accompanied by a screening of philippe garrel 's film the inner scar '' for which desertshore was the soundtrack and inspiration '' . on 14 march 2020 , p-orridge died . legacy . the band is widely viewed as having created the industrial music genre , along with contemporaries cabaret voltaire . the term was coined in the mid-1970s with the founding of industrial records by genesis p-orridge and monte cazazza ; on throbbing gristle 's debut album the second annual report , they coined the slogan '' industrial music for industrial people '' . the first wave of this music appeared with throbbing gristle and cabaret voltaire . re/search 6/7 , p . 42–49 . wreckers of civilization , a survey on coum transmissions and throbbing gristle 's original run written by simon ford , was published in 1999 ; its title is a reference to the prostitution exhibition controversy . members . genesis p-orridge – bass guitar , violin , vocals , guitar ( 1976–1981 , 2004–2010 ; died 2020 ) cosey fanni tutti – guitars , cornet , vocals , tapes ( 1976–1981 , 2004–2010 ) peter christopherson – tapes , sampler , found sounds , cornet , electronics ( 1976–1981 , 2004–2010 ; died 2010 ) chris carter – synthesizers , tapes , electronics , programming ( 1976–1981 , 2004–2010 ) . discography . during throbbing gristle 's extensive career they have released numerous volumes of music including studio albums , live releases as well as box sets . studio albums the second annual report ( 1977 ) d.o.a : the third and final report of throbbing gristle ( 1978 ) 20 jazz funk greats ( 1979 ) journey through a body ( 1982 ) cd1 ( album ) ( 1986 ) tg now ( 2004 ) part two : the endless not ( 2007 ) the third mind movements ( 2009 ) desertshore / the final report ( 2012 ) ( as x-tg )