Andrew Dickson White

diplomatic career and later work . while at cornell , in 1871 , he took leave to serve as a commissioner to santo domingo , along with benjamin wade and samuel howe , at the request of president ulysses grant to determine the feasibility of an american annexation of the dominican republic . their report ( available here ) supported the annexation , but grant was unable to gain sufficient political support to take further action . later , white was appointed as the american abassador to germany ( 1879–1881 ) . after returning to the united states , he was elected as the first president of the american historical association ( 1884–1886 ) . upstate new york republicans nominated him for governor in 1876 and for congress in 1886 , but he did not win either primary . following his resignation in 1885 as cornell 's president , white served as the minister to russia ( 1892–1894 ) , president of the american delegation to hague conventions ( 1899 and 1907 ) , and again as ambassador to germany ( 1897–1902 ) . retrieved january 30 , 2008 . in 1904 , white published his autobiography , which he had written while he wastime relaxing in italy after his retirement from the department of state with the change in administrations . cornell 's third president , jacob gould schurman , was appointed as ambassador to germany from 1925 to 1929 . at the onset of world war i , white supported the german cause within europe because he had strong professional and emotional ties to germany . by the summer of 1915 , he retreated from this position and refrained from offering any support either publicly or privately . finch , pg . 65 in the fall of 1916 , president woodrow wilson appointed white to a peace commission to prepare a treaty with china . finch , pg . 66 as of december 1916 , white had reduced some of his obligations , resigning from the smithsonian board of regents and the trustees of the carnegie institution . . bibliophile . over the course of his career , white bibliophile . his library was probably best known for its extensive section on architecture ; it was then the largest architecture library in the united states . he donated all 4,000 books to the cornell university library for the purpose of teaching architecture as well as the remainder of his 30,000-book collection . in 1879 , white enlisted george lincoln burr , a former undergraduate assistant for one of his seminars , to manage the rare books collection . though burr would later hold other positions at the university , such as professor of history , he remained white 's collaborator and head of this collection until 1922 by traveling over europe , locating and amassing books that white wanted . in particular , he built the collections on the reformation , witchcraft , and the french revolution . today , white 's collection is housed primarily in the cornell archives and in the andrew dickson white reading room ( formally known as the '' president white library of history and political science '' ) at uris library on the ithaca campus . the a.d . white reading room was designed by william henry miller , who had also designed white 's mansion on campus . while serving in russia , white made the acquaintance of author leo tolstoy . tolstoy 's fascination with mormons sparked a similar interest in white , who had previously regarded the latter-day saints ( lds ) as a dangerous cult . upon his return to the united states , white took advantage of cornell 's proximity to the religion 's birthplace in palmyra to amass a collection of lds memorabilia ( including many original copies of the book of mormon ) ; it is unmatched by any other institution outside the church itself and its flagship brigham young university . death . on october 26 , 1918 , white suffered a slight paralytic stroke following a severe illness of several days . on the morning of monday , november 4 , white died at home in ithaca . three days later , on november 7 , on what would have been white 's 86th birthday , white was interred at sage chapel on the cornell campus . the chapel was filled to capacity by faculty , trustees , and other well-wishers . white 's body resides in a sarcophagus in the memorial room with those of other persons deemed influential in the founding and early years of the university , including co-founder ezra cornell and benefactor jennie mcgraw . his marble sarcophagus was designed in the popular art nouveau style . it features crests of countries and institutions that played important roles in white 's life . for example , the adjacent picture shows the crests of the two countries where white was an ambassador ; the coat of arms of imperial germany is on left and saint george , a variation on the coat of arms of moscow , representing russia , is on the right . the sarcophagus was completed in 1926 by sculptor lee lawrie ( 1877–1963 ) , who also created sculptures adorning myron taylor hall at cornell . lawrie is perhaps best known for his atlas statue at rockefeller center in new york city . gregory paul harm , cited from a page from the lee lawrie archives , manuscripts division , library of congress , washington , d.c . in his will , white left 500,000 ( over 7 million in 2008 dollars ) to cornell university . white had already donated considerable sums to cornell earlier in his life . conflict thesis . at the time of cornell 's founding , white announced that it would be '' an asylum for science—where truth shall be sought for truth 's sake , not stretched or cut exactly to fit revealed religion . '' lindberg and numbers 1986 , pp . 2–3 until then , most of america 's private universities had been founded as religious institutions and generally were focused on the liberal arts and religious training . in 1869 , white gave a lecture on '' the battle-fields of science '' in which he argued that history showed the negative outcomes resulting from any attempt on the part of religion to interfere with the progress of science . over the next 30 years , he refined his analysis , expanding his case studies to include nearly every field of science over the entire history of christianity but also narrowing his target from '' religion '' through '' ecclesiasticism '' to '' dogmatic theology . '' the final result was the two-volume a history of the warfare of science with theology in christendom ( 1896 ) in which he asserted the conflict thesis of science being against dogmatic theology . initially less popular than john william draper 's history of the conflict between religion and science ( 1874 ) , white 's book became an influential text in the 19th century on the relationship between religion and science . white 's conflict thesis has been widely rejected among contemporary historians of science . quotation : '' the conflict thesis , at least in its simple form , is now widely perceived as a wholly inadequate intellectual framework within which to construct a sensible and realistic historiography of western science '' . ( p . 7 ) , colin a . russell '' the conflict thesis '' , science & religion : a historical introduction , gary ferngren , ed . , baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 2002 . '' . quotation : '' in the late victorian period it was common to write about the 'warfare between science and religion ' and to presume that the two bodies of culture must always have been in conflict . however , it is a very long time since these attitudes have been held by historians of science '' . ( p . 195 ) quotation : '' in its traditional forms , the conflict thesis has been largely discredited . '' ( p . 42 ) the warfare depiction remains a popular view among critics of religion . '' . while john brooke 's view of a complexity thesis rather than an historical conflict thesis has gained widespread acceptance among professional historians of science , the traditional view remains strong elsewhere , not least in the popular mind . '' p . x , science & religion : a historical introduction , gary ferngren , ed . , baltimore : johns hopkins university press , 2002 . . cornell university . until at least the mid-20th century , cornell undergraduates with the surname 'white ' were traditionally given the nickname 'andy , ' in reference to white . notably , e.b . white , author of the world-famous children 's book charlotte 's web , continued to go by the nickname 'andy ' for the rest of his life after his undergraduate years at cornell . . legacy and honors . white was awarded numerous honorary degrees : university of michigan - ll.d . ( 1867 ) cornell - ll.d . ( 1886 ) yale - ll.d . ( 1887 ) columbia - l.h.d . ( 1887 ) university of jena - ph.d . ( 1889 ) st . andrew 's - ll.d . ( october 1902 ) johns hopkins - ll.d . ( 1902 ) oxford - d.c.l . ( october 1902 ) - in connection with the bodleian library tercentenary dartmouth - ll.d . ( 1906 ) . gallery . image : ad_white_1878.png 1878 image : ad_white_1881.png 1881 image:1882 cornell university faculty.jpg 1882 - seated right of center with the cornell faculty image:1889_aha_officers.png 1885 - seen sitting on the far right with the founding members of the american historical association file : psm v48 d474 andrew dickson white.jpg 1896 - featured in popular science monthly file : andrew dickson white . photographie von j . c . schaarwächter.png in berlin , 1900 image : portrait of andrew dickson white.jpg c.1905 - gelatin silver photograph of white image : signature of andrew dickson white.jpg an undated signature of white image : photo and signature of andrew dickson white.jpg c . about 1905 - gelatin silver print cabinet card photo and undated signature of andrew d . white . possible original photo that was used in the original autobiography of andrew dickson white book file : opening of goldwin smith hall , 1906.jpg 1906 - white and goldwin smith at the opening of goldwin smith hall . a statue of white was later installed in front of the building . image : autographed copy of '' autobiography of andrew d.white '' volume 1.jpg an autographed copy of autobiography of andrew d . white volume 1 , dated june 23 , 1916 image : ad white 1910.jpg white , 1910 image : andrew dickson white 1915.jpg 1915 - featured in the new york times image : ad white undated.jpg an undated photograph of white , published c.1918 in the cornell alumni magazine after his death image : ad white at goldwin smith.jpg c . about 1915 - standing near his statue on the cornell campus image : ad white statue.jpg the statue of white on the cornell arts quad by karl bitter image : houseofandrewdickinsonwhite.jpg andrew dickson white house . selected bibliography . outlines of a course of lectures on history ( 1861 ) . syllabus of lectures on modern history ( 1876 ) . a history of the warfare of science with theology in christendom , 2 vols . ( 1896 ) , online at gutenberg text file . seven great statesmen in the warfare of humanity with unreason ( 1910 ) . the autobiography of andrew dickson white ( 1911 ) , online at autobiography of andrew dickson white : vol . 1 , vol . 2 fiat money inflation in france ( 1912 ) , e-text . works about white .