Oil lamp

components . image : oil lamp fandaqomiyah.jpg thumb double-nozzled terracotta oil lamp found in samaria the following are the main external parts of a terra-cotta lamp : ; shoulder ; pouring hole : the hole through which fuel is put inside the fuel chamber . the width generally ranges from in general . there may be one hole or multiple holes . ; wick hole and the nozzle : may be either an opening in the body of the lamp or an elongated nozzle . in some specific types of lamps , there is a groove on the top of the nozzle that runs along to the pouring hole to re-collect the oozing oil from the wick . ; handle : lamps can come with or without a handle . the handle can come in different shapes . the most common is a ring-shaped for the forefinger surmounted by a palmette , on which the thumb is pressed to stabilize the lamp . other handles can be crescent-shaped , triangular , or oval-shaped . the handleless lamps usually have an elongated nozzle , and sometimes have a lug rising diagonally from the periphery . the lug may act as a small handle where the thumb rests . some lugs are pierced . it was speculated that pierced lugs were used to place a pen or straw , called the or , with which the wick was trimmed . others think that the pierced lugs were used to hang the lamp on a metal hook when not in use . ; discus ; fuel chamber : the fuel reservoir . the mean volume in a typical terra-cotta lamp is . lamp typology . lamps can be categorized based on different criteria , including material ( clay , silver , bronze , gold , stone , slip ) , shape , structure , design , and imagery ( e.g . symbolic , religious , mythological , erotic , battles , hunting ) . lamp typological categories . typologically , lamps of the ancient mediterranean can be divided into seven major categories : ; wheel-made : this category includes greek and egyptian lamps that date before the 3rd century bc . they are characterized by simplicity , with little or no decoration , a wide pour-hole , a lack of handles , and a pierced or unpierced lug . pierced lugs occurred briefly between the 4th and 3rd century bc . unpierced lugs continued until the 1st century bc . ; volute , early imperial : with spiral , scroll-like ornaments called volutes extending from their nozzles , these lamps were predominantly produced in italy during the early roman period . they have a wide discus , a narrow shoulder , no handle , elaborate imagery and artistic finishing , and a wide range of patterns of decoration . ; high imperial : these lamps are late roman . the shoulder is wider and the discus is smaller with fewer decorations . these lamps have handles , short , plain nozzles , and less artistic finishing . ; frog : this is a regional style lamp exclusively produced in egypt and found in the regions around it , between and 300 ad . the frog ( heqet ) is an egyptian fertility symbol . ; african red slip : lamps made in north africa , but widely exported , decorated in a red slip . they date from the 2nd to the 7th century ad and comprise a wide variety of shapes including a flat , heavily decorated shoulder with a small and relatively shallow discus . their decoration is either non-religious , christian or jewish . grooves run from the nozzle back to the pouring hole . it is hypothesized that this is to take back spilled oil . these lamps often have more than one pour-hole . ; slipper : these lamps are oval-shaped and found mainly in the levant . they were produced between the 3rd to 9th centuries ad . decorations include vine scrolls , palm wreaths , and greek letters . ; factory lamps : also called , these are universal in distribution and simple in appearance . they have a channeled nozzle , plain discus , and two or three bumps on the shoulder . initially made in factories in northern italy and southern gaul between the 1st and 3rd centuries ad , they were exported to all roman provinces . the vast majority were stamped on the bottom to identify the manufacturer . oil lamps in religious contexts . judaism . image : three oil jews lamps from sardegna museo naziona sanna sassari.jpg thumb jewish terracotta oil lamps from sardinia in the museo nazionale sanna , sassari lamps appear in the torah and other jewish sources as a symbol of '' lighting '' the way for the righteous , the wise , and for love and other positive values . while fire was often described as being destructive , light was given a positive spiritual meaning . the oil lamp and its light were important household items , and this may explain their symbolism . oil lamps were used for many spiritual rituals . the oil lamp and its light also became important ritualistic articles with the further development of jewish culture and religion . the temple menorah , a ritual seven-branched oil lamp used in the second temple , forms the centre of the chanukah story . christianity . there are several references to oil lamps in the new testament , in the orthodox church and many eastern catholic churches oil lamps , slavonic : are still used both on the holy table ( altar ) and to illuminate icons on the iconostasis and around the temple ( church building ) . orthodox christians will also use oil lamps in their homes to illuminate their icon corner . traditionally , the sanctuary lamp in an orthodox church is an oil lamp . it is lit by the bishop when the church is consecrated , and ideally it should burn perpetually thereafter . the oil burned in all of these lamps is traditionally olive oil . oil lamps are also referenced as a symbol throughout the new testament , including in the parable of the ten virgins . hinduism . oil lamps are commonly used in hindu temples as well as in home shrines . generally the lamps used in temples are circular with places for five wicks . they are made of metal and either suspended on a chain or screwed onto a pedestal . there will usually be at least one lamp in each shrine , and the main shrine may contain several . usually only one wick is lit , with all five burning only on festive occasions . the oil lamp is used in the hindu ritual of aarti . in the home shrine , the style of lamp is usually different , containing only one wick . there is usually a piece of metal that forms the back of the lamp , which has a picture of a hindu deity embossed on it . in many houses , the lamp burns all day , but in other homes , it is lit at sundown . the lamp in the home shrine is supposed to be lit before any other lights are turned on at night . a hand-held oil lamp or incense sticks ( lit from the lamp ) are also used during the hindu puja ceremony . in the north of india , a five-wick lamp is used , usually fueled with ghee . on special occasions , various other lamps may be used for puja , the most elaborate having several tiers of wicks . in south india , there are a few types of oil lamps that are common in temples and traditional rituals . some of the smaller ones are used for offerings as well . ; : a brass lamp with a depiction of goddess sri lakshmi over the back piece . they are usually small and have only one wick . ; nilavilakku : a tall brass or bronze lamp on a stand where the wicks are placed at a certain height . ; : a brass or bronze lamp in the form of a lady holding a vessel with her hands . this type of lamp comes in different sizes , from very small to almost life-size . there are also large stone versions of this lamp in hindu temples and shrines of karnataka , tamil nadu and kerala , especially at the base of columns and flanking the entrance of temples . they have only one wick . ; : a brass or bronze lamp hanging from a chain , often with multiple wicks . ; nachiarkoil lamp : an ornamental brass lamp made of series of diyas , a handicraft product which is exclusively made by the pather ( kammalar ) community in nachiyar koil , tamil nadu , india . . chinese folk religion . image : malaysian god shrine.jpg thumb upright right traditional chinese shrine in petaling jaya , malaysia , containing an oil lamp oil lamps are lit at traditional chinese shrines before either an image of a deity or a plaque with classical chinese characters giving the name of the deity . such lamps are usually made from clear glass ( giving them a similar appearance to normal drinking glasses ) and are filled with oil , sometimes with water underneath . a cork or plastic floater containing a wick is placed on top of the oil with the bottom of the wick submerged in the oil . such lamps are kept burning in shrines , whether private or public , and incense sticks or joss sticks are lit from the lamp . history . curved stone lamps were found in places dated to the 10th millennium bc ( mesolithic , middle stone age period , c . 10,300–8000 bc ) . the oldest stone-oil lamp was found in lascaux in 1940 in a cave that was inhabited 10,000 to 15,000 years ago . some archaeologists claim that the first shell-lamps existed more than 6,000 years ago ( neolithic , later stone age , c . 8500–4500 bc ) . they believe that the alabaster shell-shaped lamps dug up in sumerian sites dating to 2600 bc were imitations of real shell-lamps that had been used for a long time ( early bronze age , canaanite/bronze age , c . 3300–2000 bc ) . it is generally agreed that the evolution of handmade lamps moved from bowl-shaped to saucer-shaped , then from saucer with a nozzle , to a closed bowl with a spout . chalcolithic age , c . 4500–3300 bc . the first manufactured red pottery oil lamps appeared in the chalcolithic . these were of the round bowl type . the bronze ages ( 3200–1200 bce ) . bronze age lamps were simple wheel-made bowls with a slight pinch on four sides for the wick . later lamps had only one pinch . these lamps vary in the shape of the rim , the general shape of the bowl and the shape of the base . ; intermediate bronze age lamps ( ebiv/mbi ) : a design with four spouts for wicks appeared in the intermediate bronze age ( 2300-2000 bce ) . lamps are made from large bowls with flattened bases for stability , and four equally spaced shallow pinches in the rim for wicks , although some lamps with only a single pinch have also been found . the four-spout design evolved to provide sufficient light when fueled with fish or animal oils , which burn less efficiently than olive oil . ; middle bronze age lamps ( mb ) : the four-wick oil lamps persist into this period . however , most lamps now have only one wick . early in this period the pinch is shallow , while later on it becomes more prominent and the mouth protrudes from the lamp 's body . the bases are simple and flat . the crude potter 's wheel is introduced , transforming the handmade bowls to a more uniform container . the saucer style evolves into a single spout shape . ; late bronze age lamps ( lb ) : a more pronounced , deeper single spout is developed , and it is almost closed on the sides . the shape is evolving to be more triangular , deeper and larger . all lamps are now wheel-made , with simple and usually flat bases . the iron age ( 1200–560 bc ) . during the iron age , lamp rims become wider and flatter , with a deeper and higher spout . the tip of the spout is more upright in contrast to the rest of the rim . the lamps are becoming variable in shape and distribution , although some remain similar to lamps from the late bronze period . in addition , other forms evolve , such as small lamps with a flat base and larger lamps with a round base . the later form continues into the iron age ii . in the later iron age , variant forms appear . one common type is small , with a wide rim and a wide base . another type is a small , shallow bowl with a thick and high discus base . arctic . the qulliq ( seal-oil lamp ) provided warmth and light in the harsh arctic environment where there was no wood and where the sparse population relied almost entirely on seal oil . this lamp was the most important article of furniture for the inuit , yupik and other eskimo peoples . the lamps were made of stone and their sizes and shapes of lamps could be different , but mostly were elliptical or half-moon shaped . the wicks were mostly made of dried moss or cottongrass and were lit along the edge of the lamp . a slab of seal blubber could be left to melt over the lamp feeding it with more fat . . persian . persian lamps were large , with thin sides and a deep pinch that flattens the mouth and makes it protrude outward . greek . greek lamps are more closed to avoid spilling . they are smaller and more refined . most are handle-less . some are with a lug , which may be pierced or not pierced . the nozzle is elongated . the rim is folded over so it overlaps in order to make the nozzle , and is then pinched to make the wick hole . they are round in shape and wheel-made . chinese . the earliest chinese oil lamps are dated from the warring states period ( 481–221 bc ) . the ancient chinese created oil lamps with a refillable reservoir and a fibrous wick , giving the lamp a controlled flame . lamps were constructed from jade , bronze , ceramic , wood , stone , and other materials . the largest oil lamp excavated so far is one discovered in a 4th-century tomb located in modern pingshan , hebei . . early roman . thumb production of oil lamps shifted to italy as the main source of supply in the early roman era . molds began to be used , and lamps were produced in large scale in factories . all lamps are closed in type . the lamp is produced in two parts , the upper part with the spout and the lower part with the fuel chamber . most are of the characteristic '' imperial type '' —round , with nozzles of different forms ( volute , semi-volute , u-shaped ) , a closed body , a central disk decorated with reliefs and a filling hole . late roman . late roman lamps were of the '' high imperial '' type . they included more decorations , and were produced locally or imported in large scale . the multiple-nozzled lamps appeared during this period . many different varieties were created . frog type lamps also appeared during this period . these are kidney-shaped , heart-shaped or oval , and feature the motif of a frog or its abstraction , and sometimes geometrical motifs . they were produced around 100 ad . they are so variant that two identical lamps are seldom found . early christian and late antique . early christian and late antique oil lamps were diverse . one of the most notable ones were mediterranean sigillata ( “ african ” ) lamps . the motifs were largely geometric , vegetative and graphic ( monograms ) , with figural depiction of animals and human figures , often christ . . byzantine . oil lanterns of the byzantine were slipper-shaped and highly decorative . the multiple-nozzle design continued and most lamps bore handles . some have complex exteriors . early islamic . thumb there is a transition period from byzantine to islamic lamps . the decoration on lamps of this transition period changed from crosses , animals , human likenesses , birds , or fish to plain linear , geometric , and raised-dot patterns . the early islamic lamps continued the traditions of byzantine lamps . decorations were initially a stylized form of a bird , grain , tree , plant , or flower . later , they became entirely geometric or linear with raised dots . in 9th-century baghdad , al-razi ( rhazes ) described the first kerosene lamp ; he referred to it as the in his ( 'book of secrets ' ) . in the transition period , some lamps had arabic writing . writing later disappears until the mamluk period ( 13th to 15th century ad ) . industrial age . oil-burning carriage lamps provided a model for the first bicycle lamps in the 1860s . . regional variations . israel and palestinian territories . jerusalem oil lamp : the clay has a characteristic black color because it was burned without oxygen . usually of high quality . daroma oil lamp jerash oil lamp nabatean oil lamp herodian oil lamp : considered to be used mainly by jews . wheel-made , rounded , and have a nozzle with concave sides . the lamps are usually not decorated ; if there is decoration , it tends to be simple . very common throughout all of palestine , and some lamps have also been found in jordan . date from the 1st century bc to the end of the 1st century ad . menorah ( temple ) , seven nozzles : rare and are associated with judaism because of the numerical connection with the seven branches or arms of the menorah . samaritan oil lamp : characterized by a sealed filling hole , which was to be broken by the buyer . this was probably done to ensure ritual purity . they have a wider spout , and the concavities flanking the nozzle are almost always emphasized with a ladder pattern band . in general , the lamps are uncoated . the decorations are linear or geometric . type i : a distinct channel runs from the pouring hole to the nozzle . they have a small knob handle , a ladder pattern around the nozzle and no ornamentation on the bottom of the base . type ii : pear-shaped and elongated , with a lined channel that extends from the filling hole to the nozzle . continued to be used up to the early muslim period . candle stick oil lamp : menorah design on the nozzle and bunch of grapes on the shoulders . byzantine oil lamp : the upper parts and their handles are covered with braided patterns . all are made of a dark orange-red clay . a rounded bottom with a distinct x or cross appears inside the circled base . early islamic oil lamp : large knob handle and the channel above the nozzle are the dominant elements of these . the handle is tongue-shaped , and decoration is rich and elegant . the lower parts are extremely broad and the nozzles are pointed . importance of oil lamps in india . image : diya.jpg thumb a basic earthen oil lamp used for diwali image : diya-1.jpg thumb traditional indian earthenware oil lamp or diya in vedic times , fire was kept alive in every household in some form and carried with oneself while migrating to new locations . later , the presence of fire in the household or a religious building was ensured by an oil lamp . over the years various rituals and customs were woven around an oil lamp . for , the gift of a lamp was and still is believed to be the best ( 'donation ' ) . during marriages , spinsters of the household stand behind the bride and groom , holding an oil lamp to ward off evil . the presence of an oil lamp is an important aspect of ritual worship ( the offered to a deity . moreover , a day is kept aside for the worship of the lamp in the busy festival calendar , on one ( moonless ) day in the month of shravan . this reverence for the deep is based on the symbolism of the journey from darkness and ignorance to light and the knowledge of the ultimate reality – '' '' . earlier lamps were made out of stone or seashells . the shape was like a circular bowl with a protruding beak . later , they were replaced by earthen and metal lamps . in the epics ramayana and mahabharata , there are references to gold and silver lamps as well . the simple shape evolved and the lamps were created in the shapes of the ( 'fish ' ) , ( 'tortoise ' ) and other incarnations of god vishnu . lamps were also created in the shape of the many emblems of gods , like conch shells or lotuses . birds such as swans , peacocks , or parrots , and animals like snakes , lions , elephants and horses were also favorites when decorating a lamp . for lighting multiple lamps , wooden and stone ( 'towers of light ' ) were created . erecting a in front of a temple is still a general practice in western and southern india . in some of the south indian temples , raised brass lamp towers called can be seen . to adapt the design to households and smaller spaces , the ( 'tree of light ' ) was created . as the name suggests , it is a metal lamp container with curvi-linear lines branching out from the base , each holding a lamp . the is another common design , where the goddess lakshmi holds the lamp in her hands . is another typical lamp traditionally used for household purposes in south india . oil lamps also were included in proverbs . for example , a bradj ( pre-hindi ) proverb says , '' '' , 'the utmost darkness is under the oil-lamp ' , meaning that what you seek could be close but unnoticed ( right under your nose or feet ) , in various senses ( a lamp 's container casts a strong shadow ) . oil tax . when the big temple in thanjavur , tamil nadu , was built 1010 ad , there were elaborate measures taken to provide lighting for the temple . lands were donated to or conquered for the temple for this sole objective . the income from these lands would go towards providing the oil for the lights . . books and catalogues . image : whale-oil-lamp.jpg thumb whale oil lamp of the 18th or 19th century , iron with cotton wick ( dithmarscher landesmuseum meldorf , schleswig-holstein , germany ) general excellent introductory booklet , well illustrated . edwardian illustrated article for the society of antiquaries of scotland , interesting insight into the general knowledge of that time . less academic than the museum catalogues and short on dating but fairly comprehensive ( within its specified area , i.e . not northern europe ) and extensively illustrated . another superb catalogue and excellent reference , perhaps second only to bailey . in french , good coverage of earlier and later lamps in the louvre , well illustrated . in german , superb catalogue , profusely illustrated and captioned . ( reprint of 1939 edition . ) useful introduction but illustrations are very poor . several of the items shown have since been exposed as fakes . in french , brief guide to a few lamps in the brussels museum . superseded by bailey but still worthwhile and much cheaper for an old copy . in german , small booklet but excellent illustrations in color . western europe paperback . in french , with short summaries in english , italian and german . excellent general survey of lamps , detailed study and catalogue of the small collection of roman oil lamps at nyon . paperback , frustratingly unindexed but a refreshing approach and well worth plowing through . in german , emphasis on local lamps found in trier but excellent coverage of all roman types of the rhineland . in german , catalogue of lamps . in german , long out-of-print classic but a superb reference . middle ( near ) east comprehensive coverage of lamps from the palestine region . standard reference . aegean good coverage of local lamps . excellent booklet , profusely illustrated and a recommended reference , very cheap used copies . north africa in italian , detailed catalogue of locally found lamps . paperback , lavishly color-illustrated guide to north african red slipware including many lamps . see also . ancient roman oil lamp kerosene lamp lantern lewis lamp list of light sources timeline of lighting technology diya ( lamp ) . references . further reading . . external links . romq.com , ancient lamps steve-adler.com , oil lamps from the holy land , from the adler collection oil lamps of antiquity ( includes 5 diagrams )