Eugène Delacroix

early life . eugène delacroix was born on 26 april 1798 at charenton-saint-maurice in île-de-france , near paris . his mother was named victoire oeben , the daughter of the cabinet-maker jean-françois oeben . he had three much older siblings . charles-henri delacroix ( 1779–1845 ) rose to the rank of general in the napoleonic army . henriette ( 1780–1827 ) married the diplomat raymond de verninac saint-maur ( 1762–1822 ) . henri was born six years later . he was killed at the battle of friedland on 14 june 1807 . there are medical reasons to believe that eugène 's legitimate father , charles-françois delacroix , was not able to procreate at the time of eugène 's conception . talleyrand , who was a friend of the family and successor of charles delacroix as minister of foreign affairs , and whom the adult eugène resembled in appearance and character , considered himself as his real father . andré castelot ( talleyrand ou le cynisme paris , librairie perrin , 1980 ) discusses and rejects the theory , pointing out that correspondence between charles and his wife during the pregnancy shows no sign of tension or resentment . after assuming his office as foreign minister talleyrand , dispatched delacroix to the hague in the capacity of french ambassador to the then batavian republic . delacroix who at the time suffered from erectile dysfunction returned to paris in early september 1797 , only to find his wife pregnant . talleyrand went on to assist eugène in the form of numerous anonymous commissions . throughout his career as a painter , he was protected by talleyrand , who served successively the restoration and king louis-philippe , and ultimately as ambassador of france in great britain , and later by charles de morny , duke of morny , half-brother of napoleon iii and speaker of the french house of commons . his legitimate father , charles delacroix , died in 1805 , and his mother in 1814 , leaving 16-year-old eugène an orphan . his early education was at the lycée louis-le-grand , and at the lycée pierre corneille in rouen where he steeped himself in the classics and won awards for drawing . in 1815 he began his training with pierre-narcisse guérin in the neoclassical style of jacques-louis david . an early church commission , the virgin of the harvest ( 1819 ) , displays a raphael-esque influence , but another such commission , the virgin of the sacred heart ( 1821 ) , evidences a freer interpretation . jobert , barthélémy , delacroix , page 62 . princeton university press , 1997 . it precedes the influence of the more colourful and rich style of the flemish baroque painter peter paul rubens , and fellow french artist théodore géricault , whose works marked an introduction to romanticism in art . the impact of géricault 's the raft of the medusa was profound , and stimulated delacroix to produce his first major painting , the barque of dante , which was accepted by the paris salon in 1822 . the work caused a sensation , and was largely derided by the public and officialdom , yet was purchased by the state for the musée du luxembourg ; the pattern of widespread opposition to his work , countered by a vigorous , enlightened support , would continue throughout his life . wellington , page xii . two years later he again achieved popular success for his the massacre at chios . career . chios and missolonghi . image : eugène delacroix - le massacre de scio.jpg thumb massacre at chios ( 1824 ) , louvre delacroix 's painting of the massacre at chios shows sick , dying greek civilians about to be slaughtered by the turks . one of several paintings he made of this contemporary event , expressed the official policy for the greek cause in greek war of independence against the turks , war sustained by english , russian and french governments . delacroix was quickly recognized by the authorities as a leading painter in the new romantic style , and the picture was bought by the state . his depiction of suffering was controversial , however , as there was no glorious event taking place , no patriots raising their swords in valour as in david 's oath of the horatii , only a disaster . many critics deplored the painting 's despairing tone ; the artist antoine-jean gros called it '' a massacre of art '' . the pathos in the depiction of an infant clutching its dead mother 's breast had an especially powerful effect , although this detail was condemned as unfit for art by delacroix 's critics . a viewing of the paintings of john constable and the watercolour sketches and art of richard parkes bonnington prompted delacroix to make extensive , freely painted changes to the sky and distant landscape . wellington , pages xii , 16 . image : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 017.jpg left thumb upright greece on the ruins of missolonghi ( 1826 ) , musée des beaux-arts , bordeaux delacroix produced a second painting in support of the greeks in their war for independence , this time referring to the capture of missolonghi by turkish forces in 1825 . jobert , page 127 . with a restraint of palette appropriate to the allegory , greece expiring on the ruins of missolonghi displays a woman in greek costume with her breast bared , arms half-raised in an imploring gesture before the horrible scene : the suicide of the greeks , who chose to kill themselves and destroy their city rather than surrender to the turks . a hand is seen at the bottom , the body having been crushed by rubble . the painting serves as a monument to the people of missolonghi and to the idea of freedom against tyrannical rule . this event interested delacroix not only for his sympathies with the greeks , but also because the poet byron , whom delacroix greatly admired , had died there . . romanticism . a trip to england in 1825 included visits to thomas lawrence and richard parkes bonington , and the colour and handling of english painting provided impetus for his only full-length portrait , the elegant portrait of louis-auguste schwiter ( 1826–30 ) . at roughly the same time , delacroix was creating romantic works of numerous themes , many of which would continue to interest him for over thirty years . by 1825 , he was producing lithographs illustrating shakespeare , and soon thereafter lithographs and paintings from goethe 's faust . paintings such as the combat of the giaour and hassan ( 1826 ) , and woman with parrot ( 1827 ) , introduced subjects of violence and sensuality which would prove to be recurrent . jobert , page 98 . these various romantic strands came together in the death of sardanapalus ( 1827–28 ) . delacroix 's painting of the death of the assyrian king sardanapalus shows an emotionally stirring scene alive with beautiful colours , exotic costumes and tragic events . the death of sardanapalus depicts the besieged king watching impassively as guards carry out his orders to kill his servants , concubines and animals . the literary source is a play by byron , although the play does not specifically mention any massacre of concubines . sardanapalus ' attitude of calm detachment is a familiar pose in romantic imagery in this period in europe . the painting , which was not exhibited again for many years afterward , has been regarded by some critics as a gruesome fantasy involving death and lust . especially shocking is the struggle of a nude woman whose throat is about to be cut , a scene placed prominently in the foreground for maximum impact . however , the sensuous beauty and exotic colours of the composition make the picture appear pleasing and shocking at the same time . a variety of romantic interests were again synthesized in the murder of the bishop of liège ( 1829 ) . it also borrowed from a literary source , this time scott , and depicts a scene from the middle ages , that of the murder of louis de bourbon , bishop of liège amidst an orgy sponsored by his captor , william de la marck . set in an immense vaulted interior which delacroix based on sketches of the palais de justice in rouen and westminster hall , the drama plays out in chiaroscuro , organized around a brilliantly lit stretch of tablecloth . in 1855 , a critic described the painting 's vibrant handling as '' less finished than a painting , more finished than a sketch , the murder of the bishop of liège was left by the painter at that supreme moment when one more stroke of the brush would have ruined everything '' . jobert , pages 116–18 . . liberty leading the people . image : eugène delacroix - la liberté guidant le peuple.jpg thumb liberty leading the people ( 1830 ) , louvre , paris delacroix 's most influential work came in 1830 with the painting liberty leading the people , which for choice of subject and technique highlights the differences between the romantic approach and the neoclassical style . less obviously , it also differs from the romanticism of géricault , as exemplified by the raft of the medusa . delacroix felt his composition more vividly as a whole , thought of his figures and crowds as types , and dominated them by the symbolic figure of republican liberty which is one of his finest plastic inventions . wellington , page xv . probably delacroix 's best-known painting , liberty leading the people is an unforgettable image of parisians , having taken up arms , marching forward under the banner of the tricolour representing liberty , equality , and fraternity . although delacroix was inspired by contemporary events to invoke this romantic image of the spirit of liberty , he seems to be trying to convey the will and character of the people , rather than glorifying the actual event , july revolution against charles x , which did little other than bring a different king , louis-philippe , to power . the warriors lying dead in the foreground offer poignant counterpoint to the symbolic female figure , who is illuminated triumphantly against a background of smoke . allard , sébastien , côme fabre , dominique de font-réaulx , michèle hannoosh , mehdi korchane , and asher ethan miller ( 2018 ) . delacroix . new york , ny : metropolitan museum of art . pp . 74–76 . although the french government bought the painting , by 1832 officials deemed its glorification of liberty too inflammatory and removed it from public view . allard , sébastien , côme fabre , dominique de font-réaulx , michèle hannoosh , mehdi korchane , and asher ethan miller ( 2018 ) . delacroix . new york , ny : metropolitan museum of art . p . 76 . nonetheless , delacroix still received many government commissions for murals and ceiling paintings . allard , sébastien , côme fabre , dominique de font-réaulx , michèle hannoosh , mehdi korchane , and asher ethan miller ( 2018 ) . delacroix . new york , ny : metropolitan museum of art . p . 103 . following the revolution of 1848 that saw the end of the reign of king louis philippe , delacroix ' painting , liberty leading the people , was finally put on display by the newly elected president , louis napoleon ( napoleon iii ) . it is exhibited in the louvre museum in paris ; although from december 2012 until 2014 it was on exhibit at louvre-lens in lens , pas-de-calais . the boy holding a pistol aloft on the right is sometimes thought to be an inspiration for the gavroche character in victor hugo 's 1862 novel , les misérables . néret , gilles delacroix , page 26 . taschen , 2000 . retrieved 27 may 2017 . . travel to north africa . in 1832 , delacroix traveled to spain and north africa in company with the diplomat charles-edgar de mornay , as part of a diplomatic mission to morocco shortly after the french conquered algeria . he went not primarily to study art , but to escape from the civilization of paris , in hopes of seeing a more '' primitive '' culture . he eventually produced over 100 paintings and drawings of scenes from or based on the life of the people of north africa , and added a new and personal chapter to the interest in orientalism . jobert , page 140 . delacroix was entranced by the people and their clothes , and the trip would inform the subject matter of a great many of his future paintings . he believed that the north africans , in their attire and their attitudes , provided a visual equivalent to the people of classical rome and greece : the greeks and romans are here at my door , in the arabs who wrap themselves in a white blanket and look like cato or brutus . image : eugene delacroix.jpg thumb upright self-portrait , 1837 . '' eugène delacroix was a curious mixture of skepticism , politeness , dandyism , willpower , cleverness , despotism , and finally , a kind of special goodness and tenderness that always accompanies genius '' . baudelaire , quoted in jobert , page 27 . he managed to sketch some women secretly in algiers , as in the painting women of algiers in their apartment ( 1834 ) , but generally he encountered difficulty in finding muslim women to pose for him because of muslim rules requiring that women be covered . less problematic was the painting of jewish women in north africa , as subjects for the jewish wedding in morocco ( 1837–1841 ) . while in tangier , delacroix made many sketches of the people and the city , subjects to which he would return until the end of his life . wellington , page xvi . animals—the embodiment of romantic passion—were incorporated into paintings such as arab horses fighting in a stable ( 1860 ) , the lion hunt ( of which there exist many versions , painted between 1856 and 1861 ) , and arab saddling his horse ( 1855 ) . musical inspirations . delacroix drew inspiration from many sources over his career , such as the literary works of william shakespeare and lord byron , or the artistry of michelangelo . but from beginning to end of his life , he was in part characterized by a constant need for music , saying in 1855 , '' nothing can be compared with the emotion caused by music ; that it expresses incomparable shades of feeling . '' he had said , while working at saint sulpice , that the music put him in a state of '' exaltation '' which inspired his painting . it was often in music , in the most melancholy renditions of chopin , or the '' pastoral '' works of beethoven that delacroix was often able to draw the most emotion and inspiration . at one point during his life , delacroix befriended and made portraits of the composer chopin ; in his journal , delacroix praised him frequently . . murals and later life . in 1838 delacroix exhibited medea about to kill her children , which created a sensation at the salon . his first large-scale treatment of a scene from greek mythology , the painting depicts medea clutching her children , dagger drawn to slay them in vengeance for her abandonment by jason . the three nude figures form an animated pyramid , bathed in a raking light which penetrates the grotto in which medea has hidden . though the painting was quickly purchased by the state , delacroix was disappointed when it was sent to the lille musée des beaux-arts ; he had intended for it to hang at the luxembourg , where it would have joined the barque of dante and scenes from the massacres of chios . jobert , pages 245–6 . from 1833 delacroix received numerous commissions to decorate public buildings in paris . in that year he began work for the salon du roi in the chambre des députés , palais bourbon , which was not completed until 1837 , and began a lifelong friendship with the female artist madame cavé . for the next ten years he painted in both the library at the palais bourbon and the library at the palais du luxembourg . in 1843 he decorated the church of st . denis du saint sacrement with a large pietà , and from 1848 to 1850 he painted the ceiling in the galerie d'apollon of the louvre . from 1857 to 1861 he worked on frescoes for the chapelle des anges at the church of st . sulpice in paris . they included '' the battle of jacob with the angel '' , '' saint michael slaying the dragon '' , and '' the expulsion of heliodorus from the temple '' . these commissions offered him the opportunity to compose on a large scale in an architectural setting , much as had those masters he admired , paolo veronese , tintoretto , and rubens . the work was fatiguing , and during these years he suffered from an increasingly fragile constitution . in addition to his home in paris , from 1844 he also lived at a small cottage in champrosay , where he found respite in the countryside . from 1834 until his death , he was faithfully cared for by his housekeeper , jeanne-marie le guillou , who zealously guarded his privacy , and whose devotion prolonged his life and his ability to continue working in his later years . wellington , pages xxvii–xxviii . in 1862 delacroix participated in the creation of the société nationale des beaux-arts . his friend , the writer théophile gautier , became chairman , with the painter aimé millet acting as deputy chairman . in addition to delacroix , the committee was composed of the painters carrier-belleuse and puvis de chavannes . among the exhibitors were léon bonnat , jean-baptiste carpeaux , charles-françois daubigny , gustave doré , and édouard manet . just after his death in 1863 , the society organized a retrospective exhibition of 248 paintings and lithographs by delacroix—and ceased to mount any further exhibitions . the winter of 1862–63 was extremely rough for delacroix ; he was suffering from a bad throat infection which seemed to get worse over the course of the season . on a trip to champrosay , he met a friend on the train and became exhausted after having a conversation . on 1 june he returned to paris to see his doctor . two weeks later , on 16 june , he was getting better and returned to his house in the country . but by 15 july he was sick enough to see his doctor who said he could do nothing more for him . by then , the only food he could eat was fruit . delacroix realized the seriousness of his condition and wrote his will , leaving a gift for each of his friends . for his trusted housekeeper , jenny le guillou , he left enough money for her to live on while ordering everything in his studio to be sold . he also inserted a clause forbidding any representation of his features , '' whether by a death-mask or by drawing or by photography . i forbid it , expressly . '' on 13 august , delacroix died , with jenny by his side . he was buried in père lachaise cemetery . his house , formerly situated along the canal of the marne , is now near the exit of the motorway leading from paris to central germany . gallery . file : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 024.jpg mademoiselle rose , 1817–1824 , louvre file : eugène delacroix - jeune orpheline au cimetière ( vers 1824 ) . jpg orphan girl at the cemetery , 1823 , louvre file : delacroix louis dorleans devoilant une maitresse.jpg louis of orléans unveiling his mistress , c.1825–26 , thyssen-bornemisza collection file : charles-etienne-raymond-victor de verninac by delacroix.jpg charles étienne raymond victor de verninac , the painter 's nephew , c.1825–26 . private collection file : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 021.jpg the combat of the giaour and hassan , 1826 , art institute of chicago file : delacroix , eugène ferdinand victor - woman with a parrot - 1827.jpg woman with a parrot , 1827 , museum of fine arts of lyon file : delacroix , la femme aux bas blancs.jpg woman with white socks , 1825–1830 , louvre file : young tiger playing with its mother.jpg a young tiger playing with its mother , 1830 , louvre file : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 049.jpg the duke of morny 's apartment , 1831–1833 , louvre file : delacroix portrait desmaisons.jpg portrait of dr . françois-marie desmaisons , 1832–33 , detroit institute of arts file : eugène delacroix - fantasia arabe - google art project.jpg fantasia arabe , 1833 . frankfurt städel museum file : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 014.jpg the women of algiers , 1834 , louvre file : battle of taillebourg by delacroix.jpg the battle of taillebourg ( draft ) , 1834 & ndash ; 35 , louvre file : eugène delacroix - les natchez , 1835 ( metropolitan museum of art ) . jpg the natchez , 1835 , metropolitan museum of art file : eugène delacroix - frédéric chopin - wga06194.jpg frédéric chopin , 1838 , louvre file : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 041.jpg george sand , 1838 , ordrupgaard file : columbus and his son at la rábida.jpg columbus and his son at la rábida , 1838 , national gallery of art file : jüdische hochzeit in marokko-1024.jpg jewish wedding in morocco , c.1839 , louvre file : hamlet und horatio auf dem friedhof ( eugène ferdinand victor delacroix ) . jpg hamlet with horatio , ( the gravedigger scene ) , 1839 , louvre file : eugène delacroix - christ on the sea of galilee - google art project.jpg christ on the sea of galilee , 1841 , nelson-atkins museum of art file : eugène delacroix - collision of moorish horsemen - walters 376.jpg collision of moorish horsemen , 1844 , walters art museum file : delacroix-marc aurèle-mba-lyon.jpg last words of the emperor marcus aurelius , 1844 , musée des beaux-arts de lyon file : são jorge e o dragão delacroix 1847.jpg saint george fighting the dragon , 1847 , louvre museum file : brooklyn museum - desdemona cursed by her father ( desdemona maudite par son père ) - eugène delacroix.jpg desdemona cursed by her father ( desdemona maudite par son père ) , c.1850–1854 , brooklyn museum file : eugène delacroix - andromeda - google art project.jpg andromeda , 1852 , museum of fine arts , houston file : delacroix andromeda.jpg perseus and andromeda , circa 1853 , staatsgalerie stuttgart file : eugène ferdinand victor delacroix 025.jpg 1855 , moroccan saddles his horse , hermitage museum file : eugéne delacroix - rider attacked by a jaguar - google art project.jpg rider attacked by a jaguar , 1855 . national gallery in prague file : bride of abydos 1857 950px.jpg the bride of abydos , 1857 , louvre file : death of desdemona.jpg the death of desdemona , 1858 file : ferdinand-victor-eugène delacroix - horses coming out of the sea - google art project.jpg horses leaving the sea , 1860 , the phillips collection file : arab horses fighting in a stable eugene delacroix 1860.jpg arab horses fighting in a stable , 1860 file : eugène delacroix - shipwreck on the coast - google art project.jpg shipwreck on the coast , 1862 , museum of fine arts , houston file : eugène delacroix - ovide chez les scythes ( 1862 ) . jpg ovid among the scythians , 1862 , version in metropolitan museum of art file : eugène delacroix , winter- juno and aeolus , oil sketch , 1856 . oil on canvas , private collection.jpg winter : juno and aeolus , 1856 , private collection ( sketch for the painting in the são paulo museum of art ) file : delacroix salon du roi palais bourbon paris 950px.jpg murals for salon du roi , palais bourbon , paris , 1833–1837 file : eugène delacroix , charioteers , nga 151237.jpg charioteers , pen and ink on paper , national gallery of art . legacy . image : delacroix monument jardin du luxembourg.jpg thumb upright monument to delacroix , at the jardin du luxembourg image : perelachaise-delacroix-p1000397.jpg thumb delacroix 's tomb in père lachaise cemetery image : hundred franc note delacroix 1993.jpg thumb french 100 franc banknote , 1993 at the sale of his work in 1864 , 9140 works were attributed to delacroix , including 853 paintings , 1525 pastels and water colours , 6629 drawings , 109 lithographs , and over 60 sketch books . wellington , page xxviii . the number and quality of the drawings , whether done for constructive purposes or to capture a spontaneous movement , underscored his explanation , '' colour always occupies me , but drawing preoccupies me . '' delacroix produced several fine self-portraits , and a number of memorable portraits which seem to have been done purely for pleasure , among which were the portrait of fellow artist baron schwiter , an inspired small oil of the violinist niccolò paganini , and portrait of frédéric chopin and george sand , a double portrait of his friends , the composer frédéric chopin and writer george sand ; the painting was cut after his death , but the individual portraits survive . on occasion delacroix painted pure landscapes ( the sea at dieppe , 1852 ) and still lifes ( still life with lobsters , 1826–27 ) , both of which feature the virtuoso execution of his figure-based works . jobert , page 99 . he is also well known for his journal , in which he gave eloquent expression to his thoughts on art and contemporary life . eugène delacroix , journal , nouvelle édition intégrale établie par michèle hannoosh , 2 vols . , paris , josé corti , 2009 . a generation of impressionists was inspired by delacroix 's work . renoir and manet made copies of his paintings , and degas purchased the portrait of baron schwiter for his private collection . his painting at the church of st . sulpice has been called the '' finest mural painting of his time '' . wellington , page xxiii . contemporary chinese artist yue minjun has created his own interpretation of delacroix 's painting massacre of chios , which retains the same name . yue minjun 's painting was itself sold at sotheby 's for nearly 4.1 & nbsp ; million in 2007 . his pencil drawing moorish conversation on a terrace was discovered as part of the munich art hoard . . see also . jean louis marie eugène durieu , friend , colleague , and photographer list of orientalist artists orientalism musée national eugène delacroix , his last apartment in paris . references . external links . bibliothèque numérique de l'inha – journal et correspondance d'eugène delacroix eugène delacroix 's biography , context , style and technique the national gallery : delacroix brief biography at the getty museum le musée national eugène delacroix a free video documentary about delacroix 's liberty leading the people harriet griffiths & alister mill , delacroix 's salon exhibition record , 1827–1849 , database of salon artists , 1827–1850 eugène delacroix ( 1798–1863 ) : paintings , drawings , and prints from north american collections , a full text exhibition catalog from the metropolitan museum of art romanticism & the school of nature : nineteenth-century drawings and paintings from the karen b . cohen collection , a full text exhibition catalog from the metropolitan museum of art ( see index ) jennifer a . thompson , '' basket of flowers and fruit by eugège delacroix ( cat . 974 ) '' in the john g . johnson collection : a history and selected works , a philadelphia museum of art free digital publication .