Jim Croce

1970s . they returned to philadelphia and croce decided to be '' serious '' about becoming a productive member of society . '' i 'd worked construction crews , and i 'd been a welder while i was in college . but i 'd rather do other things than get burned . '' his determination to be '' serious '' led to a job at a philadelphia r & b am radio station , what , where he translated commercials into '' soul . '' '' i 'd sell airtime to bronco 's poolroom and then write the spot : '' you wan na be cool , and you wan na shoot pool . dig it . '' in 1970 , croce met classically trained pianist-guitarist and singer-songwriter maury muehleisen from trenton , new jersey , through producer joe salviuolo . salviuolo and croce had been friends when they studied at villanova university , and salviuolo had met muehleisen when he was teaching at rowan university in new jersey . salviuolo brought croce and muehleisen together at the production office of tommy west and terry cashman in new york city . croce at first backed muehleisen on guitar , but gradually their roles reversed , with muehleisen adding a lead guitar to croce 's music . when jim croce and ingrid discovered they were going to have a child , jim became more determined to make music his profession . he sent a cassette of his new songs to a friend and producer in new york city in the hope that he could get a record deal . when their son a . j . croce was born in september 1971 , ingrid became a stay-at-home mom while jim went on the road to promote his music . in 1972 , croce signed a three-record contract with abc records , releasing two albums , you do n't mess around with jim and life and times . the singles '' you do n't mess around with jim '' , '' operator ( that 's not the way it feels ) '' and '' time in a bottle '' all received airplay . also that year , the croce family moved to san diego , california . croce began appearing on television , including his national debut on american bandstand americanbandstandperformerlist on august 12 , the tonight show johnnycarson.com on august 14 and the dick cavett show on september 20 and 21 . croce began touring the united states with muehleisen , performing in large coffee houses , on college campuses and at folk festivals . however , his financial situation was still bad . the record company had fronted him the money to record and much of his earnings went to pay back the advance . croce and muehleisen travelled to europe , performing in london , paris , amsterdam , monte carlo , zurich and dublin and receiving positive reviews . croce made television appearances on the midnight special , which he co-hosted on , and the helen reddy show on july 19 . croce 's biggest single , '' bad , bad leroy brown , '' reached number 1 on the american charts in july . from july 16 through august 4 , croce and muehleisen returned to london and performed on the old grey whistle test , where they sang '' lover 's cross '' and '' workin ' at the car wash blues '' from their upcoming album i got a name . croce finished recording the album just a week before his death . while on tour , he grew increasingly homesick and decided to take a break from music and settle with ingrid and a.j . when his life and times tour ended . in a letter to ingrid which arrived after his death , croce told her he had decided to quit music and stick to writing short stories and movie scripts as a career and withdraw from . death . on thursday night , september 20 , 1973 , during croce 's life and times tour and the day before his abc single '' i got a name '' was released , croce and all five others on board were killed when their chartered beechcraft e18s crashed into a tree during takeoff from the natchitoches regional airport in natchitoches , louisiana . croce was 30 years old . others killed in the crash were pilot robert n . elliott , croce 's bandmate maury muehleisen , comedian george stevens , manager and booking agent kenneth d . cortese , and road manager dennis rast . an hour before the crash , croce had completed a concert at northwestern state university 's prather coliseum in natchitoches ; he was flying to sherman , texas , for a concert at austin college . an investigation by the ntsb named the probable cause as the pilot 's failure to see the obstruction due to physical impairment and because fog reduced his vision . the 57-year-old elliott suffered from severe coronary artery disease and had run three miles to the airport from a motel . he had an atp certificate , 14,290 hours total flight time and 2,190 hours in the beech 18 type airplane . a later investigation placed the sole blame on pilot error due to his downwind takeoff into a '' black hole '' of severe darkness , limiting his use of visual references . croce was buried at haym salomon memorial park in frazer , pennsylvania . legacy . the album i got a name was released on december 1 , 1973 . the posthumous release included three hits : '' workin ' at the car wash blues , '' '' i 'll have to say i love you in a song , '' and the title song , which had been used as the theme to the film the last american hero which was released two months prior to his death . the album reached no . 2 and '' i 'll have to say i love you in a song '' reached no . 9 on the singles chart . while abc had not originally released the song '' time in a bottle '' as a single , croce 's untimely death gave its lyrics , dealing with mortality and the wish to have more time , an additional resonance . the song subsequently received a large amount of airplay as an album track , and demand for a single release built . when it was eventually issued as a 7 '' , it became his second and final no . 1 hit . whitburn , joel . the billboard book of top 40 hits , 7th edition , billboard books , 2000 , p . 159 . after the single had finished its two-week run at the top in early january 1974 , the album you do n't mess around with jim became no . 1 for five weeks . whitburn , joel . the billboard book of top pop albums 1955–1985 , record research inc . , 1985 , p . 88 , 505 . a greatest hits album entitled photographs & memories was released in 1974 . later posthumous releases have included home recordings : americana , the faces i 've been , jim croce : classic hits , down the highway , and dvd and cd releases of croce 's television performances , have you heard : jim croce live . in 1990 , croce was inducted into the songwriters hall of fame . on july 3 , 2012 , ingrid croce published a memoir about her husband entitled i got a name : the jim croce story . in 1985 , ingrid croce opened croce 's restaurant & jazz bar , a project she and jim had jokingly discussed over a decade earlier , in the historic gaslamp quarter in downtown san diego . she owned and managed it until it closed on december 31 , 2013 . in december 2013 , she opened croce 's park west on 5th avenue in the bankers hill neighborhood near balboa park . she closed this restaurant in january 2016 . croce 's music has appeared in several popular movies and television shows , such as invincible , the hangover part ii , django unchained , x-men : days of future past , logan , hobbs & shaw , i know this much is true , new girl , prodigal son , american gods and stranger things . discography . facets ( 1966 ) jim & ingrid croce ( 1969 ) you do n't mess around with jim ( 1972 ) life and times ( 1973 ) i got a name ( 1973 )