Modern art

history . roots in the 19th century . although modern sculpture and architecture are reckoned to have emerged at the end of the 19th century , the beginnings of modern painting can be located earlier . arnason 1998 , p . 10 . the date perhaps most commonly identified as marking the birth of modern art is 1863 , arnason 1998 , p . 17 . the year that édouard manet showed his painting le déjeuner sur l'herbe in the salon des refusés in paris . earlier dates have also been proposed , among them 1855 ( the year gustave courbet exhibited the artist 's studio ) and 1784 ( the year jacques-louis david completed his painting the oath of the horatii ) . in the words of art historian h . harvard arnason : '' each of these dates has significance for the development of modern art , but none categorically marks a completely new beginning . a gradual metamorphosis took place in the course of a hundred years . '' the strands of thought that eventually led to modern art can be traced back to the enlightenment . '' in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries momentum began to gather behind a new view of the world , which would eventually create a new world , the modern world '' . cahoone 1996 , p . 27 . the important modern art critic clement greenberg , for instance , called immanuel kant '' the first real modernist '' but also drew a distinction : '' the enlightenment criticized from the outside . modernism criticizes from the inside . '' frascina and harrison 1982 , p . 5 . the french revolution of 1789 uprooted assumptions and institutions that had for centuries been accepted with little question and accustomed the public to vigorous political and social debate . this gave rise to what art historian ernst gombrich called a '' self-consciousness that made people select the style of their building as one selects the pattern of a wallpaper . '' gombrich 1958 , pp . 358–359 . the pioneers of modern art were romantics , realists and impressionism . arnason 1998 , p . 22 . by the late 19th century , additional movements which were to be influential in modern art had begun to emerge : post-impressionism as well as symbolism . influences upon these movements were varied : from exposure to eastern decorative arts , particularly japonism , to the coloristic innovations of turner and delacroix , to a search for more realism in the depiction of common life , as found in the work of painters such as jean-françois millet . the advocates of realism stood against the idealism of the tradition-bound academic art that enjoyed public and official favor . corinth , schuster , brauner , vitali , and butts 1996 , p.25 . the most successful painters of the day worked either through commissions or through large public exhibitions of their own work . there were official , government-sponsored painters ' unions , while governments regularly held public exhibitions of new fine and decorative arts . the impressionists argued that people do not see objects but only the light which they reflect , and therefore painters should paint in natural light ( en plein air ) rather than in studios and should capture the effects of light in their work . cogniat 1975 , p . 61 . impressionist artists formed a group , société anonyme coopérative des artistes peintres , sculpteurs , graveurs ( '' association of painters , sculptors , and engravers '' ) which , despite internal tensions , mounted a series of independent exhibitions . cogniat 1975 , pp . 43–49 . the style was adopted by artists in different nations , in preference to a '' national '' style . these factors established the view that it was a '' movement '' . these traits—establishment of a working method integral to the art , establishment of a movement or visible active core of support , and international adoption—would be repeated by artistic movements in the modern period in art . early 20th century . among the movements which flowered in the first decade of the 20th century were fauvism , cubism , expressionism , and futurism . during the years between 1910 and the end of world war i and after the heyday of cubism , several movements emerged in paris . giorgio de chirico moved to paris in july 1911 , where he joined his brother andrea ( the poet and painter known as alberto savinio ) . through his brother he met pierre laprade , a member of the jury at the salon d'automne where he exhibited three of his dreamlike works : enigma of the oracle , enigma of an afternoon and self-portrait . during 1913 he exhibited his work at the salon des indépendants and salon d ’ automne , and his work was noticed by pablo picasso , guillaume apollinaire , and several others . his compelling and mysterious paintings are considered instrumental to the early beginnings of surrealism . song of love ( 1914 ) is one of the most famous works by de chirico and is an early example of the surrealism style , though it was painted ten years before the movement was '' founded '' by andré breton in 1924 . world war i brought an end to this phase but indicated the beginning of a number of anti-art movements , such as dada , including the work of marcel duchamp , and of surrealism . artist groups like de stijl and bauhaus developed new ideas about the interrelation of the arts , architecture , design , and art education . modern art was introduced to the united states with the armory show in 1913 and through european artists who moved to the u.s . during world war i . after world war ii . it was only after world war ii , however , that the u.s . became the focal point of new artistic movements . cia and abex retrieved november 7 , 2010 the 1950s and 1960s saw the emergence of abstract expressionism , color field painting , conceptual artists of art & language , pop art , op art , hard-edge painting , minimal art , lyrical abstraction , fluxus , happening , video art , postminimalism , photorealism and various other movements . in the late 1960s and the 1970s , land art , performance art , conceptual art , and other new art forms had attracted the attention of curators and critics , at the expense of more traditional media . mullins 2006 , p . 14 . larger installations and performances became widespread . by the end of the 1970s , when cultural critics began speaking of '' the end of painting '' ( the title of a provocative essay written in 1981 by douglas crimp ) , new media art had become a category in itself , with a growing number of artists experimenting with technological means such as video art . mullins 2006 , p . 9 . painting assumed renewed importance in the 1980s and 1990s , as evidenced by the rise of neo-expressionism and the revival of figurative art . mullins 2006 , pp . 14–15 . towards the end of the 20th century , a number of artists and architects started questioning the idea of '' modernism '' and created typically postmodern works . post-modernism : the new classicism in art and architecture charles jencks . art movements and artist groups . ( roughly chronological with representative artists listed . ) . 19th century . romanticism and the romantic movement – francisco de goya , j . m . w . turner , eugène delacroix realism – gustave courbet , camille corot , jean-françois millet , rosa bonheur pre-raphaelites – william holman hunt , john everett millais , dante gabriel rossetti macchiaioli – giovanni fattori , silvestro lega , telemaco signorini impressionism – frédéric bazille , gustave caillebotte , mary cassatt , edgar degas , armand guillaumin , édouard manet , claude monet , berthe morisot , pierre-auguste renoir , camille pissarro , alfred sisley post-impressionism – georges seurat , paul cézanne , paul gauguin , vincent van gogh , henri de toulouse-lautrec , henri rousseau , henri-jean guillaume martin , albert lebourg , robert antoine pinchon pointillism – georges seurat , paul signac , maximilien luce , henri-edmond cross divisionism – gaetano previati , giovanni segantini , pellizza da volpedo symbolism – gustave moreau , odilon redon , edvard munch , james whistler , james ensor les nabis – pierre bonnard , édouard vuillard , félix vallotton , maurice denis , paul serusier art nouveau and variants – jugendstil , secession , modern style , modernisme – aubrey beardsley , alphonse mucha , gustav klimt , art nouveau architecture and design – antoni gaudí , otto wagner , wiener werkstätte , josef hoffmann , adolf loos , koloman moser early modernist sculptors – aristide maillol , auguste rodin . early 20th century ( before world war i ) . abstract art – francis picabia , wassily kandinsky , františek kupka , robert delaunay , sonia delaunayléopold survage , piet mondrian , kasimir malevich , fauvism – andré derain , henri matisse , maurice de vlaminck , georges braque , kees van dongen expressionism and related – die brücke , der blaue reiter – ernst ludwig kirchner , wassily kandinsky , franz marc , egon schiele , oskar kokoschka , emil nolde , axel törneman , karl schmidt-rottluff , max pechstein cubism – pablo picasso , georges braque , jean metzinger , albert gleizes , fernand léger , robert delaunay , henri le fauconnier , marcel duchamp , jacques villon , francis picabia , juan gris futurism – giacomo balla , umberto boccioni , carlo carrà , gino severini , natalia goncharova , mikhail larionov orphism – robert delaunay , sonia delaunay , františek kupka suprematism – kazimir malevich , alexander rodchenko , el lissitzky synchromism – stanton macdonald-wright , morgan russell vorticism – wyndham lewis sculpture – constantin brâncuși , joseph csaky , alexander archipenko , raymond duchamp-villon , jacques lipchitz , ossip zadkine , henri laurens , elie nadelman , chaim gross , chana orloff , jacob epstein , gustave miklos photography – pictorialism , straight photography . world war i to world war ii . dada – jean arp , marcel duchamp , max ernst , francis picabia , kurt schwitters surrealism – marc chagall , rené magritte , jean arp , salvador dalí , max ernst , giorgio de chirico , andré masson , joan miró pittura metafisica – giorgio de chirico , carlo carrà , giorgio morandi de stijl – theo van doesburg , piet mondrian new objectivity – max beckmann , otto dix , george grosz figurative painting – henri matisse , pierre bonnard american modernism – stuart davis , arthur g . dove , marsden hartley , georgia o'keeffe constructivism – naum gabo , gustav klutsis , lászló moholy-nagy , el lissitzky , kasimir malevich , vadim meller , alexander rodchenko , vladimir tatlin bauhaus – wassily kandinsky , paul klee , josef albers scottish colourists – francis cadell , samuel peploe , leslie hunter , john duncan fergusson social realism – grant wood , walker evans , diego rivera precisionism – charles sheeler , charles demuth sculpture – alexander calder , alberto giacometti , gaston lachaise , henry moore , pablo picasso , julio gonzalez . after world war ii . figuratifs – bernard buffet , jean carzou , maurice boitel , daniel du janerand , claude-max lochu sculpture – henry moore , david smith , tony smith , alexander calder , isamu noguchi , david lander '' fifties furniture : the side table as sculpture , '' american heritage , nov./dec . 2006 . alberto giacometti , sir anthony caro , jean dubuffet , isaac witkin , rené iché , marino marini , louise nevelson , albert vrana abstract expressionism – joan mitchell , willem de kooning , jackson pollock , arshile gorky , hans hofmann , franz kline , robert motherwell , clyfford still , lee krasner , american abstract artists – ilya bolotowsky , ibram lassaw , ad reinhardt , josef albers , burgoyne diller art brut – adolf wölfli , august natterer , ferdinand cheval , madge gill arte povera – jannis kounellis , luciano fabro , mario merz , piero manzoni , alighiero boetti color field painting – barnett newman , mark rothko , adolph gottlieb , sam francis , morris louis , kenneth noland , jules olitski , helen frankenthaler tachisme – jean dubuffet , pierre soulages , hans hartung , ludwig merwart cobra – pierre alechinsky , karel appel , asger jorn conceptual art – art & language , dan graham , lawrence weiner , bruce nauman , daniel buren , victor burgin , sol lewitt de-collage – wolf vostell , mimmo rotella neo-dada – robert rauschenberg , jasper johns , john chamberlain , joseph beuys , lee bontecou , edward kienholz figurative expressionism – larry rivers , grace hartigan , elaine de kooning , robert de niro , sr . , lester johnson , george mcneil , earle m . pilgrim , jan müller , robert beauchamp , bob thompson feminist art — eva hesse , judy chicago , barbara kruger , mary beth edelson , ewa partum , valie export , yoko ono , louise bourgeois , cindy sherman , kiki smith , guerrilla girls , hannah wilke fluxus – george maciunas , joseph beuys , wolf vostell , nam june paik , daniel spoerri , dieter roth , carolee schneeman , alison knowles , charlotte moorman , dick higgins happening – allan kaprow , joseph beuys , wolf vostell , claes oldenburg , jim dine , red grooms , nam june paik , charlotte moorman , robert whitman , yoko ono dau-al-set – founded in barcelona by poet/artist joan brossa , – antoni tàpies grupo el paso – founded in madrid by artists antonio saura , pablo serrano geometric abstraction – wassily kandinsky , kazimir malevich , nadir afonso , manlio rho , mario radice , mino argento , adam szentpétery hard-edge painting – john mclaughlin , ellsworth kelly , frank stella , al held , ronald davis kinetic art – george rickey , getulio alviani land art – ana mendieta , christo , richard long , robert smithson , michael heizer les automatistes – claude gauvreau , jean-paul riopelle , pierre gauvreau , fernand leduc , jean-paul mousseau , marcelle ferron minimal art – sol lewitt , donald judd , dan flavin , richard serra , agnes martin postminimalism – eva hesse , bruce nauman , lynda benglis lyrical abstraction – ronnie landfield , sam gilliam , larry zox , dan christensen , natvar bhavsar , larry poons neo-figurative – fernando botero , antonio berni neo-expressionism – georg baselitz , anselm kiefer , jörg immendorff , jean-michel basquiat transavanguardia – francesco clemente , mimmo paladino , sandro chia , enzo cucchi figuration libre – hervé di rosa , françois boisrond , robert combas new realism – yves klein , pierre restany , arman op art – victor vasarely , bridget riley , richard anuszkiewicz , jeffrey steele outsider art – howard finster , grandma moses , bob justin photorealism – audrey flack , chuck close , duane hanson , richard estes , malcolm morley pop art – richard hamilton , robert indiana , jasper johns , roy lichtenstein , robert rauschenberg , andy warhol , ed ruscha , david hockney postwar european figurative painting – lucian freud , francis bacon , frank auerbach , gerhard richter new european painting – luc tuymans , marlene dumas , neo rauch , bracha ettinger , michaël borremans , chris ofili shaped canvas – frank stella , kenneth noland , ron davis , robert mangold . soviet art – aleksandr deyneka , aleksandr gerasimov , ilya kabakov , komar & melamid , alexandr zhdanov , leonid sokov spatialism – lucio fontana video art – nam june paik , wolf vostell , joseph beuys , bill viola , hans breder visionary art – ernst fuchs , paul laffoley , michael bowen . important modern art exhibitions and museums . belgium . smak , ghent . brazil . masp , são paulo , sp mam/sp , são paulo , sp mam/rj , rio de janeiro , rj mam/ba , salvador , bahia . colombia . bogotá museum of modern art . croatia . ivan meštrović gallery , split modern gallery , zagreb museum of contemporary art , zagreb . ecuador . museo antropologico y de arte contemporaneo , guayaquil la capilla del hombre , quito . finland . emma , espoo kiasma , helsinki . france . château de montsoreau-museum of contemporary art , montsoreau lille métropole museum of modern , contemporary and outsider art , villeneuve d'ascq musée d'orsay , paris musée d'art moderne de la ville de paris , paris musée national d'art moderne , paris musée picasso , paris museum of modern and contemporary art , strasbourg musée d'art moderne de troyes . germany . documenta , kassel ( germany ) , an exhibition of modern and contemporary art held every 5 years museum ludwig , cologne pinakothek der moderne , munich . india . centre of international modern art ( cima ) – kolkata , national gallery of modern art – new delhi , national gallery of modern art – mumbai , national gallery of modern art – bangalore , . iran . museum of contemporary art , tehran . ireland . hugh lane gallery , dublin irish museum of modern art , dublin . italy . palazzo delle esposizioni galleria nazionale d'arte moderna venice biennial , venice palazzo pitti , florence museo del novecento , milan . mexico . museo de arte moderno , méxico d.f . netherlands . van gogh museum , amsterdam stedelijk museum , amsterdam . norway . astrup fearnley museum of modern art , oslo henie-onstad art centre , oslo . qatar . mathaf : arab museum of modern art , doha . romania . national museum of contemporary art , bucharest . russia . hermitage museum , saint petersburg pushkin museum , moscow tretyakov gallery , moscow . serbia . museum of contemporary art , belgrade . spain . museu d'art contemporani de barcelona , barcelona museo nacional centro de arte reina sofía , madrid thyssen-bornemisza museum , madrid institut valencià d'art modern , valencia centro atlántico de arte moderno , las palmas de gran canaria museu picasso , barcelona . museo picasso málaga , málaga . sweden . moderna museet , stockholm . taiwan . asia museum of modern art , taichung . united kingdom . estorick collection of modern italian art , london saatchi gallery , london tate britain , london tate liverpool tate modern , london tate st ives . united states . albright-knox art gallery , buffalo , new york art institute of chicago , chicago , illinois empire state plaza art collection , albany , new york guggenheim museum , new york city , new york , and venice , italy ; more recently in berlin , germany , bilbao , spain , and las vegas , nevada high museum , atlanta , georgia los angeles county museum of art , los angeles , california mcnay art museum , san antonio , texas menil collection , houston , texas museum of fine arts , boston , massachusetts museum of modern art , new york city , new york san francisco museum of modern art , san francisco , california the baker museum , naples , florida walker art center , minneapolis , minnesota whitney museum of american art , new york city , new york