Brie

production . brie may be produced from whole or semi-skimmed milk . the curd is obtained by adding rennet to raw milk and warming it to a maximum temperature of . the cheese is then cast into molds , sometimes with a traditional perforated ladle called a . the mold is filled with several thin layers of cheese and drained for approximately 18 & nbsp ; hours . the cheese is then taken out of the molds , salted , inoculated with cheese culture ( penicillium candida , penicillium camemberti ) or brevibacterium linens , and aged in a controlled environment for at least four or five weeks . if left to mature for longer , typically several months to a year , the cheese becomes stronger in flavor and taste , the pâte drier and darker , and the rind also darker and crumbly , and it is called ( french for 'black brie ' ) . overripe brie contains an unpleasant excessive amount of ammonia , produced by the same microorganisms required for ripening . some versions of brie cheese are smoked . the new irish table : 70 contemporary recipes – margaret m . johnson . p . 17 . . nutrition . a thirty-gram serving of brie contains and 8.4 & nbsp ; grams of fat , of which 5.2 grams are saturated fat . brie is a good source of protein ; a serving of brie can provide 5 to 6 & nbsp ; grams of protein . brie contains a good amount of both vitamin b12 and riboflavin . . varieties . there are now many varieties of brie made all over the world , including plain brie , herbed varieties , double and triple brie and versions of brie made with other types of milk . indeed , although brie is a french cheese , it is possible to obtain somerset and wisconsin brie . despite the variety of bries , the french government officially certifies only two types of cheese to be sold under that name : brie de meaux and brie de melun . brie de meaux . brie de meaux is an unpasteurized brie , with an average weight of for a diameter of . manufactured in the town of meaux in the brie region of northern france since the 8th century , it was originally known as the '' queen 's cheese '' , or , after the french revolution , the '' queen of cheeses , '' and was enjoyed by the peasantry and nobility alike . it was granted the protection of appellation d'origine contrôlée ( aoc ) status in 1980 , and it is produced primarily in the eastern part of the parisian basin . brie de melun . brie de melun has an average weight of and a diameter of . it is therefore smaller than brie de meaux but is considered to have a stronger flavor and more pungent smell . it is made with unpasteurized milk . brie de melun is also available in the form of '' old brie '' or black brie . it was granted the protection of aoc status in 1980 . french non-aoc bries . the following french bries do not have aoc certification : brie de montereau , île-de-france , brie de nangis , brie de provins , brie noir , brie fermier , brie d'isigny , brie de melun bleu , brie petit moulé , brie laitier coulommiers . international bries . australia : king island dairy , on king island between victoria and tasmania , produces a range of cheeses sold as '' brie '' , king island dairy king island dairy – soft white retrieved march 8 , 2015 as does jindi cheese in victoria and high valley mudgee cheese co in mudgee , nsw . jindi cheese website jindi cheese : white cheese range retrieved march 8 , 2015 uk : cornish brie ; somerset brie ; baron bigod ( made in suffolk ) ; cenarth brie ( made in wales ) ; morangie brie ( made in the highlands , scotland ) ; connage clava brie ( made in scotland ) . us : the marin french cheese company in california has made an unaged cheese since 1865 described as '' fresh brie '' . kolb-lena , a savencia fromage & dairy plant in illinois has made brie and camembert style cheese since the early 1900 . today still producing brie under the brands : alouette , delice de france or award winning soft cheese under dorothy 's . brazil : brazilian '' brie '' is made in the dairy region located in the southern area of minas gerais state ( bordering são paulo and rio de janeiro states ) and southeast minas gerais ( bordering rio de janeiro and espírito santo states ) . ireland : ireland produces various '' brie '' cheeses such as wicklow bán brie , st . killian brie , and the little milk company 's organic irish brie . . serving . brie is usually purchased either in a full wheel or as a wheel segment . the white outside of the cheese is completely edible , and many eat brie whole . if the outside is firm and the inside is slightly bouncy and resilient , it is ready to serve . underripe brie may be stiff to the touch . meanwhile , overripe brie may be creamier and almost runny . the cheese is sometimes served slightly melted or baked , in a round , lidded ceramic dish , and topped with nuts or fruit , or both . storage . brie cheese , like camembert and cirrus , is considered a soft cheese . this particular type of cheese is very rich and creamy , unlike cheddar . this softness allows for the rapid widespread growth of bacteria if the cheese is not stored correctly . it is recommended that brie cheese be refrigerated immediately after purchase , and stored in the refrigerator until it is consumed completely . the optimal storage temperature for brie is or even lower . the cheese should be kept in a tightly sealed container or plastic wrap to avoid contact with moisture and food-spoilage bacteria which will reduce the shelf life and freshness of the product . the companies that produce this cheese usually recommend that their cheese be consumed before the best-before date and no later than a week after . although the cheese can still be consumed at this time , the quality of the cheese is believed to be reduced substantially . in the case that blue or green mould appears to be growing on the cheese , it must no longer be consumed and must be discarded immediately so that food-borne illness is prevented . the mold should not be cut off to continue consumption as there is a high risk of the mold 's spores being already spread throughout the entire cheese . . comparison with camembert . camembert is a similar soft cheese that is also made from cow 's milk . camembert is a much more recently developed cheese , and is based on brie . however , there are differences such as its origin , typical market shape , size , and flavour . brie originates from the île-de-france while camembert comes from normandy . traditionally , brie was produced in large wheels , 23 to 37 & nbsp ; cm ( 9 to 14.5 in ) in diameter , and thus ripened more slowly than the smaller camembert cheeses . when sold , brie segments typically have been cut from the larger wheels ( although some brie is sold as small , flat cylinders ) , and therefore its sides are not covered by the rind . by contrast , camembert is ripened as a small round cheese 10 & nbsp ; cm ( 4 & nbsp ; in ) in diameter by about 3 & nbsp ; cm ( 1.25 & nbsp ; in ) thick and fully covered by rind . this ratio change between rind and paste makes camembert slightly stronger when compared to a brie ripened for the same amount of time . once the rind is cut on camembert , the cheese typically has a more pungent aroma than does brie . in terms of taste , camembert has a stronger , slightly sour , and sometimes chalky taste . the texture of camembert is softer than that of brie , and if warmed , camembert will become creamier , whereas brie warms without losing as much structure . see also . neufchâtel cheese