Sauerkraut

overview and history . fermented foods have a long history in many cultures , with sauerkraut being one of the most well-known instances of traditional fermented moist cabbage side dishes . the roman writers cato ( in his de agri cultura ) and columella ( in his de re rustica ) mentioned preserving cabbages and turnips with salt . although '' sauerkraut '' is a german word , the dish did not originate in germany , as fermenting cabbage as suan cai was already practised back in the days of the building of the great wall of china , and the practice was likely transmitted from china to europe by the tartary . it then took root mostly in central and eastern european cuisines , but also in other countries including the netherlands , where it is known as zuurkool , and france , where the name became choucroute . the english name is borrowed from german where it means '' sour cabbage '' . the names in slavic and other central and eastern european languages have similar meanings with the german word : '' fermented cabbage '' , , , , , , or '' sour cabbage '' , , , , , , , , , , , , , , kisla kapusta ) . before frozen foods , refrigeration , and cheap transport from warmer areas became readily available in northern , central and eastern europe , sauerkraut – like other preserved foods – provided a source of nutrients during the winter . captain james cook always took a store of sauerkraut on his sea voyages , since experience had taught him it prevented scurvy . see / what did they eat ? which begins '' one of cook 's most important discoveries . '' and which additionally mentions '' . citrus fruit such as lemons and lime . james cook . '' the word '' kraut '' , derived from this food , is a derogatory term for the german people . oxford english dictionary . second edition , 1989 . '' 1 . sauerkraut , sourcrout . also attrib . and comb . 2 . ( often with capital initial . ) a german , esp . a german soldier . also attrib . and comb . derogatory . '' during world war i , due to concerns the american public would reject a product with a german name , american sauerkraut makers relabeled their product as '' liberty cabbage '' for the duration of the war . . production . sauerkraut is made by a process of pickling called lactic acid fermentation that is analogous to how traditional ( not heat-treated ) pickled cucumbers and kimchi are made . the cabbage is finely shredded , layered with salt , and left to ferment . fully cured sauerkraut keeps for several months in an airtight container stored at 15 & nbsp ; °c ( 60 & nbsp ; °f ) or below . neither refrigeration nor pasteurization is required , although these treatments prolong storage life . fermentation by lactobacilli is introduced naturally , as these air-borne bacteria culture on raw cabbage leaves where they grow . yeasts also are present , and may yield soft sauerkraut of poor flavor when the fermentation temperature is too high . the fermentation process has three phases , collectively sometimes referred to as population dynamics . in the first phase , anaerobic bacteria such as klebsiella and enterobacter lead the fermentation , and begin producing an acidic environment that favors later bacteria . the second phase starts as the acid levels become too high for many bacteria , and leuconostoc mesenteroides and other leuconostoc species take dominance . in the third phase , various lactobacillus species , including l . brevis and l . plantarum , ferment any remaining sugars , further lowering the ph . the ph of completely cured sauerkraut is about 3.6 ; see properly cured sauerkraut is sufficiently acidic to prevent a favorable environment for the growth of clostridium botulinum , the toxins of which cause botulism . a 2004 genomic study found an unexpectedly large diversity of lactic acid bacteria in sauerkraut , and that previous studies had oversimplified this diversity . weissella was found to be a major organism in the initial , heterofermentative stage , up to day 7 . it was also found that lactobacillus brevis and pediococcus pentosaceus had smaller population numbers in the first 14 days than previous studies had reported . the dutch sauerkraut industry found that inoculating a new batch of sauerkraut with an old batch resulted in an excessively sour product . this sourdough process is known as '' backslopping '' or '' inoculum enrichment '' ; when used in making sauerkraut , first- and second-stage population dynamics , important to developing flavor , are bypassed . this is due primarily to the greater initial activity of species l . plantarum . . regional varieties . in azerbaijani , belarusian , polish , russian , moravia , baltic states and ukrainian cuisine , chopped cabbage is often pickled together with shredded carrots . other ingredients may include caraway seeds , whole or quartered apples for additional flavor or cranberry for flavor and better keeping ( the benzoic acid in cranberries is a common preservative ) . bell peppers and beets are added in some recipes for colour . the resulting sauerkraut salad is typically served cold , as zakuski or a side dish . a home made type of very mild sauerkraut is available , where white cabbage is pickled with salt in a refrigerator for only three to seven days . this process results in very little lactic acid production . sometimes in russia the double fermentation is used , with the initial step producing an exceptionally sour product , which is then '' corrected '' by adding 30-50 % more fresh cabbage and fermenting the mix again . the flavor additives like apples , beets , cranberries and sometimes even watermelons are usually introduced at this step . sauerkraut may be used as a filling for polish pierogi , ukrainian varenyky , russian pirogi and pirozhki . sauerkraut is also the central ingredient in traditional soups , such as shchi ( a national dish of russia ) , kwaśnica ( poland ) , kapustnica ( slovakia ) , and zelňačka ( czech cuisine resp . moravian ) . it is an ingredient of polish bigos ( a hunter 's stew ) . bigos ( hunter 's stew ) in germany , cooked sauerkraut is often flavored with juniper berry mimi sheraton . the german cookbook : a complete guide to mastering authentic german cooking . p . 435 . or caraway seeds ; apples and white wine are added in popular variations . traditionally it is served warm , with pork ( e.g . eisbein , schweinshaxe , kassler ) or sausages ( smoked or fried sausages , frankfurter würstchen , vienna sausages , black pudding ) , accompanied typically by roasted or steamed potatoes or dumplings ( knödel or schupfnudel ) . similar recipes are common in other central european cuisines . the czech national dish vepřo knedlo zelo consists of roast pork with knödel and sauerkraut . in france , sauerkraut is the main ingredient of the alsatian meal choucroute garnie ( french for '' dressed sauerkraut '' ) , sauerkraut with sausages ( strasbourg sausages , smoked morteau or montbéliard sausages ) , charcuterie ( bacon , ham , etc . ) , and often potatoes . sauerkraut , along with pork , is eaten traditionally in pennsylvania on new year 's day . the tradition , started by the pennsylvania dutch , is thought to bring good luck for the upcoming year . sauerkraut is also used in american cuisine as a condiment upon various foods , such as sandwiches and hot dogs . in maryland , particularly in baltimore and on the eastern shore , sauerkraut is a traditional accompaniment for the thanksgiving turkey . file : sauerkraut 2.jpg cooked sauerkraut file : zuurkool in pan.jpg dutch zuurkoolstamppot includes sauerkraut mashed with potatoes and is traditionally served with rookworst . file:08023 dumplings stuffed with sauerkraut.jpg pierogi with sauerkraut file : cabbage soup kapuśniak 01.jpg kapuśniak made with sauerkraut file : czech sausages and sauerkraut at restaurant poseidon , helsinki ( bright ) . jpg central european-style sauerkraut and sausages is a popular snack dish in pubs . file : veproknedlozelo-00.jpg czech vepřo-knedlo-zelo file : eisbein-2.jpg pickled eisbein served with sauerkraut file : choucroute-p1030190.jpg alsatian choucroute garnie . health effects . benefits . many health benefits have been claimed for sauerkraut : it is a high source of vitamins c and k ; the fermentation process increases the bioavailability of nutrients rendering sauerkraut even more nutritious than the original cabbage . it is also low in calories and high in calcium and magnesium , and it is a very good source of dietary fiber , folate , iron , potassium , copper and manganese . if unpasteurized and uncooked , sauerkraut also contains live lactobacilli and beneficial microbes and is rich in enzymes . fiber and probiotics improve digestion and promote the growth of healthy bowel flora , protecting against many diseases of the digestive tract . during the american civil war , the physician john jay terrell ( 1829–1922 ) was able to successfully reduce the death rate from disease among prisoners of war ; he attributed this to feeding his patients raw sauerkraut . ward , jessica b . 2004 . food to die for : a book of funeral food , tips and tales from the old city cemetery , lynchburg , virginia . lynchburg , va : southern memorial association , pp . 149–150 . sauerkraut and its juice is a time-honored folk remedy for canker sores . the treatment is to rinse the mouth with sauerkraut juice for about 30 seconds several times a day , or place a wad of sauerkraut against the affected area for a minute or so before chewing and swallowing the sauerkraut . in 2002 , the journal of agriculture and food chemistry reported that finnish researchers found the isothiocyanates produced in sauerkraut fermentation inhibit the growth of cancer cells in test tube and animal studies . a polish study in 2010 concluded that '' induction of the key detoxifying enzymes by cabbage juices , particularly sauerkraut , may be responsible for their chemopreventive activity demonstrated by epidemiological studies and in animal models '' . sauerkraut is high in the antioxidants lutein and zeaxanthin , both associated with preserving eye disease . . disadvantages . excessive consumption of sauerkraut may lead to bloating and flatulence due to the trisaccharide raffinose , which the human small intestine can not break down . this does not negatively affect long-term health , although it might be uncomfortable . . scientific discovery . one of the early scientists who was involved in identifying the biology and function of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats ( crispr ) , philippe horvath , focused on the genetics of a lactic-acid bacterium used in the production of sauerkraut . . similar foods . many other vegetables are preserved by a similar process : encurtido in nicaragua atsara in the philippines curtido in el salvador dill pickles in eastern and central europe kimchi in korea whole sour cabbage in romania , serbia , bosnia , croatia , and bulgaria silage , a feed for cattle suan cai in northeastern china tsukemono in japan brovada in northern italy . see also . . references . bibliography . usda canning guides , volume 7 . external links . laboratory exercise in sauerkraut fermentation fermenting food since before h . sapiens appeared . the american journal of clinical nutrition crunchy pickled cabbage : video-tutorial