Comparative religion

history . al-biruni and ibn hazm of the islamic golden age compared the study of religious pluralism and their works have been significant in the fields of theology and philosophy . ibn hazm . the ring of the dove : a treatise on the art and practice of arab love ( preface ) . trans . a . j . arberry . luzac oriental , 1997 r . arnaldez , ibn ḥazm . encyclopaedia of islam , second edition . brill online , 2013 . reference . 9 january 2013 joseph a . kechichian , a mind of his own . gulf news : 21:30 december 20 , 2012 . social scientists in the 19th century took a strong interest in comparative and '' primitive '' religion through the work of max müller , edward burnett tylor , william robertson smith , james george frazer , émile durkheim , max weber , and rudolf otto . hans kippenberg , discovering religious history in the modern age ( 2001 ) . nicholas de lange , professor of hebrew and jewish studies at cambridge university , says that . geographical classification . according to charles joseph adams , in the field of comparative religion , a common geographical classification discerns the main world religions as follows : middle eastern religions , including judaism , christianity , islam and a variety of ancient cults ; east asian religions , the religious communities of china , japan , and korea , and consisting of confucianism , daoism , the various schools of mahayana ( “ greater vehicle ” ) buddhism , and shintō ; indian religions , including early buddhism , hinduism , jainism , sikhism , and zoroastrianism , and sometimes also the theravada ( “ way of the elders ” ) buddhism and the hindu- and buddhist-inspired religions of south and southeast asia ; african religions , the ancient belief systems of the various indigenous peoples of africa , excluding ancient egyptian religion , which is considered to belong to the ancient middle east ; american religions , the beliefs and practices of the various indigenous peoples of the two american continents ; oceanic religions , the religious systems of the peoples of the pacific islands , australia , and new zealand ; and classical religions of ancient greece and rome and their hellenistic descendants . middle eastern religions . . abrahamic or western asian religions . in the study of comparative religion , the category of abrahamic religions consists of the three monotheistic religions , christianity , islam and judaism , which claim abraham ( hebrew avraham אַבְרָהָם ; arabic ibrahim إبراهيم ) as a part of their sacred history . smaller religions such as baháʼí faith that fit this description are sometimes included but are often omitted . why abrahamic ? lubar institute for the study of the abrahamic religions at the university of wisconsin the original belief in the god of abraham eventually became strictly monotheistic present-day rabbinic judaism . judaism is considered by religious jews to be the expression of the covenant that god established with the children of israel . jews hold that the torah is part of the larger text known as the tanakh or the hebrew bible , they also believe in a supplemental oral tradition represented by later texts such as the midrash and the talmud . christians believe that christianity is the fulfillment and continuation of the jewish tanakh . christians believe that jesus ( hebrew yeshua יֵשׁוּעַ ) is the awaited messiah ( christ ) foretold in the old testament prophecy , and believe in subsequent new testament . christians in general believe in that jesus is the incarnation or son of god . their creed generally hold in common that the incarnation , ministry , suffering , death on the cross , and resurrection of jesus was for the salvation of mankind . islam believes the present christian and jewish scriptures have been tahrif over time and are no longer the original divine revelations as given to the jewish people and to moses , jesus , and other prophets . for muslims , the quran is the final , complete revelation from god ( arabic الله allah ) , who believe it to have been revealed to muhammad alone , who is believed by muslims to be the prophet of islam , and the khatam an-nabiyyin , meaning the last of the prophets ever sent by allah ( '' seal of the prophets '' ) . based on the muslim figure of the mahdī , the ultimate savior of humankind and the final imām of the twelve imams , báb , later known as bab , created the bábí movement out of the belief that he was the gate to the twelfth imām . this signaled a break with islam and started a new religious system , bábism . however , in the 1860s a split occurred after which the vast majority of bábís who considered mirza husayn ` ali or bahá ' u'lláh to be báb 's spiritual successor founded the baháʼí movement , while the minority who followed subh-i-azal came to be called azalis . '' but the upshot of the whole matter is , that out of every hundred bábís probably not more than three or four are ezelís sic , all the rest accepting behá ' u'lláh sic as the final and most perfect manifestation of the truth . '' ( browne ( 1889 ) p . 351 ) the baháʼí division eventually became a full-fledged religion of its own , the baháʼí faith . in comparison to the other abrahamic religions , judaism , christianity and islam , the number of adherents for baháʼí faith and other minor abrahamic religions are not very significant . out of the three major abrahamic faiths , christianity and judaism are the two religions that diverge the most in theology and practice . the historical interaction of islam and judaism started in the 7th century ce with the origin and spread of islam . there are many common aspects between islam and judaism , and as islam developed , it gradually became the major religion closest to judaism . as opposed to christianity , which originated from interaction between ancient greek , roman , and hebrew cultures , judaism is very similar to islam in its fundamental religious outlook , structure , jurisprudence and practice . rabbi david rosen , jewish-muslim relations , past and present , november 2003 there are many traditions within islam originating from traditions within the hebrew bible or from post-biblical jewish traditions . these practices are known collectively as the isra'iliyat . rabbi justin jaron lewis , islam and judaism , october 2001 the historical interaction between christianity and islam connects fundamental ideas in christianity with similar ones in islam . islam accepts many aspects of christianity as part of its faithwith some differences in interpretationand rejects other aspects . islam believes the quran is the final revelation from god and a completion of all previous revelations , including the bible . iranian religions . several important religions and religious movements originated in greater iran , that is , among iranian peoples . they include mithraism , ætsæg din , yazdanism , yarsanism , zurvanism , mandaeism , manichaeism , and mazdakism . indian religions . image : rigveda ms2097.jpg thumb right 150px the rig veda is one of the oldest vedas . shown here is a rig veda manuscript in devanagari , early nineteenth century . in comparative religion , indian religions consists of all the religions that originated in south asia . it is thought that '' the kinship of the religions of india stems from the fact that jains , buddhists and sikhs look back to hinduism as their common mother . '' religions of the world s . vernon mccasland , grace e . cairns , david c . yu al-biruni deeply studied the vedic religions and through his works essential details about pre-11th century india 's religions and cultures were found . adi shankaracharya was an early 8th century philosopher and theologian who consolidated the doctrine of advaita vedanta . gautama buddha is mentioned as an avatar of vishnu in the puranic texts of hinduism . most hindus believe the buddha accepted and incorporated many tenets of hinduism in his doctrine . prominent modern hindu reformers such as mahatma gandhi “ owes on eternal debt of gratitude to that great teacher , ” mahatma gandhi and buddhism y.p . anand an encounter with buddhism and vivekananda he is the ideal karma-yogi , acting entirely without motive , and the history of humanity shows him to have been the greatest man ever born ; beyond compare the greatest combination of heart and brain that ever existed , the greatest soul-power that has ever been manifested . essay , ideal karma yogi acknowledge buddhist influence . gandhi , like hindus himself did not believe buddha established a non-hindu tradition . he writes , '' i do not regard jainism or buddhism as separate from hinduism . '' p . 17 gandhi by ronald terchek . east asian or taoic religions . a taoic religion is a religion , or religious philosophy , that focuses on the east asian concept of tao ( '' the way '' ) . this forms a large group of eastern religions including taoism , confucianism , jeung san do , shintoism , i-kuan tao , chondogyo , and chen tao . in large parts of east asia , buddhism has taken on some taoic features . tao can be roughly stated to be the flow of the universe , or the force behind the natural order . it is believed to be the influence that keeps the universe balanced and ordered and is associated with nature , due to a belief that nature demonstrates the tao . the flow of ch ' i , as the essential energy of action and existence , is compared to the universal order of tao . following the tao is also associated with a '' proper '' attitude , morality and lifestyle . this is intimately tied to the complex concept of de , or literally '' virtue '' or '' power . '' de is the active expression of tao . taoism and chinese chán for centuries had a mutual influence on each other in china , japan , korea , and taiwan . these influences were inherited by zen buddhism when ch'an buddhism arrived in japan and adapted as zen buddhism . comparing traditions . baháʼí faith . baháʼí faith and the unity of religion baháʼí faith and buddhism baháʼí faith and hinduism baháʼí faith and zoroastrianism . buddhism . buddhism and christianity buddhism and eastern religions buddhism and gnosticism buddhism and hinduism buddhism and jainism buddhism and theosophy buddhism and islam comparison of buddhism and christianity . christianity . christianity and other religions buddhism and christianity comparison of buddhism and christianity christianity and islam christianity and judaism christianity and neopaganism christianity and paganism christianity and vodou ; mormonism mormonism and christianity mormonism and islam mormonism and judaism . confucianism . vinegar tasters confucianism influence . hinduism . hinduism and other religions ayyavazhi and hinduism buddhism and hinduism hindu–islamic relations . islam . islam and other religions christianity and islam hindu–islamic relations islam and jainism islamic–jewish relations ahmadiyya–jewish relations islam and sikhism mormonism and islam . jainism . buddhism and jainism islam and jainism jainism and sikhism . judaism . christianity and judaism islamic–jewish relations ahmadiyya–jewish relations hinduism and judaism . paganism and neopaganism . christianity and paganism christianity and neopaganism . sikhism . hinduism and sikhism islam and sikhism jainism and sikhism . taoism . taoism and world religions . zoroastrianism . zoroastrianism and other religions