Schadenfreude

etymology . schadenfreude is borrowed from german . it is a compound of schaden , '' damage , harm '' , and freude , '' joy '' . the german word was first mentioned in english texts in 1852 and 1867 , and first used in english running text in 1895 . oxford english dictionary , 1982 , s.v . in german , it was first attested in the 1740s . google books ( the 1659 and 1700 dates are incorrect ) although proper noun normally are not capitalised in english , schadenfreude sometimes is capitalised following the german convention . psychological causes . researchers have found that there are three driving forces behind schadenfreude : aggression , rivalry , and social justice . self-esteem has a negative relationship with the frequency and intensity of schadenfreude experienced by an individual ; individuals with less self-esteem tend to experience schadenfreude more frequently and intensely . the reverse also holds true—those with higher self-esteem experience schadenfreude less frequently or with less emotional intensity . it is hypothesized that this inverse relationship is mediated through the human psychological inclination to define and protect their self- and in-group- identity or self-conception . specifically , for someone with high self-esteem , seeing another person fail may still bring them a small ( but effectively negligible ) surge of confidence because the observer 's high self-esteem significantly lowers the threat they believe the visibly-failing human poses to their status or identity . since this confident individual perceives that , regardless of circumstances , the successes and failures of the other person will have little impact on their own status or well-being , they have very little emotional investment in how the other person fares , be it positive or negative . conversely , for someone with low self-esteem , someone who is more successful poses a threat to their sense of self , and seeing this 'mighty ' person fall can be a source of comfort because they perceive a relative improvement in their internal or in-group standing . aggression-based schadenfreude primarily involves group identity . the joy of observing the suffering of others comes from the observer 's feeling that the other 's failure represents an improvement or validation of their own group 's ( in-group ) status in relation to external ( out-groups ) groups ( see in-group and out-group ) . this is , essentially , schadenfreude based on group versus group status . rivalry-based schadenfreude is individualistic and related to interpersonal competition . it arises from a desire to stand out from and out-perform one 's peers . this is schadenfreude based on another person 's misfortune eliciting pleasure because the observer now feels better about their personal identity and self-worth , instead of their group identity . justice-based schadenfreude comes from seeing that behavior seen as immoral or '' bad '' is punished . it is the pleasure associated with seeing a '' bad '' person being harmed or receiving retribution . schadenfreude is experienced here because it makes people feel that fairness has been restored for a previously un-punished wrong . synonyms . schadenfreude has equivalents in many other languages , but no commonly-used precise english single-word equivalent . there are other ways to express the concept in english . '' epicaricacy '' is a seldom-used direct equivalent , borrowed from greek epichairekakia ( ἐπιχαιρεκακία , first attested in aristotle liddell-scott-jones , a greek–english lexicon s.v . ) from ἐπί epi 'upon ' , χαρά chara 'joy ' , and κακόν kakon 'evil' . '' tall poppy syndrome '' is a cultural phenomenon where people of high status are resented , attacked , cut down , or criticized because they have been classified as better than their peers . this is similar to '' begrudgery '' , the resentment or envy of the success of a peer . if someone were to feel joy by the victim ’ s fall from grace , they would be experiencing schadenfreude . a '' roman holiday '' is a metaphor from byron 's poem childe harold 's pilgrimage , where a gladiator in ancient rome expects to be '' butchered to make a roman holiday '' while the audience would take pleasure from watching his suffering . the term suggests debauchery and disorder in addition to sadistic enjoyment . '' morose delectation '' ( delectatio morosa in latin ) , meaning '' the habit of dwelling with enjoyment on evil thoughts '' , definition of morose delectation , oxford english dictionary was considered by the medieval church to be a sin . prima secundae partis , q . 74 , the summa theologica of st . thomas aquinas , second and revised edition , 1920 ; literally translated by fathers of the english dominican province , online edition copyright © 2006 by kevin knight . chapter 6 proposing the story of the world , richard john neuhaus , catholic matters : confusion , controversy , and the splendor of truth , basic books , 2006 . france writer pierre klossowski maintained that the appeal of sadism is morose delectation . heterodox religion and post-atheism : bataille / klossowski/ foucault , jones irwin , issn 1393-614x minerva – an internet journal of philosophy vol . 10 2006 . pierre klossowski . 1991 . sade , my neighbour , translated by alphonso lingis . illinois . northwestern university press . '' gloating '' is an english word of similar meaning , where '' gloat '' means '' to observe or think about something with triumphant and often malicious satisfaction , gratification , or delight '' ( e.g . , to gloat over an enemy 's misfortune ) . '' dictionary definition of gloat '' . gloating is different from schadenfreude in that it does not necessarily require malice ( one may gloat to a friend about having defeated him in a game without ill intent ) , and that it describes an action rather than a state of mind ( one typically gloats to the subject of the misfortune or to a third party ) . also , unlike schadenfreude , where the focus is on another 's misfortune , gloating often brings to mind inappropriately celebrating or bragging about one 's own good fortune without any particular focus on the misfortune of others . related emotions or concepts . permutations of the concept of pleasure at another 's unhappiness are : pleasure at another 's happiness , displeasure at another 's happiness , and displeasure at another 's unhappiness . words for these concepts are sometimes cited as antonyms to schadenfreude , as each is the opposite in some way . pleasure at another 's happiness is described by the buddhism concept of mudita or the concept of '' compersion '' in the polyamory community . a similar concept is the hebrew slang term firgun , happiness at another 's accomplishment . displeasure at another 's happiness is involved in envy , and perhaps in jealousy . the coinage '' freudenschade '' similarly means sorrow at another 's success . displeasure at another 's good fortune is gluckschmerz , a pseudo-german word coined in 1985 as a joke by the pseudonymous wanda tinasky ; the correct german form would be glücksschmerz . it has since been used in academic contexts . displeasure at another 's unhappiness is sympathy , pity , or compassion . sadism gives pleasure through the infliction of pain , whereas schadenfreude is pleasure on observing misfortune and in particular , the fact that the other somehow deserved the misfortune . susan sontag 's book regarding the pain of others , published in 2003 , is a study of the issue of how the pain and misfortune of some people affects others , namely whether war photography and war art may be helpful as anti-war tools , or whether they only serve some sense of schadenfreude in some viewers . philosopher and sociologist theodor adorno defined schadenfreude as '' . largely unanticipated delight in the suffering of another , which is cognized as trivial and/or appropriate . '' cited in schadenfreude is steadily becoming a more popular word according to google . wordgenius.com august 13 , 2019 . scientific studies . a new york times article in 2002 cited a number of scientific studies of schadenfreude , which it defined as '' delighting in others ' misfortune '' . many such studies are based on social comparison theory , the idea that when people around us have bad luck , we look better to ourselves . other researchers have found that people with low self-esteem are more likely to feel schadenfreude than are those who have high self-esteem . a 2003 study examined intergroup schadenfreude within the context of sports , specifically an international football ( soccer ) competition . the study focused on the german and dutch football teams and their fans . the results of this study indicated that the emotion of schadenfreude is very sensitive to circumstances that make it more or less legitimate to feel such malicious pleasure toward a sports rival . a 2011 study by cikara and colleagues using functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fmri ) examined schadenfreude among boston red sox and new york yankees fans , and found that fans showed increased activation in brain areas correlated with self-reported pleasure ( ventral striatum ) when observing the rival team experience a negative outcome ( e.g . , a strikeout ) . by contrast , fans exhibited increased activation in the anterior cingulate and insula when viewing their own team experience a negative outcome . a 2006 experiment about '' justice served '' suggests that men , but not women , enjoy seeing '' bad people '' suffer . the study was designed to measure empathy by watching which brain centers are stimulated when subjects observed via fmri see someone experiencing physical pain . researchers expected that the brain 's empathy center of subjects would show more stimulation when those seen as '' good '' got an electric shock , than would occur if the shock was given to someone the subject had reason to consider '' bad '' . this was indeed the case , but for male subjects , the brain 's pleasure centers also lit up when someone got a shock that the male thought was '' well-deserved '' . brain-scanning studies show that schadenfreude is correlated with envy in subjects . strong feelings of envy activated physical pain nodes in the brain 's dorsal anterior cingulate cortex ; the brain 's reward centers , such as the ventral striatum , were activated by news that other people who were envied had suffered misfortune . the magnitude of the brain 's schadenfreude response could even be predicted from the strength of the previous envy response . a study conducted in 2009 provides evidence for people 's capacity to feel schadenfreude in response to negative events in politics . the study was designed to determine whether or not there was a possibility that events containing objective misfortunes might produce schadenfreude . it was reported in the study that the likelihood of experiencing feelings of schadenfreude depends upon whether an individual 's own party or the opposing party is suffering harm . this study suggests that the domain of politics is prime territory for feelings of schadenfreude , especially for those who identify strongly with their political party .