G. Gordon Liddy

early years . youth , family , education . liddy was born in brooklyn , new york , liddy , g . gordon ; '' the g . gordon liddy show '' ; november 2 , 2009 hour 2 to sylvester james liddy and maria ( née abbaticchio ) . his maternal grandfather was of italian descent . liddy was raised in hoboken grove , lloyd . '' the reliable source '' , the washington post , august 16 , 2001 . accessed february 6 , 2013 . '' when g . gordon liddy was a puny lad in hoboken , n.j . , he roasted and ate a rat – 'to demonstrate to myself my lack of fear ' , the convicted watergate burglar explained in his 1980 autobiography , will . '' and west caldwell , new jersey . he was named for george gordon battle , a new york city attorney and tammany hall da nominee who had mentored liddy 's father . liddy spent grades 1 through 3 at the academy of the sacred heart . he was enrolled in the fourth grade at ss peter and paul parochial school . he was enrolled in st . aloysius parochial school at the sixth grade level in september 1941 . he graduated in 1944 and in september of that year he entered saint benedict 's preparatory school in newark , new jersey , from which he graduated in june 1948 , aged 17 . college , military , law school . liddy was educated at fordham university , graduating in 1952 . while at fordham he was a member of the national society of pershing rifles . following graduation , liddy joined the united states army , serving for two years as an artillery officer during the korean war . he remained stateside for medical reasons . he returned to new york city in 1954 to attend fordham university school of law , earning a position on the fordham law review . after graduating from law school in 1957 , he worked for the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) under j . edgar hoover . fbi . liddy joined the fbi in 1957 , initially serving as a field agent in indiana and denver . in denver , on september 10 , 1960 , liddy apprehended ernest tait , one of two persons to be a two-time ten most wanted fugitive . at age 29 , liddy became the youngest bureau supervisor at fbi headquarters in washington , d.c . a protege of deputy director cartha deloach , liddy became part of director j . edgar hoover 's personal staff and became his ghostwriter . amongst his fellow agents he had a reputation for recklessness and was known primarily for two incidents . the first was an arrest in kansas city , missouri during a black bag job ; he was released after calling clarence m . kelley , former fbi agent and chief of the kansas city police . the second was running an fbi background check on his future wife before their marriage in 1957 , which liddy later referred to as '' purely a routine precautionary measure . '' before leaving the fbi , liddy pursued his contacts for bar admissions . furthermore , his admission to the united states supreme court was moved by solicitor general archibald cox . see also . prosecutor and politician . liddy resigned from the fbi in 1962 and worked as a lawyer in new york city until 1966 . he was then hired by district attorney raymond baratta as a prosecutor in dutchess county , new york after interviewing and providing references from the fbi . in 1966 , he led a drug raid on the hitchcock estate ( then occupied by timothy leary ) in millbrook , new york , leading to an unsuccessful trial . although the case generated much publicity , other lawyers complained that liddy received credit for something in which he played a relatively small role . he was also reprimanded for firing a revolver at the ceiling in a courtroom . a liddy-directed politically motivated drug raid on bard college in 1969 involved , among others , donald fagen and walter becker , who later formed the band steely dan and wrote the song '' my old school '' about the raid . liddy is referred to in the lyrics as '' daddy gee . '' during this period , he ran unsuccessfully for the post of district attorney . in 1968 , he ran for the united states house of representatives in new york 's 28th congressional district . employing the slogan '' gordon liddy does n't bail them out ; he puts them in '' , he lost to hamilton fish iv in a close race . beginning in 1970 , he worked with egil '' bud '' krogh , gordon strachan and david young as an aide to domestic affairs advisor john d . ehrlichman in the executive office of the president . he nominally served as general counsel to the finance committee of the committee to re-elect the president ( crp ) from 1971 to 1972 . subsequently , krogh , liddy , young and erlichman were indicted for conspiracy to commit burglary in september 1973 . . white house undercover operative . in 1971 , after serving in several positions in the nixon administration , liddy was moved to nixon 's 1972 re-election campaign in order to extend the scope and reach of the white house '' plumbers '' unit , which had been created in response to damaging leaks of information to the press . john w . dean ( 2014 ) '' the nixon defence '' p . xviii . at crp , liddy concocted several plots in early 1972 , collectively known under the title '' operation gemstone '' . some of these were far-fetched , intended to embarrass the democratic opposition . knight , p . ( 2003 ) , conspiracy theories in american history p . 344 . abc-clio ; , . these included kidnapping anti-war protest organizers and transporting them to mexico during the republican national convention ( which at the time was planned for san diego ) , as well as luring mid-level democratic campaign officials to a house boat in miami , where they would be secretly photographed in compromising positions with prostitutes . most of liddy 's ideas were rejected by attorney general john n . mitchell ( who became campaign manager in march 1972 ) , but a few were given the go-ahead by nixon administration officials , including the 1971 break-in at daniel ellsberg 's psychiatrist 's office in los angeles . ellsberg had leaked the pentagon papers to the new york times . at some point , liddy was instructed to break into the democratic national committee offices in the watergate complex . watergate burglaries . liddy was the nixon administration liaison and leader of the group of five men who broke into the headquarters of the democratic national committee at the watergate complex . at least two separate entries were made in may and june 1972 ; the burglars were apprehended on june 17 . the purposes of the break-in were never conclusively established . the burglars sought to place wiretaps and planned to photograph documents . their first attempt had led to improperly-functioning recording devices being installed . liddy did not actually enter the watergate complex at the time of the burglaries ; rather , he admitted to supervising the second break-in which he coordinated with e . howard hunt , from a room in the adjacent watergate hotel . liddy was convicted of conspiracy , burglary , and illegal wiretapping . liddy was sentenced to a 20-year prison term and was ordered to pay 40,000 in fines . he began serving the sentence on january 30 , 1973 . on april 12 , 1977 , president jimmy carter commuted liddy 's sentence to eight years , '' in the interest of equity and fairness based on a comparison of mr . liddy 's sentence with those of all others convicted in watergate related prosecutions '' , leaving the fine in effect . carter 's commutation made liddy eligible for parole as of july 9 , 1977 . liddy was released on september 7 , 1977 , after serving a total of four and a half years of incarceration . after prison . in 1980 , liddy published an autobiography , titled will , which sold more than a million copies and was made into a television movie . in it he states that he once made plans with hunt to kill journalist jack anderson , based on a literal interpretation of a nixon white house statement '' we need to get rid of this anderson guy '' . in the mid-1980s liddy went on the lecture circuit , being listed as the top speaker on the college circuit in 1982 by the wall street journal . he later joined with lsd proponent timothy leary on a series of debates billed as nice scary guy vs scary nice guy on the college circuit as well ; leary had once been labeled by liddy 's ex-employer richard nixon as '' the most dangerous man in america . '' the lectures were the subject of a 1983 documentary film return engagement . liddy remained in the public eye with two guest appearances on the television series miami vice as william '' captain real estate '' maynard , a shadowy former covert operations officer whom sonny crockett knew from his military service in south vietnam . in 1994 the british documentary company brian lapping associates sent producers norma percy and paul mitchell to interview many of the conspirators for its series titled watergate in which an unrepentant liddy talked frankly about his role . he was filmed at home while sitting in front of his sizeable collection of firearms , coolly handling a pistol and describing how he had been ready , if ordered , to go straight out and kill jack anderson , the washington columnist . it was made clear that , at the time of filming , the gun collection was registered in his wife ’ s name , since he was ineligible for a licence . liddy appeared in the 1993 golden book video release of encyclopedia brown : the case of the burgled baseball cards as corky lodato . in miami vice , he acted with john diehl , who would later go on to portray liddy himself in oliver stone 's movie nixon ( 1995 ) . liddy 's other tv guest credits include airwolf , macgyver and the short-lived the highwayman . comic book author alan moore has stated that the character of the comedian ( a.k.a . edward blake ) from his graphic novel watchmen was based in a large part on liddy . the story behind the watchmen , by joshua mcconnaughey 06-06-2011 , essential webcomics in the 1979 tv adaptation of john dean 's book blind ambition , liddy was played by actor william daniels . in the early 1980s , liddy joined forces with former niles , illinois , policeman and co-owner of the protection group , ltd . , thomas e . ferraro , jr . , to launch a private security and countersurveillance firm called g . gordon liddy & associates . in 1992 , he emerged to host his own talk radio show . less than a year later , its popularity led to national syndication through viacom 's westwood one network and through radio america , in 2003 . liddy 's show ended on july 27 , 2012 . in 1999 , liddy was sued for defamation by ida '' maxie '' wells , a secretary whose desk at the democratic national committee headquarters at the watergate was said to have been a target of the last watergate break-in in order to find evidence related to an alleged prostitution ring kept in well 's desk . wells ' suit accused liddy of defamation . united states court of appeals , fourth circuit jul 28 , 1999186 f.3d 505 ( 4th cir . 1999 ) , liddy denied the allegation , and the judge dismissed the suit , commenting that '' no 'reasonable jury ' could have found in favor of the plaintiff . '' civil case no . jfm-97-946 , '' memorandum '' by district judge j . frederick motz , march 19 , 2001 , u.s . district court for the district of maryland . in addition to will , he wrote the nonfiction books , when i was a kid , this was a free country ( 2002 ) , and fight back ! tackling terrorism , liddy style ( 2006 , with his son , cdr . james g . liddy , along with j . michael barrett and joel selanikio ) . he also published two novels : out of control ( 1979 ) and the monkey handlers ( 1990 ) . liddy was one of many people interviewed for the biography of abbie hoffman , steal this dream , by larry sloman . acting career . liddy acted in several films , including street asylum , feds , adventures in spying , camp cucamonga , and rules of engagement . he appeared on such television shows as the highwayman , airwolf , fear factor , perry mason , and macgyver . he had recurring roles in miami vice and super force , and guest starred in al franken 's lateline . on april 7 , 1986 , he appeared at wrestlemania ii as a guest judge for a boxing match between mr . t ( with joe frazier and the haiti kid ) versus roddy piper ( with bob orton and lou duva ) . liddy co-starred on 18 wheels of justice as the crime boss jacob calder from january 12 , 2000 to june 6 , 2001 . liddy appeared on a celebrity edition fear factor , the show 's series finale , on september 12 , 2006 ( filmed in november 2005 ) . at 75 years of age , liddy was the oldest contestant ever to appear on the show . liddy beat the competition in the first two stunts , winning two motorcycles custom built by metropolitan chopper . liddy also appeared as a celebrity partner for a week in april 1987 on the game show super password , playing against betty white . he was also an interviewee in the documentary the u.s . vs . john lennon as well as a commercial spokesman for rosland capital , selling gold on television commercials . . personal life . liddy was married to frances purcell-liddy , a native of poughkeepsie , new york , for 53 years until her death on february 5 , 2010 . she was an educator . the couple had five children and twelve grandchildren . one of his children , raymond liddy , deputy attorney general of california , was arrested and sentenced to 5 years probation in federal court for possession of child pornography . . see also . list of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the united states . references . external links . liddy on tunein