The Station nightclub fire

sentencing and statement . on may 10 , 2006 , state prosecutor randall white asked that biechele be sentenced to ten years in prison , the maximum allowed under the plea bargain , citing the massive loss of life in the fire and the need to send a message . speaking to the public for the first time since the fire , biechele appeared remorseful during his sentencing . choking back tears , he made a statement to the court and to the families of the victims . superior court judge francis darigan jr . sentenced biechele to fifteen years in prison , with four to serve and eleven years suspended , plus three years ' probation , for his role in the fire . darigan remarked , '' the greatest sentence that can be imposed on you has been imposed on you by yourself . '' under this sentence , with good behavior , biechele would be eligible for parole in september 2007 . judge darigan deemed biechele highly unlikely to re-offend , which was among the mitigating factors that led to his decision to impose this sentence . the sentence drew mixed reactions in the courtroom . many of the families believed that the punishment was just ; others had hoped for a more severe sentence . . support for parole . on september 4 , 2007 , some families of the fire 's victims expressed their support for biechele 's parole . leland hoisington , whose 28-year-old daughter , abbie , was killed in the fire , told reporters , '' i think they should not even bother with a hearing—just let biechele out . i just do n't find him as guilty of anything . '' the state parole board received approximately twenty letters , the majority of which expressed their sympathy and support for biechele , some going as far as to describe him as a '' scapegoat '' with limited responsibility . board chairwoman lisa holley told journalists of her surprise at the forgiving attitude of the families , saying , '' i think the most overwhelming part of it for me was the depth of forgiveness of many of these families that have sustained such a loss . '' dave kane and joanne o'neill , parents of youngest victim nicholas o'neill , released their letter to the board to reporters . '' in the period following this tragedy , it was mr . biechele , alone , who stood up and admitted responsibility for his part in this horrible event . he apologized to the families of the victims and made no attempt to mitigate his guilt , '' the letter said . others pointed out that biechele had sent handwritten letters to the families of each of the 100 victims and that he had a work release position in a local charity . on september 19 , 2007 , the rhode island parole board announced that biechele would be released in march 2008 . biechele was released from prison on march 19 , 2008 . as reported by the associated press , he did not answer any questions and was quickly whisked away in a waiting car . nightclub owners ' trial . following biechele 's trial , the station 's owners , michael and jeffrey derderian , were scheduled to receive separate trials . however , on september 21 , 2006 , judge darigan announced that the brothers had changed their pleas from '' not guilty '' to '' no contest , '' thereby avoiding a trial . michael derderian received fifteen years in prison , with four to serve and eleven years suspended , plus three years ' probation—the same sentence as biechele . jeffrey derderian received a ten-year suspended sentence , three years ' probation , and 500 hours of community service . in a letter to the victims ' families , judge darigan said that a trial '' would only serve to further traumatize and victimize not only the loved ones of the deceased and the survivors of this fire , but the general public as well . '' he added that the difference in the brothers ' sentences reflected their respective involvement with the purchase and installation of the flammable foam . rhode island attorney general patrick c . lynch objected strenuously to the plea bargain , saying that both brothers should have received jail time and that michael derderian should have received more time than biechele . in january 2008 , the parole board decided to grant michael derderian an early release ; he was scheduled to be released from prison in september 2009 , but was granted his release in june 2009 for good behavior . . civil settlements . as of september 2008 , at least 115 million in settlement agreements had been paid , or offered , to the victims or their families by various defendants : in september 2008 , the jack russell tour group inc . offered 1 million in a settlement to survivors and victims ' relatives , the maximum allowed under the band 's insurance plan . club owners jeffrey and michael derderian have offered to settle for 813,000 , which is to be covered by their insurance plan due to the pair having bankruptcy protection from lawsuits . the state of rhode island and the town of west warwick agreed to pay 10 million as settlement . sealed air corporation agreed to pay 25 million as settlement . sealed air made flammable packaging foam that was improperly installed in the club , which required acoustic foam designed for this purpose . in february 2008 , providence television station wpri-tv and their then-owners lin tv made an out-of-court settlement of 30 million as a result of the claim that their video journalist was said to be obstructing escape and not sufficiently helping people exit . in march 2008 , jbl speakers settled out of court for 815,000 . jbl was accused of using flammable foam inside their speakers . the company denied any wrongdoing . anheuser-busch has offered 5 million . mclaughlin & moran , anheuser-busch 's distributor , has offered 16 million . home depot and polar industries , inc . ( a connecticut-based insulation company ) made a settlement offer of 5 million . providence radio station whjy-fm promoted the show , which was emcee 'd by its dj , mike '' the doctor '' gonsalves ( who was one of the casualties that night ) . clear channel broadcasting , whjy 's parent company , paid a settlement of 22 million in february 2008 . american foam corporation who sold the insulation to the station nightclub agreed in 2008 to pay 6.3 million to settle lawsuits relating to the fire . . memorialization . thousands of mourners attended a memorial service at st . gregory the great church in warwick on february 24 , 2003 , to remember those lost in the fire . five months after the fire , great white started a benefit tour , saying a prayer at the beginning of each concert for the friends and families affected by the incident and giving a portion of the proceeds to the station family fund . in 2003 , and again in 2005 , the band stated they had not performed the song '' desert moon '' since the tragedy . '' i do n't think i could ever sing that song again , '' said russell , while guitarist mark kendall stated , '' we have n't played that song . things that bring back memories of that night we try to stay away from . and that song reminds us of that night . we have n't played it since then and probably never will . '' by august 18 , 2007 , however , the band had resumed performing the song . two years to the day after the fire , band members russell and kendall , along with great white 's attorney , ed mcpherson , appeared on cnn 's larry king live with three survivors of the fire and the father of longley , to discuss how their lives had changed since the incident . on january 16 , 2013 , jack russell scheduled a benefit show in february 2013 , commemorating the tenth anniversary of the fire , and announced that all proceeds would go towards the station fire memorial foundation . upon hearing of the event , the foundation asked that its name be removed , stating the animosity still felt by many of the survivors and surviving families . jack russell 's management has stated that the show would be renamed and that the proceeds would go to another charity . the site of the fire was cleared , and a multitude of crosses were placed as memorials , left by loved ones of the deceased . on may 20 , 2003 , nondenominational services began to be held at the site of the fire for a number of months . access remains open to the public , and memorial services are held each february 20 . a permanent memorial at the site of the fire has been erected and named the station fire memorial park . in august 2016 , the site was reported to have been being used as a pokestop in pokémon go , to uproar from victims ' families . in june 2003 , the station fire memorial foundation ( sfmf ) was formed with the purpose of purchasing the property , to build and maintain a memorial . in september 2012 , the owner of the land , ray villanova , donated the site to the sfmf . by april 2016 , 1.65 million of the 2 million fundraising goal had been achieved and construction of the station fire memorial park had commenced . the memorial dedication ceremony took place on may 21 , 2017 . . code changes and other consequences . other nightclub fires . there have been other nightclub fires in the united states that also resulted in significant loss of life . the november 28 , 1942 cocoanut grove fire in boston caused 492 deaths . the april 23 , 1940 rhythm night club fire in natchez , mississippi , claimed the lives of approximately 209 people . the may 28 , 1977 beverly hills supper club fire in southgate , kentucky , claimed 165 lives . the december 2 , 2016 ghost ship warehouse fire in oakland , california claimed 36 lives . the march 25 , 1990 happy land fire in the bronx , new york city , claimed 87 lives . the deadliest single-building fire in united states history was the december 30 , 1903 iroquois theatre fire in chicago , with at least 602 deaths . great white . following the fire , great white split into two separate groups , one led by russell and the other by kendall . neither version of the band performed in any of the six new england states for over a decade . russell 's group made its first new england appearance in twelve years at a harvest festival in mechanic falls , maine in august 2015 . . popular culture . the season 1 episode of cold case '' disco inferno '' was based on this incident . the season 14 episode of law & order '' blaze '' was also closely based on the incident . the season 1 episode of csi : miami '' tinder box '' featured a dj 's pyrotechnics setting fire to a nightclub . scott james 's nonfiction book trial by fire ( october 2020 ) describes the fire based on interviews and investigation . safety measures . following the tragedy , governor donald carcieri declared a moratorium on pyrotechnic displays at venues that hold fewer than 300 people . numerous violations of existing codes contributed to the calamity , triggering an immediate effort to strengthen fire code protections . within weeks of the disaster , an emergency meeting was called for the national fire protection association committee handling code for '' assembly occupancies '' . based upon its work , tentative interim amendments ( tias ) were issued for the national standard '' life safety code '' ( nfpa 101 ) , in july 2003 . the tias required automatic fire sprinklers in all existing nightclubs and similar locations that accommodate more than 100 occupants , and all new locations in the same categories . the tias also required additional crowd manager personnel , among other things . these tias were subsequently incorporated into the 2006 edition of nfpa 101 , along with additional exit requirements for new nightclub occupancies . it is left for each state or local jurisdiction to legally enact and enforce the current code changes . as a result of this and other similar incidents , fire chiefs , fire marshals and inspectors require trained crowd managers to comply with the international fire code , nfpa-101 life safety code , nfpa-1 fire code and many local ordinances that address safety in public-assembly occupancies . however , fire professionals have few choices about what training should be provided and training programs are continually updated to incorporate new technologies as well as lessons learned from actual fire experiences . . see also . list of nightclub fires . explanatory notes . references . further reading . . external links . the boston globe : '' portraits of people who died in the r.i . nightclub fire '' ( 2003 ) national fire protection association web page '' nightclubs/assembly occupancies '' : includes a report on the fire , links to nightclub safety tips , information on safe use of pyrotechnics , and other relevant information . nist simulations of the fire : without sprinklers ; with sprinklers full nist government investigation guide to the station nightclub victims ' collection from the rhode island state archives