Tel Lachish

iron age . rebuilding of the city began in the early iron age during the 10th and 9th centuries bce when it was part of the kingdom of judah . the unfortified settlement may have been destroyed c . 925 bce by egyptian pharaoh sheshonk i . in the first half of the 9th century bce , under the judahite kings asa and jehoshaphat , lachish became an important city in the kingdom . it was heavily fortified with massive walls and ramparts and a royal palace was built on a platform in the center of the city . lachish was the foremost among several fortified cities and strongholds guarding the valleys that lead up to jerusalem and the interior of the country against enemies which usually approached from the coast . siege by sennacherib , assyrian rule . in 701 & nbsp ; bce , during the revolt of king hezekiah against assyria , it was besieged and captured by sennacherib despite the defenders ' determined resistance . david ussishkin , the conquest of lachish by sennacherib , tel aviv university institute of archaeology , 1982 , some scholars believe that the fall of lachish actually occurred during a second campaign in the area by sennacherib ca . 688 & nbsp ; bce . the site now contains the only remains of an assyrian siege ramp discovered so far . sennacherib later devoted a whole room in his '' palace without a rival '' , the south-west palace in nineveh , for lachish relief of the siege on large alabaster slabs , most of which are now on display in the british museum . they hold depictions of assyrian siege ramps , battering rams , sappers , and other siege machines and army units , along with lachish 's architecture and its final surrender . in combination with the archaeological finds , they give a good understanding of siege warfare of the period . william h . shea , sennacherib 's description of lachish and of its conquest , andrews university seminary studies , vol . 26 , no . 2 , pp . 171-180 , 1988 modern excavation of the site has revealed that the assyrians built a stone and dirt ramp up to the level of the lachish city wall , thereby allowing the soldiers to charge up the ramp and storm the city . excavations revealed approximately 1,500 skulls in one of the caves near the site , and hundreds of arrowheads on the ramp and at the top of the city wall , indicating the ferocity of the battle . the city occupied an area of . the town was rebuilt in the late 7th century bce during the decline of the neo-assyrian empire . babylonian period . lachish fell to nebuchadnezzar in his campaign against judah in 586 & nbsp ; bce . the city was finally destroyed in 587 & nbsp ; bce . residents were exiled as part of the babylonian captivity . during babylonian occupation , a large residence was built on the platform that had once supported the israelite palace . at the end of the captivity , some exiled jews returned to lachish and built a new city with fortifications . under the babylonian or achaemenid empire , a large altar ( known as the solar shrine ) on the east section of the mound was built . the shrine was abandoned after the area fell in the hands of alexander the great . the tell has been unoccupied since then . . biblical references . lachish is mentioned in several books in the hebrew bible . the book of joshua refers to lachish in chapter 10 ( verses , describing the israelite conquest of caanan . japhia , the king of lachish , is listed as one of the five amorite kings that allied to repel the invasion . after a surprise attack from the israelites , the kings took refuge in a cave , where they were captured and put to death . joshua and the israelites then took the city of lachish after a two-day siege , exterminating the populace . in , the king of lachish is mentioned as one of the thirty-one kings conquered by joshua . the city is assigned to the tribe of judah in as part of the western foothills . rehoboam son of solomon 's fortifications of lachish are recorded in ii chronicles . in ii kings and , amaziah of judah flees to lachish after he was defeated by jehoash of israel , where he is captured and executed . the book of micah warns the residents of lachish that the destruction of samaria by the assyrians will soon spread to judah . mentions the siege of lachish ; hezekiah sends a message there offering tribute to sennacherib in exchange for the city . in verse , the assyrians leave lachish and head to jerusalem to begin an unsuccessful siege of the city . this is also mentioned in and isaiah . the israelites learn of the departure of the assyrians from lachish in and . the jeremiah lists lachish as one of the last three fortified cities in judah to fall to the babylonian king nebuchadnezzar ii . in the book of nehemiah lachish is mentioned as an area where the people of judah settled in the persian period . identification . initially , lachish was identified by flinders petrie with tell el-hesi , an identification supported when a relevant cuneiform tablet was found there . g . ernest wright , a problem of ancient topography : lachish and eglon , the harvard theological review vol . 64 , no . 2/3 , , pp . 437-450 , cambridge university press , 1971 sir william matthew flinders petrie , tell el hesy ( lachish ) , published for the committee of the palestine exploration fund by a . p . watt , 1891 the tablet mentions zimredda a governor of who is known from one of the amarna letters ( ea 333 ) . the current identification of tell ed-duweir as lachish is strong but circumstantial , based mostly on the writing of eusebius , the royal reliefs of sennacherib , the site excavations , and an ostracon found there . lawrence t . geraty , archaeology and the bible at hezekiah 's lachish , andrews university seminary studies , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . & nbsp ; 27–37 , 1987 . archaeological exploration . starkey-tufnell expedition ( 1932-1939 ) . the first expedition at lachish , then tell ed-duweir , from 1932 to 1939 , was the starkey-tufnell british expedition which included james leslie starkey as expedition leader , olga tufnell , g.l . harding and c . inge . it was funded by charles marston and henry wellcome with the aim of finding the biblical city of lachish . they succeeded in finding lachish , with a '' wealth of well-stratified pottery '' , a '' key part of the ceramic corpus of palestine '' , and the lachish letters , c . '' written to the commander of the garrison at lachish shortly before it fell to the babylonians in either 589 or 586 b.c . '' starkey was murdered in 1938 while travelling to jerusalem to open the rockefeller museum . tufnell , harding and inge remained for the 1938-9 season . tufnell returned to london and over the next two decades , worked at the institute of archaeology in london , '' sorting , collating , studying and presenting the material found at lachish '' . she completed her final publication lachish iv in 1957 . she had already become a fellow of the society of antiquaries of london in 1951 . . aharoni expedition ( 1966 , 1968 ) . the second was an israeli expedition directed by yohanan aharoni that took place over two seasons in 1966 and 1968 . the dig , which focused mainly on the '' solar shrine '' , was worked on behalf of hebrew university and tel aviv university . aharoni published the findings in his 1975 publication , investigations at lachish : the sanctuary and the residency . yohanan aharoni , investigations at lachish : the sanctuary and the residency ( lachish v ) , gateway publishers , 1975 , . ussishkin expedition ( 1973 and 1994 ) . the third expedition , 1973 and 1994 , by a tel aviv university institute of archaeology and israel exploration society team was led by david ussishkin . excavation and restoration work was conducted between 1973 and 1994 by a tel aviv university institute of archaeology and israel exploration society team led by david ussishkin . the excavation focused on the bronze age ( 1550–1200 bce ) and iron age ( 1200–587 bce ) levels . the ussishkin expedition 's comprehensive 5-volume report set a new standard in archaeological publication . according to yosef garfinkel , '' the starkey-tufnell and ussishkin expeditions set new standards in excavation and publication . they revolutionized our understanding of various aspects of lachish , such as the later history of judah and the pre-israelite late bronze age canaanite city . '' excavations of tel lachish continued in 2012 under the auspices of tel aviv university 's institute of archaeology , conducted by nissim golding-meir . israel antiquities authority , excavators and excavations permit for year 2012 , survey permit b-380 . garfinkel expedition ( 2013 ) . in 2013 , a fourth expedition to lachish was begun under the direction of yosef garfinkel , michael g . hasel , and martin g . klingbeil to investigate the iron age history of the site on behalf of the institute of archaeology , the hebrew university of jerusalem , and the institute of archaeology , southern adventist university . other consortium institutions include virginia commonwealth university , oakland university and korea biblical geography research institute . in 2014 , during the fourth expedition to lachish , led by archaeologist saar ganor , a small potsherd with letters from a 12th century bce alphabet , was found in the ruins of a late bronze age temple . one researcher called it , a '' once in a generation '' find . israel antiquities authority , excavators and excavations permit for year 2014 , survey permit a-7073 . digs since 2016 . a 2016 expedition found indications of hezekiah 's campaign against idolatry . the excavated gate shrine in the city contained a toilet in the holy of holies of the shrine , which according to researchers was '' the ultimate desecration '' of the shrine , as well the truncation of the horns of two altars . the korean lachish excavation team led by hong soon-hwa , reported that they had '' uncovered a wide range of 10th century bc items , from houses with earthenware items and cooking stoves , to animal bones , olive seeds , spearheads , fortress walls and other objects '' on july 5 , 2017 . since 2017 , the austro-israeli excavation is exploring the middle and late bronze age strata at the site . the project is conducted a joint project of hebrew university and the institute for oriental and european archaeology of the austrian academy of sciences and is co-directed by felix höflmayer and katharina streit . the project is funded by the austrian science fund . . select archaeological findings . paleo-hebrew letters on ostraca . the first archaeological expedition , the starkey-starkey-tufnell ( 1932-9 ) uncovered the lachish letters , which were '' written to the commander of the garrison at lachish shortly before it fell to the babylonians in either 589 or 586 b.c . '' the hebrew letters were written on pieces of pottery , so-called ostraca . eighteen letters were found in 1935 and three more in 1938 , all written in paleo-hebrew script . they were from the latest occupational level immediately before the chaldean siege of 587 bc . at the time , they formed the only known corpus of documents in classical hebrew that had come down to us outside of the hebrew bible . w . f . albright , a reëxamination of the lachish letters , bulletin of the american schools of oriental research , no . 73 , pp . 16-21 , 1939 . lmlk seals . another major contribution to biblical archaeology from excavations at lachish are the lmlk seals , which were stamped on the handles of a particular form of ancient storage jar . more of these artifacts were found at this site ( over 400 ; ussishkin , 2004 , pp . & nbsp ; 2151–9 ) than any other place in israel ( jerusalem remains in second place with more than 300 ) . most of them were collected from the surface during starkey 's excavations , but others were found in level 1 ( persian and greek era ) , level 2 ( period preceding babylonian conquest by nebuchadnezzar ) , and level 3 ( period preceding assyrian conquest by sennacherib ) . it is thanks to the work of david ussishkin 's team that eight of these stamped jars were restored , thereby demonstrating lack of relevance between the jar volumes ( which deviated as much as 5 gallons or 12 litres ) , and also proving their relation to the reign of biblical king hezekiah . ( chapter 29 , section b in the lachish final excavation report ) ussishkin observed that '' the renewed excavations confirmed tufnell ’ s suggestion that level iii had been destroyed in 701 bce . all the royal storage jars , stamped and unstamped alike , date to the reign of hezekiah , to shortly before the assyrian conquest . ' the 1898 reference by bliss , contains numerous drawings , including examples of phoenician , etc . pottery , and items from pharaonic egypt , and other mediterranean , and inland regions . see also . archaeology of israel cities of the ancient near east list of artifacts significant to the bible lachish relief . references . further reading . olga tufnell , margaret murray , david diringer , '' lachish iii ( tell ed-duweir ) . the iron age '' , london-new york-toronto : oxford university press , 1953 . barnett , r . d . '' the siege of lachish . '' israel exploration journal , vol . 8 , pp . & nbsp ; 161–164 , 1958 bliss , frederick . numerous artifact drawings , also '' layer by layer '' drawings of tell el-hesi . also an original attempt of the only el amarna letter found at site , amarna letters , ea 333 . a mound of many cities ; or tell el hesy excavated , by frederick jones bliss , phd . , explorer to the fund , 2nd edition , revised . ( the committee of the palestine exploration fund . ) c 1898 . magrill , pamela , a researcher 's guide to the lachish collection in the british museum , 2006 , british museum research publication 161 , , fully available online ( p . 388 ff ) arlene m . rosen , environmental change and settlement at tel lachish israel , bulletin of the american schools of oriental research , no . 263 , pp . & nbsp ; 55–60 , 1986 ussishkin , d . , the renewed archaeological excavations at lachish ( 1973–1994 ) , volumes i-v , monographs of the institute of archaeology vol . 22 , tel aviv university , 2004 , . external links . jewish encyclopedia : lachish photo gallery of lachish ( tell ed-duweir ) images of the assyrian reliefs of lachish pictures of tel lachish a late bronze age potter 's workshop at lachish , israel in internet archaeology