1965 in literature

events . february 10 – soviet fiction writers yuli daniel and andrei sinyavsky are sentenced to five and seven years , respectively , for '' anti-soviet '' writings . february 20 – while soviet author and translator valery tarsis is abroad , the soviet union negates his citizenship . march 26 – harold pinter 's play the homecoming receives its world première at the new theatre , cardiff , from the royal shakespeare company under peter hall . its london première follows on june 3 at the aldwych theatre , with vivien merchant , pinter 's wife at this time , appearing . it also appears in print this year . may 26 – the world première of a high wind in jamaica , a film from richard hughes 's 1929 novel , features the future novelist martin amis , son of kingsley amis , as a teenage actor . june 11 – international poetry incarnation , a performance poetry event , takes place at london 's royal albert hall before an audience of 7,000 , with members of the beat generation featuring . adrian mitchell reads '' to whom it may concern '' . june 17 – the london première of frank marcus ' farce the killing of sister george ( at the duke of york 's theatre ) is among the first mainstream british plays with lesbian characters . beryl reid plays the title rôle . it has been previewed in april at the bristol old vic . june 19 – j . d . salinger 's novella '' hapworth 16 , 1924 '' takes up most of an issue of the new yorker magazine dated today . it will be the last of his works published before his death in 2010 . june 30 – the english novelists kingsley amis and elizabeth jane howard marry at marylebone register office in london , as his second marriage and her third . november 10 – chinese critic yao wenyuan publishes a review of a beijing opera production of wu han 's hai rui dismissed from office in the shanghai daily newspaper wenhui bao , claiming the drama to be counter-revolutionary , a starting point for the cultural revolution in china . unknown dates after the text of heiner müller 's play der bau ( construction site ) is published in sinn und form , authorities in east germany prevent a stage première until 1980 . the nebula award is conceived by lloyd biggle , jr . the first award will be made next year to frank herbert 's dune . the national library of new zealand is formed by merging the alexander turnbull library , the national library service and the general assembly library under the national library act of this year . . new books . fiction . lloyd alexander – the black cauldron cécile aubry – belle et sébastien j . g . ballard – the drought john bingham – a fragment of fear ray bradbury – the vintage bradbury john brunner the martian sphinx as keith woodcott the squares of the city kenneth bulmer – land beyond the map edgar rice burroughs – tarzan and the castaways john dickson carr – the house at satan 's elbow agatha christie – at bertram 's hotel l . sprague de camp the arrows of hercules the spell of seven ( ed . ) august derleth – the casebook of solar pons philip k . dick - the three stigmata of palmer eldritch margaret drabble – the millstone ian fleming – the man with the golden gun margaret forster – georgy girl witold gombrowicz – kosmos richard gordon – love and sir lancelot winston graham – after the act graham greene – the comedians frank herbert – dune arthur hailey – hotel james leo herlihy - midnight cowboy bohumil hrabal – ostře sledované vlaky ( closely observed trains ) bel kaufman – up the down staircase danilo kiš – garden , ashes ( bašta , pepeo ) pierre klossowski – le baphomet jerzy kosinski – the painted bird john le carré – the looking-glass war j . m . g . le clézio – le livre des fuites david lodge – the british museum is falling down h . p . lovecraft – dagon and other macabre tales john d . macdonald – a deadly shade of gold compton mackenzie – the stolen soprano norman mailer – an american dream eric malpass – morning 's at seven james a . michener – the source mudrooroo ( also as colin johnson ) – wild cat falling iris murdoch – the red and the green ngũgĩ wa thiong ' o ( also as james ngigi ) – the river between peter o'donnell – modesty blaise j.b . priestley – lost empires raymond queneau – the blue flowers françoise sagan – la chamade ernst von salomon – die schöne wilhelmine muriel spark - the mandelbaum gate vincent starrett – the quick and the dead ( collection ) irving stone – those who love rex stout – the doorbell rang benjamin tammuz – חיי אליקום ( hayei elyakum , the life of elyakum ) jesús torbado – las corrupciones jack vance – space opera erico verissimo – o senhor embaixador arved viirlaid – sadu jõkke ( rain for the river ) ion vinea – lunatecii ( the lunatics , posthumous ) stephen vizinczey – in praise of older women : the amorous recollections of andrás vajda kurt vonnegut – god bless you , mr . rosewater donald wandrei – strange harvest marguerite young – miss macintosh , my darling . children and young people . kir bulychov – a girl nothing can happen to , the first work of literature about alisa selezneva thora colson – rinkin of dragon 's wood susan cooper – over sea , under stone ( first in the dark is rising sequence of five books ) ruth manning-sanders – a book of dragons ruth park – the muddle-headed wombat in the treetops bill peet chester the worldly pig kermit the hermit john rowe townsend – widdershins crescent . drama . alan ayckbourn – relatively speaking ( as meet my father ) samuel beckett – come and go edward bond – saved david halliwell – little malcolm and his struggle against the eunuchs john b . keane – the field frank marcus – the killing of sister george sławomir mrożek – tango john osborne – a patriot for me nelson rodrigues – toda nudez será castigada ( all nudity shall be punished ) michel tremblay – les belles-sœurs . poetry . stanley mcnail – something breathing sylvia plath ( suicide 1963 ) – ariel clark ashton smith – poems in prose . non-fiction . dean acheson – morning and noon nelson algren – notes from a sea diary : hemingway all the way ( travel book ) dmitri borgmann – language on vacation nirad c . chaudhuri – the continent of circe allen g . debus – the english paracelsians . richard feynman – the character of physical law barney glaser and anselm strauss – awareness of dying william golding – the hot gates alex haley and malcolm x – the autobiography of malcolm x pauline kael – i lost it at the movies peter laslett – the world we have lost : england before the industrial age h . p . lovecraft – selected letters i ( 1911–1924 ) p . j . marshall – the impeachment of warren hastings robin moore – the green berets tom wolfe – the kandy-kolored tangerine-flake streamline baby . births . february 1 – louise welsh , british writer of psychological thrillers february 20 – philip hensher , english fiction writer , critic and editor march 4 andrew collins , english journalist and scriptwriter anisul hoque , bangladeshi novelist , dramatist and journalist march 30 – piers morgan , english journalist and editor june 2 – sean stewart , american-canadian author july 7 – zoë heller , english novelist july 31 – j . k . rowling , english children 's novelist august 1 – sam mendes , english theatre and film director september 29 – nikolaj frobenius , norwegian novelist october 23 – augusten burroughs , american memoirist november 28 – erwin mortier , belgian poet , novelist and translator writing in flemish/dutch november 29 – lauren child , english children 's fiction writer and illustrator december 14 – helle helle , danish novelist december 31 – nicholas sparks , american novelist unknown dates patience agbabi , british performance poet mike mccormack , irish fiction writer keith mansfield , english novelist and publisher charlotte wood , australian novelist . deaths . january 4 – t . s . eliot , american-born english poet and dramatist ( born 1888 ) january 12 – lorraine hansberry , american journalist and dramatist ( cancer , born 1930 ) march 13 – fan s . noli , albanian bishop and poet ( born 1882 ) may 3 – howard spring , welsh-born novelist and writer ( born 1889 ) may 5 – edgar mittelholzer , guyanese-born novelist ( suicide , born 1909 ) may 19 – maria dąbrowska , polish novelist , essayist and playwright ( born 1889 ) june 5 thornton burgess , american children 's author ( born 1874 ) eleanor farjeon , english children 's writer and poet ( born 1881 ) june 13 – martin buber , austrian-born jewish philosopher ( born 1878 ) july 8 – thomas sigismund stribling , american novelist ( born 1881 ) july 9 – jacques audiberti , french absurdist dramatist , poet and novelist ( born 1899 ) july 28 – rampo edogawa ( 江戸川 乱歩 , taro hirai ) , japanese author and critic ( born 1894 ) july 30 – jun'ichirō tanizaki ( 谷崎 潤一郎 ) , japanese novelist ( born 1888 ) july 31 – john metcalfe , english novelist and short story writer ( born 1891 ) august 1 – percy lubbock , english essayist , critic and biographer ( born 1879 ) august 6 – aksel sandemose , danish novelist ( born 1899 ) august 8 – shirley jackson , american horror novelist and short story writer ( born 1916 ) august 17 – jack spicer , american poet ( alcohol-related , born 1925 ) september 17 – john davy hayward , english literary editor and bibliophile ( born 1905 ) october 8 – thomas b . costain , canadian popular historian ( born 1885 ) october 15 – randall jarrell , american poet ( road accident , born 1914 ) october 30 – arthur schlesinger , sr . , american historian ( born 1888 ) november 8 – dorothy kilgallen , american journalist ( alcohol/drug overdose , born 1913 ) november 20 – katharine anthony , american biographer ( born 1877 ) november 24 – betty miller , irish-born jewish writer ( born 1910 ) december 16 – w . somerset maugham english novelist , dramatist and short story writer ( born 1874 ) . awards . nobel prize for literature – michail aleksandrovich sholokhov . canada . see 1965 governor general 's awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards . france . prix goncourt : j . borel , l'adoration prix médicis : rené-victor pilhes , la rhubarbe . united kingdom . carnegie medal for children 's literature : philip turner , the grange at high force eric gregory award : john fuller , derek mahon , michael longley , norman talbot newdigate prize : peter jay james tait black memorial prize for fiction : muriel spark , the mandelbaum gate james tait black memorial prize for biography : mary moorman , william wordsworth : the later years 1803–1850 queen 's gold medal for poetry : philip larkin . united states . american academy of arts and letters gold medal for criticism : walter lippmann hugo award : fritz leiber , the wanderer nebula award : frank herbert , dune newbery medal for children 's literature : maia wojciechowska , shadow of a bull pulitzer prize for drama : frank d . gilroy , the subject was roses pulitzer prize for fiction : shirley ann grau – the keepers of the house pulitzer prize for poetry : john berryman : 77 dream songs . elsewhere . miles franklin award : thea astley , the slow natives alfaguara prize : jesús torbado , las corrupciones premio nadal : e . cabalero calderón , el buen salvaje viareggio prize : goffredo parise , il padrone ( the boss ) . references .