Kukri

history . researchers trace the origins of the blade back to the domestic sickle and the prehistoric bent stick used for hunting and later in hand-to-hand combat . similar implements have existed in several forms throughout the indian subcontinent and were used both as weapons and as tools , such as for sacrificial rituals . burton ( 1884 ) writes that the british museum housed a large kukri-like falchion inscribed with writing in pali . among the oldest existing kukri are those belonging to drabya shah ( c . 1559 ) , housed in the national museum of nepal in kathmandu . the kukri came to be known to the western world when the east india company came into conflict with the growing gorkha kingdom , culminating in the gurkha war of 1814–1816 . it gained literary attention in the 1897 novel dracula by irish author bram stoker . despite the popular image of dracula having a stake driven through his heart at the conclusion of a climactic battle between dracula 's bodyguards and the heroes , mina 's narrative describes his throat being sliced through by jonathan harker 's kukri and his heart pierced by quincey morris 's bowie knife . stoker , dacre and ian holt ( 2009 ) . dracula the un-dead . penguin group . p . 306 . all gurkha troops are issued with two kukris , a service no.1 ( ceremonial ) and a service no.2 ( exercise ) ; in modern times members of the brigade of gurkhas receive training in its use . the weapon gained fame in the gurkha war and its continued use through both world war i and world war ii enhanced its reputation among both allied troops and enemy forces . its acclaim was demonstrated in north africa by one unit 's situation report . it reads : '' enemy losses : ten killed , our nil . ammunition expenditure nil . '' reagan , geoffrey ( 1992 ) . military anecdotes . guinness publishing . p . 180 . elsewhere during the second world war , the kukri was purchased and used by other british , commonwealth and us troops training in india , including the chindits and merrill 's marauders . the notion of the gurkha with his kukri carried on through to the falklands war . on 2 september 2010 , bishnu shrestha , a retired indian army gurkha soldier , alone and armed only with a khukri , defeated thirty bandits who attacked a passenger train he was on in india . he was reported to have killed three of the bandits , wounded eight more and forced the rest of the band to flee . '' lone nepali gorkha who subdued 40 train robbers '' , república , 13 january 2011 . a contemporaneous report in the times of india , that includes an interview with shrestha , indicates he was less successful . '' soldier takes on dacoits on train ; gang of 30 '' , times of india , times news network , 4 september 2010 . . design . the kukri is designed primarily for chopping . the shape varies a great deal from being quite straight to highly curved with angled or smooth spines . there are substantial variations in dimensions and blade thickness depending on intended tasks as well as the region of origin and the smith that produced it . as a general guide the spines vary from at the handle , and can taper to by the point while the blade lengths can vary from for general use . a kukri designed for general purpose is commonly in overall length and weighs approximately . larger examples are impractical for everyday use and are rarely found except in collections or as ceremonial weapons . smaller ones are of more limited utility , but very easy to carry . another factor that affects its weight and balance is the construction of the blade . to reduce weight while keeping strength , the blade might be hollow forged , or a fuller is created . kukris are made with several different types of fuller including tin chira ( triple fuller ) , dui chira ( double fuller ) , ang khola ( single fuller ) , or basic non-tapered spines with a large bevelled edge . kukri blades usually have a notch ( karda , kauda , gaudi , kaura , or cho ) at the base of the blade . various reasons are given for this , both practical and ceremonial : that it makes blood and sap drop off the blade rather than running onto the handle and thereby prevent the handle from becoming slippery ; that it delineates the end of the blade whilst sharpening ; that it is a symbol representing a cows ' foot , or shiva ; that it can catch another blade or kukri in combat . the notch may also represent the teats of a cow , a reminder that the kukri should not be used to kill a cow , an animal revered and worshipped by hindus . the notch may also be used as a catch , to hold tight against a belt , or to bite onto twine to be suspended . the handles are most often made of hardwood or water buffalo horn , but ivory , bone , and metal handles have also been produced . the handle quite often has a flared butt that allows better retention in draw cuts and chopping . most handles have metal bolsters and butt plates which are generally made of brass or steel . the traditional handle attachment in nepal is the partial tang , although the more modern versions have the stick tang which has become popular . the full tang is mainly used on some military models but has not become widespread in nepal itself . the kukri typically comes in either a decorated wooden scabbard or one which is wrapped in leather . traditionally , the scabbard also holds two smaller blades : an unsharpened checkmark to burnish the blade , and another accessory blade called a karda . some older style scabbards include a pouch for carrying flint or dry tinder . manufacture . the biswakarma kami ( caste ) are the traditional inheritors of the art of kukri-making . modern kukri blades are often forged from spring steel , sometimes collected from recycled suspension ( vehicle ) . the tang of the blade usually extends all the way through to the end of the handle ; the small portion of the tang that projects through the end of the handle are hammered flat to secure the blade . kukri blades have a hard , tempered edge and a softer spine . this enables them to maintain a sharp edge , yet tolerate impacts . kukri handles , usually made from hardwood or buffalo horn , are often fastened with a kind of tree sap called laha ( also known as '' himalayan epoxy '' ) . with a wood or horn handle , the tang may be heated and burned into the handle to ensure a tight fit , since only the section of handle which touches the blade is burned away . in more modern kukri , handles of cast aluminium or brass are press-fitted to the tang ; as the hot metal cools it shrinks , locking onto the blade . some kukri ( such as the ones made by contractors for the modern indian army ) , have a very wide tang with handle slabs fastened on by two or more rivets , commonly called a full tang ( panawal ) configuration . traditional profiling of the blade edge is performed by a two-man team ; one spins a grinding wheel forwards and backwards by means of a rope wound several times around an axle while the sharpener applies the blade . the wheel is made by hand from fine river sand bound by laha , the same adhesive used to affix the handle to the blade . routine sharpening is traditionally accomplished by passing a chakmak over the edge in a manner similar to that used by chefs to steel their knives . kukri scabbards are usually made of wood or metal with an animal skin or metal or wood covering . the leather work is often done by a sirki . uses . weaponry . the kukri is effective as a chopping weapon , due to its weight , and slashing weapon , because the curved shape creates a '' wedge '' effect which causes the blade to cut effectively and deeper . because the blade bends towards the opponent , the user need not angle the wrist while executing a chopping motion . unlike a straight-edged sword , the center of mass combined with the angle of the blade allow the kukri to slice as it chops . the edge slides across the target 's surface while the center of mass maintains momentum as the blade moves through the target 's cross-section . this gives the kukri a penetrative force disproportional to its length . the design enables the user to inflict deep wounds and to penetrate bone . utility . while most famed from use in the military , the kukri is the most commonly used multipurpose tool in the fields and homes in nepal . its use has varied from building , clearing , chopping firewood , digging , slaughtering animals for food , cutting meat and vegetables , skinning animals , and opening cans . its use as a general farm and household tool disproves the often stated '' taboo '' that the weapon can not be sheathed '' until it has drawn blood '' . the kukri is versatile . it can function as a smaller knife by using the narrower part of the blade , closest to the handle . the heavier and wider end of the blade , towards the tip , functions as an axe or a small shovel . anatomy . blade . keeper ( hira jornu ) : spade/diamond shaped metal/brass plate used to seal the butt cap . butt cap ( chapri ) : thick metal/brass plate used to secure the handle to the tang . tang ( paro ) : rear piece of the blade that goes through the handle . bolster ( kanjo ) : thick metal/brass round shaped plate between blade and handle made to support and reinforce the fixture . spine ( beet ) : thickest blunt edge of the blade . fuller/groove ( khol ) : straight groove or deep line that runs along part of the upper spine . peak ( juro ) : highest point of the blade . main body ( ang ) : main surface or panel of the blade . fuller ( chirra ) : curvature/hump in the blade made to absorb impact and to reduce unnecessary weight . tip ( toppa ) : the starting point of the blade . edge ( dhaar ) : sharp edge of the blade . belly ( bhundi ) : widest part/area of the blade . bevel ( patti ) : slope from the main body until the sharp edge . notch ( cho ) : a distinctive cut ( numeric ' 3 '-like shape ) in the edge . used as a stopper when sharpening with the chakmak . ricasso ( ghari ) : blunt area between the notch and bolster . rings ( harhari ) : round circles in the handle . rivet ( khil ) : steel or metal bolt to fasten or secure tang to the handle . tang tail ( puchchar ) : last point of the kukri blade . scabbard . frog ( faras ) : belt holder specially made of thick leather ( 2 & nbsp ; mm to 4 & nbsp ; mm ) encircling the scabbard close towards the throat . upper edge ( mathillo bhaag ) : spine of the scabbard where holding should be done when handling a kukri . lace ( tuna ) : a leather cord used to sew or attach two ends of the frog . especially used in army types . main body ( sharir ) : the main body or surface of the scabbard . generally made in semi oval shape . chape ( khothi ) : pointed metallic tip of the scabbard . used to protect the naked tip of a scabbard . loop ( golie ) : round leather room/space where a belt goes through attached/fixed to the keeper with steel rivets . throat ( mauri ) : entrance towards the interior of the scabbard for the blade . strap/ridge ( bhunti ) : thick raw leather encircling the scabbard made to create a hump to secure the frog from moving or wobbling ( not available in this pic ) . lower edge ( tallo bhag ) : belly/curvature of the scabbard . classification . kukris can be broadly classified into two types : eastern and western . the eastern blades are originated and named according to the towns and villages of eastern nepal . the eastern khukuris are angkhola khukuri , bhojpure khukuri , chainpure khukuri , cheetlange ( chitlange ) khukuri , chirwa ( chiruwa ) khukuri , dhankute khukuri , ganjawla khukuri , panawala khukuri , sirupate khukuri translates as siru grass leaf like . khukuris made in locations like chainpur , bhojpur , and dhankuta in eastern nepal are excellent and ornate knives . visit nepal '98 : by the official travel manual of visit nepal '98 vny'98 secretariat , 1998 western blades are generally broader . occasionally the western style is called budhuna , ( referring to a fish with a large head ) , or baspate ( bamboo leaf ) which refers to blades just outside the proportions of the normal sirupate blade . despite the classification of eastern and western , both styles of kukri appear to be used in all areas of nepal . there is khukuri named after gorkhali general amar singh thapa called amar singh thapa khukuri . this khukuri is modelled on the real khukuri used by the gorkhali general . the real khukuri used by amar singh thapa is archived at national museum of nepal and is more curvy in nature than other traditions . . legacy . there is a popular proverb in nepali as follows : . see also . bagh nakh falcata husa knife katar khopesh kopis parang ( knife ) pata ( sword ) gurkha . references . external links .