Whore of Babylon

passages from revelation . the '' great whore '' of the book of revelation is featured in chapter 17 : : : — & nbsp ; . symbolism . the whore is associated with the beast of revelation by connection with an equally evil kingdom . the word '' whore '' can also be translated metaphorically as '' idolatry '' . πόρνη : from greek . fr . transliteration ; pornē ; english ; prostitute/whore . 2 ) metaphor ; an idolatress ; a ) of '' babylon '' i.e . rome , the chief seat of idolatry . '' dictionary and word search for pornē ( strong 's 4204 ) '' . blue letter bible . 1996–2011 . retrieved on : 3 nov 2011 . the whore 's apocalypse downfall is prophecy to take place in the hands of the image of the the beast ( revelation ) . there is much speculation within christian eschatology on what the whore and beast symbolize as well as the possible implications for contemporary interpretations . rome or jerusalem ? a protestant study on the whore of babylon in revelation hunting the whore of babylon . catholic answers ch 17 : babylon the whore . commentary on revelation . preterist interpretations . some scholars interpret 'babylon ' as being preterism . rome and the roman empire . many biblical scholars women in scripture : a dictionary of named and unnamed women in the hebrew l . michael white , understanding the book of revelation , pbs helmut köster , introduction to the new testament , volume 2 , 260 pheme perkins , first and second peter , james , and jude , 16 watson e . mills , mercer commentary on the new testament , 1340 nancy mcdarby , the collegeville bible handbook , 349 carol l . meyers , toni craven , ross shepard kraemer women in scripture : a dictionary of named and unnamed women in the hebrew , p . 528 david m . carr , colleen m . conway , introduction to the bible : sacred texts and imperial contexts , 353 larry joseph kreitzer gospel images in fiction and film : on reversing the hermeneutical flow , 61 by mary beard , john a . north , s . r . f . price religions of rome : a history , david m . rhoads , from every people and nation : the book of revelation in intercultural perspective , 174 charles t . chapman , the message of the book of revelation , 114 norman cheadle , the ironic apocalypse in the novels of leopoldo marechal , 36 peter m . j . stravinskas , the catholic answer book , volume 1 , 18 catherine keller , god and power : counter-apocalyptic journeys , 59 brian k . blount , revelation : a commentary , 346 frances carey , the apocalypse and the shape of things to come , 138 richard dellamora , postmodern apocalypse : theory and cultural practice at the end , 117 a . n . wilson , paul : the mind of the apostle , 11 gerd theissen , john bowden , fortress introduction to the new testament , 166 believe that '' babylon '' is a metaphor for the pagan roman empire at the time it persecuted christians , before the edict of milan in 313 . some biblical scholars recognize that '' babylon '' is a cipher for rome or the roman empire but believe babylon is not limited to the roman city of the first century . craig koester says outright that '' the whore is rome , yet more than rome . '' craig r . koester , revelation , anchor yale bible 38a ( new haven , ct : yale university press , 2014 ) , 684 . it '' is the roman imperial world , which in turn represents the world alienated from god . '' ibid . , 506 . some exegesis interpret the passage as a scathing critique of a servant people of rome who do the empire 's bidding , interpreting that the author of revelation was speaking of the herodians—a party of jews friendly to rome and open to its influence , like the hellenizers of centuries past—and later , corrupt hasmoneans , where the ruler of jerusalem or roman judea exercised his power at the pleasure of the roman emperor , and was dependent on roman influence , like herod the great in the gospel of luke . in 4 ezra , 2 esdras/4 esdras ; see esdras differences in names 4 ezra 3:1–2 , 28–31 2 baruch 2 baruch 10:1–3 , 11:1 , 67:7 and the sibylline oracles , sibylline oracles 5.143 , 159–60 '' babylon '' is a cryptic name for rome . reinhard feldmeier speculates that '' babylon '' is used to refer to rome in the first epistle of peter . in revelation 17:9 it is said that she sits on '' seven mountains '' , ( the king james version bible—the new international version bible uses the words '' seven hills '' ) typically understood as the seven hills of rome . wall , r . w . ( 1991 ) . new international biblical commentary : revelation ( 207 ) . peabody , ma : hendrickson publishers . bratcher , r . g . , & hatton , h . ( 1993 ) . a handbook on the revelation to john . ubs handbook series ; helps for translators ( 248 ) . new york : united bible societies . davis , c . a . ( 2000 ) . revelation . the college press niv commentary ( 322 ) . joplin , mo . : college press pub . mounce , r . h . ( 1997 ) . '' the book of revelation . '' the new international commentary on the new testament ( 315 ) . grand rapids , mi : wm . b . eerdmans publishing co . beckwith , isbon t . the apocalypse of john . new york : macmillan , 1919 ; reprinted , eugene : wipf and stock publishers , 2001 . a roman coin minted under the emperor vespasian ( ca . 70 ad ) depicts rome as a woman sitting on seven hills . according to the international standard bible encyclopedia , '' the characteristics ascribed to this babylon apply to rome rather than to any other city of that age : ( a ) as ruling over the kings of the earth ( revelation 17:18 ) ; ( b ) as sitting on seven mountains ( revelation 17:9 ) ; ( c ) as the center of the world 's merchandise ( revelation 18:3 , 11–13 ) ; ( d ) as the corrupter of the nations ( revelation 17:2 ; 18:3 ; 19:2 ) ; ( e ) as the persecutor of the saints ( revelation 17:6 ) . '' according to eusebius of caesarea babylon would be rome or the roman empire : '' and peter makes mention of mark in his first epistle which they say that he wrote in rome itself , as is indicated by him , when he calls the city , by a figure , babylon , as he does in the following words : « the church that is at babylon , elected together with you , salutes you ; and so does marcus my son . » ( 1 peter 5:13 ) '' . jerusalem . alan james beagley , david chilton , j . massyngberde ford , peter gaskell , kenneth gentry , edmondo lupieri , bruce malina , iain provan , j . stuart russell , milton s . terry alan james beagley , the 'stitz im leben ' of the apocalypse with particular reference to the role of the church 's enemies , 1987 , 92–108 david chilton , the days of vengeance : an exposition of the book of revelation , 1987 , 421–-66 josephine massyngberde-ford , '' revelation '' , ed , anchor bible , vol . 38 , 1975 , 283–286 peter gaskell , is she jewish ? is she roman ? the identity of the whore of babylon in the book of revelation , 2003 kenneth gentry , four views of revelation , 1998 , 73–79 edmondo lupieri , a commentary on the apocalypse of john , 2006 , 281 bruce malina , 1995 , 206–220 iain provan , '' foul spirits , fornication and finance : revelation 18 from an old testament perspective , '' jsnt , 64 , 1996 , 81–100 j . stuart russell , the parousia : a critical inquiry into the new testament doctrine of our lord 's second coming , 1887 , 482–98 milton s . terry , biblical apocalyptics : a study of the most notable revelations of god and of christ , 1898 , 426–39 point out that although rome was the prevailing pagan power in the 1st century , when the book of revelation was written , the symbolism of the whore of babylon refers not to an invading infidel or foreign power . it refers to an apostasy false queen , a former '' bride '' who has been infidelity and who , even though she has been divorced and cast out because of unfaithfulness , continues to falsely claim to be the '' queen '' of the spiritual realm . hunting the whore of babylon douglas connelly . '' the indispensable guide to practically everything : bible prophecy and end times '' . this symbolism did not fit the case of rome at the time . proponents of this view suggest that the '' seven mountains '' in rev 17:9 are the seven hills on which jerusalem stands and the '' fall of babylon '' in rev 18 is the fall and siege of jerusalem ( 70 ) . a commentary on the apocalypse of john , edmondo lupieri , p.7 several old testament prophets referred to jerusalem as being a spiritual harlot and a mother of such harlotry ( isaiah 1:21 ; jeremiah 2:20 ; 3:1–11 ; ezekiel 16:1–43 ; 23 , epistle to the galatians 4:25 ) . some of these old testament prophecies , as well as the warnings in the new testament concerning jerusalem , are in fact very close to the text concerning babylon in revelation . this suggests that john of patmos may well have actually been citing those prophecies in his description of babylon . for example , in matthew 23:34–37 and luke 11:47–51 , jesus himself assigned all of the bloodguilt for the killing of the prophets and of the saints ( of all time ) to the pharisees of jerusalem . in revelation 17:6 and 18:20,24 , almost identical phrasing is used in charging that very same bloodguilt to babylon . this is also bolstered by jesus ' statement that '' it 's not possible for a prophet to be killed outside of jerusalem . '' ( luke 13:33 ) . revelation 11:8 indicates that only jerusalem is being referenced allegorically as “ sodom ” and “ egypt ” ; “ where indeed their lord was crucified ” , corroborated therewith jesus christ 's statement in luke 13:33 . moreover , revelation 21:9–27 refers to “ the new jerusalem ” , whereas revelation 21:22 states , “ and i saw no temple therein : for the lord god almighty and the lamb are the temple of it . '' this contrasts with “ the synagogue of satan ” in revelation 3:9 . this coincides with st . stephen 's charge against the sanhedrin , in acts 7:43 , “ yea , ye took up the tabernacle of moloch , and the star of your god remphan , figures which ye made to worship them : and i will carry you away beyond babylon . ” . historicist and idealistic interpretations . catholic view . in the most common medieval ( catholic ) view , deriving from augustine of hippo 's the city of god ( early 5th century ) , babylon and jerusalem referred to two spiritual cities ( or civilizations ) which were spiritually at war with one another , throughout all of history : babylon from babel is interpreted confusion , jerusalem vision of peace . they are mingled , and from the very beginning of mankind mingled they run on unto the end of the world . two loves make up these two cities : love of god makes jerusalem , love of the world makes babylon . they also represented two principles at war with one another , inside each individual person , even inside seemingly worldly christian monarchs ; thus augustine could boast approvingly , '' . believing christian monarchs of this world came to the city of rome , as to the head of babylon : they went not to the temple of the emperor , but to the saint peter 's tomb . '' on the other hand , even seemingly religious popes could become so entangled in worldly pursuits as to constitute '' babylon '' , in dante 's eyes : dante alighieri equated the corruption and simony of the pontificate of pope boniface viii ( term 1294–1303 ) with the whore of babylon in canto 19 of his inferno : : di voi pastor s'accorse il vangelista , : quando colei che siede sopra l'acque : puttaneggiar coi regi a lui fu vista . : ( shepherds like you the evangelist had in mind when he saw the one that sits upon the waters committing fornication with the kings . ) . reformation view . historicist interpreters commonly used the phrase '' whore of babylon '' to refer to the catholic church . reformation writers martin luther ( 1483–1546 , author of on the babylonian captivity of the church ) , john calvin ( 1509–1564 ) , and john knox ( 1510–1572 , author of the first blast of the trumpet against the monstruous regiment of women ) taught this association . most early protestant reformers believed , and the modern seventh-day adventist church teaches , that in bible prophecy a woman represents a church . commentary on daniel and revelation . google books . keys to bible symbols see woman , pure and woman , corrupt on bottom of page '' i have likened the daughter of zion to a lovely and delicate woman . '' ( jeremiah 6:2 a harlot , it is argued , is representative of a church that has been unfaithful : : '' go , take yourself a wife of harlotry : and children of harlotry , : for the land has committed great harlotry : by departing from the . '' ( hosea 1:2 see also '' they have committed adultery with their idols '' ( ezekiel 23:37 ) . they also believed that the primary location of this unfaithful church is stated in the same chapter . : '' and the woman whom you saw is that great city which reigns over the kings of the earth . '' ( revelation 17:18 ) the connection noted above on the seven hills of rome is argued to locate the church . walvoord , john f . '' every prophecy of the bible '' . pg . 603–610 . lahaye , tim . '' revelation unveiled '' . pg . 262–271 . ( softcover ) . identification of the pope as the antichrist was written into protestant creeds such as the westminster confession of 1646 . the identification of the roman catholic church with the whore of babylon is kept in the scofield reference bible ( whose 1917 edition identified '' ecclesiastical babylon '' with '' apostate christendom headed by the papacy '' ) . an image from the 1545 edition of luther 's bible depicts the whore as wearing the papal tiara . . seventh-day adventist view . adventism believe that the whore of babylon represents the fallen state of traditional christianity , especially in the catholic church . other churches ( predominantly protestant ) are generally considered either part of the harlot or her daughters . adventists further hold that the persecution of the '' saints '' in revelation 17:6 represents the persecution of believers who rejected the doctrines introduced by the roman catholic church and were based on pagan roman beliefs . the persecution during the middle ages of anyone who opposed the catholic church , especially by the inquisition , and the persecution of the waldensians and the huguenots are cited as examples . seventh-day adventists interpret revelation 17:18 as a prophecy of the false church , which has power over the kings of the earth . they consider the pope to be in apostasy for allowing pagan rituals , beliefs and ceremonies to come into the church . they consider the papacy , as a continuation of the roman empire , as a fulfillment of : '' for the secret power of lawlessness is already at work ; but the one who now holds it back will continue to do so till he is taken out of the way . '' ellen g . white 's the great controversy ( 1858 ) states that '' spiritual babylon '' would have worldwide influence , affecting '' all nations '' , that imperial roman empire could not meet the criteria , as she wrote that it only had influence in the old world . like many reformation-era protestant leaders , her writings also describe the catholic church as a fallen church , and it plays a nefarious eschatological role as the antagonist against god 's true church and that the pope is the antichrist . . jehovah 's witnesses view . jehovah 's witnesses , whose early teachings were strongly influenced by adventism but have since diverged , believe that the whore of babylon represents '' the world empire of false religion '' , referring to all other religious groups including , but not limited to , christendom . the watchtower , april 15 , 1962 , p . 229 par . 6 watch tower bible and tract society of pennsylvania . '' christendom has failed god ! after her end , what ? '' jehovah 's witnesses literature frequently refers to the '' great harlot '' of babylon and the subsequent attack on her by the political powers , signaling the beginning of the '' great tribulation '' . the watchtower , october 15 , 1961 , p . 229 par . 6 . '' when all nations unite under god 's kingdom '' . watch tower bible and tract society of pennsylvania . they believe that the empire of false religion has persecuted god 's people , and that '' false religion '' has committed '' fornication '' with the world 's political and commercial elements , based on their interpretation of . what does the bible really teach ? p . 219 par . 2 p . 220 par . 3 . published by watch tower bible and tract society of pennsylvania . . latter-day saint view . the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) views the whore of babylon and its book of mormon equivalent , the '' great and abominable church '' , as having dominion over the entire earth and representing a singular group as well as groups of carnal individuals seeking wealth , sexual immorality , and the persecution or death of saints . the whore of babylon , or the devil 's church , consists of all organisations not associated or against all faithful people in christ . ultimately , the whore of babylon 's fate is to be destroyed in the last days . stephen e . robinson , '' warring against the saints of god '' , ensign , january 1988 . dennis a . wright , '' great and abominable church '' , encyclopedia of mormonism ( daniel h . ludlow ed . ) ( macmillan : new york , 1992 ) . . the family international view . the family international ( formerly known as '' the children of god '' ) believe the whore of babylon refers to the united states of america , apologetics index : the family international central issues in teaching new religious movements with founder and former leader david berg stating in one of his writings '' all mankind worships her & loves her & fucks her & has fornication & intercourse with her & bestows upon her everything they 've got & all their power & all ! that 's babylon ! including today 's babylon , america , the capitalist west & the communist east . '' homearc ml 1192goe america the whore . in popular culture . in fritz lang 's 1927 film metropolis , the protagonist freder has a vision of the whore of babylon arising before an avid audience of upper-class youths . in the lars von trier film nymphomaniac , the central character joe reminisces about a field trip as a young girl that suggests she had a vision of messalina and the whore of babylon looking over her as she levitates and spontaneously has her first orgasm . in the sixth season of dexter , season antagonist travis marshall – who is committing biblical-themed murders while 'guided ' by a hallucination of his dead professor that acts as a second personality – kills his sister lisa , in order for her to serve as the whore of babylon for his apocalyptic tableau in the episode '' sin of omission '' . in the fifth season of supernatural , when the protagonists must thwart the apocalypse after lucifer is released from hell , the episode '' 99 problems '' sees protagonists dean and sam winchester and their angel ally castiel arrive in a small town where a woman named leah gideon is presenting herself as a prophet of the lord , protecting the town from demons by performing exorcisms and encouraging the residents to turn against the 'sinners ' among them . castiel reveals that leah gideon is not a prophet as angels are aware of the names of all the prophets , identifying leah as the whore of babylon ( sam speculates that the real leah was killed months ago and the whore is now impersonating her ) , who will come bearing false prophecy and condemn those who follow her to hell . she can only be slain with a stake made from a cypress tree that grew in babylon when wielded by a true servant of heaven . the whore of babylon , referred to as '' the harlot '' and '' mother harlot '' , appears as a high level fiend race demon in the megami tensei series . she first appears in the updated version shin megami tensei : nocturne as an optional boss that guards the candelabrum of beauty . she also appears in the spinoff persona series . the whore of babylon is also referenced in the 1978 film , damien : omen ii . carl bugenhagen , played by leo mckern , takes a fellow archaeologist to a site to show him a painting , which proves that damien thorn is the antichrist . on their way , a statue of the whore is pointed out . shortly afterwards , the site collapses and both men are buried alive . at the end of the film , damian 's aunt ann , who raised him , is revealed to represent the whore of babylon by killing her husband to prevent him from killing damian while stating she always belonged to him . the whore of babylon is an upgrade in the game the binding of isaac : rebirth , as an item and starting item for the character eve the whore of babylon is referenced several times in the avenged sevenfold song '' the beast and the harlot '' . in the leonard cohen song '' is this what you wanted '' , he sings '' you were the whore and the beast of babylon '' . in the bright eyes song '' four winds '' , the whore of babylon is referenced in the song 's chorus . in the 2018 video game agony , the whore of babylon is referred to as the red goddess . she guides nimrod/amraphel ( the playable character ) through hell , often tormenting him with violent and deadly tactics . if certain conditions are met , one ending will show that the red goddess reveals herself as the whore of babylon . in the 2019 babylon novel series written by mado nozaki the main antagonist ai magase is alluded to as the whore of babylon in the third volume and also in the prologue to episode 11 of the animated series . in the 2009 underground rap song '' nuclear medicinemen '' released by la coka nostra , babylon the great is mentioned in the 4th verse : '' the severed heads of the dragon , the whore of babylon '' in the 2020 song by zheani , '' whore of babylon '' . it references the biblical story throughout the duration of the song .