Fancy rat

coloring . while some pet rats retain the agouti coloring of the wild brown rat ( three tones on the same hair ) , others have solid colors ( a single color on each hair ) , a trait derived from rats with black coats . agouti-based colors include agouti , cinnamon , and fawn . black-based colors include black , beige , blue , and chocolate . eye color is considered a subset of coloring , and coat color definitions often include standards for the eyes , as many genes which control eye color will also affect the coat color or vice versa . the american fancy rat and mouse association ( afrma ) lists black , pink , ruby , and odd-eyed ( two differently-colored eyes ) as possible eye colors , depending on the variety of rat shown . ruby refers to eyes which at a glance appear black , but which are on closer observation a deep , dark red . color names can vary for more vaguely defined varieties , like lilac and fawn , while the interpretations of standards can fluctuate between ( and even within ) different countries or clubs . . markings . further dividing the varieties of fancy rats are the many different markings . fancy rats can appear in any combination of colors and markings . the markings are typically in reference to the patterns and ratios of colored hair versus white hair . two extremes would be a self ( completely solid , non-white color ) and a himalayan ( completely white except blending into colored areas at the nose and feet , called points , as in a himalayan cat 's markings ) . markings have a strict standard , with detailed terminology , for showing in fancy rat pet shows . however , many domestic rats are not closely bred to any color standard ; many of those found in pet shops will have mismarkings from a formal breeding perspective , which are defined as variations in markings that are not recognized as conforming to a breed standard published by a rat fancier organisation . commonly recognized standards include : berkshire – colored top , white belly hooded – color runs in a saddle , a single , unbroken line from the full head down to the spine and possibly partly down the tail capped – color on the full head only blazed – colored head ( capped ) or body ( irish , berkshire or self ) with a triangular wedge of white fur over the face . variegated – any form of mismatched oddities in the fur . can be anything from a broken or spotted hood to a misshaped blaze . irish or english irish – in england , the irish is standardized by the nfrs as an equilateral triangle of white with a side that begins at the chest , or between the front legs , and where the point ends mid-length . in the united states and elsewhere , clubs like the afrma distinguish this marking as the english irish and allow for another standardized irish in which the rat may have white of an even or symmetrical nature anywhere along its underside . other marking varieties include spotted or dalmatian ( named for the spotted dalmatian dog ) , essex , masked , himalayan ( typically a gradient of color along the body , darkest at the base of the tail and nose as in siamese cats ) , and down under or downunder ( an australian variety which has a solid color stripe on the belly or a color marking there that corresponds to the markings on the top ) . . body type . two of the most prominent and standardized physical changes applied to rats through selective breeding are the development of the manx rat and dumbo rat . the dumbo rat , whose origins are in the united states , is characterized by having large , low , round ears on the sides of its head caused by a recessive mutation , and was named for its resemblance to the fictional character dumbo the flying elephant . the manx rat is tailless due to a genetic mutation , and was named for the manx cat which shares this feature , though not necessarily due to the same mutation . breeding manx rats does raise some ethical and health concerns however , as rats use their tails for both balance and thermoregulation . . coat types . there is a relatively small variety of coats in relation to the number of colors and markings , and not all are internationally standardized . the most common type is the normal or standard , which is allowed variance in coarseness between the sexes ; males have a coarse , thick , rough coat , while females ' coats are softer and finer . other standardized coats include : rex , in which all the hairs are curly , even the whiskers ; velveteen , a softer variation of the rex ; satin or silky coat , which is extra-soft and fine , with a sheen ; and harley , characterized by wispy long straight hairs . remaining coat types are not defined by the hair itself , but rather by the lack of it , such as hairless rats . hairless rats . hairless rats are a coat variety characterized by varying levels of hair loss . one type of hairless rat is bred from curly-coated rexes . these range from having areas of very short fur to being completely bald . since rex is a dominant trait , there only needs to be one rex parent to produce curly rex-coated offspring . however , when two rex parents are bred , two copies of the trait may be present in the offspring . this causes varying levels of hairlessness , and has earned the colloquial name '' double rex '' . the other type of hairless rat is sometimes referred to as a '' true hairless '' . this is caused by a different gene , and is distinguishable from a hairless double rex by the absence of whiskers . unlike a double rex , this type of hairless rat is incapable of growing hairs on any part of the body . one additional subset of semi-hairless rats , patchwork rex , constantly lose their hair and regrow it in different '' patches '' several times throughout their life . hairless rats may be prone to more health problems than their standard- or rex-coated counterparts , including a reduced tolerance for cold , kidney and liver failure , skin conditions , and shortened life span . ethics of selective breeding . there is controversy among rat fanciers in regard to selective breeding . on one hand , breeding rats to '' conform '' to a specific standard or to develop a new one is a large part of history . on the other hand , the process results in many rats who do not '' conform '' , and are then either given away , sold as food , or killed—the latter referred to as culling . there are concerns as to whether breeding hairless and tailless rats is ethical . the tail is vital for rats ' balance and for adjusting thermoregulation . tailless rats have greater risk of hyperthermia , poor bowel and bladder control , falling from heights , and can be at risk for life-threatening deformities in the pelvic region , like hind leg paralysis and megacolon . similarly , hairless rats are less protected from scratches and the cold without their coat . groups such as the nfrs prohibit the showing of these varieties at their events and forbid advertisement through affiliated services . . availability . because r . norvegicus and related species are seen as pests , their intentional import into foreign countries is often regulated . for example , the importation of foreign rodents is prohibited in australia , and so various coat types , colors , and varieties have been bred separately from foreign lines , or are just not obtainable within that country ( for example , hairless and dumbo rats do not exist in australia ) . in other areas , like the canadian province of alberta , which is considered rat-free , the ownership of domestic fancy rats outside of schools , laboratories , and zoos is illegal . . health . human-raised r . norvegicus are more prone to specific health risks and diseases than their wild counterparts , but they are also far less likely to succumb to certain illnesses that are prevalent in the wild . the major considerations for susceptibility include exposure , living conditions , and diet . rats that live their entire lives indoors usually are able to avoid disease-causing bacteria such as salmonella and pseudomonas aeruginosa ; the latter is absent in treated water . they may also more easily avoid vectors like cockroaches , beetles , and fleas which are essential for the spread of endemic typhus and intestinal parasites like the rat tapeworm . additionally , pet or laboratory rats enjoy the intrinsic benefits of having a consistent and well-balanced diet , along with access to medical care . porphyrin is a browny-red substance which fancy rats can develop around the eyes and nose . it may appear like dried blood , but is a mucus-like substance which is released at times of stress or if the rat has a respiratory infection . it can also be caused by temporary irritation in the eye such as the rat accidentally scratching its eye while grooming . while living indoors decreases the risk of contracting certain diseases , living in close quarters with other rats , being unable to always seek proper protection from environmental factors ( e.g . temperature , humidity ) , being fed an unhealthy diet , and the stresses inherently associated with living in an unnatural habitat can all adversely affect a rat 's health to make them more prone to specific conditions . specifically , tyzzer 's disease , protozoic infections ( e.g . giardia muris ) , and pseudotuberculosis are usually seen in stressed or young rats . additionally , pet rats are exposed to streptococcus pneumoniae , a zoonotic disease caught from humans , not the same bacteria associated with pneumonia . a human-associated fungus , pneumocystis carinii ( also found in almost all domesticated animals ) is usually asymptomatic in the rat , unless the rat 's immune system is compromised by illness . if this occurs the infection can develop into pneumonia . several diseases , like rat coronavirus infection ( rci ) , sendai virus , and murine respiratory mycoplasmosis ( mrm , mycoplasma ) , are prevalent simply because their highly contagious natures work in tandem with the way rats are kept in laboratories , pet stores , and by breeders . mrm is far less likely to occur in laboratory rats than in those kept as pets . pet rats can also develop pituitary tumors if they are given high-calorie diets , and ringtail if they are placed in areas with low humidity or high temperatures . staphylococcus spp . are a mostly benign group of bacteria that commonly reside on the top of the skin , but cuts and scratches from social and hierarchical fighting can open up the pathways for them to cause ulcerative dermatitis . there is some evidence that spayed female rats ( '' does '' ) are less likely to develop mammary and pituitary tumors than non-spayed females . research into prevention of common diseases and health issues in rats is on-going . dietary changes are among the main suggestions for improved health and longevity in fancy rats , such suggestions included are feeding rat-friendly superfoods in moderation to reduce the risk of cancers , heart disease and stroke . risks to owners . keeping rats as pets can come with the stigma that rats supposedly transmit dangerous diseases to their owners . one fear is that all rats carry plague , when in fact r . norvegicus is not among the list of species considered a threat . in 2004 , an outbreak of salmonella in the united states was connected to people who owned pet rats . however , it has been determined that a pet rat 's initial exposure to salmonella , along with many other zoonotic rat diseases , typically indicates exposure to wild rodent populations , either from an infestation in the owner 's home , or from the pet 's contaminated food , water , or bedding . another risk to rat owners is rat-bite fever . this is a rare disease among domesticated rats and is most often found in rats from large chain pet stores who breed their stock of rats in masses ( usually with the intention of being snake food rather than pets ) or from breeders who fail to take good care of their rats . this disease is fairly unnoticeable in the rat , but is characterized by the swelling of the site of the bite or scratch where it was contracted , a fever , vomiting and body aches . it is contracted by being bitten or scratched by an infected rat . in 2017 , the centers for disease control reported an outbreak of seoul virus spread by pet rats . . fiction . in fiction , pet brown rats are often depicted as tamed rather than domesticated , akin to when a character befriends a wolf . as tamed pets , they have been portrayed in roles that vary from evil to ambiguous to lovable . samantha martin , a professional animal trainer for films , commercials , and music videos , has claimed that rats are one of the easiest animals to train due to their adaptability , intelligence , and focus . in flushed away , roddy st . james is a pampered pet fancy rat in a posh kensington flat . in the direct-to-video sequels to the 1987 film the brave little toaster , the brave little toaster to the rescue and the brave little toaster goes to mars , ratso is the pet rat of rob mcgroarty . the novella ratman 's notebooks by stephen gilbert was the basis for the films willard ( 1971 ) and ben ( 1972 ) , and a willard ( 2003 film ) . here , the protagonist befriends the rats found in his home and builds up a close relationship , only to have it end tragically . while these movies generally emphasize the popular perception of malevolence —they kill people and cats and ransack grocery stores—other wild rats who become pets are portrayed in more neutral to positive ways ; the television show , house , briefly featured '' steve mcqueen '' , the pet rat of the titular character . in certain versions of the teenage mutant ninja turtles franchise , the master and adoptive father of the turtles is splinter , who was once the pet rat of ninja hamato yoshi and learned his martial arts skills by imitating his owner . in the 1996 point-and-click adventure game phantasmagoria : a puzzle of flesh , the protagonist curtis craig owns a pet rat named blob , which is seen various times in the game and is even involved in one of the many puzzles that the player must decipher . pet rats are unofficially allowed at hogwarts school of witchcraft and wizardry in the harry potter series , but are not generally seen as desirable pets . ron weasley 's pet rat scabbers is eventually revealed to be a magically transformed human in league with the main villain .