Transcendentalism

origin . transcendentalism is closely related to unitarianism , the dominant religious movement in boston in the early nineteenth century . it started to develop after unitarianism took hold at harvard university , following the elections of henry ware as the hollis professor of divinity in 1805 and of john thornton kirkland as president in 1810 . transcendentalism was not a rejection of unitarianism ; rather , it developed as an organic consequence of the unitarian emphasis on free conscience and the value of intellectual reason . the transcendentalists were not content with the sobriety , mildness , and calm rationalism of unitarianism . instead , they longed for a more intense spiritual experience . thus , transcendentalism was not born as a counter-movement to unitarianism , but as a parallel movement to the very ideas introduced by the unitarians . . transcendental club . transcendentalism became a coherent movement and a sacred organization with the founding of the transcendental club in cambridge , massachusetts , on september 8 , 1836 , by prominent new england intellectuals , including george putnam ( unitarian minister ) , ralph waldo emerson , and frederic henry hedge . other members of the club included amos bronson alcott , orestes brownson , theodore parker , henry david thoreau , william henry channing , james freeman clarke , christopher pearse cranch , convers francis , sylvester judd , and jones very . female members included sophia ripley , margaret fuller , elizabeth peabody , ellen sturgis hooper , and caroline sturgis tappan . from 1840 , the group frequently published in their journal the dial , along with other venues . second wave of transcendentalists . by the late 1840s , emerson believed that the movement was dying out , and even more so after the death of margaret fuller in 1850 . '' all that can be said , '' emerson wrote , '' is that she represents an interesting hour and group in american cultivation . '' . there was , however , a second wave of transcendentalists , including moncure conway , octavius brooks frothingham , samuel longfellow and franklin benjamin sanborn . . notably , the transcendence of the spirit , most often evoked by the poet 's prosaic voice , is said to endow in the reader a sense of purpose . this is the underlying theme in the majority of transcendentalist essays and papers—all of which are centered on subjects which assert a love for individual expression . stevenson , martin k . '' empirical analysis of the american transcendental movement '' . new york , ny : penguin , 2012:303 . though the group was mostly made up of struggling aesthetes , the wealthiest among them was samuel gray ward , who , after a few contributions to the dial , focused on his banking career . wayne , tiffany . encyclopedia of transcendentalism : the essential guide to the lives and works of transcendentalist writers . new york : facts on file , 2006 : 308 . . beliefs . transcendentalists are strong believers in the power of the individual . it is primarily concerned with personal freedom . their beliefs are closely linked with those of the romantics , but differ by an attempt to embrace or , at least , to not oppose the empiricism of science . transcendental knowledge . transcendentalists desire to ground their religion and philosophy in principles based upon the german romanticism of johann gottfried herder and friedrich schleiermacher . transcendentalism merged '' english and german romanticism , the biblical criticism of herder and schleiermacher , the skepticism of hume '' , and the transcendental philosophy of immanuel kant ( and of german idealism more generally ) , interpreting kant 's a priori categories as a priori knowledge . early transcendentalists were largely unacquainted with german philosophy in the original and relied primarily on the writings of thomas carlyle , samuel taylor coleridge , victor cousin , germaine de staël , and other english and french commentators for their knowledge of it . the transcendental movement can be described as an american outgrowth of english romanticism . individualism . transcendentalists believe that society and its institutions—particularly organized religion and political parties—corrupt the purity of the individual . they have faith that people are at their best when truly '' self-reliant '' and independent . it is only from such real individuals that true community can form . even with this necessary individuality , transcendentalists also believe that all people are outlets for the '' over-soul . '' because the over-soul is one , this unites all people as one being . emerson alludes to this concept in the introduction of the american scholar address , '' that there is one man , - present to all particular men only partially , or through one faculty ; and that you must take the whole society to find the whole man . '' such an ideal is in harmony with transcendentalist individualism , as each person is empowered to behold within him or herself a piece of the divine over-soul . indian religions . transcendentalism has been directly influenced by indian religions . thoreau in walden spoke of the transcendentalists ' debt to indian religions directly : in 1844 , the first english translation of the lotus sutra was included in the dial , a publication of the new england transcendentalists , translated from french by elizabeth peabody . . idealism . transcendentalists differ in their interpretations of the practical aims of will . some adherents link it with utopian social change ; brownson , for example , connected it with early socialism , but others consider it an exclusively individualist and idealist project . emerson believed the latter . in his 1842 lecture '' the transcendentalist '' , he suggested that the goal of a purely transcendental outlook on life was impossible to attain in practice : . importance of nature . transcendentalists have a deep gratitude and appreciation for nature , not only for aesthetic purposes , but also as a tool to observe and understand the structured inner workings of the natural world . emerson emphasizes the transcendental beliefs in the holistic power of the natural landscape in nature : in the woods , we return to reason and faith . there i feel that nothing can befall me in life , — no disgrace , no calamity , ( leaving me my eyes , ) which nature can not repair . standing on the bare ground , — my head bathed by the blithe air , and uplifted into infinite space , — all mean egotism vanishes . i become a transparent eye-ball ; i am nothing ; i see all ; the currents of the universal being circulate through me ; i am part or particle of god . the conservation of an undisturbed natural world is also extremely important to the transcendentalists . the idealism that is a core belief of transcendentalism results in an inherent skepticism of capitalism , manifest destiny , and industrialization . as early as 1843 , in summer on the lakes , margaret fuller noted that '' the noble trees are gone already from this island to feed this caldron , '' and in 1854 , in walden , thoreau regards the trains which are beginning to spread across america 's landscape as a '' winged horse or fiery dragon '' that '' sprinkles all the restless men and floating merchandise in the country for seed . '' . influence on other movements . transcendentalism is , in many aspects , the first notable american intellectual movement . it has inspired succeeding generations of american intellectuals , as well as some literary movements . coviello , peter . '' transcendentalism '' the oxford encyclopedia of american literature . oxford university press , 2004 . oxford reference online . web . 23 oct . 2011 transcendentalism influenced the growing movement of '' mental sciences '' of the mid-19th century , which would later become known as the new thought movement . new thought considers emerson its intellectual father . . emma curtis hopkins ( '' the teacher of teachers '' ) , ernest holmes ( founder of religious science ) , charles and myrtle fillmore ( founders of unity ) , and malinda cramer and nona l . brooks ( founders of divine science ) were all greatly influenced by transcendentalism . . transcendentalism also influenced hinduism . ram mohan roy ( 1772–1833 ) , the founder of the brahmo samaj , rejected hindu mythology , but also the christian trinity . he found that unitarianism came closest to true christianity , and had a strong sympathy for the unitarians , who were closely connected to the transcendentalists . ram mohan roy founded a missionary committee in calcutta , and in 1828 asked for support for missionary activities from the american unitarians . by 1829 , roy had abandoned the unitarian committee , but after roy 's death , the brahmo samaj kept close ties to the unitarian church , who strived towards a rational faith , social reform , and the joining of these two in a renewed religion . its theology was called '' neo-vedanta '' by christian commentators , and has been highly influential in the modern popular understanding of hinduism , but also of modern western spirituality , which re-imported the unitarian influences in the disguise of the seemingly age-old neo-vedanta . major figures . major figures in the transcendentalist movement were ralph waldo emerson , henry david thoreau , margaret fuller , and amos bronson alcott . some other prominent transcendentalists included louisa may alcott , charles timothy brooks , orestes brownson , william ellery channing , william henry channing , james freeman clarke , christopher pearse cranch , john sullivan dwight , convers francis , william henry furness , frederic henry hedge , sylvester judd , theodore parker , elizabeth palmer peabody , george ripley , thomas treadwell stone , jones very , christopher mccandless and walt whitman . gura , philip f . american transcendentalism : a history . new york : hill and wang , 2007 : 7–8 . . criticism . early in the movement 's history , the term '' transcendentalists '' was used as a pejorative term by critics , who were suggesting their position was beyond sanity and reason . . nathaniel hawthorne wrote a novel , the blithedale romance ( 1852 ) , satirizing the movement , and based it on his experiences at brook farm , a short-lived utopian community founded on transcendental principles . . edgar allan poe wrote a story , '' never bet the devil your head '' ( 1841 ) , in which he embedded elements of deep dislike for transcendentalism , calling its followers '' frogpondians '' after the pond on boston common . . the narrator ridiculed their writings by calling them '' metaphor-run '' lapsing into '' mysticism for mysticism 's sake '' , and called it a '' disease . '' the story specifically mentions the movement and its flagship journal the dial , though poe denied that he had any specific targets . . in poe 's essay '' the philosophy of composition '' ( 1846 ) , he offers criticism denouncing '' the excess of the suggested meaning . which turns into prose ( and that of the very flattest kind ) the so-called poetry of the so-called transcendentalists . '' . . see also . dark romanticism freemasonry immanentism self-transcendence transcendence ( religion ) fruitlands the machine in the garden