Hannibal Lecter

inspiration . , for killing three people . simmons had been shot by a prison guard and treated by a skilled prison doctor whom harris referred to as '' dr salazar '' . when harris interviewed salazar , salazar questioned harris about simmons 's victims and disfigurement and the nature of torment . harris described him as a '' small , lithe man with dark red hair '' who '' stood very still '' with '' a certain elegance about him '' . the prison guard later told harris that salazar was a murderer who could '' package his victim in a surprisingly small box '' . salazar inspired harris to create a character with a '' peculiar understanding of the criminal mind '' . salazar is believed to be alfredo ballí treviño , the last criminal condemned to the death sentence in mexico , in 1959 . ballí was a physician from an upper-class monterrey family who murdered his friend and lover jesus castillo rangel and mutilated his body . he was also suspected of killing and dismembering several hitchhikers in the countryside during the late 1950s and early 1960s . harris also incorporated some of these details into buffalo bill 's development as a killer in silence of the lambs . ballí 's sentence was commuted to 20 years and he was released in 1981 . after his release , ballí continued working as a physician in an austere office until his death in 2009 . in her book evil serial killers , charlotte greig asserts lecter was inspired at least in part by the serial killer albert fish . greig also states that , to explain lecter 's pathology , harris borrowed the possibly apocryphal story of serial killer and cannibal andrei chikatilo 's brother stepan being kidnapped and eaten by starving neighbors . grieg , pg . 102 the location of the book hannibal was inspired by the monster of florence . while preparing the book , harris traveled to italy and was present at the trial of the main suspect , pietro pacciani , where he was seen taking notes . . character . hannibal lecter is a serial killer who cannibalism . he is highly intelligent , with refined tastes and '' impeccable '' manners . he is deeply offended by rudeness , and often kills people who exhibit bad manners ; according to the novel hannibal , he '' prefers to eat the rude '' . hopkins described lecter as '' robin hood of killers '' , who kills '' the terminally rude '' . in the novel red dragon , protagonist will graham says that psychologists refer to lecter as a sociopath '' because they do n't know what else to call him '' . graham claims that '' he has no remorse or guilt at all '' , and zoosadism as a child , but he does not exhibit any of the other criteria traditionally associated with sociopathy . asked how he himself would describe lecter , graham responds , '' he 's a monster '' , implying that lecter 's mind is somehow '' incomplete '' in the same way that some babies are born with missing limbs or non-functioning organs . in the silence of the lambs , lecter 's keeper , dr . frederick chilton , claims that lecter is a '' pure sociopath '' ( '' pure psychopath '' in the film adaptation ) . in the film adaptation of the silence of the lambs , protagonist clarice starling says of lecter , '' they don ’ t have a name for what he is . '' lecter 's pathology is explored in greater detail in hannibal and hannibal rising , which explains that he was traumatized as a child in lithuania in 1944 when he witnessed the murder and eating of his beloved sister , mischa , by a group of deserting lithuanian hilfswillige , one of whom claimed that lecter unwittingly ate his sister as well . all media in which lecter appears portray him as intellectually brilliant , cultured and sophisticated , with refined tastes in art , music and cuisine . he is frequently depicted preparing gourmet meals from his victims ' flesh , the most famous example being his admission that he once ate a census taker 's liver '' with some fava beans and a nice chianti '' ( a '' big amarone '' in the novel ) . prior to his capture and imprisonment , he was a member of baltimore , maryland 's social elite , and a sitting member of the baltimore philharmonic orchestra 's board of directors . in the silence of the lambs , lecter is described through starling 's eyes : '' she could see that he was small , sleek ; in his hands and arms she saw wiry strength like her own . '' the novel also reveals that lecter 's left hand has a rare condition called mid-ray duplication polydactyly , i.e . a duplicated middle finger . in hannibal , he performs plastic surgery on his own face on several occasions , and removes his extra digit . lecter 's eyes are a shade of maroon , and reflect the light in '' pinpoints of red '' . he has small white teeth and dark , slicked-back hair with a widow 's peak . he also has a keen sense of smell ; in red dragon , he immediately recognizes will graham 's old spice , and in the silence of the lambs , he is able to identify through a plexiglass window with small holes the brand of perfume that starling wore the day before . he has an eidetic memory with which he has constructed in his mind an elaborate '' memory palace '' with which he relives memories and sensations in rich detail . anthony hopkins , the actor most closely identified with the character , said he played lecter as '' ultra sane , very still . he has such terrifying physical power , and he does n't waste an ounce of energy . he 's so contained . he ’ s all brain . '' his performance was inspired by hal 9000 from stanley kubrick 's 2001 : a space odyssey . critic roger ebert elaborated on this comparison : '' he is a dispassionate , brilliant machine , superb at logic , deficient in emotions . '' in the same essay , ebert theorized : one key to the film 's appeal is that audiences like hannibal lecter.he may be a cannibal , but as a dinner party guest he would give value for money ( if he did n't eat you ) . he does not bore , he likes to amuse , he has his standards , and he is the smartest person in the movie.he bears comparison , indeed , with such other movie monsters as nosferatu , frankenstein.king kong and norman bates . they have two things in common : they behave according to their natures , and they are misunderstood . nothing that these monsters do is '' evil '' in any conventional moral sense , because they lack any moral sense . they are hard-wired to do what they do . they have no choice . in the areas where they do have choice , they try to do the right thing . ebert , pg . 419 according to the guardian , before the silence of the lambs , films portrayed psychopathic killers as '' claw-handed bogeymen with melty faces and rubber masks . by contrast , lecter was highly intelligent with impeccable manners . '' . appearances . novels . . red dragon . in the backstory of the 1981 novel red dragon , fbi profiler will graham interviews lecter about one of his patients who was murdered by a serial killer , before intuiting that lecter is the culprit ; he sees the antique medical diagram “ wound man ” in lecter ’ s office , and remembers that the victim suffered the same injuries depicted in the drawing . realizing that graham is on to him , lecter creeps up behind graham and stabs him with a linoleum knife , nearly disemboweling him . graham survives , but is so traumatized by the incident that he takes early retirement from the fbi . lecter is charged with a series of nine murders , but is found not guilty by reason of insanity . he is institutionalized in the baltimore state hospital for the criminally insane under the care of dr . frederick chilton , a pompous , incompetent psychiatrist whom he despises , and who subjects him to a series of petty cruelties . some years later , graham comes out of retirement and consults lecter in order to catch another serial killer , francis dolarhyde , known by the nickname '' the tooth fairy '' . through the classifieds of a tabloid called the national tattler , lecter provides dolarhyde with graham 's home address ; dolarhyde later uses this information to break into graham ’ s home , stab him in the face , and threaten his family before graham ’ s wife molly shoots him dead . at the end of the novel , lecter sends graham a letter , saying that he hopes graham '' won ’ t be very ugly '' . the silence of the lambs . in the 1988 sequel the silence of the lambs , lecter assists fbi agent-in-training clarice starling in catching a serial killer , jame gumb , known by the nickname '' buffalo bill '' . lecter is fascinated by starling , and they form an unusual relationship in which he provides her with a profile of the killer and his modus operandi in exchange for details about her unhappy childhood . lecter had previously met gumb , the former lover of his patient ( and eventual victim ) benjamin raspail . he does not reveal this information directly , instead giving starling vague clues to help her figure it out for herself . in return for lecter 's assistance , the fbi and chilton arrange for him to be transferred to a lower security facility , far away from chilton . lecter escapes while in transit , however , killing and mutilating his guards and using one of their faces as a mask to fool police and paramedics before killing the latter and escaping . while in hiding , he writes one letter to starling wishing her well , a second to barney ( his primary orderly at the asylum ) , thanking him for his courteous treatment , and a third to chilton , promising gruesome revenge ; chilton disappears soon afterward . hannibal . in the third novel , 1999 's hannibal , lecter lives in a palazzo in florence , italy , and works as a museum curator under the alias '' dr . fell '' . one of lecter ’ s two surviving victims , mason verger - a wealthy , sadistic pedophile whom lecter had brutalized during a court-ordered therapy session , leaving him a horrifically disfigured quadriplegic - offers a huge reward for anyone who apprehends lecter , whom he intends to feed to wild boars specially bred for the purpose . verger enlists the help of rinaldo pazzi , a disgraced italian police inspector , and paul krendler , a corrupt justice department official and starling 's boss . lecter kills pazzi and returns to the united states to escape verger 's sardinian henchmen , only to be captured . starling follows them , intent on apprehending lecter personally , and is injured in a gunfight with verger 's henchmen . lecter escapes , thanks to starling 's help , and persuades verger 's younger sister margot – his former patient , whom verger had molested and raped years earlier – to kill her brother , promising to take the blame . lecter rescues the wounded starling and takes her to his rented house on the chesapeake shore to treat her , subjecting her to a regimen of mind-altering drugs in the course of therapy sessions to help her heal from her childhood trauma and her pent-up anger at the injustices of the world . he considers whether his long-dead younger sister mischa may somehow be able to live again through starling . one day , he invites her to a formal dinner where the guest and first course is krendler , whose brain they consume together . on this night , starling refuses to let her personality be subsumed , telling lecter that mischa 's memory can live within him . she then offers him her breast , and they become lovers . three years later , former orderly barney , who had treated lecter with respect while he was incarcerated in baltimore , sees lecter and starling entering the teatro colón opera house in buenos aires . fearing for his life , barney leaves buenos aires immediately , never to return . the reader then learns that lecter and starling are living together in an '' exquisite '' beaux arts mansion , where they employ servants and engage in activities such as learning new languages and dancing together and building their own respective method of loci , and is told that '' sex is a splendid structure they add to every day '' , that the mind-altering drugs '' have had no part in their lives for a long time '' , and that lecter is '' satisfied '' with the fact that mischa can not return . hannibal rising . harris wrote a 2006 prequel , hannibal rising , after film producer dino de laurentiis ( who owned the cinematic rights to the lecter character ) announced an intended film project depicting lecter 's childhood and development into a serial killer with or without harris ' help . harris would also write the film 's screenplay . the novel chronicles lecter 's early life , from his birth into an aristocratic family in lithuania in 1933 , to being orphaned , along with his beloved younger sister mischa , in 1944 when a nazi stuka bomber attacks a soviet tank in front of their forest hideaway . shortly thereafter , he and mischa are captured by a band of nazi collaborators , who murder and cannibalize mischa before her brother 's eyes ; lecter later learns that the collaborators also fed him mischa 's remains . irreparably traumatized , lecter escapes from the deserters and wanders through the forest , dazed and unable to speak . he is found and taken back to his family 's old castle , which had been converted into a soviet orphanage , where he is bullied by the other children and abused by the dean . he is adopted by his uncle robert and robert 's japanese wife , lady murasaki , who nurses him back to health and teaches him to speak again . robert dies shortly after adopting lecter , who forms a close , pseudo-romantic relationship with his aunt . during this time he also shows great intellectual aptitude , entering medical school at a young age and distinguishing himself . despite his seemingly comfortable life , lecter is consumed by a savage obsession with avenging mischa 's death . he kills for the first time as a teenager , beheading a racism fishmonger who insulted murasaki . he then methodically tracks down , tortures , and murders each of the men who had killed his sister . in the process of taking his revenge , he forsakes his relationship with murasaki and seemingly loses all traces of his humanity . the novel ends with lecter being accepted to johns hopkins hospital . in film . red dragon was first adapted to film in 1986 as the michael mann film manhunter , although the spelling of lecter 's name was changed to '' lecktor '' . he was played by actor brian cox . cox based his performance on scottish serial killer peter manuel . in 1991 , orion pictures produced a jonathan demme-directed adaptation of the silence of the lambs , in which lecter was played by actor anthony hopkins . hopkins ' academy award-winning performance made lecter into a cultural icon . in 2001 , hannibal was adapted to film , with hopkins reprising his role . in the film adaptation , the ending is revised : starling attempts to apprehend lecter , who escapes after cutting off his own hand to free himself from her handcuffs . in 2002 , red dragon was adapted again , this time red dragon ( 2002 film ) , with hopkins again as lecter and edward norton as will graham . hopkins wrote a screenplay for another sequel , ending with starling killing lecter . in 2016 , hopkins said , '' i made the mistake of doing two more hannibal lecter movies and i should have only done one . '' in late 2006 , the novel hannibal rising was adapted into a film , which portrayed lecter 's development into a serial killer . in the film , which was finished by 2007 , eight-year-old lecter is portrayed by aaran thomas , while gaspard ulliel portrays him as a young man . both the novel and film , as well as ulliel ’ s performance as lecter , received generally negative reviews . . in television . in february 2012 , nbc gave a series order to hannibal , a television adaptation of red dragon to be written and executive-produced by bryan fuller . mads mikkelsen plays lecter , opposite hugh dancy as will graham . fuller commented on mikkelsen 's version of lecter : '' what i love about mads ' approach to the character is that , in our first meeting , he was adamant that he did n't want to do hopkins or cox . he talked about the character not so much as 'hannibal lecter the cannibal psychiatrist ' , but as satan – this fallen angel who 's enamoured with mankind and had an affinity for who we are as people , but was definitely not among us – he was other . i thought that was a really cool , interesting approach , because i love science fiction and horror and – not that we 'd ever do anything deliberately to suggest this – but having it subtextually play as him being lucifer felt like a really interesting kink to the series . it was slightly different than anything that 's been done before and it also gives it a slightly more epic quality if you watch the show through the prism of , 'this is satan at work , tempting someone with the apple of their psyche ' . it appealed to all of those genre things that get me excited about any sort of entertainment . '' . season 1 . the first season amends the series ' continuity so that graham and lecter first work together during the hunt for garrett jacob hobbs ( vladimir jon cubrt ) , the '' minnesota shrike '' , a serial killer who preys on college girls . during the investigation , lecter secretly calls hobbs to tip him off that graham is on to him , just to see what hobbs will do . as a result , hobbs turns on his own family , killing his wife and trying to kill his daughter abigail ( kacey rohl ) as graham charges in and shoots him dead . killing hobbs weighs on graham 's conscience and gives him nightmares , so his boss jack crawford ( laurence fishburne ) sends him to lecter for counseling . throughout the first season , lecter acts as graham 's unofficial psychiatrist , and they form a tenuous friendship . lecter and graham also become father figures to abigail , and cover for her when they discover that she was her father 's unwilling accomplice . lecter is fascinated by graham 's ability to empathize with psychopaths , and he spends much of the series trying to undermine graham 's fragile sanity and push him into becoming a killer . to this end , lecter prevents graham from learning that he has advanced encephalitis , just to see how graham would function under the circumstances . in the first-season finale , lecter reluctantly frames graham for a series of murders that he himself committed throughout the season – including , apparently , abigail 's – but not before graham realizes that lecter is the “ chesapeake ripper ” , the very serial killer he has been trying to catch . . season 2 . throughout the beginning of the second season , graham , who is now institutionalized , attempts to convince his skeptical former colleagues that lecter is the real killer and begins pulling strings from within his cell in order to expose him . meanwhile , lecter begins to manipulate evidence from the outside , exonerating himself after the fbi 's initial investigations into graham 's claims . eventually , graham persuades his friend and colleague beverly katz ( hettienne park ) , a forensic scientist , to investigate lecter in exchange for help on a case . she breaks into lecter 's house , where she finds evidence of his guilt . lecter catches her , however , and kills her ; he then sections her body vertically and displays it in tableau . angry and vengeful , graham convinces deranged hospital orderly matthew brown ( jonathan tucker ) to try to kill lecter , but lecter gets the better of brown and kills him . lecter retaliates by taking as his lover alana bloom ( caroline dhavernas ) , a psychologist for whom graham has romantic feelings . lecter then exonerates graham by planting forensic evidence of graham 's alleged victims at the scene of one of his own murders , resulting in graham 's release . he also frames his colleague frederick chilton ( raúl esparza ) by planting a mutilated corpse in his house and '' influencing '' his surviving victim miriam lass ( anna chlumsky ) , into believing that chilton had abducted and tortured her . graham resumes therapy with lecter as an attempt to entrap him . lecter is aware of the ruse , but is fascinated by the experience and allows it to continue in an attempt to examine his connection with graham . in an attempt to push graham into becoming a killer , lecter sends his psychotic former patient randall tier ( mark o'brien ) after him , and graham kills and mutilates tier – just as lecter hoped he would . later , graham attacks tabloid reporter freddy lounds ( lara jean chorostecki ) , who is investigating him and lecter . graham shares a meal with lecter of what is implied to be her flesh , but it is soon revealed that lounds is still alive and conspiring with graham and crawford to draw lecter into their trap . lecter and graham acquire a common enemy in mason verger ( michael pitt ) , a wealthy sadist whom they both despise for emotionally and sexually abusing his twin sister , and lecter ’ s patient , margot ( katharine isabelle ) . verger briefly enters therapy with lecter to find out what margot is saying about him , but soon kidnaps lecter and graham , intent on feeding them both to his prize pigs . they both escape , however , and lecter takes verger hostage in graham 's house . lecter gives mason a hallucinogenic drug cocktail , and tells him to cut off pieces of his own face and feed them to graham 's dogs . with graham 's tacit approval , lecter then breaks verger 's neck with his bare hands , paralyzing him from the neck down . in the second-season finale , crawford arrives at lecter 's house to arrest him . in the ensuing struggle , lecter seriously wounds crawford , while a very much alive abigail hobbs pushes bloom out of a window . lecter then stabs graham and cuts abigail 's throat in front of him , and flees before the police arrive . he is shown in a post-credits scene aboard a flight to france with his psychiatrist , bedelia du maurier ( gillian anderson ) . . season 3 . the third season amends the series ' continuity to incorporate events from the novels red dragon and hannibal . it also changes lecter 's origin story : in this continuity , lecter 's sister mischa was murdered , cannibalized , and fed to him by a peasant in his native lithuania ; lecter eventually made the peasant his prisoner . certain episodes also suggest that , in his youth , lecter was the unidentified serial killer known as the '' monster of florence '' . months after his escape , lecter is living in florence with du maurier , working as a museum curator under the alias '' dr . fell '' – having murdered the original curator and stolen his identity . disgraced italian detective rinaldo pazzi ( fortunato cerlino ) tries to apprehend him to collect a bounty placed by mason verger ( joe anderson ) , who is also consulting with bloom to capture lecter . lecter kills pazzi and tries to flee the country , but is accosted by crawford , who engages him in brutal hand-to-hand combat . meanwhile , graham goes looking for lecter with the help of the doctor 's family servant chiyoh ( tao okamoto ) , traveling to his adversary 's home country to find out more about him . lecter manages to escape from crawford and meet up with graham when he arrives in italy again . graham makes peace with lecter before pulling a knife on him , but chiyoh shoots and wounds graham . lecter takes graham back to his villa and tries to perform a craniotomy on him in front of crawford , but is interrupted by italian detectives on mason ’ s payroll , who deliver them both to his estate in maryland . mason ’ s physician cordell doemling ( glenn fleshler ) tells lecter that he will mutilate him until he dies , and prepare gourmet cuisine from his flesh for mason to eat . influenced by graham , bloom frees lecter , who suggests that margot kill her brother , promising to take the blame . lecter then kills doemling , who is about to surgically remove graham 's face and graft it onto mason 's , and later instructs margot and bloom on how to “ milk ” the unconscious mason 's prostate to give margot the sperm she needs to conceive a child and thus inherit the verger family fortune . after margot kills her brother , lecter goes to graham 's house , carrying the wounded and unconscious graham . when graham wakes up , he allows lecter to escape , claiming that he never wants to see him again . to spite graham , lecter surrenders to crawford later that evening and is taken into custody . lecter is found insane at his trial , and incarcerated in the baltimore hospital for the criminally insane , under chilton and bloom 's care . three years later , graham visits him at the hospital to ask for help in profiling a serial killer dubbed '' the tooth fairy '' , who murders entire families . lecter begins communicating with the killer , francis dolarhyde ( richard armitage ) , and gives him graham 's home address . dolarhyde attacks and wounds graham 's wife , molly ( nina arianda ) . bloom and crawford threaten to take away lecter 's hospital privileges unless he lets them listen in on his conversations with dolarhyde . lecter complies , but then suddenly tells dolarhyde they are listening . bloom punishes him by taking away his books and toilet seat , and confining him in a straitjacket and muzzle . graham , in an attempt to make dolarhyde come out of hiding , gives an interview with chilton and lounds in which he describes '' the tooth fairy '' as ugly , impotent , and a product of incest . dolarhyde , enraged by the '' bad review '' , abducts , burns and disfigures chilton , and sends lecter chilton 's severed lips , one of which lecter eats . in the series finale , '' the wrath of the lamb '' , lecter and graham develop a plan to catch dolarhyde , using lecter as bait . lecter goes with graham on a police convoy , to be transferred to another facility in order to eventually draw the killer out . however , graham has made a deal with dolarhyde to free lecter , and dolarhyde attacks the convoy , killing the guards and letting lecter and graham live . lecter then takes graham to a secluded clifftop cottage where he previously held abigail hobbs and miriam lass . dolarhyde tracks them down and attacks them , shooting lecter in the back and stabbing graham in the face . though they are both badly wounded , lecter and graham manage to get the better of dolarhyde and kill him together : graham slices open dolarhyde 's chest , while lecter tears out his throat with his teeth . lecter and graham then embrace , before graham pushes them both off a cliff . their ultimate fate is left ambiguous ; a post-credits scene shows du maurier dining on her own leg at a table set for three . series creator bryan fuller has said this scene is meant to suggest that lecter and graham survived and that graham has become lecter 's partner in murder . fuller has stated that season 4 would have depicted lecter and graham on the run from the fbi in argentina , mirroring lecter and starling 's storyline from the novels . . relationship between graham and lecter . the emotional relationship between graham and lecter forms the foundation of the series . in season 3 , their developing romance has been taken from subtext into text . as to whether it was a part of the initial plan to portray their relationship as romantic , fuller stated : '' no , it naturally evolved because i guess i was absorbing so much of mads and hugh 's performance , which felt like it was growing in intimacy , and it would have been inauthentic not to address it . because all of these characters , and particularly bedelia , was able to call out what she had witnessed between lecter and graham , it seemed like a natural conclusion . i remember when i turned in the rewrite pages where will asks bedelia if hannibal is in love with him , i got a note from don mancini , one of our writers who was always pushing for more homosexual text – not just context or subtext but text , text , text – and he was like , '' i 'm so glad you put that in there ! they said it ! they said it ! '' discussing what motivated him to verbally acknowledge the romance between graham and lecter , fuller said , '' it felt like we had to shit or get off the pot , ultimately , because there had been so much going on between these two men that when will asks , '' is hannibal lecter in love with me ? '' it is very much about death and the romance between these two men . there is a quality to connections that go above and beyond sexuality . you can have this intimate connection with somebody that then causes you to wonder where the lines of your own sexuality are . and we did n't quite broach the sexuality . it was certainly suggested , but the love is absolutely on the table . '' remembering how the song for the finale of the series – '' love crime '' by siouxsie sioux – was created , fuller said : '' it was interesting . she siouxsie sioux was like , '' i want to write this song , and what are the things i should really be thinking about ? '' and i was like , 'this is a love story . a love story between a full-fledged psychopath and someone who has nascent psychopathic abilities . ' actually , hannibal lecter is not a psychopath ; he 's something else entirely . but it 's a love relationship between two men : one of them is a cannibal , and one of them understands those cannibalistic instincts all too well . '' . in other media . lecter is the subject of the 1998 song '' hannibal ( se ) lectah '' by the skalatones . the best tracks so far ( pork pie , 1998 ) . lecter is parodied in the 2005 musical silence ! the musical , with the character being originated by actor brent barrett . lecter was depicted by epic rap battles of history in the episode jack the ripper vs . hannibal lecter , in which lecter ( lloyd ahlquist ) raps against jack the ripper ( dan bull ) . . reception and legacy . in 2003 , lecter ( as portrayed by hopkins ) was named the greatest villain in american cinema by the american film institute . in 2010 , entertainment weekly named him one of the 100 greatest characters of the preceding 20 years . in 2019 , lecter ( as portrayed by mikkelsen ) was named the 18th greatest villain in television history by rolling stone . his '' fava beans '' quote was the 21st afi 's 100 years.100 movie quotes . see also . bogeyman list of horror film antagonists fictional serial killers . references . external links . hannibal lecter on imdb information about hannibal lecter , with a focus on manhunter ( 1986 ) npr broadcast on lecter brian cox interview about portraying hannibal lecter