Telephone directory

content . subscriber names are generally listed in alphabetical order , together with their postal or street address and telephone number . in principle every subscriber in the geographical coverage area is listed , but subscribers may request the exclusion of their number from the directory , often for a fee ; their number is then said to be '' unlisted '' ( us and canada ) , '' ex-directory '' ( british english ) , or '' private '' ( australia and new zealand ) . a telephone directory may also provide instructions : how to use the telephone service , how to dial a particular number , be it local or international , what numbers to access important and emergency services , utilities , hospitals , doctors , and organizations who can provide support in times of crisis . it may also have civil defense or emergency management information . there may be transit maps , postal code/zip code guides , international dialing codes or stadium seating charts , as well as advertising . in the us , under current rules and practices , mobile phone and voice over ip listings are not included in telephone directories . efforts to create cellular directories have met stiff opposition from several fronts , including those who seek to avoid telemarketers . types . a telephone directory and its content may be known by the colour of the paper it is printed on . white pages generally indicates personal or alphabetic listings . yellow pages , golden pages , a2z , or classified directory is usually a '' business directory '' , where businesses are listed alphabetically within each of many classifications ( e.g . , '' lawyers '' ) , almost always with paid advertising . grey pages , sometimes called a '' reverse telephone directory '' , allowing subscriber details to be found for a given number . not available in all jurisdictions . ( these listings are often published separately , in a city directory , or under another name , for a price , and made available to commercial and government agencies . ) other colors may have other meanings ; for example , information on government agencies is often printed on blue pages or green pages . publication . telephone directories can be published in hard copy or in electronic form . in the latter case , the directory can be used provided as an online service through proprietary terminals or over the internet , or on physical media such as cd-rom . in many countries directories are both published in book form and also available over the internet . printed directories were usually supplied free of charge . history . telephone directories are a type of city directory . books listing the inhabitants of an entire city were widely published starting in the 18th century , before the invention of the telephone . the first telephone directory , consisting of a single piece of cardboard , was issued on 21 february 1878 ; it listed 50 individuals , businesses , and other offices in new haven , connecticut that had telephones . the first british telephone directory was published on 15 january 1880 by the telephone company . it contained 248 names and addresses of individuals and businesses in london ; telephone numbers were not used at the time as subscribers were asked for by name at the exchange . records of the telephone company limited ( bell 's patents ) , bt archives reference tpa the directory is preserved as part of the british phone book collection by bt archives . the r . h . donnelley company asserts that it published the first classified directory , or yellow pages , for chicago , illinois , in 1886 . in 1938 , at & t commissioned the creation of a new type font , known as bell gothic , the purpose of which was to be readable at very small font sizes when printed on newsprint where small imperfections were common . in 1981 , france was the first country to have an electronic directory on a system called minitel . the directory is called '' 11 '' after its telephone access number . in 1991 , the u.s . supreme court ruled ( in feist v . rural ) that telephone companies do not have a copyright on telephone listings , because copyright protects creativity and not the mere labor of collecting existing information . in 1996 , the first telephone directories went online in the usa . yellowpages.com and whitepages.com both saw their start in april . telephone directory history by whitepages.fr in 1999 , the first online telephone directories and people-finding sites such as lookupuk.com went online in the uk . in 2003 , more advanced uk searching including electoral roll became available on locatefirst.com . in the 21st century , printed telephone directories are increasingly criticized as waste . in 2012 , after some north american cities passed laws banning the distribution of telephone books , an industry group sued and obtained a court ruling permitting the distribution to continue . manufacture and distribution of telephone directories produces over 1,400,000 metric tons of greenhouse gases and consumes over 600,000 tons of paper annually . . reverse directories . a reverse telephone directory is sorted by number , which can be looked up to give the name and address of the subscriber . in popular culture . ripping phone books in half has often been considered a feat of strength . there are guinness world records for ripping the most phone books within a specific time period : the record for most phone books ripped within three minutes was established by tina shelton in 2007 for females ( 21 books ) and by edward charon in 2006 for males ( 56 books ) . charon and shelton are husband and wife , and they used an oregonian city phone book . google : ( '' tina shelton '' ( '' rip '' or '' ripped '' ) ) ( oregon or oregonian ) population less than 40,000 vs . a manhattan phone book for 1,000,000+ people the 1979 film the jerk features the naïve protagonist navin r . johnson ( portrayed by steve martin ) thrilled to find himself listed in the local telephone directory , his name '' in print '' for the first time , after which a gun-wielding lunatic flips through his own copy and picks '' johnson , navin r . '' as his next '' random victim bastard . '' the 1988 film rain man features an autistic savant raymond babbitt ( portrayed by dustin hoffman ) , inspired by the real-life savant kim peek ( known for his capability of reading and memorizing whole books within an hour ) , who was capable of memorizing and reciting entire telephone directories . the 1984 film the terminator features the titular '' cyborg assassin '' antagonist sent back in time to murder the character sarah connor . knowing only the name and general location of the target , the cyborg uses telephone directories from public phone booths to systematically murder everyone in the local area with that name , in the order in which they appeared in the directory , causing the press and police to use the nickname 'the phone book killer' .