MCA Records

pre-history . mca inc . , a powerful talent agency and a television production company , entered the recorded music business in 1962 with the purchase of the new york-based us decca records ( established in 1934 ) , including coral records and brunswick records . mca was forced to exit the talent agency business in order to complete the merger . as american decca owned universal pictures , mca assumed full ownership of universal and made it into a top film studio , producing several hits . in 1966 , mca formed uni records and in 1967 purchased kapp records which was placed under uni records management . . history . the early years . in 1937 , the owner of decca , e . r . lewis , chose to split off the uk decca company from the us company ( keeping his us decca holdings ) , fearing the financial damage that would arise for uk companies if the emerging hostilities of nazi germany should lead to war & ndash ; correctly foreseeing world war ii . lewis sold the remainder of his us decca holdings when war did break out . us-based decca records kept the rights to the decca name in north and south america and parts of asia including japan . uk decca owned the rights to the decca name in the rest of the world . after the war , british decca formed a new us subsidiary , london records . during this time american decca issued records outside north america on the brunswick and coral labels . in 1962 , mca acquired american decca and became a wholly owned subsidiary . in 1967 , brunswick and coral were replaced by the mca label , which was used to release us decca and kapp label material outside north america . initial activity as mca records was based in london and mca records uk was formally launched on february 16 , 1968 . among the early artists on the mca label , around 1971 , were groups wishbone ash , osibisa , stackridge and budgie , and solo artists tony christie , mick greenwood and roy young . billboard magazine , november 13 , 1971 - mca records advertisement , p . l28 ( spotlight on london ) early mca releases were distributed by uk decca but it moved to emi in 1974 . in 1979 , distribution moved to cbs , while the last releases in the 1980s were self-distributed , mostly through wea , though bmg was used during the 1990s . as the us division of mca records was not established until 1972 , the earliest uk mca records material was released in the us on either kapp or decca . mca uk also issued american brunswick material on the mca label until 1972 , two years after mca lost control of brunswick , after which american brunswick material was issued in the uk on the revived brunswick label . uni label material was issued on the uni label worldwide . mca records formation in canada and the united states . in 1970 , mca reorganized its canadian record company compo company ltd . into mca records ( canada ) . in april 1970 , former warner bros . records president mike maitland joined mca and initially served as decca 's general manager . maitland was unsuccessful in his attempt to consolidate warner bros . records with co-owned atlantic records which led to his departure from warner . in april 1971 , maitland supervised the consolidation of the new york-based decca and kapp labels plus the california-based uni label into mca records based in universal city , california , with maitland serving as president . the three labels maintained their identities for a short time but were retired in favor of the mca label in 1973 . '' drift away '' by dobie gray became the final decca pop label release in the u.s in 1973 . beginning the same year the catalogs of decca , uni and kapp were reissued in the us on the mca label under the supervision of veteran decca producer milt gabler . . early success . the first mca records release in the us was former uni artist elton john 's '' crocodile rock '' single in 1972 , which appeared on a plain black and white label . immediately following this the us mca label used a black with curved rainbow design until the late 1970s . this design was directly inspired by the us decca label of the 1960s . in december 1972 , neil diamond , another uni artist , reached superstar status with his first mca release , the live multi-platinum hot august night . elton john 's double album goodbye yellow brick road was released in october 1973 and was number one on the us billboard 200 albums chart for eight straight weeks . the management of former decca artists the who had formed their own label track records in the uk but were still under contract with mca for us distribution . the who 's double album quadrophenia was released by track/mca also in october 1973 . quadrophenia peaked at number 2 as it was held back from the number 1 slot by goodbye yellow brick road . other successful artists on mca after the consolidation included former kapp artist cher , and uni artist olivia newton-john . mca released the highly successful soundtrack album to the 1973 film the sting . the soundtrack music was arranged and conducted by marvin hamlisch and won an academy award for best original score ( mca issued many other soundtracks to films from universal , along with some non-universal films ) . one of the most successful new mca artists in this era was the rock band lynyrd skynyrd . originating from jacksonville , florida , the group would go on to become one of the most popular in the southern rock genre . the group was discovered and produced by al kooper and the records were initially released on kooper 's yellow '' sounds of the south '' label imprint of mca . the song '' free bird '' peaked at 19 on the billboard hot 100 chart in edited form , but the full-length version became one of the most popular songs of all time on album-oriented rock radio stations . on the second album , second helping , the group recorded a song about their relationship with the label called , '' workin ' for mca '' . three lynyrd skynyrd albums reached the double platinum sales level and at least two others reached platinum or gold levels . the album street survivors was released in october 1977 , just prior to a tragic plane crash in rural mississippi in which members of the group were either killed or severely injured . the original street survivors cover had a picture of the band members surrounded by flames , but this was quickly substituted for a revised design without flames . though a latter version of the group enjoyed success , lynyrd skynyrd 's streak of hits ended after the crash . during the 1970s and 1980s mca profited from reissuing classic early rock and roll recordings made by artists who recorded for the numerous labels absorbed by mca . one notable example was the 1954 decca recording '' rock around the clock '' by bill haley & his comets , which was featured as the lead track of mca 's no . 1-charting american graffiti soundtrack album , and as a single returned to the american top 40 that year , 20 years after it was recorded . expansion and struggles . in 1977 mca president sidney sheinberg set up the infinity records division , based in new york city with ron alexenberg as ceo . alexenberg had been with the epic division of cbs records , now sony music entertainment . the intention was to give mca a stronger presence on the east coast . the only big hit the infinity label had was '' escape ( rupert holmes song ) '' by rupert holmes , a 1 single at the end of 1979 . infinity also had some success with hot chocolate , spyro gyra , new england and tko . but mca pulled the plug on infinity after it failed to sell most of the 1 million advance copies of an album featuring pope john paul ii in october 1979 . infinity was fully absorbed by the parent company in 1980 . in 1979 , bob siner replaced maitland as mca records president . shortly afterwards , mca acquired abc records along with its subsidiaries paramount , dunhill , impulse ! , westminster , and dot . abc had acquired the paramount and dot labels when they purchased gulf+western 's record labels and famous music . thus mca now controlled material once owned by paramount pictures , the music released by paramount 's record labels , and the pre-1950 films by paramount as well . also included in the deal were recordings controlled by abc , including albums by tom petty and the heartbreakers which were originally released by shelter records . petty was furious about the reassignment of his contract and refused to record for mca . this led to a series of lawsuits , which resulted in his bankruptcy in 1980 . petty and other abc/shelter artists eventually had their contracts transferred to the backstreet records label , which was distributed by mca . abc records ' independent distributors sued abc and mca for 1.3 million in damages for being stuck with unsold abc recordings they could not return to mca . the better selling abc records catalog albums were reissued on the mca label . the combined effects of the infinity records failure , the purchase of abc , rising vinyl costs and a major slump in record sales produced tremendous losses for the company between 1979 and 1982 . it was not until the mid-1980s that the record labels returned to significant profitability . in late 1980 mca received negative publicity when it attempted to raise the list price of new releases by top selling artists from 8.98 to 9.98 . this policy , known as '' superstar pricing '' , ultimately failed . the xanadu soundtrack album and gaucho , by former abc act steely dan , were the first releases with the higher list price . backstreet artist tom petty succeeded in his campaign to force mca to drop prices back to 8.98 for the release of his album hard promises , in may 1981 . . recovery , further expansion and mca music entertainment group formation . from 1983 to 1989 , mca records was headed by irving azoff , a record executive who receives credit amongst its management and staff for saving the company from bankruptcy . azoff resigned from mca in 1989 to form his own record label , giant records , now defunct . richard palmese was named president of mca records after azoff in 1990 . in this period , mca signed a distribution agreement with wea international which lasted until 1990 . in the late 1980s , mca formed mechanic records as a sub-label for releasing heavy metal music . bands signed to mechanic included voivod , dream theater , bang tango , and trixter . another sub-label , called the futurist label , was created to release progressive rock and death metal albums . in 1993 william knoedelseder , a business writer for the los angeles times , released the book '' stiffed : a true story of mca , the music business , and the mafia '' . this volume detailed mca 's connections to organized crime during the 1980s . the chess records catalog was acquired from the remnants of sugar hill records in 1985 . motown records was bought in 1988 ( and sold to polygram in 1993 ) . grp records and geffen records were acquired in 1990 . unlike most of mca 's previous acquisitions , the grp ( which began managing mca 's jazz holdings ) and geffen ( which became a second mainstream subsidiary ) labels kept their identities and mca created a new holding company in 1989 called mca music entertainment group , headed by al teller , former president of united artists records , and co-chairman of turf classics , a concert production company , run by producer richard flanzer ; among several other music industry positions teller held . with palmese continuing to run the mca label . in the same year , the mca inc . parent company was purchased by the matsushita group . universal music group . in 1995 , seagram company ltd . acquired 80 % of mca . in november of that year , teller was fired and replaced by former warner music group head doug morris . palmese left mca a week later . on december 9 , 1996 , the new owners dropped the mca name ; the company became universal studios and its music division , mca music entertainment group , was renamed universal music group ( umg ) , headed by morris . in 1997 , mca records adopted a new logo that featured the parent company 's former full name . many younger people had been unaware of what mca had stood for in the past , hence the new logo . in conjunction with the new logo , the first mca records website was launched . on may 21 , 1998 , seagram acquired polygram ( owner of british decca ) from philips and merged it with its music holdings . when seagram 's drinks business was bought by france-based pernod ricard , its media holdings ( including universal ) were sold to vivendi which became vivendi universal which was later renamed back to vivendi sa after selling most of the entertainment division ( which included universal pictures ) to general electric . morris continued to head the combined company , still called universal music group . mca label phaseout . in spring 2003 , the mca label was absorbed by sister umg label geffen records . today universal music enterprises manages mca 's rock , pop , and urban back catalogues ( including those from abc records and famous music group ) in conjunction with geffen - ume and geffen have re-released various albums from mca in the years since , as well as several compilations . its country music label mca nashville records is still in operation , and is one of the only businesses using the mca trademark as of 2016 along with mca records france ( imprint of universal music france ) . mca 's jazz catalogue is managed by verve records ( through the impulse ! and grp imprints , depending on whether the recording was acquired from abc or not ) , while its classical music catalogue is managed by deutsche grammophon . mca 's musical theatre catalogue is managed by decca records on its decca broadway imprint . logos . image:1960smcalogo.jpg first mca records logo , with lowercase name , used outside the united states from 1967 through 1972 . image:1970smcarecordslogo.jpg mca records logo used from 1972 through 1991 . image:1990smcarecordslogo.svg logo used from 1991 through 1997 ; currently used by active label mca nashville and mca records france . image : mca records logo ( svg type ) . svg final mca records logo , used from 1997 until its dismantling in 2003 . it adds the founding company 's original full name , music corporation of america . . labels . image : mcarecordscover1970s.jpg white promotional label used for second logo , 1972 until 1991 ( vinyl version ) file : oh boy ! ( mca-uk ) . jpg black rainbow label used logo 1972 until 1980 ( vinyl version ) image : mcarecordscover1990s.jpg label used for third logo , 1991 until 1997 ( cd version ) . mca records recording artists . references . external links . a collection of mca record labels