Action potential

overview . nearly all cell membranes in animals , plants and fungi maintain a voltage difference between the exterior and interior of the cell , called the membrane potential . a typical voltage across an animal cell membrane is −70 mv . this means that the interior of the cell has a negative voltage relative to the exterior . in most types of cells , the membrane potential usually stays fairly constant . some types of cells , however , are electrically active in the sense that their voltages fluctuate over time . in some types of electrically active cells , including neurons and muscle cells , the voltage fluctuations frequently take the form of a rapid upward spike followed by a rapid fall . these up-and-down cycles are known as action potentials . in some types of neurons , the entire up-and-down cycle takes place in a few thousandths of a second . in muscle cells , a typical action potential lasts about a fifth of a second . in some other types of cells and plants , an action potential may last three seconds or more . the electrical properties of a cell are determined by the structure of the membrane that surrounds it . a cell membrane consists of a lipid bilayer of molecules in which larger protein molecules are embedded . the lipid bilayer is highly resistant to movement of electrically charged ions , so it functions as an insulator . the large membrane-embedded proteins , in contrast , provide channels through which ions can pass across the membrane . action potentials are driven by channel proteins whose configuration switches between closed and open states as a function of the voltage difference between the interior and exterior of the cell . these voltage-sensitive proteins are known as voltage-gated ion channels . process in a typical neuron . all cells in animal body tissues are electrically polarized – in other words , they maintain a voltage difference across the cell 's plasma membrane , known as the membrane potential . this electrical polarization results from a complex interplay between protein structures embedded in the membrane called ion pumps and ion channels . in neurons , the types of ion channels in the membrane usually vary across different parts of the cell , giving the dendrites , axon , and cell body different electrical properties . as a result , some parts of the membrane of a neuron may be excitable ( capable of generating action potentials ) , whereas others are not . recent studies have shown that the most excitable part of a neuron is the part after the axon hillock ( the point where the axon leaves the cell body ) , which is called the initial segment , but the axon and cell body are also excitable in most cases . each excitable patch of membrane has two important levels of membrane potential : the resting potential , which is the value the membrane potential maintains as long as nothing perturbs the cell , and a higher value called the threshold potential . at the axon hillock of a typical neuron , the resting potential is around –70 millivolts ( mv ) and the threshold potential is around –55 mv . synaptic inputs to a neuron cause the membrane to depolarize or hyperpolarize ; that is , they cause the membrane potential to rise or fall . action potentials are triggered when enough depolarization accumulates to bring the membrane potential up to threshold . when an action potential is triggered , the membrane potential abruptly shoots upward and then equally abruptly shoots back downward , often ending below the resting level , where it remains for some period of time . the shape of the action potential is stereotyped ; this means that the rise and fall usually have approximately the same amplitude and time course for all action potentials in a given cell . ( exceptions are discussed later in the article ) . in most neurons , the entire process takes place in about a thousandth of a second . many types of neurons emit action potentials constantly at rates of up to 10–100 per second . however , some types are much quieter , and may go for minutes or longer without emitting any action potentials . biophysical basis . action potentials result from the presence in a cell 's membrane of special types of voltage-gated ion channels . a voltage-gated ion channel is a cluster of proteins embedded in the membrane that has three key properties : it is capable of assuming more than one conformation . at least one of the conformations creates a channel through the membrane that is permeable to specific types of ions . the transition between conformations is influenced by the membrane potential . thus , a voltage-gated ion channel tends to be open for some values of the membrane potential , and closed for others . in most cases , however , the relationship between membrane potential and channel state is probabilistic and involves a time delay . ion channels switch between conformations at unpredictable times : the membrane potential determines the rate of transitions and the probability per unit time of each type of transition . voltage-gated ion channels are capable of producing action potentials because they can give rise to positive feedback loops : the membrane potential controls the state of the ion channels , but the state of the ion channels controls the membrane potential . thus , in some situations , a rise in the membrane potential can cause ion channels to open , thereby causing a further rise in the membrane potential . an action potential occurs when this positive feedback cycle ( hodgkin cycle ) proceeds explosively . the time and amplitude trajectory of the action potential are determined by the biophysical properties of the voltage-gated ion channels that produce it . several types of channels capable of producing the positive feedback necessary to generate an action potential do exist . voltage-gated sodium channels are responsible for the fast action potentials involved in nerve conduction . slower action potentials in muscle cells and some types of neurons are generated by voltage-gated calcium channels . each of these types comes in multiple variants , with different voltage sensitivity and different temporal dynamics . the most intensively studied type of voltage-dependent ion channels comprises the sodium channels involved in fast nerve conduction . these are sometimes known as hodgkin-huxley sodium channels because they were first characterized by alan hodgkin and andrew huxley in their nobel prize-winning studies of the biophysics of the action potential , but can more conveniently be referred to as na v channels . ( the '' v '' stands for '' voltage '' . ) an na v channel has three possible states , known as deactivated , activated , and inactivated . the channel is permeable only to sodium ions when it is in the activated state . when the membrane potential is low , the channel spends most of its time in the deactivated ( closed ) state . if the membrane potential is raised above a certain level , the channel shows increased probability of transitioning to the activated ( open ) state . the higher the membrane potential the greater the probability of activation . once a channel has activated , it will eventually transition to the inactivated ( closed ) state . it tends then to stay inactivated for some time , but , if the membrane potential becomes low again , the channel will eventually transition back to the deactivated state . during an action potential , most channels of this type go through a cycle deactivated→activated→inactivated→deactivated . this is only the population average behavior , however – an individual channel can in principle make any transition at any time . however , the likelihood of a channel 's transitioning from the inactivated state directly to the activated state is very low : a channel in the inactivated state is refractory until it has transitioned back to the deactivated state . the outcome of all this is that the kinetics of the na v channels are governed by a transition matrix whose rates are voltage-dependent in a complicated way . since these channels themselves play a major role in determining the voltage , the global dynamics of the system can be quite difficult to work out . hodgkin and huxley approached the problem by developing a set of differential equations for the parameters that govern the ion channel states , known as the hodgkin–huxley model . these equations have been extensively modified by later research , but form the starting point for most theoretical studies of action potential biophysics . as the membrane potential is increased , sodium channel open , allowing the entry of sodium ions into the cell . this is followed by the opening of potassium channel that permit the exit of potassium ions from the cell . the inward flow of sodium ions increases the concentration of positively charged cations in the cell and causes depolarization , where the potential of the cell is higher than the cell 's resting potential . the sodium channels close at the peak of the action potential , while potassium continues to leave the cell . the efflux of potassium ions decreases the membrane potential or hyperpolarizes the cell . for small voltage increases from rest , the potassium current exceeds the sodium current and the voltage returns to its normal resting value , typically −70 & nbsp ; mv . however , if the voltage increases past a critical threshold , typically 15 & nbsp ; mv higher than the resting value , the sodium current dominates . this results in a runaway condition whereby the positive feedback from the sodium current activates even more sodium channels . thus , the cell fires , producing an action potential . given its conservation throughout evolution , the action potential seems to confer evolutionary advantages . one function of action potentials is rapid , long-range signaling within the organism ; the conduction velocity can exceed 110 & nbsp ; m/s , which is one-third the speed of sound . for comparison , a hormone molecule carried in the bloodstream moves at roughly 8 & nbsp ; m/s in large arteries . part of this function is the tight coordination of mechanical events , such as the contraction of the heart . a second function is the computation associated with its generation . being an all-or-none signal that does not decay with transmission distance , the action potential has similar advantages to digital electronics . the integration of various dendritic signals at the axon hillock and its thresholding to form a complex train of action potentials is another form of computation , one that has been exploited biologically to form central pattern generators and mimicked in artificial neural networks . the common prokaryotic/eukaryotic ancestor , which lived perhaps four billion years ago , is believed to have had voltage-gated channels . this functionality was likely , at some later point , cross-purposed to provide a communication mechanism . even modern single-celled bacteria can utilize action potentials to communicate with other bacteria in the same biofilm . . experimental methods . image : loligo forbesii.jpg thumb right 250px giant axons of the longfin inshore squid ( doryteuthis pealeii ) were crucial for scientists to understand the action potential . alt illustration of the longfin inshore squid . the study of action potentials has required the development of new experimental methods . the initial work , prior to 1955 , was carried out primarily by alan lloyd hodgkin and andrew fielding huxley , who were , along john carew eccles , awarded the 1963 nobel prize in physiology or medicine for their contribution to the description of the ionic basis of nerve conduction . it focused on three goals : isolating signals from single neurons or axons , developing fast , sensitive electronics , and shrinking electrodes enough that the voltage inside a single cell could be recorded . the first problem was solved by studying the giant axons found in the neurons of the squid ( loligo forbesii and doryteuthis pealeii , at the time classified as loligo pealeii ) . these axons are so large in diameter ( roughly 1 & nbsp ; mm , or 100-fold larger than a typical neuron ) that they can be seen with the naked eye , making them easy to extract and manipulate . however , they are not representative of all excitable cells , and numerous other systems with action potentials have been studied . the second problem was addressed with the crucial development of the voltage clamp , which permitted experimenters to study the ionic currents underlying an action potential in isolation , and eliminated a key source of electronic noise , the current i c associated with the capacitance c of the membrane . since the current equals c times the rate of change of the transmembrane voltage v m , the solution was to design a circuit that kept v m fixed ( zero rate of change ) regardless of the currents flowing across the membrane . thus , the current required to keep v m at a fixed value is a direct reflection of the current flowing through the membrane . other electronic advances included the use of faraday cages and electronics with high input impedance , so that the measurement itself did not affect the voltage being measured . the third problem , that of obtaining electrodes small enough to record voltages within a single axon without perturbing it , was solved in 1949 with the invention of the glass micropipette electrode , which was quickly adopted by other researchers . refinements of this method are able to produce electrode tips that are as fine as 100 å ( 10 nm ) , which also confers high input impedance . snell , fm in action potentials may also be recorded with small metal electrodes placed just next to a neuron , with neurochips containing eosfets , or optically with dyes that are calcium imaging or to voltage . image : single channel.png thumb left as revealed by a patch clamp electrode , an ion channel has two states : open ( high conductance ) and closed ( low conductance ) . alt plot of membrane potential versus time . the channel is primarily in a high conductance state punctuated by random and relatively brief transitions to a low conductance states while glass micropipette electrodes measure the sum of the currents passing through many ion channels , studying the electrical properties of a single ion channel became possible in the 1970s with the development of the patch clamp by erwin neher and bert sakmann . for this discovery , they were awarded the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1991 . patch-clamping verified that ionic channels have discrete states of conductance , such as open , closed and inactivated . optical imaging technologies have been developed in recent years to measure action potentials , either via simultaneous multisite recordings or with ultra-spatial resolution . using potentiometric dyes , action potentials have been optically recorded from a tiny patch of cardiomyocyte membrane . . neurotoxins . image : puffer fish dsc01257.jpg thumb right tetrodotoxin is a lethal toxin found in pufferfish that inhibits the voltage-gated ion channel , halting action potentials. alt photograph of a pufferfish . several neurotoxins , both natural and synthetic , are designed to block the action potential . tetrodotoxin from the pufferfish and saxitoxin from the gonyaulax ( the dinoflagellate genus responsible for '' red tides '' ) block action potentials by inhibiting the voltage-sensitive sodium channel ; similarly , dendrotoxin from the mamba snake inhibits the voltage-sensitive potassium channel . such inhibitors of ion channels serve an important research purpose , by allowing scientists to '' turn off '' specific channels at will , thus isolating the other channels ' contributions ; they can also be useful in purifying ion channels by affinity chromatography or in assaying their concentration . however , such inhibitors also make effective neurotoxins , and have been considered for use as chemical weapons . neurotoxins aimed at the ion channels of insects have been effective insecticides ; one example is the synthetic permethrin , which prolongs the activation of the sodium channels involved in action potentials . the ion channels of insects are sufficiently different from their human counterparts that there are few side effects in humans . history . image : purkinjecell.jpg thumb left image of two purkinje cells ( labeled as a ) drawn by santiago ramón y cajal in 1899 . large trees of dendrites feed into the soma , from which a single axon emerges and moves generally downwards with a few branch points . the smaller cells labeled b are granule cells. alt hand drawn figure of two purkinje cells side by side with dendrites projecting upwards that look like tree branches and a few axons projected downwards that connect to a few granule cells at the bottom of the drawing . the role of electricity in the nervous systems of animals was first observed in dissected frogs by luigi galvani , who studied it from 1791 to 1797 . galvani 's results stimulated alessandro volta to develop the voltaic pile—the earliest-known electric battery—with which he studied animal electricity ( such as electric eels ) and the physiological responses to applied direct current voltages . scientists of the 19th century studied the propagation of electrical signals in whole nerves ( i.e . , bundles of neurons ) and demonstrated that nervous tissue was made up of cells , instead of an interconnected network of tubes ( a reticulum ) . carlo matteucci followed up galvani 's studies and demonstrated that cell membranes had a voltage across them and could produce direct current . matteucci 's work inspired the german physiologist , emil du bois-reymond , who discovered the action potential in 1843 . the conduction velocity of action potentials was first measured in 1850 by du bois-reymond 's friend , hermann von helmholtz . kathryn olesko , and frederic l . holmes . '' experiment , quantification and discovery : helmholtz 's early physiological researches , 1843-50 '' . in hermann von helmholtz and the foundations of nineteenth century science , ed . david cahan , 50-108 . berkeley ; los angeles ; london : university of california , 1994 . to establish that nervous tissue is made up of discrete cells , the spanish physician santiago ramón y cajal and his students used a stain developed by camillo golgi to reveal the myriad shapes of neurons , which they rendered painstakingly . for their discoveries , golgi and ramón y cajal were awarded the 1906 nobel prize in physiology . their work resolved a long-standing controversy in the neuroanatomy of the 19th century ; golgi himself had argued for the network model of the nervous system . image:3b8e.png thumb right ribbon diagram of the sodium–potassium pump in its e2-pi state . the estimated boundaries of the lipid bilayer are shown as blue ( intracellular ) and red ( extracellular ) planes. alt cartoon diagram of the sodium–potassium pump drawn vertically imbedded in a schematic diagram of a lipid bilayer represented by two parallel horizontal lines . the portion of the protein that is imbedded in the lipid bilayer is composed largely of anti-parallel beta sheets . there is also a large intracellular domain of the protein with a mixed alpha-helix/beta-sheet structure . the 20th century was a significant era for electrophysiology . in 1902 and again in 1912 , julius bernstein advanced the hypothesis that the action potential resulted from a change in the permeation of the axonal membrane to ions . bernstein 's hypothesis was confirmed by ken cole and howard curtis , who showed that membrane conductance increases during an action potential . in 1907 , louis lapicque suggested that the action potential was generated as a threshold was crossed , what would be later shown as a product of the dynamical systems of ionic conductances . in 1949 , alan hodgkin and bernard katz refined bernstein 's hypothesis by considering that the axonal membrane might have different permeabilities to different ions ; in particular , they demonstrated the crucial role of the sodium permeability for the action potential . they made the first actual recording of the electrical changes across the neuronal membrane that mediate the action potential . this line of research culminated in the five 1952 papers of hodgkin , katz and andrew huxley , in which they applied the voltage clamp technique to determine the dependence of the axonal membrane 's permeabilities to sodium and potassium ions on voltage and time , from which they were able to reconstruct the action potential quantitatively . hodgkin and huxley correlated the properties of their mathematical model with discrete ion channels that could exist in several different states , including '' open '' , '' closed '' , and '' inactivated '' . their hypotheses were confirmed in the mid-1970s and 1980s by erwin neher and bert sakmann , who developed the technique of patch clamping to examine the conductance states of individual ion channels . in the 21st century , researchers are beginning to understand the structural basis for these conductance states and for the selectivity of channels for their species of ion , through the atomic-resolution crystal structures , fluorescence distance measurements and cryo-electron microscopy studies . julius bernstein was also the first to introduce the nernst equation for resting potential across the membrane ; this was generalized by david e . goldman to the eponymous goldman equation in 1943 . the na+/k+-atpase was identified in 1957 and its properties gradually elucidated , culminating in the determination of its atomic-resolution structure by x-ray crystallography . the crystal structures of related ionic pumps have also been solved , giving a broader view of how these molecular machines work . . quantitative models . image : membranecircuit.svg thumb 336px right equivalent electrical circuit for the hodgkin–huxley model of the action potential . i m and v m represent the current through , and the voltage across , a small patch of membrane , respectively . the c m represents the capacitance of the membrane patch , whereas the four gs represent the conductances of four types of ions . the two conductances on the left , for potassium ( k ) and sodium ( na ) , are shown with arrows to indicate that they can vary with the applied voltage , corresponding to the voltage-gated ion channel . the two conductances on the right help determine the resting membrane potential. alt circuit diagram depicting five parallel circuits that are interconnected at the top to the extracellular solution and at the bottom to the intracellular solution . mathematical and computational models are essential for understanding the action potential , and offer predictions that may be tested against experimental data , providing a stringent test of a theory . the most important and accurate of the early neural models is the hodgkin–huxley model , which describes the action potential by a coupled set of four ordinary differential equations ( odes ) . although the hodgkin–huxley model may be a simplification with few limitations compared to the realistic nervous membrane as it exists in nature , its complexity has inspired several even-more-simplified models , such as the morris–lecar model and the fitzhugh–nagumo model , both of which have only two coupled odes . the properties of the hodgkin–huxley and fitzhugh–nagumo models and their relatives , such as the bonhoeffer–van der pol model , have been well-studied within mathematics , sato , s ; fukai , h ; nomura , t ; doi , s in fitzhugh , r in computation nelson , me ; rinzel , j in rinzel , j & ermentrout , gb ; in and electronics . however the simple models of generator potential and action potential fail to accurately reproduce the near threshold neural spike rate and spike shape , specifically for the mechanoreceptors like the pacinian corpuscle . more modern research has focused on larger and more integrated systems ; by joining action-potential models with models of other parts of the nervous system ( such as dendrites and synapses ) , researchers can study neural computation and simple reflexes , such as escape reflexes and others controlled by central pattern generators . getting , pa in