Assault weapon

definitions and usage . drawing from federal and state law definitions , the term assault weapon refers primarily to semi-automatic rifles , pistols , and shotguns that are able to accept detachable magazines and possess one or more other features . some jurisdictions define revolving cylinder shotguns as assault weapons . legislative definitions do not include fully automatic weapons , which are regulated separately as title ii weapons under federal law . meanwhile many gun rights activists have put forward that the term originated from the media or gun control activists . conservative writer rich lowry said that assault weapon is a '' manufactured term '' . joseph p . tartaro of the second amendment foundation ( saf ) wrote in 1994 : '' one of the key elements of the anti-gun strategy to gull the public into supporting bans on the so-called 'assault weapons ' is to foster confusion . as stated previously , the public does not know the difference between a full automatic and a semi-automatic firearm . '' robert crook , executive director of the coalition of connecticut sportsmen , said '' the term 'assault weapon , ' as used by the media , is a media invention . '' . differing state law definitions . seven states have assault weapon bans with different definitions and characteristics . california defines assault weapons by name , by '' series '' ( ak or ar-15 ) , and by characteristic . a shotgun with a revolving cylinder is also defined as an assault weapon . connecticut defines assault weapons as selective-fire firearms ( including assault rifles capable of fully automatic or burst fire ) ; semi-automatic firearms specified by name ; and semi-automatic firearms with specific characteristics . hawaii defines and bans assault pistols . maryland defines and bans assault pistols . it regulates 45 other assault weapons listed by make or model including copies , regardless of manufacturer . massachusetts defines assault weapons as semi-automatic firearms with the same definition provisions from the expired federal ban of 1994 . new york had an assault weapons ban prior to 2013 , but on january 16 of that year it passed the safe act , which created a stricter definition of assault weapons and banned them immediately . the ny safe act defines assault weapons as semi-automatic pistols and rifles with detachable magazines and one military-style feature , and semi-automatic shotguns with one military-style feature . in illinois , proposed legislation in 2013 would have defined the term '' semi-automatic assault weapon '' as any semi-automatic firearm able to accept a detachable magazine , but it was never brought to a vote . acevedo , edward j . ( january 4 , 2013 ) . amendment to senate bill 2899 , illinois general assembly web site . retrieved january 18 , 2013 . '' in this section : '' semi-automatic assault weapon '' means : . ( c-2 ) a semi-automatic rifle or a pistol with the capacity to accept a detachable magazine , a muzzle brake , or muzzle compensator . '' the illinois state rifle association said most of the state 's firearms owners owned one or more guns that would have been banned under the proposal . the nra said the proposal would have restricted about 75 percent of handguns and 50 percent of long guns in circulation . as municipalities , chicago and cook county bans certain firearms defined as assault weapons and have no provision for legal possession of firearms owned before their laws were passed . minnesota also defines certain firearms as assault weapons and regulates their sales . . distinction from assault rifles . the term '' assault rifle '' is sometimes used interchangeably with the term '' assault weapon '' . according to the associated press stylebook , '' although the terms are often used interchangeably , some make the distinction that assault rifle is a military weapon with a selector switch for firing in either fully automatic or semi-automatic mode from a detachable , 10- to 30-round magazine . '' civilian ownership of machine guns , including selective-fire rifles , has been tightly regulated since 1934 under the national firearms act and since 1986 under the firearm owners protection act . . cosmetic features . gun control advocates and gun rights advocates have referred to at least some of the features outlined in assault weapons bans as '' cosmetic '' . the nra institute for legislative action and the violence policy center both used the term in 2004 when the federal ban expired . in may 2012 , the law center to prevent gun violence said , '' the inclusion in the list of features that were purely cosmetic in nature created a loophole that allowed manufacturers to successfully circumvent the law by making minor modifications to the weapons they already produced . '' some reporters used the term in stories after the 2012 shootings in aurora , colorado and at sandy hook elementary school . more cosmetic sources : assault weapons , also sometimes called '' black guns '' or '' black rifles '' , are no more powerful than many other semi-automatic rifles legally used for hunting throughout the united states ; they do not shoot faster or have greater range . two scholars have written : '' one problem inherent in the study of assault weapons ( aw ) is that the classifications of aw are based on cosmetic features of firearms . for instance , the colt ar-15 series of semi-automatic rifles—the civilian version of the fully automatic m-16 rifle issued to u.s . soldiers—was subject to the 1994 aw restrictions , but the ruger mini-14 rifle was not banned . yet , the mini-14 is the same caliber , has a similar barrel length , the same semi-automatic action , and can use magazines that hold 30 rounds of ammunition . the only real meaningful difference between the two firearms is cosmetic : the ar-15 rifle looks more dangerous . '' the national shooting sports foundation , a firearms industry trade group , states that the term assault weapon has been misapplied to many semi-automatic firearms because of their appearance and not their use in crime . '' . political and legislative issues . prominent gun-control groups that support restrictions on ownership of firearms include the brady campaign '' federal gun laws : assault-style weapons '' , brady campaign to prevent gun violence . retrieved january 6 , 2013 . and the coalition to stop gun violence . '' issues and campaigns : assault weapons '' , coalition to stop gun violence . retrieved january 6 , 2013 . prominent opponents of assault-weapons bans include the national rifle association '' semi-automatic firearms and the 'assault weapon ' issue '' , national rifle association – institute for legislative acton , june 3 , 2011 . retrieved january 6 , 2013 . and gun owners of america . '' assault weapons bans : a solution in search of a problem '' , gun owners of america , december 24 , 2008 . retrieved january 6 , 2013 . in 2002 , the nra 's wayne lapierre and jim baker said '' assault weapons '' is a pejorative term . the national shooting sports foundation considers it a politically driven catchphrase aimed to conflate non-automatic weapons with full-automatic assault rifles . as of 2012 , there are an estimated 2.5–3.7 million rifles from just the ar-15 family of rifles in civilian use in the united states ; the total number of assault weapons in the united states among all types is not known , and can not be known because of the different definitions in different jurisdictions . . defunct u.s . federal assault weapons ban . the public safety and recreational firearms use protection act of 1994 , more commonly known as the federal assault weapons ban , expired in 2004 . it banned the manufacture or importation of certain semi-automatic firearms that it defined as '' semiautomatic assault weapons '' , commonly known as assault weapons . any firearms so defined that were already possessed at the time the law took effect were grandfathered in , and could be legally owned or transferred . another aspect of the law banned the manufacture or importation of magazines that could hold more than ten rounds of ammunition , with existing magazines grandfathered in as legal . the federal assault weapons ban of 1994 defined certain firearms as assault weapons based on the features they possessed . this included semi-automatic rifles with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features : a pistol grip , a folding or telescoping stock , a flash suppressor or threaded barrel , a bayonet lug , or a muzzle-mounted grenade launcher . it included semi-automatic pistols with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features : a magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip , a threaded barrel , a barrel shroud , or an unloaded weight of 50 ounces or more . additionally defined as assault weapons were semi-automatic shotguns with a rotating cylinder , or with at least two of these features : a pistol grip , a folding or telescoping stock , a detachable magazine , or a fixed magazine that can hold more than five rounds . the ban also prohibited 19 specifically named models of firearms , as well as copies of those guns . these included the ak-47 , uzi , galil , ar-15 , fn fal , mac-10 , steyr aug , tec-9 , and armsel striker . file : ruger 10-22 ( 2 ) . jpg this ruger 10/22 rifle with a pistol grip and a folding stock was classified as an assault weapon under the federal assault weapons ban . file : kg99.jpg an intratec tec-dc9 with a 32-round magazine . this semi-automatic pistol has a threaded barrel and a magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip , two of the features listed in the federal assault weapons ban . . failed assault weapons ban of 2013 bill . on december 16 , 2012 , two days after the sandy hook elementary school shooting , senator dianne feinstein said she would introduce a new assault weapons ban on the first day of congress . five days later , on december 21 , wayne lapierre , chief executive of the national rifle association , held a news conference repeating the nra 's opposition to additional gun laws . feinstein and senator richard blumenthal held a separate news conference in response . there , feinstein said that it seemed to her '' prudent '' to register grandfathered assault weapons under the national firearms act ( nfa ) . a two-page bill summary on the senator 's web site also mentioned registering grandfathered assault weapons under the nfa , but the text of the bill introduced to the senate did not include that provision . on january 24 , 2013 , feinstein introduced s . 150 , the '' assault weapons ban of 2013 '' . the bill was similar to the 1994 ban , but differed in that it used a one-feature test for a firearm to qualify as an assault weapon rather than the two-feature test of the 1994 ban . on april 17 , 2013 , it failed on a senate vote of 60 to 40 . . see also . military-style semi-automatic , new zealand legal classification semi-automatic firearm . notes . references . external links .