Richard Corben

biography . richard corben was born on a farm balfour , brad ( june 2001 ) . '' the richard corben interview , part 1 '' . heavy metal 51 : 6–11 . in anderson , missouri , and went on to get a bachelor of fine arts degree from the kansas city art institute , in 1965 . bharucha , fershid ( 1981 ) . richard corben : flights into fantasy , page 26 . thumb tack books . at the same time , he trained in bodybuilding , but eventually retired from the sport with few accomplishments due to a lack of time to dedicate himself to it . after working as a professional animator , corben started doing underground comics , including grim wit , slow death , skull , rowlf , fever dreams and his own anthology fantagor . bharucha , fershid ( 1981 ) . richard corben : flights into fantasy , page 52-56 . thumb tack books . in 1970 he began illustrating horror and science-fiction stories for warren publishing . bharucha , fershid ( 1981 ) . richard corben : flights into fantasy , page 92 . thumb tack books . his stories appeared in creepy , eerie , vampirella , 1984 and comix international . he also colored several episodes of will eisner 's spirit . all the stories and covers he did for creepy and eerie have been reprinted by dark horse books in a single volume : creepy presents richard corben . the three stories he drew for vampirella have been reprinted by dynamite entertainment in vampirella archives vol . 5 . in 1975 , when moebius , druillet , and jean-pierre dionnet started publishing the magazine métal hurlant in france , corben submitted some of his stories to them . balfour , brad ( july 2001 ) . '' the richard corben interview , part 2 '' . heavy metal 52 : page 11 . he continued his work for the franchise in america , where the magazine was called heavy metal . also in 1975 , a selection of his black-and-white underground comix stories was collected in hardcover as the richard corben funnybook from kansas city 's nickelodeon press . in 1976 he adapted a short robert e . howard story in an early graphic novel , bloodstar . seuling , phil ( 1975 ) . '' the fantasy epic : crearaphic novel '' . mediascene 16 : 8–9 . among the stories drawn for heavy metal he continued the saga of his most famous creation , den which had begun in the short film neverwhere ( neil gaiman used the same title , neverwhere , later , but the two creations have nothing in common ) and a short story in the underground publication grim wit no . 2 . the saga of den is a fantasy series about the adventures of a young underweight nerd who travels to neverwhere , a universe taking inspirational nods from robert e . howard 's hyborian age , edgar rice burroughs 's barsoom and h . p . lovecraft 's horror dimensions . there , the boy becomes an enormously endowed nude muscleman who has erotic adventures in a world of outrageous dangers , hideous monsters , and buxom nude women who lustfully throw themselves at him . this story was adapted in a highly abridged form in the animated film heavy metal , where den was voiced by john candy in an abbreviated adaptation that involved corben himself that he felt was satisfactory . corben 's collaborations are varied , ranging from rip in time with bruce jones , to harlan ellison for vic and blood , to the den saga , the mutant world titles , jeremy brood , and the arabian nights with jan strnad . from 1986–1994 corben operated his own publishing imprint , fantagor press . among the titles fantagor published were den , den saga , horror in the dark , rip in time , and son of mutant world . fantagor went out of business after the 1994 contraction of the comics industry . '' newswatch : comics publishers suffer tough summer : body count rises in market shakedown , '' the comics journal 172 ( november 1994 ) , pp . 13–18 . american illustrator and comic book artist , richard corben has passed away . due to the sexual nature of corben 's art , it has been accused of being pornographic , a description he himself disagrees with , preferring to call his work '' sensual '' instead . one notorious example was the interview he gave heavy metal editor brad balfour in 1981 . balfour , brad . '' the richard corben interview , part 2 '' . heavy metal 52 : 8–14 . balfour , brad ( august 2001 ) . '' the richard corben interview , part 3 '' . heavy metal 53 : 8–13 . corben was very dissatisfied with the interview . he felt it portrayed him as a '' petty , childish , borderline psychotic oaf '' . he wrote a letter in retort , which was published in the september 1981 issue . heavy metal vol . v , no . 6 ( september 1981 ) . corben did the cover of meat loaf 's bat out of hell , jim steinman 's bad for good and a movie poster ( based on a drawing by neal adams adams , neal ( 1976 ) . the neal adams treasury . pure imagination . page 36 , ) for the brian de palma film phantom of the paradise . in addition , he provided cover art for the vhs release of the low-budget horror film spookies . in 2000 , corben collaborated with brian azzarello on five issues of azzarello 's run on hellblazer ( 146–150 ) which was collected in a trade called hellblazer : hard time . he also adapted the classic horror story the house on the borderland by william hope hodgson for dc 's vertigo imprint . in 2001 , azzarello and corben teamed up to create marvel 's startling stories : banner ( a four issue mini-series exploring doc samson 's relationship with bruce banner ) and marvel max 's cage ( a five issue mini-series starring luke cage ) . in june 2004 , corben joined with garth ennis to produce the punisher : the end , a one-shot title for marvel published under the max imprint as part of marvel 's the end series . the story tells of the punisher 's final days on an earth ravaged by nuclear holocaust . ever the independent , corben would work with rocker rob zombie and steve niles in 2005 on a project for idw publishing called bigfoot . in 2007 , corben did a two issue run on marvel comics ' surreal demon biker , ghost rider . at marvel 's max imprint he has produced haunt of horror , a mini-series adapting classic works of horror to comics . the first mini-series , published in 2006 , was based on the stories of edgar allan poe followed by a second series in 2008 adapting works by h . p . lovecraft . corben and lovecraft at marvel in june , newsarama , march 20 , 2008 between 2008 and 2009 he illustrated the flashback sequences in conan of cimmeria 1–7 , collected as conan volume 7 : cimmeria . in 2009 he illustrated starr the slayer for marvel 's max comics imprint . since then corben has done more work for marvel , dc , idw , and most notably dark horse , drawing the eisner award–winning hellboy . in may 2020 , parallax studio announced preproduction on the live-action animated film to meet the faces you meet based on the comic book fever dreams illustrated by corben and written by jan strnad . the film will feature the voices of patton oswalt and patrick warburton and is set to star robert picardo and samuel hunt . . personal life . corben 's wife is named madonna '' dona '' ( née marchant ) . he was the special-effects/animation technician for her prize-winning film entry siegfried saves metropolis in a contest sponsored by famous monsters of filmland magazine in 1964 ( see issues 34 and 35 ) . they married soon afterwards in 1965 . keränen , sidsid . '' the jan strnad interview , part 2 ( 2 ) , '' muuta.net ( mar./apr . 2001 ) . corben died on december 2 , 2020 , following heart surgery . he was 80 years old . . awards . corben 's work in comics and animation has won him recognition , including the shazam award for outstanding new talent in 1971 , and a shazam award for superior achievement by an individual in 1973 . corben won a 1973 goethe award for '' favorite fan artist '' . he also received a cine golden eagle and president of japan cultural society trophy in 1968 for his short film neverwhere . bharucha , fershid ( 1981 ) . richard corben : flights into fantasy . page 44 . thumb tack books . while working for the warren anthologies , he received numerous warren awards : 1973 best artist/writer and special award for '' excellence '' , 1976 best art for '' within you , without you '' ( eerie 77 ) and best cover ( also for eerie 77 ) , and 1978 best cover artist . in 2009 corben won the '' best finite series/limited series '' eisner award for hellboy : the crooked man and in 2011 he won the '' best single issue ( or one-shot ) '' eisner award , for hellboy : double feature of evil . finally , in 2012 he was elected to the will eisner award hall of fame . in 2015 , corben was inducted into the ghastly awards hall of fame . his previous ghastly awards include best artist in 2013 and best one-shot comics for his dark horse poe adaptations . edgar allan poe 's the conqueror worm in 2012 , edgar allan poe : the raven & the red death ( 2013 ) and edgar allan poe ’ s morella and the murders in the rue morgue in 2014 . in january 2018 he won the prestigious grand prix at angoulême and presidency of the 2019 festival . beginning concurrently with the 2019 festival in january , a 250-piece collection of his original artworks was put on display at the musée d'angoulême , the exhibit ending march 10 , 2019 . see also . rip in time bloodstar a boy and his dog heavy metal magazine . references . sources . . external links . richard corben on the lambiek comiclopedia the most complete comicography of richard corben illustrations r.corben . interviews . the richard corben interview pt . 1 the richard corben interview pt . 2 the richard corben interview pt . 3 the richard corben retort letter