Philippe Starck

yachts . in 2004 starck designed the motor yacht a and then in 2012 the a ( sailing yacht ) – one of the world 's largest sailing yachts . 5 of the best philippe starck-designed yachts boatsinternational.com sam dangremond , world ’ s largest sailing yacht meets its baby brother in monaco , may 10 2017 town & country starck designed the infrastructure for the port adriano harbour on the south-west bay of palma de mallorca , mallorca and was artistic director for the interior . it opened in april 2012 . in 2008 he designed steve jobs 's yacht venus , which was launched in october 2012 , just over a year after the death of apple 's founder . the yacht was built at aalsmeer in the netherlands . . collections . starck 's work is seen in the collections of european and american museums , including the musée national d'art moderne ( to which he has donated several pieces , in particular prototypes ) the musée des arts décoratifs in paris , mad paris philippe starck le design pour tous , coffret maison starck . the moma and the brooklyn museum in new york city , the vitra design museum in basel and the design museum in london . more than 660 of his designs were inventoried in french public collections in 2011 . philippe starck per kartell spa , sedia louis ghost , 2002.jpg masters chair , homage to the masters , arne jacobsen , charles eames , eero saarinen , kartell , indianapolis museum of art . philippe starck per kartell spa . , sedia sr . glob , 1988.jpg dr.glob chair , kartell indianapolis museum of art . philippe starck per vitra ag , sgabello w.w . , 1990.jpg tabouret ww , 1990 , vitra , indianapolis museum of art . philippe starck per alessi spa . , centrotavola les ministres , 1996 , in reina e acciaio.jpg table center , alessi , indianapolis museum of art . philippe starck , sedia costes , 1981.jpg chaise costes , centre georges pompidou . philippe starck per alessi spa . , spremiagrumi juicy salif , 1990.jpg juicy salif , alessi , indianapolis museum of art . table & chairs by philippe starck.jpg louis ghost chairs . philosophy . ecology . starck develops alternative materials to create in a more ecological way . in 2010 he took an interest in sorting waste in companies and designed elise , an ecological trash can available in six colors , for six different types of waste . zartan , created for magis in 2010 , is a chair entirely made from natural material as bamboo , linen and hemp fiber , a non-toxic and biodegradable alternative to replace plastic . this made it eco friendly and very good for the environment as he wasnt using plastic . in 2012 , starck released broom for emeco , an anti-waste chair made of materials collected in lumber and plastic plants factories . starck continues his reflection on structure and matter with the 7 chairs of the generic collection for kartell in 2015 . the evolution of universal seats as chairs found in cafes , offices , administrations that are part of the collective memory . in 2016 , he introduces wood into kartell 's catalog with the smart wood collection by transforming wood residues into material able to be molded like plastic . starck released cassina croque la pomme in 2019 , a furniture collection for cassina , entirely made from a vegan fabric , with apple leather . . democratic design . starck 's concept of democratic design led him to focus on mass-produced consumer goods rather than one-off pieces , seeking ways to reduce cost and improve quality in mass market goods . designs on love , le monde , 10 february 2008 in 2007 , starck was the first designer to participate in the ted talks ( technology , entertainment & design ) . through his '' democratic design '' concept , starck has campaigned for well-designed objects that are not just aimed for upper-tiered incomes . he has expressed this as a utopian ideal , approached in practice by increasing production quantities to cut costs and by using mail-order , '' so it is absolutely possible to talk about a utopian project with starck '' , benoît heilbrunn , starck in words , 2003 via 3 suisses . in 1998 , philippe starck sets up the good goods catalogue with la redoute , proposing 170 sustainable and respectful everyday life objects '' for the future moral market '' . later in 2000 , driven by his desire to make design accessible for everyone , he works with target stores and proposes a collection of more than 50 exclusive and affordable products . starck released ideas box in 2011 for bibliothèques sans frontières . these kit media libraries give the refugee populations access to culture and information . the can by installed anywhere around the world and provide screens , books , games , cameras etc . one of the ways starck has economized costs for the public '' i 'm against beautiful objects . i prefer good objects . i 'll stop when my chairs cost fifty bucks '' , l'express , 22 october 1998 is his plastic-furniture line , producing pieces such as the kartell louis ghost chair , over a million of which have been sold . he has also been involved in the development of fluocaril toothbrushes museum of design in plastics , philippe starck toothbrush and holder . to bathroom fittings for duravit , hansgrohe , hoesch and axor , from alessi 's juicy salif lemon squeezer to zikmu speakers , zik headphones by parrot , laguiole knife , starckeyes glasses by mikli and the marie coquine lamp for baccarat . '' philippe starck sets in motion an education of the masses . to the greatest number of people , he distributes forms that educate the eye … from the minute to the immense , starck marks out the paths that reconcile aesthetic , ethical and political '' , michel onfray , starck in words , 2003 alongside his work , starck partnered with moustache bikes for the m.a.s.s . ( mud , asphalt , sand and snow ) . this is a portfolio of four e-bikes that use a bosch electrical engine and battery pack . in january 2013 starck redesigned the navigo travel pass . philippe starck waived his fee for designing this new-generation card , said transport authority stif . its pared-down design is intended to make it last , le parisien , january 2012 . technology . in 1996 , starck worked with alain mikli to launch starck eyes . bought in 2013 by luxottica , starck eyes becomes starck biotech paris in 2019 and is inspired by the human body to create revolutionary eyewear , merging design with biomechanics . starck helped design the xiaomi mi mix smartphone , notable for having a 6.4-inch '' whole surface screen '' . in 2016 starck developed a gps-tracking wristband , dial ( individual alert and localization device ) for société nationale de sauvetage en mer , which allows endangered people to share their exact location to rescue service whether they are in the sea or in the beach . in 2019 the so-called ai chair was presented to the public . starck cooperated with experts of the 3d software company autodesk and created a chair design with help of an artificial intelligence . the same year he teames up with the corsican start-up icare technologies to imagine the design of aeklys by starck , a connected ring which allows contactless payment among other parameters . in 2020 starck collaborates with axiom space and creates the interior of the international space station 's housing module . a comfortable and luxurious living space adapted to weightlessness , with suede-textured walls , big windows to appreciate the view and all the technology needed to stay connected . . political messaging . sometimes pointed political messages , combined with the unexpected and humour '' i 'm convinced that for many , the political nature of his work is not only hard to detect but of little interest . yet for most of us , the most sensational thing about starck 's architecture and design is the combination of fun and the unexpected '' , zoom sur philippe starck , courrier international , 2 september 1995 can be found in starck 's projects , such as the subversive gun lamp ( flos , 2005 ) , the superarchimoon floor lamp ( flos , 2000 ) , in fact a giant architect 's lamp standing 217 centimetres high , the haaa ! ! ! and hooo ! ! ! lamps he imagined with the american artist jenny holzer ( flos/baccarat , 2009 ) and the chandeliers in the darkside collection , featuring the zenith chandelier ( baccarat , 2005 ) . bibliography . . references . external links . mobilier national ( france ) : philippe starck