Wadhurst

situation . wadhurst is situated on the kent–sussex border seven miles ( 11 & nbsp ; km ) east of crowborough and about seven miles ( 11 & nbsp ; km ) south of royal tunbridge wells . other nearby settlements include ticehurst , burwash , mayfield and heathfield in east sussex , and lamberhurst , hawkhurst and cranbrook in kent . physically , wadhurst lies on a high ridge of the weald – a range of wooded hills running across sussex and kent between the north downs and the south downs . the reservoir of bewl water is nearby . the river bewl , which is a sub-tributary of the river medway , and the limden rise within the civil parish of wadhurst . history . the name wadhurst ( wadeherst in early records ) is anglo-saxon and most probably derives from wada which is believed to be the name of a saxon tribe which occupied the area and began the clearing of the forests in the 7th or 8th century . there is an anglo-saxon manor known as bivelham which lay between the parishes of wadhurst and mayfield . although wadhurst was almost certainly in existence at the time of the domesday survey in 1086 , it was part of the archbishop of canterbury 's land and was therefore not mentioned . the earliest record relating to the area is a reference in the cartulary of battle abbey to '' snape in the parish of wadhurst '' . henry iii granted wadhurst its charter in 1253 , allowing wadhurst to hold a market every saturday and a fair on 29 june , the feast of st peter and st paul . in the 16th , 17th and 18th centuries wadhurst , as did many towns and villages in the weald , had a thriving iron industry . two of the large georgian buildings in the high street , hill house and the old vicarage , were both ironmasters ' houses , along with a number of other large houses on the outskirts of wadhurst . in the church of st peter and st . paul there are several iron ledger-stone memorials of ironmasters , which are unique to this area . during the first world war , wadhurst lost 149 men , out of a total village population of 3,500 . the worst losses were during the battle of aubers ridge , when 25 men from wadhurst were killed in one day : nearly 80 % of the men from wadhurst who went into no man 's land that day . wadhurst is now actively twinned with aubers . governance . an electoral ward in the same name exists . the population of this ward at the 2011 census was 5,181 . . buildings and people . wadhurst is a small market town , and has kept a very good range of shops considering its size . it has a traditional butcher , baker , ironmonger , hairdresser , bank , post office , gift shop , several pubs and much more . the population of the ward was 4,883 at the 2011 census . there are three buildings of particular architectural interest in the town itself , and a number of old manor houses and farms nearby . the church of st . peter and st . paul dominates the centre of the town . wadhurst 's heritage as a centre of the iron industry is shown by the many iron gravestones in the church . there are two early georgian houses on the high street , the old vicarage and hill house . on the outskirts is the 19th-century wadhurst castle . the parish church is medieval and includes work from the 12th to the 15th centuries ; there is a shingled spire and a vaulted porch . there is little of interest inside apart from 30 inscribed iron tomb slabs dating from 1614 to 1790 . betjeman , j . ( ed . ) ( 1968 ) collins pocket guide to english parish churches : the south . london : collins ; p . 394 the rest of the town is in a variety of vernacular styles , from the 13th century onwards ; and little in the centre of the town is very modern apart from a range of shops which replaced the queens head hotel , demolished in the crash of a gloster meteor in january 1956 in which four people were killed . the victorian era saw the town expand towards the new railway station , about north of the town . the station ( the highest in southern england ) is on the line from london charing cross to hastings via tunbridge wells , and was opened in 1851 by the south eastern railway . the resulting expansion brought the hamlets of sparrow 's green , turners green and best beech hill into the town . in addition to the railway , there are buses to tunbridge wells , crowborough and hastings , as well as community transport and 'rail link ' buses to ticehurst and mayfield . bus services , wadhurst.info in the centre of wadhurst there are two churches : st . peter and st.paul is an anglican church ; parts of it date from the 12th century . the church building , which is situated in church street , st peter 's and st paul 's church website wadhurst methodist church is no longer used as a church . all about wadhurst : wadhurst chapels and churches , wadhurst.info there is a catholic church in mayfield lane attached to the sacred heart school . sacred heart , wadhurst churches , wadhurst.info the three churches also participate in churches together , an interdenominational organisation , along with st john the baptist , an anglican church in tidebrook , and st peter in ticehurst . churches together in wadhurst , wadhurst.info church street contains a row of 13th- and 14th-century cottages which are reputed to be the oldest properties in wadhurst . some apparently were built as a cloister to st . peters and st . paul 's church . there are also two early 19th-century former strict baptist chapels of similar design in the hamlets of pell green ( rehoboth chapel ) and shover 's green ( the shover 's green baptist chapel ) . both are listed at grade ii . wadhurst has two schools in the state-maintained sector : a church of england primary school ( with a nursery ) in sparrows green and uplands , a community secondary school and sixth form with technology college status . the latter also has an affiliated youth and community centre . in addition , in mayfield lane there is an independent catholic preparatory school , sacred heart . history of schools in wadhurst , wadhurst.info wadhurst also used to be the site of bellerbys college ( formerly known as wadhurst college and micklefield wadhurst ) , a private girls ' school on mayfield lane that has been defunct since about 2004 . wadhurst united f.c . wadhurst united f.c . ( based at the recreation ground , south view road ) is wadhurst 's local football team . they were formed in 1890 and joined the sussex county league division three in 2004 . they left the league after the 2005–06 season , to rejoin the east sussex football league . the club won the east sussex league division two title in the 2008–09 season . they also have many junior teams of different ages . notable people . jeff beck , guitarist , has lived in wadhurst since summer 1975 . his move came a few months after the release of his blow by blow album , which reached no . 4 in the us . his large stone country house dates to 1591 . william bidlake , ( 1861–1938 ) , architect , moved to wadhurst in 1924 and practised there until his death . caroline augusta foley rhys davids , pāli language scholar and translator davina mccall , television presenter , lives in wadhurst . irfan orga ( 1908–70 ) , exiled turkish writer , lived at spike island , wadhurst , 1961–70 . hans rausing ( 1926–2019 ) , billionaire inheritor of tetra pak , had a house and deer park in wadhurst . notes . references . savidge , alan and oliver mason . ( 1988 ) . wadhurst : town of the high weald . gillingham : meresborough . ; oclc 20798945